NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA INCREASED SYMPTOMS
REPORTING AND ADHERENCE TO PREVENTIVE BEHAVIORS AMONG 25
MILLION RECIPIENTS WITH SIMILAR EFFECTS ON NON-RECIPIENT MEMBERS
OF THEIR COMMUNITIES
Abhijit Banerjee
Marcella Alsan
Emily Breza
Arun G. Chandrasekhar
Abhijit Chowdhury
Esther Duflo
Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham
Benjamin A. Olken
Working Paper 27496
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27496

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2020
Ben Golub and Alessandra Peter provided helpful comments. We thank J-PAL SA, and
particularly Tithee Mukhopadhyay, Shreya Chaturvedi, Vasu Chaudhary, Shobitha Cherian,
Arnesh Chowdhury, Anoop Singh Rawat, Advik Shreekumar, and Meghna Yadav for exceptional
research support. We gratefully acknowledge funding from NSF RAPID #2029880, the Weiss
Foundation, and J-PAL’s Innovation in Government Initiative (IGI). The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27496.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by Abhijit Banerjee, Marcella Alsan, Emily Breza, Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Abhijit Chowdhury,
Esther Duflo, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, and Benjamin A. Olken. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Messages on COVID-19 Prevention in India Increased Symptoms Reporting and Adherence
to Preventive Behaviors Among 25 Million Recipients with Similar Effects on Non-recipient
Members of Their Communities
Abhijit Banerjee, Marcella Alsan, Emily Breza, Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Abhijit Chowdhury,
Esther Duflo, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, and Benjamin A. Olken
NBER Working Paper No. 27496
July 2020
JEL No. D8,D83,I1,I15,I18,O1
ABSTRACT
During health crises, like COVID-19, individuals are inundated with messages promoting healthpreserving behavior. Does additional light-touch messaging by a credible individual change
behavior? Do the features of the message matter? To answer this, we conducted a large-scale
messaging campaign in West Bengal, India. Twenty-five million individuals were sent an SMS
containing a 2.5-minute clip, delivered by West Bengal native and 2019 Nobel laureate Abhijit
Banerjee. All messages encouraged reporting symptoms to the local public health worker. In
addition, each message emphasizes one health-preserving behavior (distancing or hygiene) and
one motivation for action (effects on everyone or just on self). Further, some messages addressed
concerns about ostracism of the infected. Messages were randomized at the PIN code level. As
control, three million individuals received a message pointing them to government information.
The campaign (i) doubled the reporting of health symptoms to the community health workers (p =
0.001 for fever, p = 0.024 for respiratory symptoms); (ii) decreased travel beyond one’s village in
the last two days by 20% (p = 0.026) (on a basis of 37% in control) and increased estimated handwashing when returning home by 7% (p = 0.044) (67.5% in control); (iii) spilled over to
behaviors not mentioned in the message – mask-wearing was never mentioned but increased 2%
(p = 0.042), while distancing and hygiene both increased in the sample where they were not
mentioned by similar amounts as where they were mentioned; (iv) spilled over onto nonrecipients
within the same community, with effects similar to those for individuals who received the
messages.
Abhijit Banerjee
Department of Economics, E52-540
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
banerjee@mit.edu

Emily Breza
Harvard University
Littauer Center, M28
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ebreza@fas.harvard.edu

Marcella Alsan
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy St.
Rubenstein Bldg R403
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
marcella_alsan@hks.harvard.edu

Arun G. Chandrasekhar
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
arungc@stanford.edu

Abhijit Chowdhury
John C. Martin Centre for Liver Research and Innov
Kolkata, West 7000150
India
abhijit@liverfoundation.in
Esther Duflo
Department of Economics, E52-544
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
eduflo@mit.edu
Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
paulgp@gmail.com
Benjamin A. Olken
Department of Economics, E52-542
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
bolken@mit.edu

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

1

1. Introduction
At the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, governments faced the need to rapidly
inform their population about the new disease: its symptoms, mechanisms of transmission, and behaviors that limit its spread. In particular, policymakers sought to increase hygienic behaviors, such as handwashing, social distancing, and mask-wearing
(Lewnard and Lo, 2020; Prather et al., 2020; Kissler et al., 2020). In the absence of
widespread testing, they also needed to rapidly put in place an effective system of
reporting COVID-19 symptoms.
Very quickly, individuals were inundated with messages from numerous sources. In
India, by the end of March and beginning of April 2020, individuals received messages
about distancing and hygiene through television, radio, public signs, local government
addresses, and even a short jingle accompanying outgoing mobile phone calls. Besides
these official sources, they also receive messages via physical conversations, phone
calls, WhatsApp, Facebook and Twitter.
In a survey in the Indian state of West Bengal, residents reported that on average
in the two previous days, they heard about the importance of social distancing 20.2
times, about washing hands 16.9 times, and about wearing masks 17.2 times (N =
408) (see Appendix B, Table B2).
Absorbing and acting on multiple streams of information may be challenging and
despite the ubiquity of messages, or perhaps because of it, compliance with basic
recommendations is far from complete. Despite a nationwide lockdown in India during
the time of this experiment, on average, 37% of our respondents in the control group
left their village at least once every two days. Respondents report that typical villagers
systematically wash their hands only 68% of the times when returning home. This
suggests that the Indian government’s public health messaging was either ignored,
forgotten, misunderstood, or insufficiently disseminated within the community.
How can we create messages to have an impact in this setting of information overload? One potential avenue is celebrity messaging, a common public health tool in
both normal times and the COVID-19 crisis. Our previous research on Twitter in
Indonesia shows that there is a large premium for celebrity messaging in the context
of vaccination, and the value is mostly driven by authentic messages coming from the
celebrity’s voice rather than echoing others such as the Ministry of Health (Alatas
et al., 2019), but perhaps such messages get drowned in a context with such information overload? Further, assuming that messaging works, how should the message be

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

2

designed and diffused for effectiveness? In particular, should we provide comprehensive information about the best way to stay safe, which may be ignored (given the
evidence that most people have limited attention span (Abaluck and Gruber, 2011;
Beshears et al., 2013; Carvalho and Silverman, 2019)) or rely on the fact that the
information is already out there and people mostly need a nudge to pay attention to
it, in which case a pithy and memorable message might work better? And finally, is
it important that we reach everyone directly or can we limit outreach and rely on the
information diffusing through the community?
To answer these questions, we conducted a large-scale randomized controlled trial
in West Bengal, a large state in India (population 91.3 million), with over two-thirds
of the population living in rural areas.
We designed 2.5-minute-long video clips, delivered by Abhijit Banerjee, an author
of this study and a public intellectual, who is native to West Bengal and grew up there.
Since receiving the 2019 Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in memory
of Alfred Nobel (also known as the Nobel Prize in Economics), he has been covered
widely in West Bengal media. He is also the chair of the West Bengal government’s
COVID-19 advisory board.
In the experiment, these video messages were sent via a link embedded in a text
message to 25 million subscribers of the phone network Reliance Jio (henceforth Jio),
randomly selected out of 28 million subscribers. The remaining three million received
a text containing a link to the government website on COVID-19, similar to the many
messages they have already received.
All video messages instructed individuals with cough and fever to contact their local
frontline health worker. In addition, there were eight different variants emphasizing
one practice (social distancing or hand-washing), one rationale for action (cost to self
or cost to everyone including self), and a social problem (either an explicit statement
that ostracism of COVID-19 victims is unacceptable and should be reported to the
authorities, or no mention of the issue). Experimental message treatments were randomized at the PIN code (Postal Index Number) level across 1214 out of the state’s
1264 PIN codes, covering an estimated 88 million people.1
A few days after the campaign, we conducted two surveys. First, we surveyed 677
frontline health workers from the sample communities to ask them about reporting
1India

does not use PIN codes as an administrative unit, so we lack precise data about the population
within each PIN code. We deliver messages in 1214 out of the 1264 PIN codes in West Bengal, and
estimate the total population in our study area by scaling the state’s population of 91.3 million down
by factor of 1214/1264. We present this estimate purely for illustrative purposes.

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

3

of symptoms. Second, we surveyed a random sample of 1,883 individuals drawn
from a publicly-available database of former and current local village council (gram
panchayat) members. We measured health-preserving behaviors, including whether
individuals traveled outside their villages, the number of interactions within two arms’
length (which was how the two meters mentioned in the message was interpreted in the
local context), the estimated frequency of hand-washing upon returning home, and
the use of masks or similar face covering when leaving home. We also measured the
frequency of conversations that respondents had about COVID-19 (which included
both face-to-face discussions, phone calls, or chats such as WhatsApp), beliefs about
symptomatic and asymptomatic carriers, and knowledge of the virus. Our surveyed
individuals included both those who received the message (Jio users) and those who
were not messaged directly (non-Jio users).
Our results demonstrate large effects of treatment with significant spillovers both
from message recipients onto non-recipients and also onto behaviors that were not
emphasized in the message.
First, reporting of symptoms to the frontline health workers, critical to the tracking
of the epidemic, doubled. Since the measurement was done within five days of the
intervention, this almost certainly reflects reporting, rather than an increased level of
sickness, given lag times for transmission and the time it takes for someone to become
symptomatic. Second, rates of not leaving the village, washing hands and wearing
masks improved significantly in treatment communities. Critically, the effects are of
similar magnitudes for behaviors targeted in the videos (not traveling out, washing
hands) and those not even mentioned (mask use). Third, distancing (hygiene) went
up in the sample where only hygiene (distancing) was mentioned by more or less
the same amount as when distancing (hygiene) was explicitly mentioned. Both these
spillovers are consistent with the view that the message acted as a nudge. Finally,
magnitudes of the effects are also similar between Jio users and others, suggesting
significant community diffusion of health behaviors.
Overall, the results show that even against a background of a high level of messaging, an additional message by a respected public figure can still have large direct and
indirect effects.

2. Context, Experiment, and Data
2.1. Context. This study took place in the state of West Bengal, India. West Bengal
has a population of 91.3 million, with 62.2 million living in rural areas. The literacy

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

4

rate is 77.08% (Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner, India,
2011). As of March 19, 2019, around 57.72 million had access to mobile devices
(Department of Telecommunications, India, 2019).
Community health workers (Accredited Social Health Activists, known as ASHAs)
serve an important role in West Bengal’s COVID-19 response as frontline health
workers. Introduced as a part of the National Rural Health Mission in 2005, ASHAs
are women selected from within the community itself, and each ASHA is responsible
for serving the health needs of approximately 1000 residents. Prior to the pandemic,
ASHAs primarily focused on maternal and newborn health, family planning, child
vaccinations, and monitoring TB patients (further details are in Appendix A.1.2).
During the pandemic, ASHAs have been re-purposed to become the frontline health
workers responsible for connecting communities to the formal healthcare system for
COVID-19 concerns (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, India, 2020). They are
tasked with community outreach, screening for symptoms, tracking return of migrants
via door-to-door checks, and referring cases to higher healthcare facilities.
In response to COVID-19, India began a nationwide lockdown on March 24, 2020.
At the time of our survey, India was in “Phase 3” of this lockdown, which began on
May 4, 2020 and was scheduled to last for the next two weeks. During this period
the country was divided into red, orange, and green zones. Red zones were those
with high COVID-19 cases that were increasing steadily, orange zones were those
with comparatively fewer cases, and green zones were those without any cases in the
past 21 days. At the start of our information campaign, out of the 23 districts in
West Bengal, 10 districts were red zones, five were orange, and eight were green.
Prior to Phase 3, states prohibited all non-essential services, inter-district travel, and
suspended all public transport. Phase 3 saw relaxations on some activities primarily
in green and orange zones, including inter-district travel with limits on the number
of passengers and resumption of public transport at 50 percent capacity.
Through all phases of the lockdown, individuals received messages on precautions,
hygiene and distancing through public service announcements on television, radio,
newspapers, and via text messages and jingles from their telecom service providers.
State governments also ran information campaigns (including using celebrity videos)
that were shared on social media. Apart from this, individuals received messages
through their social networks via platforms like Facebook, WhatsApp and TikTok.
In a separate survey we ran in West Bengal, respondents reported hearing about

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

5

social distancing 20.2 times, washing hands 16.9 times and wearing masks 17.2 times
in the last 2 days (N = 408, Appendix B, Table B2).

2.2. Experiment. We delivered eight treatment messages in a cross-randomized
2 × 2 × 2 + 1 design, described below. The exact scripts were crafted under the
guidance of a physician member of the West Bengal COVID-19 advisory board, Abhijit Chowdhury, as well as physician Marcella Alsan, both co-authors of this study
and are included in Appendix A.3. Each message emphasized a health behavior and
a motivation for acting, and some messages addressed concerns of ostracism of the
ill:
T1: Health Behavior: Social distancing vs. Hygiene
The message varied in whether it emphasized that people must maintain
2-meter distance (as mandated by the government), or the steps individuals
must take to maintain hygiene (e.g., hand-washing with soap). Some other
behaviors (e.g., not spitting) were mentioned in both and others (like wearing
a mask) came up in neither.
T2: Motivation: Externality + Internality vs. Internality
The message varied in whether it emphasized that the illness could be damaging to others in one’s community, especially the elderly and vulnerable (externality) or not. Both types of messages mentioned the effect on oneself
(internality).
T3: Ostracism: Anti-ostracism vs. No Mention
The message varied in whether it explicitly stated that ostracism of COVID19 victims is unacceptable and should be reported to the authorities, or stayed
silent on that issue.
Every message concluded by encouraging the individual to contact a health worker if
exhibiting symptoms of fever or coughing.
The messages were recorded by Abhijit Banerjee in separate 2.5-minute video clips
posted privately on YouTube. Banerjee jointly won the Nobel Prize in Economics in
October 2019 and is also the chair of the West Bengal COVID-19 advisory board.
Both events, his winning the Nobel Prize and his role in advising in the state during
the pandemic, have received widespread media coverage in West Bengal.
To deliver messages we partnered with Reliance Jio, one of the largest telecom
operators in India. We randomized each of the 1214 study PIN codes to receive one

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

6

of the messages, and stratified our randomization at the district level 2. The telecom
partner then sent SMS messages to each of the 28 million subscribers on their network
in the study PIN codes. All SMS messages were sent on May 4, 2020 and May 5,
2020.
Subscribers in 1085 treatment PIN codes received an SMS with a link to one of
the eight video messages. The message contained the text: “Nobel laureate Abhijit
Vinayak Banerjee’s appeal on the subject of Coronavirus” and the unique YouTube
link to the treatment’s message. Those in 129 control PIN codes received an SMS
with a link to a government website with COVID-19 information, similar to typical
government messaging. The message contained the text: “An appeal on the subject
of Coronavirus” and a link to a website with COVID-19 information.3 In total,
24,585,927 Jio users received an SMS message with a link to a video message and
3,358,819 received the control message.

2.3. Data. We collected two datasets to measure the impact of the campaign. First,
we surveyed 677 ASHAs by phone within 5 days of the messaging intervention to
measure symptom reporting in their local communities. Second, from May 8, 2020
to May 19, 2020, we surveyed by phone a random sample of individuals drawn from
a publicly available phone directory of previous and current village council (gram
panchayat) members. This generated a cross-sectional dataset spanning nine days.
In the council member survey, we asked respondents whether they had traveled
outside their village in the last 2 days. We also asked them the total number of
individuals they interacted with within two arms’ length, both within their own village
as well as outside of their own village, over the last 2 days. To measure the level of
conversation, we asked them the total number of people from whom they received
information, or gave information about COVID-19 over the last 2 days, be it in
person, over phone, on chat, or by other means. Hygiene practices were measured
by asking respondents whether they wear a mask when they step out of the house,
and how many times (out of 10) a typical person living in their village washes their
hands after coming back home (we deliberately ask about community handwashing to

2India

has 36 States and Union territories. Each of these is further divided into administrative units
called districts. There are 19 districts in our study area. We use districts as specified in the most
recent Indian Census.
3These messages contained the link: https://wb.gov.in/COVID-19.aspx

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

7

avoid demand effects). Respondents were also assessed for their knowledge of COVID19 symptoms and precautions.4 For non-binary variables (number of COVID-related
conversations and number of in-person interactions), we winsorize at the 95%-ile level
to deal with unreasonable outliers and further show robustness to the 97.5%-ile cut
off in Appendix B, Table B3.
To keep the survey short, we collected minimal demographic information: gender,
age, current council member status and smartphone access. 57.6% of our sample
individuals belonged to a household where at least one member had a Jio connection.
Henceforth, we refer to these individuals as the Jio sample. Compared to the non-Jio
population, Jio users are significantly and substantially more likely to be male (21.5%
vs. 14.3%, p < 0.01) and own a smartphone (81.1% vs. 61.5%, p < 0.01), and perhaps
slightly younger as well (mean age 44.3 vs 45.8, t-test p < 0.01).
The rates of health-preserving behavior in the control villages are often low, but
varied. On average over the past two days, despite the lockdown, 37% of individuals
had travelled to other villages, the average respondent had interacted with 11 people
within 2 arms’ distance and reported washing their hands when they return home
only 65.7%, of the time. However, 97.8% wear a mask or cover their face when going
outside their house.
Finally, we have direct view counts of each video from YouTube (displayed in Appendix B, Figure B6). All treatments had similar viewing rates, on average 1.14%.
The low viewing rate is consistent with the literature on click-through-rates, which
documents low rates (0.3%-2.6%) (Richardson et al., 2007; Kanich et al., 2008). Despite this, given the large reach of the messaging campaign, 279,800 unique individuals
eventually clicked on the link to watch the video. In what follows, we focus on treatment as receiving our treatment SMS (intention-to-treat from the perspective of the
YouTube video) and the spillovers from the Jio to the non-Jio individuals within a
PIN code.
3. Results
3.1. Reporting Symptoms to Health Workers. Because every message encouraged individuals to report symptoms to the ASHA, we examine how reporting rates
4

We used the WHO list of symptoms to distinguish between correct and incorrect symptoms. Correct symptoms include cough, shortness of breath, sore throat, feverloss of taste, loss of smell,
diarrhea, body aches, headaches, covid-toes, conjunctivitis, tiredness, chest pain, and rash. Incorrect symptoms include unny nose, vomiting, dizziness, itching,chills, and swelling in the legs and
feet

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

8

Table 1. ASHA Regressions
VARIABLES
TREATMENT

Observations
District FE
Total Rounds FE
Smartphone FE
Control Mean

(1)
(2)
Number of Fever Cases Number of Respiratory Cases
0.272
(0.082)
[0.001]

0.187
(0.083)
[0.024]

677
X
X
X
0.247

677
X
X
X
0.198

Notes: Both columns look at cases reported within a window of 5 days after broadcasting.
We include fixed effects for district, total number of survey rounds, and smartphone access,
and further control for the number of households the ASHA supervises. Standard errors
are clustered at the PIN code level and reported in parentheses, and p-values are reported
in brackets.

for fevers and respiratory issues responded to messaging. To isolate a reporting effect,
as opposed to possible effects on disease transmission itself, we look at reports within
a 5-day horizon of the intervention. Given that the average incubation period is 5.1
days (Li et al., 2020; Guan et al., 2020; Chan et al., 2020; Lauer et al., 2020), as well
as time lags for disease transmission, limiting ourselves to reports within 5 days of
the intervention means that is likely almost entirely capturing a change in reporting.
To show robustness, we study 3 and 4 day window periods (Appendix B, Tables B4
and B5) and find similar results there as well.
We estimate treatment effects using the following regression:
(3.1)

yj = βTreatmentj + δ 0 Xj + j

where yj is, for ASHA worker j, the number of reports of fever or of respiratory
symptoms. Reports include all means through which an ASHA might find out about
a case: through regular home visits, over the phone, or via the patient or their
household members approaching the ASHA in person. Xj is a vector of controls
including smartphone access and the number of households supervised by the ASHA
and fixed effects including district and total rounds of surveys done with the ASHA
within a 5 day horizon of the intervention. All standard errors are clustered at the
PIN code level. We find large effects on reporting. Reporting of fevers increases by

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

9

Table 2. Phone Survey Regressions
VARIABLES

(1)
Did you travel
outside your
village?

(2)
Number of
interactions
with people
within 2 arms
length

(3)
Estimated %
time washing
hands upon
returning home

(4)
Did you use a
mask?

(5)
Number of
conversations in
person /online
/mobile about
COVID-19

(6)
COVID-19
Knowledge
Index

Panel A: Pooled
TREATMENT

-0.074
(0.033)
[0.026]

-1.473
(1.164)
[0.206]

0.047
(0.023)
[0.044]

0.019
(0.009)
[0.042]

-2.099
(1.303)
[0.108]

0.097
(0.123)
[0.435]

Observations
District FE
Survey Day FE
Jio FE
Control Mean

1,883
X
X
X
0.370

1,875
X
X
X
11.052

1,821
X
X
X
0.675

1,883
X
X
X
0.978

1,881
X
X
X
11.678

1,883
X
X
X
5.135

Panel B: Jio
TREATMENT

-0.061
(0.043)
[0.155]

0.421
(1.527)
[0.783]

0.012
(0.030)
[0.694]

0.023
(0.014)
[0.088]

-0.539
(1.604)
[0.737]

0.227
(0.140)
[0.106]

Observations
District FE
Survey Day FE
Control Mean

1,082
X
X
0.376

1,076
X
X
10.096

1,046
X
X
0.708

1,082
X
X
0.976

1,082
X
X
11.368

1,082
X
X
5.088

Panel C: Non Jio
TREATMENT

-0.094
(0.057)
[0.100]

-3.869
(2.073)
[0.063]

0.088
(0.036)
[0.015]

0.011
(0.012)
[0.349]

-3.794
(2.121)
[0.074]

-0.077
(0.199)
[0.699]

Observations
District FE
Survey Day FE
Control Mean

801
X
X
0.362

799
X
X
12.190

775
X
X
0.636

801
X
X
0.981

799
X
X
12.048

801
X
X
5.190

Treat(Jio) =
Treat(non-Jio)

0.645

0.112

0.100

0.492

0.221

0.174

Notes: All columns control for district and survey day fixed effects. Panel A also includes a Jio access fixed effect. The last row
presents p-values for a test of equality between treatment effects in the Jio and non-Jio samples. Respondent level controls also
include age, gender and smartphone access. Standard errors are clustered at the PIN code level and reported in parentheses, and
p-values are reported in brackets.

110% relative to the control mean (p = 0.001) and reporting of respiratory symptoms
increases by 94% (p = 0.024). In the absence of widespread community testing to
track disease spread, this is an extremely important and promising result.
3.2. Effects of Messaging. Next we report on self-reports of behavior in the community. Table 2 presents estimated treatment effects, pooling all eight messages.
Panel A presents results across the entire sample, including both Jio recipients and
non-Jio community members. Panels B and C restrict results to Jio recipients and to
non-Jio community members, respectively. In all cases, for respondent i in PIN code

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

10

p and on survey day t, we estimate
(3.2)

yipt = βTreatmentp + δ 0 Xipt + ipt

where yipt is one of the following outcomes: traveling outside the village, interactions within two arms’ length, percent of times washing hands upon returning home,
mask usage when leaving home, conversations about COVID-19, and knowledge about
COVID-19. Treatmentp indicates whether the PIN code p was assigned to any of the
eight treatment messages, and Xipt is a vector of controls including a district fixed
effect, a survey day fixed effect, a dummy for i being a Jio user, and controls for age,
gender and smartphone access. All standard errors are clustered at the PIN code
level.
We begin by examining behaviors mentioned explicitly in messaging (columns 1-3).
In column 1, we see that being in a treated PIN code decreased travel outside one’s
village by 20% (p = 0.026). These effects are statistically indistinguishable in the Jio
and non-Jio samples and if anything, appear to be smaller in magnitude in the Jio
sample. As noted already, the Jio sample is quite different from the non-Jio sample
so we focus on the fact that there is an effect in the non-Jio sample, rather than the
difference between the two samples.
Treatment had no statistically detectable effect on social interactions that were not
appropriately socially distanced, with a 13.3% decline (p = 0.206, column 2) relative
to a base of 11.05 interactions with others within two arms’ distance in control villages.
This effect is larger among non-Jio users (31.7% decline, p = 0.063), but dampened
by an insignificant 4.2% (p = 0.783) increase in interactions among Jio users.
Column 3 shows treatment increased the rate of estimated hand washing upon
returning home from outside by 7% (p = 0.044) relative to the control village mean
of 67.5%. Again, the effect is indistinguishable from zero for Jio users (p = 0.694) but
large for non-Jio users, who report increases in handwashing by 13.8% (p = 0.015).
Column 4 reports impact on a behavior that was not directly targeted. Despite
a high baseline use rates of masks (97.8%), treatment spilled over to that behavior:
mask usage increased by 1.9pp (p = 0.042). We find this increase in both the Jio
and non-Jio samples, though less precisely than in the pooled sample. In Appendix
B, Table B3, we look at respondents’ estimates of mask usage by others in their
community and find a 4.0% (p = 0.037) increase relative to the control village mean
of 77.2%.

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

11

The key result is thus that the intervention induced behavioral changes both in
reporting of symptoms and in prevention behavior and spilling over on to behaviors
that were not mentioned in the video, and these changes were at least as large in the
sample that was not directly treated, indicating large-scale community diffusion.
The next two columns investigate whether direct communication was a likely mechanism for this community diffusion. Column (7) looks at knowledge about COVID-19.
Knowledge also slightly improved in the Jio treated group (4.5%, p = 0.106), though
not in the non-Jio group (the point estimate is a reduction of 1.4%, p = 0.699 in the
knowledge index of this group). We don’t find evidence that the intervention sparked
conversations: in column 5 we estimate an 18% decline in the number of conversations
(in-person/online/on mobile) regarding COVID-19 (p = 0.108). The drop is particularly large among non-Jio community members (31.4%, p = 0.074), while for Jio
recipients it is indistinguishable from zero (p = 0.737). These findings are consistent
with people having fewer in-person interactions within 2 arms’ distance–as we report
above, there is a large effect on this measure of distancing though it is not significant
in the pooled sample–and not fully compensating for the missed conversations, be it
in person, over phone, on chat, or by other means. This interpretation explains both
the large drop in conversations for the non-Jio sample, who also report far fewer inperson interactions, and the small drop in conversations in the Jio sample, for whom
there is no drop in in-person interactions. The finding that mass messaging doesn’t
necessarily spark conversations on a complicated topic is also consistent with other
recent empirical work in India (Banerjee et al., 2019). Overall it does not appear
likely that it is through conversations about COVID-19 that the intervention led to
diffusion: it seems more likely to have come from direct observations and imitation
of behavior.
3.3. Effects by Content. We next separately analyze the three message topics and
show results in Figure 1. In Appendix B, Figures B4 and B5, we further disaggregate
this analysis for both the Jio and non-Jio samples. Here, we fit a separate regression
for each of the three topics (behavior, motivation, and ostracism), including dummies
for the two message variants within a topic and omitting a dummy for the control
group. We adjust for the same covariates as in Table 2 and use the specification
(3.3)

yipt = α + βm1 Vpm1 + βm2 Vpm2 + δ 0 Xipt + ipt .

Here m indexes each of the three regressions conducted, one for each of behavior,
motivation, and ostracism. Vpm1 and Vpm2 are dummies for the message variants

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

12

Figure 1. Effects by Content
% time handwash upon returning home

SD

Hyg

Ext

Int

NO

Neut

.02
0

−.15

−4

−3

−.1

−2

.04

−1

.06

−.05

0

.08

1

.1

No. of interactions with
people within 2 arms length

0

Did you travel outside your village?

SD

Hyg

Ext

Int

NO

Neut

SD

Hyg

Ext

Int

NO

Neut

SD = Hyg : 0.94 | Ext = Int : 0.35 | NO = Neut : 0.59

Did you use a mask?

Number of conversations
in person/online/mobile
about COVID−19

COVID−19 Knowledge Index

0

.2

−5

−.2

−4

.01

0

−3

−2

.02

−1

.03

0

.4

SD = Hyg : 0.09 | Ext = Int : 0.43 | NO = Neut : 0.77

.04

SD = Hyg : 0.63 | Ext = Int : 0.82 | NO = Neut : 0.55

SD

Hyg

Ext

Int

NO

Neut

SD = Hyg : 0.46 | Ext = Int : 0.91 | NO = Neut : 0.64

SD

Hyg

Ext

Int

NO

Neut

SD = Hyg : 0.87 | Ext = Int : 0.43 | NO = Neut : 0.78

SD

Hyg

Ext

Int

NO

Neut

SD = Hyg : 0.84 | Ext = Int : 0.69 | NO = Neut : 0.40

Notes: This figure presents estimated treatment effects by message content, with each panel
presenting the treatment effect on a separate outcome. For all regressions, we use district and
survey day, as well as controls for age, gender, smartphone access, and Jio access. Within each
panel, the point and whiskers give point estimate and 90% confidence intervals, and vertical lines
separate estimates from different regressions. The note below each pane presents the p-value for a
test of equality between the noted pairs of coefficients. Standard errors are clustered at the PIN
code level. SD - ”Social Distancing”, Hyg - ”Hygiene”, Ext - ”Externality + Internality”, Int ”Internality Only”, NO - ”No Ostracism”, Neut - ”Neutral”. Sample size varies from 1821
observations (estimated handwash) to 1883 observations (travel outside village).

(e.g., for the behavior topic, these are dummies for social distancing and hygiene,
respectively), and βm1 and βm2 are the respective effects. Standard errors are clustered
at the PIN code level. Each pane in Figure 1 plots estimates for βm1 and βm2 for a
common outcome, across topics and the standard errors are clustered at PIN code
level. To emphasize that we fit separate regressions for each topic, we use vertical
bars within each pane to distinguish estimates from different regressions.
The main takeaway is that, for the most part, we cannot distinguish the impact
of any particular emphasis within each topic. For example, we cannot reject that a
message that spent more time on hygiene had the same impact on travel outside the

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

13

village as one explicitly geared to encourage social distancing, with minimal focus on
hygiene (p = 0.63).
Taken together, the results suggest that messaging on any subtopic is sufficient to
spillover not only to other people, but also onto other behaviors. This, combined
with the fact that this is an information-rich environment where it is difficult to get
people to pay attention to messages, suggests that short messages are likely to be
most effective.

4. Discussion
Public health behaviors and messages that inform and encourage them are thought
to be crucial. Yet the marginal effect of a message in the setting of a rich information
environment is unclear. This is particularly true in the context of the novel respiratory virus COVID-19, where individuals were bombarded with information that was
initially evolving rapidly, and may have been confusing and frightening.
India has deployed a variety of different strategies to try and inform individuals about the health-promoting behaviors. These strategies include replacing mobile
caller tune with an informational jingle on COVID-19 across telecom operators, getting popular celebrities to talk about COVID-19 on television and promoting COVID19 related videos on the official YouTube channel (cal, 2020).5 However, even in this
rich information environment, there is still scope to improve public health behaviors
since social distancing often fails and hand-washing rates are low.
We find large effects with large spillovers in a light-touch campaign. Messaging
27% of community members leads to large improvements in distancing and hygiene
in the entire community and mask use, which was not part of the campaign, also went
up.
Consistent with prior work (rates of 0.3%-2.6%), our SMS blast caused only a
small fraction to watch the actual video messages (Richardson et al., 2007; Kanich
et al., 2008). The share of videos watched on average is 1.14% and does not vary
by message content. Combined with the effect on non-targeted behavior and nontargeted community members, this suggests that the video had indirect impacts on
many who did not watch them.
This rapid diffusion of behavior is particularly intriguing in a context where social
interactions were generally discouraged, and where our intervention itself aimed to
5A

video from the government YouTube campaign can be found - here

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

14

reduce social interactions (and did to an extent, by reducing trips outside the village, and for the non-Jio population, intimate contact even with people inside the
village). Indeed, we find reductions in conversations (in-person/online/on mobile)
about COVID-19. This highlights that one cost of improved adherence to social
distancing guidelines is a decrease in information flow in the community.
But despite this decreased information flows, reporting of symptoms and adherence
to preventive behaviors increased. This could be due to a shift in social norms–people
observe others adhering to the new rules and do the same.
Our results point to several important policy implications. First, there is value
in persistent messaging, at least by celebrities. Though there is a lot of existing
information, a new message can act as a useful nudge and reminder and this may
be particularly important if the conditions change and updating the information is
necessary. Second, given that governments have a fixed budget for messages and
since within-community spillovers are large, it is important to disseminate the messages broadly across many communities, rather than instead using the same budget
to target more people within a particular community. Third, the exact content of the
message may not matter in such cases, since the information is out there and what is
needed is a nudge to pay attention to it. Indeed, the literature finds that very long
messages hurt comprehension so the message should be short rather than comprehensive (Abaluck and Gruber, 2011; Beshears et al., 2013; Carvalho and Silverman,
2019). Fourth, behavior and knowledge are not one-to-one. We have observed large
shifts in distancing, hygiene, and mask-wearing despite little-to-no shifts in knowledge. Emphasis on behavior seems to be paramount. On net, the results suggest an
important role for messaging by credible individuals.

References
(2020): “India TV, Jio, Airtel spreading coronavirus precautions through caller
tunes: Here’s how it works,” https://www.indiatvnews.com/technology/
news-jio-airtel-coronavirus-precautions-caller-tunes-how-it-works-596078,
accessed on 16 June 2020.
Abaluck, J. and J. Gruber (2011): “Choice inconsistencies among the elderly:
Evidence from plan choice in the Medicare Part D program,” American Economic
Review, 101, 1180–1210.

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

15

Alatas, V., A. G. Chandrasekhar, M. Mobius, B. A. Olken, and C. Paladines (2019): “When Celebrities Speak: A Nationwide Twitter Experiment Promoting Vaccination in Indonesia,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Banerjee, A. V., E. Breza, A. G. Chandrasekhar, and B. Golub (2019):
“When less is more: Experimental evidence on information delivery during India’s
demonetization,” Available at SSRN 3163930.
Beshears, J., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian (2013): “Simplification and saving,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 95, 130–145.
Carvalho, L. and D. Silverman (2019): “Complexity and Sophistication,” Tech.
rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Chan, J. F.-W., S. Yuan, K.-H. Kok, K. K.-W. To, H. Chu, J. Yang,
F. Xing, J. Liu, C. C.-Y. Yip, R. W.-S. Poon, et al. (2020): “A familial
cluster of pneumonia associated with the 2019 novel coronavirus indicating personto-person transmission: A study of a family cluster,” The Lancet, 395, 514–523.
Department of Telecommunications, India (2019): “Telecom Statistics India2019,”
https://dot.gov.in/sites/default/files/Telecom%20Statistics%
20India-2019.pdf?download=1, accessed 04 June 2020.
Guan, W.-j., Z.-y. Ni, Y. Hu, W.-h. Liang, C.-q. Ou, J.-x. He, L. Liu,
H. Shan, C.-l. Lei, D. S. Hui, et al. (2020): “Clinical characteristics of
coronavirus disease 2019 in China,” New England journal of medicine, 382, 1708–
1720.
Kanich, C., C. Kreibich, K. Levchenko, B. Enright, G. M. Voelker,
V. Paxson, and S. Savage (2008): “Spamalytics: An empirical analysis of spam
marketing conversion,” in Proceedings of the 15th ACM conference on Computer
and communications security, 3–14.
Kissler, S. M., C. Tedijanto, M. Lipsitch, and Y. Grad (2020): “Social
distancing strategies for curbing the COVID-19 epidemic,” medRxiv.
Lauer, S. A., K. H. Grantz, Q. Bi, F. K. Jones, Q. Zheng, H. R. Meredith,
A. S. Azman, N. G. Reich, and J. Lessler (2020): “The incubation period
of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) from publicly reported confirmed cases:
Estimation and application,” Annals of internal medicine, 172, 577–582.
Lewnard, J. A. and N. C. Lo (2020): “Scientific and ethical basis for socialdistancing interventions against COVID-19,” The Lancet. Infectious diseases.

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

16

Li, Q., X. Guan, P. Wu, X. Wang, L. Zhou, Y. Tong, R. Ren, K. S.
Leung, E. H. Lau, J. Y. Wong, et al. (2020): “Early transmission dynamics
in Wuhan, China, of novel coronavirus–infected pneumonia,” New England Journal
of Medicine.
Ministry
of
Health
and
Family
Welfare,
India (2020):
“Micro
Plan
for
Containing
Local
Transmission
of
Coronavirus
Disease
(COVID-19),”
https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/
ModelMicroplanforcontainmentoflocaltransmissionofCOVID19.pdf, accessed
on 04 June 2020.
Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner, India (2011):
“STATE OF LITERACY,” https://censusindia.gov.in/
2011-prov-results/data_files/india/Final_PPT_2011_chapter6.pdf,
accessed 04 June 2020.
Prather, K. A., C. C. Wang, and R. T. Schooley (2020): “Reducing transmission of SARS-CoV-2,” Science.
Richardson, M., E. Dominowska, and R. Ragno (2007): “Predicting clicks:
Estimating the click-through rate for new ads,” in Proceedings of the 16th international conference on World Wide Web, 521–530.

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

17

Appendix A. Study Design and Details
A.1. Data Collection and Sample Characteristics.
A.1.1. Survey of Present and Ex Village Council Members. India has a well-established
system of local government with village councils (small clusters of villages with a common council, known as Gram Panchayat) at its core. The councils are composed of
elected representatives from each administrative unit (known as ward) in the cluster
of villages. The term of a village council member lasts for 5 years. They are charged
with ensuring basic amenities in the cluster of villages, implementation of government
schemes, as well as other functions related to planning, and upkeep of welfare. Village
councils derive legal authority from the 73rd amendment to the Indian Constitution,
passed in 1992. The amendment also mandated a quota-based affirmative action system wherein a fraction of council member seats is reserved on a rotating basis for
historically disadvantaged groups of Schedules Castes (SCs), Scheduled Tribes (STs)
and women. The fraction of reserved seats for SCs and STs depends on each group’s
population share. 6 At least one-third of all council member seats have to be reserved
for women and this proportion is maintained even within the seats reserved for SCs
and STs. Moreover, in 2010, the West Bengal government decided to increase the
share of seats reserved for women from one-third to half, to be operational from the
2013 elections.
Our sampling frame consisted of a publicly available directory of 44,312 present
and ex village council members from 3,340 village councils across 19 districts in West
Bengal. The directory included village council members from 2017, and 19.64% of
our respondents were active village council members.
Postal code information was extracted where possible, for each council, and mapped
onto the list of PIN codes that received treatment and control SMS. We were able to
map 11,614 council members onto our PIN code database.
We started surveying the random sample of previous and current village council
members two days after the broadcast, on May 8th, 2020, and continued until May
19th, 2020. The surveys were conducted by phone.
Enumerators were randomly assigned approximately 50 phone numbers to attempt
per day, stratifying on treatment status. In order to obtain an appropriate number of
observations each day for inference, numbers were attempted only once, and respondents that did not receive the call after a single attempt were tried again at the end
6The

exact implementation varies by state.

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

18

of the day, and not contacted further at any point in the experiment if they did not
pick up at the second attempt. If the respondent asked to be called again at a later
time, we would do that. However, if in their second call they asked to be called at a
later time again, we did not call a third time.
For the same reason, the survey was conducted with the person who received the
call, provided they consented and were willing. We asked the respondent whether
they currently held the post of a village council member, in order to track which of
our respondents currently held council positions.
We collected our primary outcomes as follows:
(1) Travel outside village
Respondents were asked the following question:
“Including yesterday and the day before yesterday, where did you go outside
your village? Think about the time when you went to the market which may
have been outside of your village or when you went to a bank or a hospital
outside your village or for any other reason whatsoever”. Respondents were
given the option of choosing if they went to another village, another town,
another city, any combination of these 3 options, or they did not go out of
their village in the last 2 days. If the respondent said they visited either
another village, town, city, or any combination of these options, they were
considered to have exited from the village in the last 2 days, for our purposes.
(2) Interactions
In order to measure interactions, we asked respondents the number of people
they came within 2 arms distance of, excluding members of their household,
within their village, in the last 2 days. Enumerators related the following script
to the respondents, to help them think about people they met intentionally,
as well as those they came into contact with unintentionally.
“Think of both the people you purposefully met with as well as close contact
that was unintentional. Like, if you went to a shop, count both the shopkeeper
as well as other people who were there to buy things and were within 2 arms
distance of you. Think about anybody you ate a meal or had tea with, anybody you stopped to talk to (be it at work, at the tea stalls, medicine shops
or on way to buy ration etc.), anybody you socialized with (spent time with,
outside your family-watching TV together, played games with), anybody you
worked closely with, anybody who’s home you visited or anybody who visited
your home.”

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

19

Those who visited other villages, towns, or cities were also asked the number
of people they came within 2 arms distance of, in each of these locations. Total
interactions were measured by summing up the number of people respondents
had interacted with, within their own village, as well as outside over the past
2 days.
(3) Conversations about COVID-19
We asked respondents the following questions to assess levels of conversation
and learning about COVID-19 in the community:
(a) Whether they had given any information or advice to anyone in their
village about COVID-19 over the phone, on WhatsApp, in person, or
through any other means, over the last 2 days.
(b) The number of people in their village they gave information or advice to,
if they did, over the last 2 days.
(c) Whether they had received any information or advice from anyone in
their village about COVID-19 over the phone, on WhatsApp, in person,
or through any other means, over the last 2 days.
(d) The number of people in their village that they received advice from, if
they did, over the last 2 days.
To calculate the total number of conversations in Table 1, we summed
the number of persons the respondent gave advice to, (point b. above) and
the number they received advice from (point d. above). Conversations are
measured over 2 days.
(4) Frequency of washing hands
To measure the level of hand washing, respondents were asked to think
about a typical person in their village. If this person went out 10 times a
day, they were asked the number of times upon returning home a typical
person would wash their hands with soap, for over 20 seconds. Respondents
were asked to think about a typical person in their community, in order to
eliminate any demand effects that may arise as a result of asking them about
their own hand washing behavior.
(5) Mask usage
In order to measure mask usage, respondents were asked the following:
(a) Out of 100 people in their village, how many are wearing masks.
(b) Whether they themselves wear a mask or anything else such as handkerchief to cover their face when they go out.

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

20

(c) Whether they agree or disagree with the statement “If you wear a mask,
you can meet and interact with people as you like”. This was asked to
only a subset of respondents (randomized to appear in the digital survey
25 percent of the time).
(d) Whether they agree or disagree with the statement “If I wear a mask and
go out in my location, I will not feel judged or people will not look at me
differently”. This was asked to only a subset of respondents (randomized
to appear in the digital survey 25 percent of the time).
Items 4. and 5. were asked on a 5-point Likert scale, ranging from “Agree
Strongly” to “Disagree Strongly”, with a neutral midpoint. In table 2., we
report on the respondent’s own mask usage (point b. from the list above).
(6) Knowledge of symptoms and precautions
We asked respondents to list the symptoms of coronavirus, as well as the
precautions that people could take to avoid contracting the virus. The list of
symptoms consisted of correct, as well as incorrect symptoms, and the list of
precautions consisted of correct as well as incorrect precautions.
• The correct symptoms included in the list were: cough, shortness of
breath, sore throat, fever, loss of taste, loss of smell, diarrhea, body
aches, headaches, rashes on one’s feet or body, conjunctivitis, tiredness,
and chest pain. We used the WHO list of symptoms to differentiate
between correct and incorrect symptoms.
• The incorrect symptoms included in the list were: runny nose, vomiting,
dizziness, itching, chills and swelling in legs and feet.
• The correct precautions included in the list were: not going to work,
wearing a mask, washing hands, using hand-sanitizer, social distancing,
wearing clean clothes, not spitting, covering one’s mouth when sneezing
or coughing, wearing gloves and not touching one’s face.
• The incorrect precautions included in the list were: having herbs, drinking
hot water, drinking chemical substances, drinking alcohol, taking antibiotics, taking anti-malarial medication and eating hot food.
Respondents were first asked to enumerate the symptoms of coronavirus, to
the best of their ability, without the enumerator reading out any options from
the list. We then read out items from the list that the respondent had not
mentioned previously, and asked them if they believed it was a symptom of

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

21

the virus or not. This was recorded in a separate variable. The same process
was followed for precautions.
We then calculated the total correct symptoms listed by the respondent,
by summing the number of correct symptoms they were able to tell us, without priming. The total correct precautions were also calculated in the same
manner. Total incorrect symptoms were calculated by summing the number
of incorrect symptoms mentioned by the respondent, without priming. Total
incorrect precautions were also calculated in the same manner.
We then created a “knowledge index” for each respondent, (reported in
Table 2), using the following formula:
total number of correct symptoms - total number of incorrect symptoms +
total number of correct precautions - total number of incorrect precautions
We collected demographic information and other variables as follows:
(1) Demographic Variables
We collected basic demographic information on respondents including:
(a) Gender
(b) Age
(c) District: The name of the administrative division within the state of West
Bengal, in which they lived.
(d) Subdistrict: The name of the administrative division within the district,
in which they lived.
(e) Village: The name of the village, within the subdistrict, in which they
lived.
(f) Gram Panchayat (Village Council)- The name of the village council under
which their village was governed.
(g) Location: Whether they live in a village, town or city. For our purposes,
a city was defined as a district headquarter or bigger than that. A town
is a subdistrict headquarter. Everything smaller than that is a village.
(h) PIN Code: The Postal Index Number (PIN) of the village in which they
live. We used this information to then merge with the list of PIN Codes
that Jio had delivered the different messages to, in order to obtain the
treatment status of the respondent.
(i) Village council membership: Whether they were currently holding office
as a village council member.

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

22

(j) Smartphone access: Whether they, or anyone in their household possessed
a smartphone.
(k) Jio access: Whether they, or anyone in their household, possessed a Jio
sim card.
(2) Other Secondary data
(a) Population: We asked respondents to estimate the population of their
village.
(b) Probability of Travel: We asked respondents to estimate the number of
people from their village, that exited the village, in the last 2 days. Specifically, we asked: “Think about your friends, relatives or other people in
your village you know, between yesterday and the day before yesterday
how many people went out of the village?”. Based on the answer they
provided to the above question, we asked them to estimate the number
of people who exited to go to another village (a), the number that exited
to go to another town (b), and the number who exited to go to another
city (c), out of the total that exited in the last 2 days (x).
The proportion of the village that exited (y) was calculated by dividing
the total number of people that exited the village (x), by the total village
population estimated by the respondent in 1.
Probabilities of traveling from the village to another village, town or city
was estimated as per the below:
(i) Probability of traveling from the village to another village = proportion of the village that exited (y)*the number that exited to go
to another village(a) / the total number that exited (x)
(ii) Probability of traveling from the village to another town = proportion of the village that exited (y)*the number that exited to go to
another town (b) / the total number that exited (x)
(iii) Probability of traveling from the village to another city = proportion of the village that exited (y)*the number that exited to go to
another city (c) / the total number that exited (x)
(c) Distances: We asked respondents to think of the last village that they or
someone they know had visited, and to estimate the distance from their
current village to that village. We similarly asked them to estimate the
distance to the last town and the last city that they or someone they
know had visited. Questions on distances were asked to only a subset

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

23

of respondents (randomized to appear in the digital survey 25 percent of
the time).
(d) Migration: Respondents were asked the following questions on persons
who had recently returned back to their village from other places in the
country:
(i) Whether any members of their household who lived and worked outside the village had come back home since the beginning of March,
and how many such household members had returned. This was
asked to a subset of respondents (randomized to appear in the digital survey 25 percent of the time).
(ii) Whether any other persons had visited/come to stay with them
since the beginning of March, and how many such persons had done
so. This included friends, relatives, new brides etc., who stayed in
their home for a night or longer. This was asked to a subset of
respondents (randomized to appear in the digital survey 25 percent
of the time).
(iii) We also asked them to estimate the number of households in their
village, that had any new persons coming to stay with them since
the beginning of March.
(e) YouTube Views: All of our treatment videos were shared with respondents via a private YouTube link. We were able to capture the total
number of views on each video, as well as the number of unique views, as
per data provided by YouTube.

A.1.2. Survey of Health Workers. Accredited social health activists (ASHAs) are
community level health workers that are generally responsible for serving the health
needs of approximately 1000 residents of a single village. Instituted by the government of India’s Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) as a part of the
National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) in 2005, ASHAs are selected from amongst
the female members of the village, and are required to live in the same village they
serve in. Their primary tasks include overseeing immunization of children, catering to
the needs of pregnant and lactating women by providing basic pre and post natal care,
spreading awareness on good health practices and sanitation, treating basic illnesses,
keeping demographic records, and monitoring those suffering from non-communicable
diseases. ASHA workers are meant to be the link between the community and the

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

24

public health system. At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, ASHAs were repurposed to be the first point of contact for COVID-related concerns in villages (Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare, India, 2020). They were required to keep track of the
incidence of COVID related symptoms by conducting house visits, referring suspected
cases to higher hospitals, and keeping a check on the number of migrants returning
from other parts of the country, to the village.
We built a database of health worker contact information across 19 districts in West
Bengal using our village council directory. We randomly sampled 5,253 individuals
from this directory, and contacted them to obtain the contact details of the health
worker in their village. This list of respondents was separate from the 11,614 members
that were sampled for the outcomes survey.
Enumerators were randomly assigned 15 phone numbers to attempt each day. For
making initial contact, health workers that did not receive the call were tried again
the following day, after which they were dropped. For follow up surveys, respondents
were tried again for 2 more days, after they did not receive their follow-up call, before
being dropped from further data collection.
On contacting a health worker for the first time, we received information on demographics, the area and number of households they were in charge of, the number
of households they visited, the number of recent migrants that had returned to their
areas, and the number of cases of fever, cough, respiratory illness, anosmia and rashes
around the feet in their area for the previous 3 days. We then obtained permission to
conduct follow up surveys with them at 3-day intervals. For the health workers that
agreed to follow-ups, we called them 3 days later to obtain data on cases of fever,
cough, respiratory illness, anosmia and rashes on the feet again.

A.2. Data Quality Assurance Procedures.
• Data Checks: Incoming data was scrutinized on a daily basis for enumerator
productivity, respondent refusal rates, successful call rates, total survey duration, section wise survey duration, the rate of responses that were coded
as “Do Not Know”, and outliers greater than 2 standard deviations from the
mean. The above items were observed at an enumerator level as well as at an
aggregate level. Unreasonable outliers were cross verified with the enumerator
who had conducted the survey.
• Accompaniments: 10 percent of outcome surveys, and 30 percent of health
worker surveys were also observed by senior field staff. Senior enumerators

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

25

were on the same phone call with the respondent, along with the enumerator conducting the survey. The senior field staff members were required to
record responses, and submit a separate survey form, for all calls they observed. Responses from the senior enumerator’s form and the enumerator’s
form were cross checked, to ensure minimal discrepancies across all members
of the survey team.

A.3. Randomization and Intervention. The list of candidate PIN codes comes
from two sources: a dataset of PIN codes from data.gov.in dated May 2019, and an
unofficial repository of PIN codes mirrored from the “PIN code Search” tool on the
official India Post website. We classify each PIN code as either a city PIN code or a
non-city PIN code.
PIN codes do not have precise geographical boundaries, so we use a geocoding
procedure to identify city pin codes. First, we query the Google Maps API to locate
the centroid of each PIN code as depicted on Google Maps. Then, we overlay these
centroids onto a shapefile of West Bengal and define city PIN codes as those whose
centroids fall inside a polygon with a population of at least 100,000. We exclude 50
PIN codes that we could not classify as city or non-city using this procedure, resulting
in a sample of 1214 PIN codes.
We assign treatment at the PIN code level using stratified randomization, stratifying at the district level outside cities, and at the district and city level inside cities.
We present basic demographics for our treatment and control units as well as results
from balance tests in Appendix Table S1.
Treatment videos use the following script:
“This is Abhijit Banerjee. I am stuck very far away but my heart is
with you in West Bengal. I am sending you a set of suggestions and
requests from the government of West Bengal and myself.
West Bengal, like the rest of the world, is fighting the spread of an
unseen and unknown enemy. It won’t be won in a few days, it’s going
to take some months at least. On the other hand, while it is very
contagious, most people get better in a matter of days. We need to be
careful, not petrified.
Please forward this message to others on the phone via WhatsApp
or text about it. Do not physically meet others to share it, you may
pass the virus or get sick yourself.

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

• (Only in Hygiene-focused): To prevent getting the virus, wash
your hands frequently and well with soap and water, especially
after going out of the house. Without soap the virus will still stay
on your hand. Count 30 while washing. Avoid touching your face
as far as possible.
• (Only in Social Distancing-focused): To prevent getting the virus
avoid going to any crowded places—markets, hospitals, meetings,
as far possible. Try to stay at least 2 meters from the nearest
person when you are outside the house, even when you are doing
allowed activities such as groceries, bank, work or even your next
door neighbors.
Also please do not spit. If you have to cough or sneeze don’t cough
or sneeze into your hands. Use your elbow or your clothes or a handkerchief or a towel, but remember to boil them after use before hanging
them to dry
• (Only in Internality + Externality-focused): By doing so you protect the community and especially the elderly and otherwise vulnerable people in your neighborhood.
• (Only in No-Ostracism): If you or your family members have a
cough and fever, it does not have to be corona. No one has the
right to ostracize you for having the disease. If that happens let
the local ASHA know.
• (Ostracism not mentioned): If you or your family members have
a cough and fever, it does not have to be corona.
And/However if you or your family members have a cough and fever,
just to be safe, please report it to the ASHA or on West Bengal government’s Shondhane app so that the government can track the spread
of the disease and try to control it. Be well, don’t lose hope, and please
accept my greetings. ”

26

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

27

Appendix B. Tables and Figures

Table B1. Balance Table

Variable

(1)
Control
N
Mean/SE

(2)
Treatment
N
Mean/SE

T-test
P-value
(1)-(2)

Respondent age

242

44.996
(0.674)

1747

44.858
(0.253)

0.849

Respondent gender

242

0.202
(0.026)

1747

0.170
(0.009)

0.212

Respondent or at least someone in family has a Jio connection

230

0.543
(0.033)

1653

0.580
(0.012)

0.292

Has a smartphone?

242

0.740
(0.028)

1747

0.726
(0.011)

0.650

Are you currently a gram panchayat member?

214

0.196
(0.027)

1573

0.196
(0.010)

0.995

Notes: The value displayed for t-tests are p-values.

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

28

Table B2. Background Conversations Survey
Mean
Outgoing phone calls made
26.432
Social Distancing messages received 20.248
Mask usage messages received
17.176
Messages received on washing hands 16.863

SD
29.443
19.030
17.135
16.359

N
405
408
408
408

Notes: Respondents were asked the total number of outgoing
phone calls they had made, and the number of messages on
social distancing, washing hands, and using masks they had
heard or received in the last 2 days.

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

29

Table B3. Phone Survey Regressions
In the last two days (Winsorized at 97.5%-ile)
(1)
Number of interactions
with people within 2 arms
length

(2)
Number of conversations in
person /online /mobile
about COVID-19

Belief
(3)
Belief about mask
usage in community

(4)
About Symptomatic
Rate

(5)
About Asymptomatic
Rate

Panel A: Pooled
TREATMENT

-1.091
(1.458)
[0.455]

-3.056
(1.765)
[0.084]

0.031
(0.015)
[0.037]

0.005
(0.020)
[0.783]

-0.002
(0.003)
[0.377]

Observations
district FE
survey day FE
jio FE
Control Mean

1,875
X
X
X
11.891

1,881
X
X
X
14.104

1,872
X
X
X
0.772

1,580
X
X
X
0.114

1,686
X
X
X
0.011

Panel B: Jio
TREATMENT

1.264
(1.873)
[0.500]

-1.847
(2.211)
[0.404]

0.040
(0.021)
[0.055]

0.054
(0.018)
[0.003]

-0.002
(0.004)
[0.519]

Observations
district FE
survey day FE
Control Mean

1,076
X
X
10.640

1,082
X
X
14.112

1,075
X
X
0.762

928
X
X
0.072

987
X
X
0.010

Panel C: Non-Jio
TREATMENT

-4.048
(2.573)
[0.117]

-4.210
(2.936)
[0.153]

0.020
(0.023)
[0.390]

-0.055
(0.039)
[0.162]

-0.002
(0.004)
[0.614]

Observations
district FE
survey day FE
Control Mean

799
X
X
13.381

799
X
X
14.095

797
X
X
0.784

652
X
X
0.166

699
X
X
0.013

Notes: Columns 1 and 2 are winsorized at 97.5%, as compared to 95% in table of main paper. All columns control for district and survey day fixed
effects and in panel A we have Jio access fixed effects as well. Respondent level controls also include age, gender and smartphone access. Standard
errors (clustered at PIN code level) are reported in parentheses and p-values are reported in brackets.

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

Table B4. ASHA Case Counts (Reports from May 7th to 8th)
VARIABLES

(1)
(2)
Number of Fever Cases Number of Respiratory Cases

TREATMENT

0.272
(0.111)
[0.015]

0.245
(0.101)
[0.016]

Observations
district FE
total rounds FE
smartphone FE
Control Mean

406
X
X
X
0.208

406
X
X
X
0.189

Notes: The case counts for both columns look at the window from 7th
to 8th May. We account for district, total rounds and smartphone fixed
effects. We also control for total households under the ASHA. Standard
errors (clustered at PIN code level) are reported in parentheses and p-values
are reported in brackets.

30

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

Table B5. ASHA Case Counts (Reports from May 7th to 9th)
VARIABLES

(1)
(2)
Number of Fever Cases Number of Respiratory Cases

TREATMENT

0.300
(0.091)
[0.001]

0.196
(0.088)
[0.027]

Observations
district FE
total rounds FE
smartphone FE
Control Mean

602
X
X
X
0.229

602
X
X
X
0.214

Notes: The case counts for both columns look at the window from 7th
to 9th May. We account for district, total rounds and smartphone fixed
effects. We also control for total households under the ASHA. Standard
errors (clustered at PIN code level) are reported in parentheses and p-values
are reported in brackets.

31

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

32

Figure B1. Effects over Time (Pooled Sample)
Did you travel
outside your village?
.4

Number of conversations
in person/online/mobile
about COVID−19

No. of interactions with
people within 2 arms length
20

5

.2

0

10

0

−5

0

−.2

−10

−.4

−15

% time handwash
upon returning home
.3
.2
.1

−10

Did you use a mask?
.15
.1

1

.05

0

COVID−19 Knowledge Index
2

0

0

−.1

−1

−.05

Do you know your ASHA?
.2

Symptomatic Rate

Asymptomatic Rate

.2

.02

0

0
0

−.2

−.02
−.2

−.4
3 4 5 6 7 8

10

13 14

−.04
3 4 5 6 7 8

10

13 14

3 4 5 6 7 8

10

13 14

• For all plots, we have district and Jio access fixed effects, as well as controls
for age, gender and smartphone access. The dot represents the point estimate
and whiskers represent 90% confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered
at the PIN code level.
• The x-axis represents number of days post the broadcast message was sent.

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

33

Figure B2. Effects over Time (Jio Sample)
Did you travel
outside your village?
.5

20

10
5

0

10

0

0

−5

−10

−10

−.5

Number of conversations
in person/online/mobile
about COVID−19

No. of interactions with
people within 2 arms length

% time handwash
upon returning home

Did you use a mask?

COVID−19 Knowledge Index

.2

2

.2

.1

1

0

0

.4

0

−.2

−1

−.1

Do you know your ASHA?

−2

Symptomatic Rate

Asymptomatic Rate

.2

.5

.02

.1

0

0

0

−.02

−.1
−.5

−.04

−.2
3 4 5 6 7 8

10

13 14

3 4 5 6 7 8

10

13 14

3 4 5 6 7 8

10

13 14

• For all plots, we have district fixed effects, as well as controls for age, gender
and smartphone access. We keep only the sample which had access to Jio
connection. The dot represents the point estimate and whiskers represent
90% confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the PIN code level.
• The x-axis represents number of days post the broadcast message was sent.

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

34

Figure B3. Effects over Time (Non-Jio Sample)
Did you travel
outside your village?

Number of conversations
in person/online/mobile
about COVID−19

No. of interactions with
people within 2 arms length

.5

0

−.5

10

20

0

10

−10

0

−20

−10

−30

−20

% time handwash
upon returning home

Did you use a mask?

.4

.2

.2

.1

0

0

COVID−19 Knowledge Index
2
1
0

−.2

−1

−.1

Do you know your ASHA?

−2

Symptomatic Rate

Asymptomatic Rate
.05

.2

.5

0
0

0

−.2
−.4

−.5
3 4 5 6 7 8

10

13 14

−.05
3 4 5 6 7 8

10

13 14

3 4 5 6 7 8

10

13 14

• For all plots, we have district fixed effects, as well as controls for age, gender
and smartphone access. We keep the sample which did not have access to a
Jio connection. The dot represents the point estimate and whiskers represent
90% confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the PIN code level.
• The x-axis represents number of days post the broadcast message was sent.

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

35

Figure B4. Effects by Content (Jio Sample)
% time handwash upon returning home

SD

Hyg

Ext

Int

NO

Neut

−.05

−.15

−2

−1

−.1

0

0

−.05

1

.05

2

0

3

.1

No. of interactions with
people within 2 arms length

.05

Did you travel outside your village?

SD

Hyg

Ext

Int

NO

Neut

SD

Hyg

Ext

Int

NO

Neut

SD = Hyg : 0.79 | Ext = Int : 0.11 | NO = Neut : 0.55

Did you use a mask?

Number of conversations
in person/online/mobile
about COVID−19

COVID−19 Knowledge Index

0
−.2

−4

0

−2

.01

.02

0

.2

.03

2

.4

.04

4

.6

SD = Hyg : 0.74 | Ext = Int : 0.74 | NO = Neut : 0.84

.05

SD = Hyg : 0.70 | Ext = Int : 0.28 | NO = Neut : 0.14

SD

Hyg

Ext

Int

NO

Neut

SD = Hyg : 0.96 | Ext = Int : 0.93 | NO = Neut : 0.13

SD

Hyg

Ext

Int

NO

Neut

SD = Hyg : 0.27 | Ext = Int : 0.50 | NO = Neut : 0.67

SD

Hyg

Ext

Int

NO

Neut

SD = Hyg : 0.93 | Ext = Int : 0.32 | NO = Neut : 0.71

• For all plots, we have district and survey day fixed effects, as well as controls
for age, gender and smartphone access. We keep only the sample which had
access to Jio connection. The dot represents the point estimate and whiskers
represent 90% confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the PIN
code level. Sd - “Social Distancing”, Hyg - “Hygiene”, Ext - “Externality”,
Int - “Internality”, NO - “No Ostracism”, Neut - “Neutral”. Externality here
implies both ”Internality and Externality” was in the message.

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

36

Figure B5. Effects by Content (Non Jio Sample)
No. of interactions with
people within 2 arms length

% time handwash upon returning home

.1
0

−.3

−8

−6

−.2

.05

−4

−.1

−2

0

0

.15

.1

Did you travel outside your village?

SD

Hyg

Ext

Int

NO

Neut

SD

Hyg

Ext

Int

NO

Neut

SD

Hyg

Ext

Int

NO

Neut

SD = Hyg : 0.58 | Ext = Int : 0.70 | NO = Neut : 0.86

Did you use a mask?

Number of conversations
in person/online/mobile
about COVID−19

COVID−19 Knowledge Index

−8

−.6

−.01

−.4

−6

0

−.2

−4

.01

0

−2

.02

.2

0

.4

SD = Hyg : 0.03 | Ext = Int : 0.30 | NO = Neut : 0.96

.03

SD = Hyg : 0.65 | Ext = Int : 0.46 | NO = Neut : 0.01

SD

Hyg

Ext

Int

NO

Neut

SD = Hyg : 0.48 | Ext = Int : 0.90 | NO = Neut : 0.07

SD

Hyg

Ext

Int

NO

Neut

SD = Hyg : 0.30 | Ext = Int : 0.89 | NO = Neut : 0.97

SD

Hyg

Ext

Int

NO

Neut

SD = Hyg : 0.63 | Ext = Int : 0.65 | NO = Neut : 0.26

• For all plots, we have district and survey day fixed effects, as well as controls
for age, gender and smartphone access. We keep only the sample which did
not have access to a Jio connection. The dot represents the point estimate and
whiskers represent 90% confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at
the PIN code level. Sd - “Social Distancing”, Hyg -“Hygiene”, Ext - “Externality”, Int - “Internality”, NO - “No Ostracism”, Neut - “Neutral”. Externality
here implies both ”Internality and Externality” was in the message.

MESSAGES ON COVID-19 PREVENTION IN INDIA

37

Figure B6. YouTube View Count

uniqueviews
totalviews

40000

Views

30000
20000
10000
0

1

2

3

4
5
Treatment Video

6

7

8

• For each of the 8 treatment videos we provide both “Unique viewers” and
“Total views”.

