                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              NATURAL DISASTERS AND ELECTIVE MEDICAL SERVICES:
                        HOW BIG IS THE BOUNCE-BACK?

                                        Tatyana Deryugina
                                         Jonathan Gruber
                                         Adrienne Sabety

                                       Working Paper 27505
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27505


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2020




We thank David Cutler, Timothy Layton, Justin McKone, Halea Meese, Edward Norton, Julian
Reif, and Jonathan Roth for helpful suggestions. We thank Lauren Rice, Nikhil Bhasavappa,
Stephanie Li, Whitney Zhang, and Bhavik Nagda for exceptional research assistance. Research
reported in this publication was supported by the National Institute on Aging of the National
Institutes of Health under award number R01AG053350. The content is solely the responsibility
of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of
Health or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Tatyana Deryugina, Jonathan Gruber, and Adrienne Sabety. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Natural Disasters and Elective Medical Services: How Big is the Bounce-Back?
Tatyana Deryugina, Jonathan Gruber, and Adrienne Sabety
NBER Working Paper No. 27505
July 2020
JEL No. H12,I11,Q54

                                           ABSTRACT

COVID-19 has created a dual set of stresses on health care systems worldwide: a rise in
expensive intensive care services and a dramatic decline in elective services. The U.S.
government has responded with both grant and loan programs to help health care providers
weather the storm. But the optimal size and nature of such programs are hard to evaluate without
an understanding of the ability of providers to make up their lost elective service revenues over
time. In this paper, we study the closest relevant parallel to the reduction in elective services seen
under COVID-19: hurricanes. We match information on hurricanes to data on Medicare hospital
elective visits and charges from 1997-2013, comparing counties impacted by hurricanes to nearby
unaffected counties. We find that the average hurricane reduces elective services by about 7% in
the month it makes landfall. For the most severe hurricanes, we estimate a reduction of more than
20%. Services return to baseline fairly rapidly, but for severe hurricanes it takes a year or more to
make up lost revenues. Projections based on variation in hurricane severity suggest that it will
take over 3 years for providers to make up the lost revenue from COVID-19.

Tatyana Deryugina                                 Adrienne Sabety
Department of Finance                             NBER
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign        1050 Massachusetts Ave.
515 East Gregory Drive, MC-520                    Cambridge, MA
Champaign, IL 61820                               02138
and NBER                                          ahsabety@nber.org
deryugin@illinois.edu

Jonathan Gruber
Department of Economics, E52-434
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu
1     Introduction

COVID-19 has placed an enormous strain on health care systems worldwide. Much of the
focus has been on the inability of some health care systems to handle the volume of COVID-
19 cases. In particular, the overwhelmed hospital system in Italy and nursing home systems
in the U.S. and Europe have potentially led to thousands of needless deaths (Stockman et al.,
2020; Rudan, 2020; Bisserbe and Dalton, 2020; Kamp and Mathews, 2020).
    But the surge in cases of extreme illness is not the only pressure point for health care
providers. On the other side is the financial pressure from a reduced volume of elective care.
Social distancing desires as well as explicit rules put in place by local and federal leaders
have dramatically reduced the volume of elective care throughout the health care system,
with inpatient discharge volume declining by as much as 40% in the Northeast (FAIRHealth,
2020; CMS, 2020). Other providers, such as primary care physicians, have also experienced
a dramatic drop in the number of patients, with initial estimates suggesting that such visits
decreased by nearly 60% (Mehrotra et al., 2020). For some providers, such as hospitals, the
decline means a reduction in high-margin services at exactly the moment when they face the
strain of caring for the sickest.
    Policymakers in the U.S. have struggled to appropriately respond to the needs of providers.
The first source of pressure—high volumes of COVID-19 cases—is readily addressed through
higher reimbursement rates. In the U.S., hospital rates for the categories of care required
by COVID-19 patients were increased by 20% (Congress, 2020). There is an ongoing de-
bate about the right level of such adjustment, particularly given the extra requirements on
providers for new ventilators and personal protective equipment. But further adjustment of
reimbursement rates for providers treating COVID-19 patients can in principle address the
primary source of additional costs.
    The second source of pressure—reduced elective care—has proven more contentious. The
U.S. Congress appropriated $175 billion to the Trump Administration to distribute as grants
to providers to help them address this shortfall, but providers have argued that this is not

                                              1
sufficient (Tardi, 2020). In addition, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
has provided $34 billion in loans to providers in the form of advance payments of expected
Medicare charges—to be repaid 120 days later out of future payments at an interest rate of
10.25% (Morse, 2020). The HEROES Act recently proposed by the House of Representatives
would provide more grant funds as well as extend the repayment period and lower the interest
rate for CMS loans.
       This mixed set of grants and loans, and controversy over amounts and repayment con-
ditions, reflects a lack of clarity about whether this reduction in elective care represents a
permanent or temporary shock. Many health care providers have strong access to capital
markets, and others may benefit from emergency loan programs. If the reduced elective pro-
cedures are simply delayed, rather than canceled entirely, then such loans can be easily paid
back. But if elective surgeries return only to their pre-virus levels, or even remain below,
then providers may struggle to make up for this permanent loss in revenues.
       There is no experience in recent history exactly like COVID-19 that we can use to inform
this debate, but the impact of natural disasters offers a close parallel. Much like the virus,
natural disasters may lead to a dramatic reduction in the volume of elective care. On the
demand side, hurricanes, especially the most powerful, lead to significant increases in non-
employment, potentially reducing demand for health care (Deryugina, 2017). On the supply
side, hurricanes also cause widespread damage to hospital infrastructure, taking hospitals
offline for weeks, months, and even years (DeSalvo, Sachs and Hamm, 2008; Deryugina and
Molitor, 2019).1
       We therefore use U.S. hurricanes to help inform COVID-19’s long-term impact. We
recognize the limitations of such a parallel. Some are partially addressable. For example,
the impact of COVID-19 will last much longer than that of most natural disasters. But some
hurricanes are more severe and we can examine how the impact varies with the magnitude of
elective surgery reductions. There are some fundamental differences, however, like the fact
   1
     The cost of natural disasters is also high and growing faster than GDP, making disasters an increasingly
relevant phenomenon to study in isolation (Freeman and Mani, 2003; Bouwer et al., 2007).


                                                     2
that disasters may destroy physical provider capital in a way that COVID-19 does not. But
for a variety of reasons we argue that the lessons from disasters are quite informative about
what we can expect from COVID-19.
   We carry out this analysis in three steps. First, we collect data on all hurricanes from
1997–2012. For each hurricane, we gather information on the location of each storm in
six-hour intervals, the maximum sustained wind speed at that time, as well as the distance
across which the wind speed extends. Second, we match information on the location, timing,
and intensity of hurricanes to health insurance claims for those enrolled in the Medicare
program, the U.S. program of universal coverage for its seniors. We use a nearly universal
sample of hospitals and clinics covering almost two billion inpatient and outpatient visits in
1997–2013. Third, we quantify the impact of hurricanes on the health care delivery system.
Leveraging the size and scope of the Medicare data, we compare counties that do and do
not experience a hurricane using a differences-in-differences event study. Following recent
literature, we assume that hurricane strikes are quasi-random for identification (Deryugina,
2017; Deryugina, Kawano and Levitt, 2018; Deryugina and Molitor, 2019). Outcomes of
treated and control counties trend similarly before the strike, supporting our assumption
that treated counties are comparable to counties that do not experience a hurricane.
   We find that, even for the most severe hurricanes, hospitals appear to recover lost revenue
from elective services—but that the time it takes to recoup those revenues varies with the
severity of the hurricane. For a broad set of hurricanes, we find that elective services fall
by about 7% in the month of the event, with revenues made-up within 10-11 months post-
landfall. But for the most severe hurricanes, we find that elective services fall by more than
20% in the month of the event, and that those revenues are not recouped within 12 months.
Moreover, for the most severe hurricanes, inpatient elective revenues are not made up, but
increased outpatient revenue offsets those losses.
   The decline in elective services under COVID-19 appears to be even larger, and to last
longer, than the most severe hurricanes in our sample. We perform an extrapolation exercise


                                              3
based on the variation in hurricane severity in our sample to project the recovery time for
declines as severe as those seen under COVID-19. While these projections are out of sample,
they indicate that it will be more than three years before hospitals recover the elective
revenues lost from COVID. This conclusion suggests that short loan repayment periods and
high interest rates could lead to significant long-term losses for providers.
    Our findings also contribute to society’s understanding of how natural disasters affect
the health care sector. While there is a substantial amount of research focusing on disaster
preparedness (e.g., Kaji, Langford and Lewis, 2008) and on how the health care sector
performs in the immediate aftermath of a disaster (e.g., Eastman et al., 2007; Mortensen and
Dreyfuss, 2008; Wang et al., 2008), there is little systematic evidence on longer-run impacts.
An exception is DeSalvo, Sachs and Hamm (2008), who provide quantitative evidence on
hospital capacity in the New Orleans area two years after Hurricane Katrina. To the best
of our knowledge, we are the first to provide systematic quantitative evidence on longer-run
health care utilization and revenue in the aftermath of natural disasters. Our findings imply
that the health care infrastructure in the U.S. is quite resilient to natural disasters in both
the medium- and long-run.
    Our paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses our data and how we created the
sample of hurricanes to study. Section 3 describes our empirical methodology for evaluating
the impact of hurricanes. Section 4 presents our results, while Section 5 concludes with
implications for the current COVID-19 crisis.



2     Data

2.1    Medicare data

Our analyses rely on Medicare administrative records from 1997–2013. The majority of U.S.
individuals aged 65 and older are eligible for Medicare. Individuals under the age of 65
are eligible if they have been enrolled in the Social Security Disability Insurance program


                                               4
for at least two years or have end-stage renal disease or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. For
beneficiaries enrolled in Traditional Medicare (TM), we observe 100% of inpatient admissions
and outpatient claims (e.g. visits to ambulatory surgery centers).2 In total, we observe nearly
two billion inpatient and outpatient visits from 1997–2013. These data therefore allow us to
capture a nearly nationally representative sample of hospitals and clinics.
      We focus our analysis on visits and charges for elective services because changes in emer-
gency visits in response to hurricanes are likely a poor parallel for emergency visits during
COVID-19. To give a sense of the differences, we later show that emergency services increase
by 2-4% in the month of a hurricane (Appendix Table A2). In contrast, emergency depart-
ment volume from March 29–April 25, 2020 decreased by 42% relative to previous years,
leaving excess capacity in many emergency departments across the country (Hartnett et al.,
2020).
      We define elective services to include all outpatient claims (excluding emergency depart-
ment visits) and elective inpatient claims. We define elective inpatient services using an
indicator created by CMS for whether the visit was for an elective, urgent, or emergency
condition created by Medicare. CMS derives the indicator based on the characteristics of
the inpatient admission associated with the service.3 We classify procedures into specific
categories (e.g. orthopedic, chemotherapy, radiation therapy) using the Agency for Health
Research and Quality’s Clinical Classifications Software linked to ICD-9/ICD-10 procedure
codes as well as Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System codes.
      For our analyses, we calculate the total charges, visits, and procedures at the county-
month level. The visit date is the day a beneficiary was admitted to the hospital, or the first
day of the billing statement for procedures performed in the outpatient setting.
  2
     Claims occurring when beneficiaries are enrolled in Medicare Advantage (MA) are not observed. The
share of Medicare beneficiaries enrolled in MA ranges from 7% in 2007 to 14% in 2013 (Henry J. Kaiser
Family Foundation, 2019).
   3
     For instance, orthopedic, hernia, chemotherapy, and diagnostic procedures for patients not admitted
through the emergency department are considered elective.




                                                   5
2.2      Hurricane data

Cyclones are tropical storm systems with circulating winds that sometimes form over warm
ocean water. Cyclones that form in the Atlantic Ocean and attain maximum one-minute
sustained wind speeds of 74 miles per hour or more are called “hurricanes.” While many hur-
ricanes dissipate without reaching land, those that make landfall can cause massive damage
and disruption.
      Our hurricane data come from The Tropical Cyclone Extended Best Track Dataset.4
The dataset reports the location of each storm’s center in six-hour intervals, the maximum
sustained wind speed at that time, as well as the distance across which this wind speed
extends (“radius of maximum wind” or RMS). We linearly interpolate between the reported
storm locations to infer the path of the storm. We do the same for the maximum wind speed
and the RMS.
      We consider a county affected by a storm if its centroid fell within the RMS of the
point on the storm path that is closest to the centroid. If the RMS is not reported, we
consider a county affected if its centroid was within 50 miles of the storm path. We consider
two definitions of treatment. The “all hurricanes” treatment considers counties impacted
by wind speeds of at least 74 miles per hour (mph). The “strong hurricane” treatment
considers counties impacted by wind speeds of at least 100 mph. We exclude the city of New
Orleans, LA from our sample because the extensive population outflow in the aftermath
of Hurricanes Katrina could jeopardize the generalizability of our estimates (Deryugina,
Kawano and Levitt, 2018; Deryugina and Molitor, 2019). We exclude Galveston County,
TX, for similar reasons. In 2008, Hurricane Ike damaged approximately 80% of homes and
essentially all public infrastructure in the island city of Galveston, resulting in long-lasting
population declines (White, 2013).
      To avoid the econometric difficulties associated with a treated unit experiencing multiple
  4
   Available from http://rammb.cira.colostate.edu/research/tropical_cyclones/tc_extended_
best_track_dataset/.




                                                6
events, we only include multiple hurricane instances if these have sufficiently long gaps
between them to avoid overlapping events during the event study time window of interest
(19 months in our case). Specifically, if a county experiences multiple hurricanes within any
given 19-month period, we ignore all events beyond the first one within that period.5 Given
the random nature of hurricane paths, this approach should not bias our results. However,
we also perform robustness checks where we exclude counties that experience more than one
event of interest within a 19-month window, obtaining similar estimates.
       Table 1 lists the hurricanes in our sample, the dates on which they formed, and the
states they impacted. For our “all hurricanes” definition (wind speeds of at least 74 miles
per hour), our sample includes 25 hurricanes that affected 169 counties and 1,020 medical
providers in the years 1997–2012. For our definition of strong hurricanes (wind speeds of at
least 100 miles per hour), our sample includes 13 hurricanes that affected 33 counties and
280 medical providers in the years 1997–2012.
       Figures 1 and 2 illustrate the areas impacted by the hurricanes in our sample. Hurricanes
only affect certain parts of the U.S., so we only allow coastal counties and counties within
75 miles of coastal counties in states that typically experience hurricanes to enter as con-
trols (yellow counties). Hurricane states include: Alabama, Texas, Mississippi, Louisiana,
New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South
Carolina, Georgia, and Florida. Figure 1 shows the spatial distribution of all hurricanes
in our sample, with counties becoming increasingly dark with the number of hurricanes in
that county over our sample period. Figure 2 shows the same for strong hurricanes, which
impacted a more limited set of counties. No county experienced more than one year with a
strong hurricane during our sample period.
       Table 2 shows differences between control and treated counties affected by all hurricanes
as well as strong hurricanes. We compare means and changes in 1997, our baseline year.6
   5
     For example, if a county experienced a hurricane in September of 1998, October of 1999, and August of
2004, our analysis will only consider the 1998 and 2004 hurricanes, ignoring the 1999 strike.
   6
     We consider 1997 to be a reasonable baseline year because there was only one county that experienced
a hurricane in that year and results are not sensitive to its exclusion.


                                                    7
Treated counties in the all hurricane sample experienced at least one hurricane with wind
speeds of 74 mph or more in 1997–2012. The strong hurricane sample includes a subset of
treated counties that experienced hurricanes with wind speeds of 100 mph or more. Control
counties did not experience a hurricane in 1997–2012.
    While our identification strategy relies on trends between treated and control counties
being similar, understanding how treated and control counties differ in levels is useful for
interpretation. It is immediately clear from Table 2 that treated and control counties are
significantly different at baseline. Counties that experience hurricanes have larger elderly
populations and more hospitals, which leads to differences in the number of medical services
and charges. All specifications therefore include county fixed effects to address level differ-
ences. What is potentially more concerning for estimation is that differences in levels may
indicate differences in trends. Fortunately, 1997 trends in our main outcomes of interest—
log visits and charges—are largely similar for counties affected by the average hurricane and
control counties. Differences between treated counties that experienced strong hurricanes
and control counties are larger and sometimes significant. However, we later verify that
trends six months before hurricane strikes are similar for control and treatment counties for
all main outcomes.



3     Empirical approach

To illuminate the dynamics of health care utilization following a hurricane, we begin with a
standard event study specification:

                                 12
                                 X
              ln (Ycmy ) =                  βτ Hcτ + βP P Hc,P P + αcm + αmy + εcmy ,      (1)
                             τ =−6,τ 6=−2


where Ycmy is some measure of health care utilization for county c in month m and year
y. The variable Hcτ is a hurricane indicator equal to 1 if, as of month-year my, the county
experienced a hurricane τ months ago. To account for the small share of county-months in


                                                      8
our data with zero values, we add one before taking logs.7
      Hurricanes can be anticipated several days ahead of when they strike, and in some cases
a hurricane forms in the month before it makes landfall. For example, Hurricane Frances
formed as a tropical depression on August 25, 2004, but did not make strike Florida until
the early morning of September 5, 2004. Similarly, Hurricane Lili formed on September 21,
2002, but made landfall in Louisiana only on October 3, 2002. To account for potential
anticipation effects, we therefore normalize the effect two months before the hurricane (β−2 )
to zero.
      The indicator Hc,P P in Equation (1) is equal to 1 if a county experienced a hurricane
outside of the time window of interest. The variables αcm and αmy are county-by-month
and month-by-year fixed effects, respectively. Standard errors are clustered by county. We
weight our estimates by each county’s monthly average of the outcome variable at baseline,
calculated using data for January–June of 1997.
      To interpret βτ for τ ≥ 0 as the causal effect of a hurricane on health care utilization,
it must be the case that, absent the hurricane, outcomes in the treated counties would
have evolved in parallel with outcomes in the control counties. Given the random nature
of hurricanes, verifying that βτ is not statistically different from zero for τ < −2 provides
strong evidence in support of this assumption.
      To estimate the effect of a hurricane more concisely, we also present a pooled version of
the event study specification illustrated by Equation (1):


                  ln (Ycmy ) = γ−1 Hc,−1 + γ0 Hc0 + γ1 Hc1 + γ2 Hc2 + γ3 Hc,3 to 12         (2)

                                         +βP P Hc,P P + αcm + αmy + εcmy .

      In this equation, we estimate treatment effects from the month before to two months after
the hurricane separately (Hc,−1 , Hc0 , Hc1 , and Hc2 ) but combine the estimated treatment
effects in months 3–12 (Hc,3 to 12 ), over which the effect appears to be roughly constant. All
  7
      Only 5% of county-months have zero elective procedures.



                                                     9
other variables are the same as Equation (1).
    We estimate the cumulative effects of a hurricane by first calculating the implied level
change in each outcome for each month τ ≥ −1. To do so, we multiply eβτ − 1 by the mean
of the outcome variable among the treated counties at τ = −2. We then sum these estimates
over the desired time period to obtain the cumulative hurricane-caused change. To calculate
confidence intervals, we re-estimate the set {βτ } in 1,000 clustered bootstraps, reporting the
5th and 95th percentiles of the cumulative estimates.



4     Results

4.1    Overall Impacts

Figure 3 presents the event study results for all elective procedures and charges, along with
associated 95% confidence intervals. There are four panels, corresponding to two measures
of outcomes (visits and charges) and two measures of hurricane strength (all hurricanes or
strong hurricanes). The vertical line at τ = 0 indicates that treated counties experience a
hurricane in that month. The horizontal line at zero provides a reference point. We show
results for the six months preceding a hurricane’s landfall to assess the presence of pre-trends.
Reassuringly, visits and charges are not significantly different between hurricane and control
counties before τ = −2 in all cases.
    Our results reveal that hurricanes have significant and notable effects on elective care.
In the month preceding the hurricane (τ = −1), visits and charges increase slightly, which is
likely due to providers and patients anticipating a hurricane strike. In the month a hurricane
hits, elective care declines sharply. For the full sample of hurricanes, shown in panels (a)
and (c), elective care declines by 6.5% in the month of the hurricane. Elective care remains
below its baseline level in the first month after the hurricane but returns to the baseline level
two months later. Starting in the third month post-landfall, elective care increases above
baseline, both for visits and charges, and largely stays higher than baseline until at least 12


                                               10
months after a hurricane strike.
   Panel (b) and (d) show the results for the stronger set of hurricanes (note that the
scale is different from the all-hurricane sample). For the stronger sample of hurricanes, the
initial drop in elective visits and charges is much larger, exceeding 20%. The bounce-back is
somewhat slower as well, although both visits and charges are not statistically distinguishable
from baseline by month two. Elective visits are significantly above baseline 8–12 months after
the hurricane.
   Figure 4 graphs the cumulative effects implied by our event study graphs. The cumulative
impact is normalized to zero two months before the hurricane. We find that, for the full
sample of hurricanes, the negative cumulative effect on elective care lasts 9–10 months,
although we can only state with statistical certainty that losses are significant for 4–5 months.
For the strongest hurricanes, we can say with statistical certainty that providers do not
make up lost visit and revenues for 8–9 months. After 12 months, both cumulative visits
and cumulative charges remain negative (419 visits and $21 million below the baseline level,
respectively). However, neither of these estimates is significantly different from zero (Table
A4), and both are fairly small relative to the mean, amounting to less than half a month of
charges in cumulative terms. Thus, for the most severe hurricanes, hospitals appear to make
up their lost revenues in about a year.
   Table 3 shows regression results corresponding to event study graphs in Figure 3. The
slight uptick in the month before the hurricane is statistically insignificant across outcomes
with one exception: elective charges the month before a strong hurricane increase 3.0%.
Strikingly, elective visits in months 3–12 increase similarly for the sample of all hurricanes as
they do for the sample of strong hurricanes. During this post-event window, elective visits
increase significantly by 2.0% per month in response to all hurricanes and by 1.5% per month
in response to strong hurricanes. Charges significantly increase by 1.6% per month for all
hurricanes and by 2.3% per month for strong hurricanes.
   These findings suggest that providers are unable to immediately compensate for lost


                                               11
services, instead increasing capacity at a low and constant rate for several months. As a
result, providers appear to be less able to bounce back from larger shocks because they
may be constrained in their ability to expand capacity. This has important implications for
COVID-19, which likely represents a much larger shock to the provision of elective services.


4.2    Impacts by Place of Service

Figures 5 and 7 present event study estimates and corresponding 95% confidence intervals
for inpatient elective and outpatient services. Figures 6 and 8 graph the cumulative impact
of hurricanes on these outcomes, along with 95% confidence intervals.
   For elective inpatient care, the results are quite different depending on the strength of the
hurricane. For the average hurricane, both charges and visits bounce back quickly (Figure
5). Cumulative effects for visits and charges are positive by months 6 and 10, respectively
and cease to be significantly negative by months 2–3 (Figure 6). For stronger hurricanes,
the effects are significantly negative until months 6–8, and even by month 12 remain 517
visits and $20 million below the baseline level, although not significantly different from zero
(Table A6).
   Table 4 shows the difference-in-differences estimates corresponding to the event studies
in Figure 5. Elective visits and charges are not significantly different from zero the month
before the hurricane, except for a 3.5% increase in elective charges in response to a strong
hurricane. In the hurricane month, visits decrease by 6.5% in response to all hurricanes and
by 23.5% in response to strong hurricanes. Charges decrease even more: by 7.9% in response
to all hurricanes and by 28.1% in response to strong hurricanes. Three to 12 months after
landfall, inpatient elective visits and charges do not significantly increase, and the point
estimate ranges from -1.9% to 1.5%. This suggests that providers are unable to increase
their inpatient capacity to offset losses caused by severe hurricanes.
   For outpatient care, the results follow similar patterns across the two hurricane samples,
albeit with somewhat different timing and magnitudes. Both visits and charges largely


                                              12
bounce back by month two for both samples of hurricanes (Figure 7). For the average
hurricane, the overall cumulative effect looks fairly similar to inpatient elective services,
crossing zero 9–11 months after landfall (Figure 8 and Table A8). But, unlike inpatient
elective care, for stronger hurricanes the cumulative effect for outpatient visits trends up
and crosses zero only 12 months after landfall. Outpatient charges remain below zero at the
end of our sample period, although the estimates is small (−$1.9 million) and statistically
insignificant.
   Table 5 shows the difference-in-differences estimates corresponding to the event studies
in Figure 7. Estimates for the month before the hurricane are not significantly different from
zero and range from 0.01 to 2.9%. The month of the hurricane, visits decline by 6.7% in
response to all hurricanes and by 24.0% in response to strong hurricanes. Charges decrease
similarly, by 8.7% among counties experiencing the average hurricane and by 23.8% among
counties experiencing strong hurricanes. Three to 12 months after a hurricane, the monthly
number of visits increases by 2.1% in response to all hurricanes and by 1.8% in response to
strong hurricanes. Charges increase by 1.1% in response to all hurricanes and by 3.3% in
response to strong hurricanes. Thus, unlike for elective inpatient services, providers appear
to be able to expand their capacity to ultimately make up for their foregone outpatient
elective revenue—although, once again, for the most severe hurricanes, this takes a year or
more.
   Our results are very similar if, in addition to county-by-month and month-by-year fixed
effects, we control for state-by-year fixed effects or for county-specific annual trends (in-
teractions between county indicators and the year variable). The results are also robust
to omitting counties that experience more than one hurricane event within any 19-month
rolling window.




                                             13
4.3    Impacts by Type of Elective Care

The results thus far have focused on the impacts by type of care for all elective services. It
is separately of interest to assess which elective services respond the most to hurricanes. We
therefore consider a number of different major elective services. The results across services
are strongly indicative of which services are cut back the most after hurricanes—and how
strong the bounce-back appears to be.
   In particular, we quantify how hurricanes affect elective orthopedic (Table 6), hernia
(Table 7), radiation therapy (Table 9), and chemotherapy (Table 8) treatments. Because this
exercise further divides our sample, we are unable to estimate event studies with meaningful
precision. We therefore estimate a modified version of equation 2 that omits the indicator
for the month before the hurricane and combines indicators for post-hurricane months 1, 2,
and 3–12 into a single month 1–12 indicator.
   In the month of the hurricane, orthopedic procedures decline by 9.4% in response to all
hurricanes and by 27.3% in response to strong hurricanes. Hernia procedures decline by 7.1%
in the response to all hurricanes and by 39.5% in response to strong hurricanes. Radiation
therapy is not significantly impacted and chemotherapy declines by an insignificant 3.3% in
response to all hurricanes and by a significant 8.9% in response to strong hurricanes. These
patterns suggest that elective orthopedic and hernia procedures are the most sensitive to cut-
backs in elective care. They also happen to be the two most profitable services of the four:
at baseline, charges per visit are largest for orthopedics (Table 6), followed by hernias (Table
7), and smallest for chemotherapy (Table 8). This suggests that revenue from orthopedics
and hernias are important inputs into hospital profitability, while simultaneously bearing
the largest cuts.


4.4    Projected Recovery Times for Larger Shocks

Although the strongest hurricanes in our sample reduce elective care by over 20% in the
month of the hurricane, these magnitudes are still smaller than what we observe with COVID-

                                              14
19, which has led to larger and longer-lasting reductions. To infer recovery times for such
shocks, we combine projections of the in-sample initial decrease in elective services with the
average observed bounce-back.
      We first re-estimate equation (2) for every integer wind speed between 74 and 100. In
other words, we progressively increase the threshold for what constitutes a “treated” county,
first counting as treatments all hurricanes, then only hurricanes with wind speed of 75 miles
per hour or more, and so on. Figure 9 shows the relationship between the initial decline in
elective visits and charges and the wind speed threshold. That is, we show the coefficient γ0
from equation (2) for each wind speed threshold. The relationship appears to be very close
to linear (as shown by cluster of dots between 74 and 100 miles per hour), so we extend
this linear relationship outwards. We project that wind speeds of around 130 miles per hour
would generate a one-month drop in elective services and charges of about 40%.
      We assume the initial decline of 40% lasts for three months and is then followed by
observed changes in months 1–2 (γ1 , and γ2 ).8 For each of the following months, we assume
that visits and charges evolve according to the bounce-back in months 3–12 (γ3 ) and calculate
the number of months it takes elective services to reach a cumulative change of zero. Because
we do not observe a strong relationship between wind speed and the size of the bounce-back
in months 3–12, we use the average estimated bounce-back of 0.59% for elective visits and
2.2% for elective charges.
      This back-of-the-envelope exercise implies that elective charges would be made up within
about 40 months, while elective visits would take over 150 months (or more than 12.5 years)
to be made up. The stark difference between the projections for visits and charges suggests
that less expensive (and, potentially, less urgent) care is more likely to be forgone completely.
  8
      For completeness, we also include γ−1 in this calculation.




                                                      15
5     Conclusion

COVID-19 represents an unprecedented shock to our nation’s health care system. Never
before has there been the combination of a massive economic displacement with forced re-
ductions in many medical services. Medical providers have been hit hard, and they have been
vocal about the implications for their ultimate financial viability (AHA, 2020; FAIRHealth,
2020).
    In the face of this enormous shock, policymakers have struggled to address the problems
facing the U.S. health care sector. Issues such as providing grants versus loans, the size and
targeting of grants, and the terms at which loans should be repaid are being debated in real
time as the virus moves around the country.
    This debate faces the important challenge that the long-term implications for providers
are unknown. There is clearly a short-term reduction in use of elective services (Mehrotra
et al., 2020; FAIRHealth, 2020). But to what extent will providers be able to recoup those
losses—and over what time period? The answer to this question is centrally important for
designing policy responses.
    Hurricanes represent the closest possible parallel to the COVID-19 shutdown. They are
severe events that lead to sizeable reductions in elective care. Additionally, the comparison
of more to less severe hurricanes can provide some sense of how the magnitude of the crisis
impacts hospital finances.
    Our results show that hurricanes cause a significant decline in the provision of hospital
elective services lasting more than one month and as long as three months. For the average
hurricane, that drop is roughly 7%, and hospitals make up their financial losses about 10–11
months later. But for the most severe hurricanes, the drop is more than 20%, and financial
losses are at best made up within 12 months, if at all.
    We also find that the “bounce-back” in elective services is much larger for outpatient
than inpatient elective care. In particular, for the strongest hurricanes, we find that the
losses from inpatient elective care have the potential to be long-lasting.

                                              16
   These results have important implications for policy. For example, the existing CMS loan
program has a repayment period of six months. Based on our findings, it seems extremely
unlikely that providers will have made up their lost revenues in that period. Even for the
strongest hurricanes, where the decline in elective procedures was less than is reported under
COVID-19, cumulative revenues from elective procedures took more than a year to recover.
It is therefore extremely unlikely that providers will be able to fully pay back their loans
even within a year under these circumstances. Allowing for longer repayment periods or
grants is likely necessary if the goal is to preserve the earnings of the health care sector.




                                               17
References
AHA. 2020. “Hospitals and Health Systems Face Unprecedented Financial Pressures Due
  to COVID-19.” American Hospital Association. https://www.aha.org/system/files/
  media/file/2020/05/aha-covid19-financial-impact-0520-FINAL.pdf.
Bisserbe,         Noemie,         and       Matthew         Dalton.       2020.    “How
  Coronavirus         Outmaneuvered           France’s        Health-Care       System.”
  The         Wall        Street       Journal.        https://www.wsj.com/articles/
  how-coronavirus-outmaneuvered-frances-health-care-system-11587906000?
  mod=djemHL_t.
Bouwer, Laurens M., Ryan P. Crompton, Eberhard Faust, Peter Höppe, and
  Roger A. Pielke, Jr. 2007. “Confronting Disaster Losses.” Science (Policy Forum) 318
  (5851): 753.
CMS. 2020. “Non-Emergent, Elective Medical Services, and Treatment Recommendations.”
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. https://www.cms.gov/files/document/
  cms-non-emergent-elective-medical-recommendations.pdf.
Congress, The United States. 2020. “Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security
  (CARES) Act, Pub. L. No. 116-136.” https://www.aha.org/system/files/media/file/
  2020/05/aha-covid19-financial-impact-0520-FINAL.pdf.
Deryugina, Tatyana. 2017. “The Fiscal Cost of Hurricanes: Disaster Aid versus Social
  Insurance.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(3): 168–198.
Deryugina, Tatyana, and David Molitor. 2019. “Does when you die depend on where
  you live? Evidence from Hurricane Katrina.” NBER Working Paper 24822.
Deryugina, Tatyana, Laura Kawano, and Steven Levitt. 2018. “The Economic Impact
  of Hurricane Katrina on its Victims: Evidence from Individual Tax Returns.” American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 10(2).
DeSalvo, Karen B., Benjamin P. Sachs, and L. Lee Hamm. 2008. “Health Care
  Infrastructure in Post-Katrina New Orleans: A Status Report.” The American Journal of
  the Medical Sciences, 336(2): 197–200.
Eastman, Alexander L, Kathy J Rinnert, Ira R Nemeth, Raymond L Fowler,
  and Joseph P Minei. 2007. “Alternate site surge capacity in times of public health dis-
  aster maintains trauma center and emergency department integrity: Hurricane Katrina.”
  Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, 63(2): 253–257.
FAIRHealth. 2020. “Illuminating the Impact of COVID-19 on Hospitals and Health
  Systems.” A FAIR Health Brief. https://s3.amazonaws.com/media2.fairhealth.org/
  brief/asset/Illuminating%20the%20Impact%20of%20COVID-19%20on%20Hospitals%
  20and%20Health%20Systems%20-%20A%20Comparative%20Study%20of%20Revenue%
  20and%20Utilization%20-%20A%20FAIR%20Health%20Brief.pdf (accessed May 20,
  2020).
Freeman, Paul K., Michael Keen, and Muthukumara Mani. 2003. Dealing with In-
  creased Risk of Natural Disasters: Challenges and Options. International Monetary Fund
  (IMF) Working Paper 03/197.


                                           18
Hartnett, Kathleen P., Aaron Kite-Powell, Jourdan DeVies, Michael A. Co-
  letta, Tegan K. Boehmer, Jennifer Adjemian, Adi V. Gundlapalli, and Na-
  tional Syndromic Surveillance Program Community of Practice. 2020. “Impact
  of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Emergency Department Visits–United States, January 1,
  2019–May 30, 2020.” Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Morbidity and Mortality
  Weekly Report, 69.
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. 2019. “Medicare Advantage Fact Sheet.”
Kaji, Amy H, Vinette Langford, and Roger J Lewis. 2008. “Assessing hospital disaster
  preparedness: a comparison of an on-site survey, directly observed drill performance, and
  video analysis of teamwork.” Annals of emergency medicine, 52(3): 195–201.
Kamp,          Jon,       and      Anna       Wilde         Mathews.       2020.      “Coron-
  avirus     Deaths     in    U.S.    Nursing,     Long-Term       Care     Facilities   Top
  10,000.”      The      Wall    Street    Journal.       https://www.wsj.com/articles/
  coronavirus-deaths-in-u-s-nursing-long-term-care-facilities-top-10-000-11587586237.
Mehrotra, Ateev, Michael Chernew, David Linetsky, Hilary Hatch, and David
  Cutler. 2020. “The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Outpatient Visits: A Rebound
  Emerges.” To the Point (blog), Commonwealth Fund. https://www.commonwealthfund.
  org/publications/2020/apr/impact-covid-19-outpatient-visits.
Morse, Susan. 2020. “CMS Makes $34 Billion Loan Available to Providers, Sup-
  pliers.”    Healthcare   Finance.     https://www.healthcarefinancenews.com/news/
  cms-makes-34-billion-loan-available-providers-suppliers.
Mortensen, Karoline, and Zachary Dreyfuss. 2008. “How many walked through the
  door?: the effect of hurricane Katrina evacuees on Houston emergency departments.”
  Medical Care, 46(9): 998–1001.
Rudan, Igor. 2020. “A Cascade of Causes that led to the COVID-19 Tragedy in Italy and
  in other European Union Countries.” Journal of Global Health, 10(1).
Stockman, Farah, Matt Richtel, Danielle Ivory, and Mitch Smith. 2020.
  “‘They’re Death Pits’:        Virus Claims at Least 7,000 Lives in U.S. Nurs-
  ing Homes.” The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/17/us/
  coronavirus-nursing-homes.html.
Tardi, Joe. 2020. “Treating Coronavirus is Draining Hospital Coffers of Millions
  and Threatening Resources.” NBC News. https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/
  treating-coronavirus-draining-hospital-coffers-millions-threatening-resources-n1201541
  cid=eml_mrd_20200507&utm_source=Sailthru&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=
  Morning%20Rundown%20Special%20Edition:%20The%20Coronavirus%20Crisis%2C%
  207%20May%202020.
Wang, Philip S, Michael J Gruber, Richard E Powers, Michael Schoenbaum,
  Anthony H Speier, Kenneth B Wells, and Ronald C Kessler. 2008. “Disruption
  of existing mental health treatments and failure to initiate new treatment after Hurricane
  Katrina.” American Journal of Psychiatry, 165(1): 34–41.
White, Audrey. 2013. “Five Years After Ike, Galveston Is Still Picking Up
  the Pieces.” The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/26/us/


                                      19
galveston-tex-picking-up-the-pieces-5-years-after-hurricane-ike.html.




                                   20
Figures

                Figure 1: Sample of treated and control counties, all hurricanes




                                                          0


                                                                    1


                                                                              2


                                                                                       3
Notes: Map shows counties included in our sample (non-white counties) as well as the number of times
they experienced a hurricane with wind speeds of at least 74 miles per hour. Yellow counties are counties
that never experienced a hurricane, orange counties experienced one hurricane, red counties experienced 2
hurricanes, and brown counties experienced 3 hurricanes. Our sample includes coastal counties and counties
75 miles from coastal counties. Counties that had zero outpatient and inpatient claims did not enter our
sample. New Orleans Parish and Galveston counties were excluded from our treatment sample.




                                                   21
              Figure 2: Sample of treated and control counties, strong hurricanes




                                                            0


                                                                     1

Notes: Map shows counties included in our sample (non-white counties) as well as the number of times they
experienced a hurricane with wind speeds of at least 100 miles per hour. Yellow counties are counties that
never experienced a hurricane and orange counties experienced one hurricane. Our sample includes coastal
counties and counties 75 miles from coastal counties. Counties that had zero outpatient and inpatient claims
did not enter our sample. New Orleans Parish and Galveston counties were excluded from our treatment
sample.




                                                    22
                                           Figure 3: Impact of hurricanes on elective care


                            (a) Impact of all hurricanes on                                   (b) Impact of strong hurricanes on
                                    elective visits                                                     elective visits
          .05




                                                                                .1
 Change (log scale)




                                                                        Change (log scale)
                                                                                         0
              0




                                                                              -.1
  -.05




                                                                       -.2
          -.1




                                                                                -.3
                       -6      -3    0        3        6      9   12                         -6    -3    0        3        6     9   12
                                    Months since hurricane                                              Months since hurricane

                            (c) Impact of all hurricanes on                                   (d) Impact of strong hurricanes on
                                   elective charges                                                    elective charges
          .1




                                                                                .1
                 .05




                                                                                        0
 Change (log scale)




                                                                       Change (log scale)
                                                                               -.1
 -.05     0




                                                                        -.2     -.3
          -.1




                       -6      -3    0        3        6      9   12                         -6    -3    0        3        6     9   12
                                    Months since hurricane                                              Months since hurricane


Notes: Event study graphs plot the monthly change in elective visits using a log scale. The specification is
outlined in Section 3. The x-axis contains the relative number of months since the hurricane occurred in
t = 0. Regressions are at the county-month level, cluster at the county level, and contain county-by-month
and month-by-year fixed effects. See Table 3 for point estimates.




                                                                   23
                                             Figure 4: Cumulative impact of hurricanes on elective care


                 (a) Cumulative impact of all hurricanes on                    (b) Cumulative impact of strong hurricanes on
                               elective visits                                                 elective visits
                           15000




                                                                                                         15000
 Change (number of visits)




                                                                               Change (number of visits)
              5000




                                                                                            5000
    -5000




                                                                                  -5000
                -15000




                                                                                              -15000
                                   -6   -3    0        3        6     9   12                                     -6   -3    0        3        6     9   12
                                             Months since hurricane                                                        Months since hurricane

                 (c) Cumulative impact of all hurricanes on                    (d) Cumulative impact of strong hurricanes on
                              elective charges                                               elective charges
                60




                                                                                              60
 Change (millions of dollars)




                                                                                  Change (millions of dollars)
                                                                                                          30
                        30




                                                                                                   0
                 0




                                                                               -90 -60 -30
  -60   -30     -90




                                   -6   -3    0        3        6     9   12                                     -6   -3    0        3        6     9   12
                                             Months since hurricane                                                        Months since hurricane


Notes: Graphs plot the cumulative change in the outcome of interest. The specification is outlined in Section
3. The x-axis contains the relative number of months since the hurricane occurred in t = 0. Regressions
are at the county-month level, cluster at the county level, and contain county-by-month and month-by-year
fixed effects.




                                                                           24
                                       Figure 5: Impact of hurricanes on inpatient elective care


                              (a) Impact of all hurricanes on                                       (b) Impact of strong hurricanes on
                                  inpatient elective visits                                               inpatient elective visits
           .1




                                                                                    .1
                   .05




                                                                                          0
   Change (log scale)




                                                                         Change (log scale)
                                                                                  -.1
          0




                                                                          -.2
 -.05




                                                                                    -.3
           -.1




                         -6      -3    0        3        6      9   12                             -6    -3    0        3        6     9   12
                                      Months since hurricane                                                  Months since hurricane

                              (c) Impact of all hurricanes on                                       (d) Impact of strong hurricanes on
                                 inpatient elective charges                                              inpatient elective charges
                                                                                    .1
           .1




                                                                                               0
                 .05
 Change (log scale)




                                                                            Change (log scale)
                                                                                      -.1
           0




                                                                               -.2
   -.05




                                                                         -.3
           -.1
           -.15




                                                                                    -.4




                         -6      -3    0        3        6      9   12                             -6    -3    0        3        6     9   12
                                      Months since hurricane                                                  Months since hurricane


Notes: Event study graphs plot the monthly change in elective visits using a log scale. The specification is
outlined in Section 3. The x-axis contains the relative number of months since the hurricane occurred in
t = 0. Regressions are at the county-month level, cluster at the county level, and contain county-by-month
and month-by-year fixed effects. See Table 4 for point estimates.




                                                                     25
                                                   Figure 6: Cumulative impact of hurricanes on inpatient elective care


                   (a) Cumulative impact of all hurricanes on                                    (b) Cumulative impact of strong hurricanes on
                           inpatient elective visits                                                       inpatient elective visits
                              500




                                                                                                                            500
    Change (number of visits)




                                                                                                  Change (number of visits)
                                                                                                                  0
                  0




                                                                                                         -500
       -500




                                                                                                 -1000
                  -1000




                                      -6           -3     0        3        6      9       12                                     -6   -3    0        3        6     9   12
                                                         Months since hurricane                                                             Months since hurricane

                   (c) Cumulative impact of all hurricanes on                                    (d) Cumulative impact of strong hurricanes on
                          inpatient elective charges                                                      inpatient elective charges
                             50




                                                                                                               50
               Change (millions of dollars)




                                                                                                   Change (millions of dollars)
                                                                                                                           25
                                      25




                                                                                                                     0
                               0




                                                                                                 -75 -50 -25
                -50   -25    -75




                                              -6    -3     0        3        6         9    12                                    -6   -3    0        3        6     9   12
                                                          Months since hurricane                                                            Months since hurricane
s
Notes: Graphs plot the cumulative change in the outcome of interest. The specification is outlined in Section
3. The x-axis contains the relative number of months since the hurricane occurred in t = 0. Regressions
are at the county-month level, cluster at the county level, and contain county-by-month and month-by-year
fixed effects.




                                                                                            26
                                        Figure 7: Impact of hurricanes on outpatient care


                           (a) Impact of all hurricanes on                                    (b) Impact of strong hurricanes on
                                  outpatient visits                                                   outpatient visits
         .05




                                                                               .1
 Change (log scale)




                                                                       Change (log scale)
                                                                                        0
              0




                                                                             -.1
  -.05




                                                                      -.2
         -.1




                                                                               -.3
                      -6      -3    0        3        6      9   12                          -6    -3    0        3        6     9   12
                                   Months since hurricane                                               Months since hurricane

                           (c) Impact of all hurricanes on                                    (d) Impact of strong hurricanes on
                                 outpatient charges                                                  outpatient charges
         .05




                                                                               .1
 Change (log scale)




                                                                        Change (log scale)
               0




                                                                             -.1      0
   -.05




                                                                      -.2
         -.1




                                                                               -.3




                      -6      -3    0        3        6      9   12                          -6    -3    0        3        6     9   12
                                   Months since hurricane                                               Months since hurricane


Notes: Event study graphs plot the monthly change in elective visits using a log scale. The specification is
outlined in Section 3. The x-axis contains the relative number of months since the hurricane occurred in
t = 0. Regressions are at the county-month level, cluster at the county level, and contain county-by-month
and month-by-year fixed effects. See Table 5 for point estimates.




                                                                  27
                                             Figure 8: Cumulative impact of hurricanes on outpatient care


                 (a) Cumulative impact of all hurricanes on                     (b) Cumulative impact of strong hurricanes on
                             outpatient visits                                                outpatient visits
                           15000




                                                                                                          15000
 Change (number of visits)




                                                                                Change (number of visits)
              5000




                                                                                             5000
    -5000




                                                                                   -5000
                -15000




                                                                                               -15000
                                   -6   -3     0        3        6     9   12                                     -6   -3    0        3        6     9   12
                                              Months since hurricane                                                        Months since hurricane

                 (c) Cumulative impact of all hurricanes on                     (d) Cumulative impact of strong hurricanes on
                            outpatient charges                                               outpatient charges
                15




                                                                                                          15
 Change (millions of dollars)




                                                                                Change (millions of dollars)
                   0




                                                                                               0
      -15




                                                                                    -15        -30
                -30




                                   -6   -3     0        3        6     9   12                                     -6   -3    0        3        6     9   12
                                              Months since hurricane                                                        Months since hurricane


Notes: Graphs plot the cumulative change in the outcome of interest. The specification is outlined in Section
3. The x-axis contains the relative number of months since the hurricane occurred in t = 0. Regressions
are at the county-month level, cluster at the county level, and contain county-by-month and month-by-year
fixed effects.




                                                                            28
                              Figure 9: Initial impact on elective services by wind speed


                                                    (a) Elective visits



                          -5
               Initial change, percent
                -20       -15
                          -25     -10




                                         75   80         85       90          95            100
                                                         Wind speed

                                                   (b) Elective charges
                          -5
               Initial change, percent
                -20       -15
                          -25     -10




                                         75   80         85       90          95            100
                                                         Wind speed

Notes: Graphs plot the estimated changes in elective care in the month of the hurricane for different defini-
tions of treatment (black circles) and a linear fit line (black line).




                                                            29
Tables

                                   Table 1: In-sample hurricanes

 Hurricane name                   Date formed                               Affected states

 Danny                           Jul 16, 1997                                   LA
 Bonnie                          Aug 19, 1998                                NC*, VA
 Earl                            Aug 31, 1998                               AL, FL, GA
 Georges                         Sep 15, 1998                                LA*, MS*
 Bret                            Aug 18, 1999                                   TX
 Floyd                           Sep 10, 1999                              MD, NC, VA
 Irene                           Oct 12, 1999                                   FL
 Lili                            Sep 21, 2002                                   LA
 Claudette                       Jul 10, 2003                                   TX
 Isabel                          Sep 10, 2003                                NC*, VA
 Charley                         Aug 10, 2004                                   FL*
 Frances                         Aug 25, 2004                                   FL*
 Ivan                            Sep 10, 2004                                   AL*
 Jeanne                          Sep 13, 2004                                   FL
 Dennis                          Jul 10, 2005                                 AL, FL*
 Katrina                         Aug 23, 2005                              FL, LA*, MS*
 Rita                            Sep 18, 2005                                  TX*
 Wilma                           Oct 15, 2005                                   FL*
 Humberto                        Sep 12, 2007                                   TX
 Dolly                           Jul 20, 2008                                   TX
 Gustav                          Aug 25, 2008                                   LA*
 Ike                              Sep 1, 2008                                  TX*
 Irene                           Aug 21, 2011                         DE, MD, NC, NJ, PA, VA
 Isaac                           Aug 20, 2012                                   LA
 Sandy                           Oct 21, 2012                             MD, NJ, NY, PA


Notes: The table reports the names and formation dates of hurricanes in our estimation sample, as well as
the states they affected. * indicates that at least one county within the state experienced winds of 100
miles per hour or greater.




                                                   30
                      Table 2: Characteristics for treated and control counties in 1997

                                              All hurricane counties           Strong hurricane counties
                                      Treated        Control      P-value    Treated      Control     P-value
County characteristics
   Number of counties                   169            205                     33          341
   Size of over 65 population          29,779         15,825     p< 0.001    28,885       21,477          0.26

   Number of providers                    4              2        0.001         6            3            0.19
   Community hospitals                    3              2       p< 0.001       4            2            0.19
   Large hospitals                        2              1       p< 0.001       3            2            0.23

Visits
   Elective visits                     20,417         10,352       0.02      18,651       16,476          0.71
   Outpatient visits                   19,439          9,937       0.02      17,328       15,777          0.77
   Inpatient elective visits            1,151           517        0.04      1,494         818            0.28

Charges in dollars
   Elective charges                  34,735,040 12,915,498 0.006            43,423,044   24,323,845       0.25
   Outpatient charges                10,198,689 3,815,562 p< 0.001          13,201,245    7,078,497       0.09
   Inpatient elective charges        25,487,154 9,288,393   0.01            30,739,235   17,978,464       0.33

Change in log visits
   Log elective visits                -0.0058         -0.0057      0.95       -0.011      -0.0051         0.08
   Log outpatient visits              -0.0055         -0.0057      0.94       -0.011      -0.0049         0.08
   Log inpatient elective visits       -0.014          -0.010      0.31       -0.013       -0.012         0.81

Change in log charges
   Log elective charges                -0.012         -0.0076      0.19       -0.013      -0.0098         0.42
   Log outpatient charges             -0.0095         -0.0077      0.40       -0.014      -0.0079         0.03
   Log inpatient elective charges      -0.014         -0.0097      0.37       -0.013       -0.012         0.78


         Notes: “Control" counties did not experience a hurricane between 1997–2012. Unaffected
         counties are coastal counties or within 75 miles of coastal counties in states that experience
         hurricanes. Treated “All hurricane counties” experienced at least one hurricane with wind
         speeds over 74 miles per hour between 1997–2012. Treated “Strong hurricane counties”
         experienced at least one hurricane with wind speeds over 100 miles per hour between 1997–
         2012. We show the average of each category. Charges are in dollars.



                                                        31
            Table 3: Difference-in-difference estimate for elective visits and charges

                                          (1)                 (2)            (3)                (4)
                                           Elective visits (log)             Elective charges (log)
                                                            Strong                           Strong
                                     All hurricanes       hurricanes    All hurricanes     hurricanes

 Month -1                             -0.0000205            0.0125         0.00534           0.0304**
                                       (0.00480)           (0.0136)       (0.00668)          (0.0136)
 Month 0                              -0.0669***          -0.238***      -0.0819***         -0.258***
                                        (0.0104)           (0.0224)        (0.0155)          (0.0346)
 Month 1                               -0.0218**         -0.0786***       -0.0274**           -0.0546
                                       (0.00929)           (0.0296)        (0.0127)          (0.0420)
 Month 2                                0.00373            -0.00363        -0.00806          0.00449
                                        (0.0114)          (0.00807)        (0.0136)          (0.0149)
 Months 3 to 12                        0.0201**            0.0147*          0.0159*          0.0230*
                                       (0.00976)          (0.00841)       (0.00920)          (0.0129)
 Outcome mean (weighted, levels)         19,819            19,819        77,176,584        77,176,584
 Observations                            75,082            75,082          75,082            75,082
 Adjusted R-squared                      0.961              0.961          0.976             0.976


Notes: The table reports estimates of Equation (2). Outcome variables are indicated at top of each
column. All regressions include county-by-month and month-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered by county. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.



            Table 4: Difference-in-difference estimate for all elective inpatient visits

                                          (1)                (2)             (3)                (4)
                                      Elective inpatient visits (log)   Elective inpatient charges (log)
                                                           Strong                             Strong
                                     All hurricanes      hurricanes     All hurricanes      hurricanes

 Month -1                               -0.00743             0.0118        0.00388           0.0346*
                                       (0.00935)           (0.0175)       (0.0136)           (0.0190)
 Month 0                              -0.0652***          -0.235***      -0.0794***         -0.281***
                                        (0.0175)           (0.0601)       (0.0217)           (0.0526)
 Month 1                                 -0.0101            -0.0162        -0.0313            -0.0349
                                        (0.0139)           (0.0392)       (0.0201)           (0.0479)
 Month 2                                -0.00800           -0.00932       -0.0339*            -0.0126
                                        (0.0155)           (0.0175)       (0.0205)           (0.0223)
 Months 3 to 12                          0.0121             -0.0185         0.0131             0.0145
                                        (0.0154)           (0.0300)       (0.0171)           (0.0278)
 Outcome mean (weighted, levels)          860                860         42,572,528        42,572,528
 Observations                            65,491            65,491          65,491            65,491
 Adjusted R-squared                      0.960              0.960          0.938             0.938


Notes: The table reports estimates of Equation (2). Outcome variables are indicated at top of each
column. All regressions include county-by-month and month-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered by county. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.



                                                    32
               Table 5: Difference-in-difference estimate for all outpatient visits

                                          (1)                (2)              (3)               (4)
                                          Outpatient visits (log)            Outpatient charges (log)
                                                           Strong                             Strong
                                     All hurricanes      hurricanes      All hurricanes     hurricanes

 Month -1                              0.000501            0.0130          -0.000893          0.0293
                                       (0.00501)          (0.0143)         (0.00722)         (0.0259)
 Month 0                              -0.0668***         -0.240***        -0.0873***        -0.238***
                                        (0.0105)          (0.0230)          (0.0126)         (0.0230)
 Month 1                               -0.0224**        -0.0834***         -0.0246**         -0.0676*
                                       (0.00939)          (0.0298)          (0.0107)         (0.0368)
 Month 2                                0.00404           -0.00436          0.00558           0.0124
                                        (0.0116)         (0.00839)          (0.0111)         (0.0129)
 Months 3 to 12                        0.0212**           0.0178*            0.0112         0.0331***
                                       (0.00989)         (0.00908)         (0.00726)         (0.0122)
 Outcome mean (weighted, levels)         19,066           19,066          33,719,624        33,719,624
 Observations                            75,053           75,053            75,053            75,053
 Adjusted R-squared                      0.951             0.951            0.949             0.949


Notes: The table reports estimates of Equation (2). Outcome variables are indicated at top of each
column. All regressions include county-by-month and month-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered by county. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




             Table 6: Difference-in-difference estimate for orthopedic procedures

                                         (1)              (2)                 (3)              (4)
                                    Orthopedic procedures visits (log)   Orthopedic procedures charges (log)
                                                        Strong                               Strong
                                    All hurricanes    hurricanes         All hurricanes    hurricanes

 Month 0                              -0.0944***         -0.273***          -0.0379**        -0.122***
                                       (0.0158)           (0.0422)           (0.0159)         (0.0298)
 Months 1 to 12                         0.0171            -0.00888           -0.00690         -0.00552
                                       (0.0145)           (0.0176)          (0.00825)         (0.0174)
 Outcome mean (weighted, levels)          275               275            17,912,266        17,912,266
 Observations                            61,663           61,663             69,724            69,724
 Adjusted R-squared                      0.950             0.950             0.939             0.939


Notes: The table reports estimates of a modified version of Equation (2). Outcome variables are indicated
at top of each column. All regressions include county-by-month and month-by-year fixed effects. Standard
errors (in parentheses) are clustered by county. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                   33
                  Table 7: Difference-in-difference estimate for hernia procedures

                                          (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)
                                      Hernia procedures visits (log)    Hernia procedures charges (log)
                                                         Strong                             Strong
                                     All hurricanes     hurricanes      All hurricanes     hurricanes

 Month 0                               -0.0713**         -0.395***          -0.0806         -0.403***
                                        (0.0348)          (0.0704)         (0.0557)           (0.133)
 Months 1 to 12                         -0.00132           -0.0256          0.0254            0.0416
                                        (0.0150)          (0.0252)         (0.0321)          (0.0745)
 Outcome mean (weighted, levels)          37.3              37.3          1,882,255         1,882,255
 Observations                            60,957           60,957            65,641            65,641
 Adjusted R-squared                      0.912             0.912            0.790             0.790


Notes: The table reports estimates of a modified version of Equation (2). Outcome variables are indicated
at top of each column. All regressions include county-by-month and month-by-year fixed effects. Standard
errors (in parentheses) are clustered by county. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                   Table 8: Difference-in-difference estimate for chemotherapy

                                          (1)              (2)               (3)            (4)
                                        Chemotherapy visits (log)        Chemotherapy charges (log)
                                                         Strong                           Strong
                                     All hurricanes   hurricanes        All hurricanes  hurricanes

 Month 0                                 -0.0329         -0.0894**          -0.0311          -0.0280
                                        (0.0205)          (0.0347)         (0.0456)         (0.0594)
 Months 1 to 12                          0.0238            0.0572          0.0548*           0.110*
                                        (0.0251)          (0.0785)         (0.0326)         (0.0600)
 Outcome mean (weighted, levels)          615               615           8,840,696         8,840,696
 Observations                            45,000           45,000           46,778             46,778
 Adjusted R-squared                      0.926             0.926            0.841             0.841


Notes: The table reports estimates of a modified version of Equation (2). Outcome variables are indicated
at top of each column. All regressions include county-by-month and month-by-year fixed effects. Standard
errors (in parentheses) are clustered by county. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                   34
                  Table 9: Difference-in-difference estimate for radiation therapy

                                          (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)
                                      Radiation therapy visits (log)    Radiation therapy charges (log)
                                                         Strong                             Strong
                                     All hurricanes     hurricanes      All hurricanes     hurricanes

 Month 0                                 0.0298           -0.0300           -0.0302          -0.108*
                                        (0.0437)         (0.0389)          (0.0318)         (0.0561)
 Months 1 to 12                          0.0317           0.0139           -0.00623         0.00518
                                        (0.0514)         (0.0472)          (0.0229)         (0.0499)
 Outcome mean (weighted, levels)          272               272           4,307,686         4,307,686
 Observations                            33,046           33,046           35,902             35,902
 Adjusted R-squared                      0.851             0.850            0.773             0.773


Notes: The table reports estimates of a modified version of Equation (2). Outcome variables are indicated
at top of each column. All regressions include county-by-month and month-by-year fixed effects. Standard
errors (in parentheses) are clustered by county. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                   35
Appendix
             Table A1: Difference-in-difference estimate for all visits and charges

                                          (1)                  (2)           (3)                (4)
                                              All visits (log)                  All charges (log)
                                                            Strong                            Strong
                                     All hurricanes        hurricanes   All hurricanes      hurricanes

 Month -1                              0.000303             0.0110          0.00535        0.0319***
                                       (0.00395)           (0.0107)       (0.00492)         (0.00908)
 Month 0                              -0.0456***          -0.162***      -0.0258***        -0.0999***
                                       (0.00792)           (0.0181)       (0.00872)          (0.0288)
 Month 1                               -0.0159**         -0.0616***        -0.00655           -0.0288
                                       (0.00774)           (0.0223)       (0.00924)          (0.0248)
 Month 2                                0.00201            -0.00641        -0.00124          -0.00441
                                       (0.00906)          (0.00630)       (0.00791)          (0.0113)
 Months 3 to 12                        0.0163**             0.0104         9.58e-06           0.00461
                                       (0.00804)          (0.00711)       (0.00538)          (0.0119)
 Outcome mean (weighted, levels)         23,401             23,401       182,386,656       182,386,656
 Observations                            75,082             75,082         75,082            75,082
 Adjusted R-squared                      0.972               0.972          0.985             0.985


Notes: The table reports estimates of Equation (2). Outcome variables are indicated at top of each
column. All regressions include county-by-month and month-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered by county. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                    36
        Table A2: Difference-in-difference estimate for emergency visits and charges

                                           (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
                                          Emergency visits (log)            Emergency charges (log)
                                                          Strong                            Strong
                                     All hurricanes     hurricanes      All hurricanes    hurricanes

 Month -1                              0.0000616          0.00222          0.00226          0.0331**
                                       (0.00323)        (0.00705)         (0.00723)         (0.0145)
 Month 0                               0.0205***         0.0391*           0.00192           -0.0163
                                       (0.00544)         (0.0215)         (0.00919)         (0.0342)
 Month 1                                 0.00263          -0.0153          0.00208           -0.0141
                                       (0.00513)         (0.0105)         (0.00878)         (0.0169)
 Month 2                                -0.00532        -0.0200**         -0.000130         -0.00885
                                       (0.00491)        (0.00825)         (0.00877)         (0.0164)
 Months 3 to 12                         -0.00436         -0.00445          -0.0114           -0.0124
                                       (0.00374)         (0.0103)         (0.00777)         (0.0181)
 Outcome mean (weighted, levels)        4,081              4,081         110,215,096      110,215,096
 Observations                           74,888            74,888           74,888           74,888
 Adjusted R-squared                     0.976              0.976            0.957            0.957


Notes: The table reports estimates of Equation (2). Outcome variables are indicated at top of each
column. All regressions include county-by-month and month-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered by county. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                   37
                              Table A3: Point estimates for Figure 3

                                          (1)                 (2)            (3)                (4)
                                           Elective visits (log)             Elective charges (log)
                                                            Strong                           Strong
 Event time                          All hurricanes       hurricanes    All hurricanes     hurricanes

 -6                                      -0.0056           0.0085          -0.0023           -0.0045
                                        (0.0057)           (0.010)        (0.0070)           (0.018)
 -5                                      -0.0046          0.020***         0.0041           0.00031
                                        (0.0044)          (0.0078)        (0.0095)          (0.0093)
 -4                                      -0.0059           0.0072          -0.0026            -0.012
                                        (0.0036)          (0.0096)        (0.0089)           (0.011)
 -3                                      -0.0020           0.0041          -0.0034         -0.026***
                                        (0.0028)          (0.0080)        (0.0072)          (0.0098)
 -1                                      -0.0035            0.022          0.0064              0.024
                                        (0.0056)           (0.017)        (0.0071)           (0.017)
 0                                     -0.070***          -0.23***        -0.081***         -0.26***
                                        (0.0097)           (0.022)         (0.018)           (0.035)
 1                                      -0.026**          -0.071**         -0.028*            -0.063
                                         (0.010)           (0.030)         (0.015)           (0.043)
 2                                      -0.00052           0.0042          -0.0089           -0.0039
                                         (0.012)          (0.0098)         (0.017)           (0.018)
 3                                       0.0069            0.0018            0.012           -0.0056
                                        (0.0095)           (0.011)         (0.013)           (0.016)
 4                                       -0.0047            0.012           0.0065           -0.0034
                                         (0.011)           (0.011)         (0.013)           (0.017)
 5                                        0.015             0.015           0.0097           -0.0018
                                         (0.012)           (0.014)         (0.013)           (0.018)
 6                                       0.018*             0.014           0.0094          -0.00061
                                         (0.010)           (0.014)         (0.011)           (0.021)
 7                                        0.015             0.021           0.0040             0.013
                                        (0.0099)           (0.014)         (0.011)           (0.019)
 8                                       0.019*           0.033***          0.0037            0.0058
                                         (0.011)           (0.012)         (0.013)           (0.025)
 9                                       0.018*           0.029***           0.012             0.022
                                         (0.010)           (0.010)         (0.011)           (0.018)
 10                                     0.021**             0.019            0.020             0.020
                                         (0.011)           (0.015)         (0.013)           (0.021)
 11                                     0.026**            0.039*          0.039**             0.041
                                         (0.013)           (0.022)         (0.017)           (0.030)
 12                                     0.026**           0.042***          0.036*           0.057**
                                         (0.013)           (0.015)         (0.020)           (0.024)
 Outcome mean (weighted, levels)        19,819             19,819        77,176,584        77,176,584
 Observations                           75,082             75,082          75,082            75,082
 Adjusted R-squared                      0.96               0.96            0.98              0.98


Notes: The table reports estimates of equations (1). Outcome variables are indicated at top of each
column. All regressions include county-by-month and month-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered by county. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                   38
                              Table A4: Point estimates for Figure 4

                       (1)                     (2)                   (3)                     (4)
                              Elective visits                        Elective charges (millions)
 Event time       All hurricanes        Strong hurricanes       All hurricanes       Strong hurricanes

 -1                         -83                   525                   0.72                  4.1*
                      [-295, 141]           [-140, 1,249]         [-0.61, 2.0]           [-0.52, 10]
 0                     -1,714***              -4,410***               -8.1***               -35***
                 [-2,177, -1,262]        [-5,595, -3,256]          [-12, -4.2]            [-48, -25]
 1                     -2,330***              -6,059***               -11***                -46***
                 [-3,067, -1,601]        [-8,232, -4,595]          [-17, -5.4]            [-71, -28]
 2                     -2,342***              -5,957***               -12***                -46***
                 [-3,382, -1,267]        [-8,538, -4,173]          [-19, -4.6]            [-77, -24]
 3                     -2,177***              -5,913***                -11**                -47***
                   [-3,497, -811]        [-8,743, -3,796]          [-19, -1.3]            [-85, -21]
 4                      -2,290**              -5,627***                 -10*                -48***
                   [-3,971, -580]        [-9,034, -3,173]           [-20, 1.2]            [-87, -18]
 5                       -1,938*              -5,263***                 -9.1                 -48**
                     [-4,030, 87]        [-9,098, -2,422]           [-21, 4.4]            [-91, -13]
 6                        -1,491              -4,915***                 -8.0                 -48**
                    [-3,937, 856]        [-9,363, -1,685]           [-21, 7.5]           [-93, -9.3]
 7                        -1,137               -4,402**                 -7.6                 -46**
                  [-3,931, 1,541]          [-9,537, -639]           [-23, 9.4]           [-96, -3.5]
 8                         -689                 -3,588*                 -7.1                  -45*
                  [-3,867, 2,365]           [-9,328, 464]            [-24, 12]            [-96, 1.9]
 9                         -245                  -2,885                 -5.8                  -41*
                  [-3,739, 3,148]         [-9,099, 1,608]            [-25, 15]             [-98, 10]
 10                         271                  -2,430                 -3.6                   -38
                  [-3,500, 4,035]         [-9,309, 2,545]            [-24, 20]            [-101, 17]
 11                         893                  -1,460                 0.99                   -31
                  [-3,318, 5,160]         [-9,371, 4,398]            [-23, 27]            [-101, 30]
 12                        1,530                  -419                   5.1                   -21
                  [-3,171, 6,208]         [-8,590, 5,920]            [-22, 35]             [-96, 47]


Notes: The table reports estimates of cumulative treatment effects. Outcome variables are indicated at top
of each column. All regressions include county-by-month and month-by-year fixed effects. Ninety-five
percent confidence intervals (in brackets) are based on 1,000 bootstrap draws. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05,
* p < 0.10.




                                                    39
                              Table A5: Point estimates for Figure 5

                                          (1)                (2)             (3)                (4)
                                      Elective inpatient visits (log)   Elective inpatient charges (log)
                                                           Strong                             Strong
 Event time                          All hurricanes      hurricanes     All hurricanes      hurricanes

 -6                                       0.019*             0.020           0.015            0.0097
                                         (0.010)           (0.037)         (0.016)            (0.037)
 -5                                        0.010             0.022           0.015            -0.0052
                                         (0.012)           (0.016)         (0.018)            (0.023)
 -4                                        0.015           0.0022           0.0098            0.0011
                                         (0.012)           (0.014)         (0.019)            (0.020)
 -3                                      -0.0035            -0.021         -0.0056           -0.040**
                                        (0.0093)           (0.015)         (0.015)            (0.019)
 -1                                       0.0016             0.018           0.013             0.029
                                        (0.0098)           (0.017)         (0.014)            (0.021)
 0                                     -0.056***          -0.23***        -0.071***          -0.29***
                                        (0.018)            (0.058)         (0.027)            (0.054)
 1                                      -0.0020             -0.011          -0.024             -0.042
                                        (0.016)            (0.041)         (0.025)            (0.053)
 2                                      0.00011            -0.0042          -0.027             -0.020
                                        (0.019)            (0.022)         (0.026)            (0.031)
 3                                        0.017            -0.0072           0.019             -0.017
                                        (0.018)            (0.025)         (0.022)            (0.030)
 4                                       0.0083            -0.0041           0.016             -0.011
                                        (0.019)            (0.035)         (0.021)            (0.036)
 5                                        0.026             -0.021           0.026             -0.010
                                        (0.020)            (0.031)         (0.022)            (0.028)
 6                                        0.018             -0.026           0.020            -0.0080
                                        (0.018)            (0.033)         (0.021)            (0.030)
 7                                        0.011             -0.028          0.0053              0.019
                                        (0.018)            (0.033)         (0.020)            (0.034)
 8                                        0.018             -0.035          0.0043             -0.015
                                        (0.019)            (0.041)         (0.027)            (0.044)
 9                                       0.0092             -0.021           0.015              0.026
                                        (0.019)            (0.033)         (0.023)            (0.029)
 10                                      0.030*             0.0096           0.012              0.027
                                        (0.017)            (0.026)         (0.020)            (0.028)
 11                                       0.033            0.00075           0.045              0.032
                                        (0.024)            (0.038)         (0.033)            (0.035)
 12                                       0.033            -0.0024           0.041              0.031
                                        (0.028)            (0.037)         (0.036)            (0.029)
 Outcome mean (weighted, levels)          860               860          42,572,528        42,572,528
 Observations                            65,491            65,491          65,491            65,491
 Adjusted R-squared                       0.96              0.96            0.94              0.94


Notes: The table reports estimates of equations (1). Outcome variables are indicated at top of each
column. All regressions include county-by-month and month-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered by county. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                    40
                                  Table A6: Point estimates for Figure 6

                       (1)                      (2)                  (3)                    (4)
                         Elective inpatient visits              Elective inpatient charges (millions)
 Event time       All hurricanes        Strong hurricanes       All hurricanes       Strong hurricanes

 -1                       1.6                      28                  0.77                    2.9
                      [-13, 18]                [-13, 92]          [-0.72, 2.2]           [-1.3, 7.5]
 0                      -51**                  -289***                -3.3*                 -22***
                     [-86, -14]             [-459, -169]          [-6.7, 0.20]            [-34, -13]
 1                       -53*                  -306***                -4.7*                 -26***
                    [-104, 6.7]             [-587, -124]          [-9.7, 0.72]            [-48, -12]
 2                        -53                   -313**                -6.3*                 -28***
                     [-126, 33]              [-658, -80]           [-13, 1.3]            [-57, -9.3]
 3                        -37                   -324**                 -5.1                  -30**
                     [-128, 72]              [-723, -48]           [-13, 4.0]            [-64, -7.5]
 4                        -28                    -330*                 -4.2                  -31**
                    [-140, 110]               [-802, 25]           [-13, 7.0]            [-70, -5.2]
 5                       -3.3                    -362*                 -2.6                  -32**
                    [-143, 170]               [-883, 73]            [-14, 10]            [-74, -3.1]
 6                         14                    -401*                 -1.4                  -32**
                    [-148, 223]              [-954, 125]            [-14, 14]            [-78, -2.2]
 7                         25                     -444                 -1.1                   -30*
                    [-158, 264]            [-1,065, 169]            [-16, 16]             [-82, 4.8]
 8                         43                     -498                -0.88                   -32*
                    [-160, 313]            [-1,166, 242]            [-18, 19]             [-87, 6.6]
 9                         52                     -530               -0.0079                   -29
                    [-175, 350]            [-1,252, 305]            [-19, 22]              [-89, 13]
 10                        82                     -515                 0.71                    -27
                    [-163, 413]            [-1,274, 401]            [-20, 24]              [-88, 18]
 11                       114                     -514                  3.4                    -23
                    [-160, 491]            [-1,299, 517]            [-20, 31]              [-90, 27]
 12                       146                     -517                  5.9                    -20
                    [-161, 569]            [-1,391, 615]            [-21, 37]              [-91, 35]


Notes: The table reports estimates of cumulative treatment effects. Outcome variables are indicated at top
of each column. All regressions include county-by-month and month-by-year fixed effects. Ninety-five
percent confidence intervals (in brackets) are based on 1,000 bootstrap draws. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05,
* p < 0.10.




                                                     41
                              Table A7: Point estimates for Figure 7

                                          (1)                (2)             (3)               (4)
                                          Outpatient visits (log)           Outpatient charges (log)
                                                           Strong                            Strong
 Event time                          All hurricanes      hurricanes     All hurricanes     hurricanes

 -6                                     -0.0055           0.0081           0.0012            -0.015
                                       (0.0059)           (0.010)         (0.0077)          (0.017)
 -5                                     -0.0047          0.021***          0.0042           -0.0048
                                       (0.0049)          (0.0081)         (0.0077)          (0.018)
 -4                                    -0.0071*           0.0066           -0.0087           -0.020
                                       (0.0040)          (0.0099)         (0.0059)          (0.014)
 -3                                     -0.0017           0.0045           0.0034           -0.0096
                                       (0.0030)          (0.0085)         (0.0053)          (0.011)
 -1                                     -0.0032            0.022          -0.00042            0.022
                                       (0.0059)           (0.018)         (0.0071)          (0.027)
 0                                     -0.070***         -0.23***         -0.087***         -0.24***
                                        (0.0097)          (0.023)           (0.013)          (0.023)
 1                                      -0.027**         -0.076**          -0.025**         -0.077**
                                         (0.010)          (0.031)           (0.011)          (0.037)
 2                                      -0.00039          0.0035            0.0054           0.0026
                                         (0.013)         (0.0098)           (0.010)          (0.012)
 3                                       0.0071           0.0012            0.0088           -0.0035
                                        (0.0097)          (0.011)          (0.0065)          (0.012)
 4                                       -0.0037           0.014            0.0042           0.0023
                                         (0.011)          (0.012)           (0.011)          (0.018)
 5                                        0.016            0.018            0.0051            0.0053
                                         (0.012)          (0.014)          (0.0090)          (0.021)
 6                                       0.020*            0.018             0.010            0.0083
                                         (0.010)          (0.015)           (0.010)          (0.017)
 7                                        0.016           0.026*             0.012             0.010
                                         (0.010)          (0.014)          (0.0078)          (0.019)
 8                                       0.020*          0.038***           0.0098            0.026*
                                         (0.011)          (0.013)          (0.0072)          (0.015)
 9                                       0.020*          0.032***           0.012*             0.023
                                         (0.011)          (0.011)          (0.0069)          (0.016)
 10                                      0.021*            0.022             0.011             0.027
                                         (0.011)          (0.015)          (0.0076)          (0.019)
 11                                     0.026**           0.043*            0.019*             0.054
                                         (0.013)          (0.023)           (0.010)          (0.035)
 12                                     0.027**          0.046***            0.020          0.079***
                                         (0.013)          (0.016)           (0.012)          (0.029)
 Outcome mean (weighted, levels)        19,066            19,066         33,719,624        33,719,624
 Observations                           75,053            75,053           75,053            75,053
 Adjusted R-squared                      0.95              0.95             0.95              0.95


Notes: The table reports estimates of equations (1). Outcome variables are indicated at top of each
column. All regressions include county-by-month and month-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered by county. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                   42
                              Table A8: Point estimates for Figure 8

                       (1)                     (2)                   (3)                     (4)
                             Outpatient visits                      Outpatient charges (millions)
 Event time       All hurricanes       Strong hurricanes        All hurricanes      Strong hurricanes

 -1                        -74                    507                 -0.022                   1.5
                     [-288, 148]            [-131, 1,203]        [-0.59, 0.52]           [-1.6, 4.7]
 0                    -1,649***               -4,184***              -4.3***                -14***
                 [-2,106, -1,206]        [-5,329, -3,047]         [-5.6, -3.0]           [-18, -9.5]
 1                    -2,262***               -5,840***              -5.5***                -19***
                 [-2,988, -1,553]        [-7,859, -4,432]         [-7.5, -3.8]            [-27, -13]
 2                    -2,271***               -5,761***              -5.2***                -19***
                 [-3,302, -1,197]        [-8,163, -4,071]         [-7.6, -3.0]            [-28, -12]
 3                    -2,105***               -5,734***              -4.8***                -19***
                   [-3,409, -764]        [-8,449, -3,695]         [-7.5, -2.2]            [-29, -12]
 4                     -2,191**               -5,421***              -4.6***                -19***
                   [-3,814, -547]        [-8,604, -3,056]         [-7.7, -1.4]            [-29, -10]
 5                      -1,828*               -5,012***               -4.3**                -18***
                    [-3,906, 142]        [-8,691, -2,243]        [-7.9, -0.64]           [-30, -7.2]
 6                       -1,367               -4,610***                -3.8*                 -18**
                    [-3,765, 966]        [-8,853, -1,475]         [-7.8, 0.50]           [-31, -5.0]
 7                        -996                 -4,017**                 -3.2                 -17**
                  [-3,762, 1,712]          [-8,812, -459]          [-7.7, 1.5]           [-31, -2.5]
 8                        -521                  -3,147*                 -2.7                  -15*
                  [-3,570, 2,453]           [-8,500, 757]          [-7.6, 2.5]           [-31, 0.78]
 9                         -44                   -2,396                 -2.1                  -13*
                  [-3,387, 3,290]         [-8,293, 1,857]          [-7.3, 3.4]            [-31, 4.1]
 10                        442                   -1,899                 -1.5                   -12
                  [-3,241, 4,188]         [-8,575, 2,904]          [-7.1, 4.4]            [-31, 7.7]
 11                       1,045                   -892                 -0.57                  -7.7
                  [-3,109, 5,256]         [-8,457, 4,694]          [-6.8, 6.1]             [-31, 13]
 12                       1,684                   178                   0.45                  -1.9
                  [-2,879, 6,416]         [-7,910, 6,417]          [-6.5, 7.9]             [-28, 22]


Notes: The table reports estimates of cumulative treatment effects. Outcome variables are indicated at top
of each column. All regressions include county-by-month and month-by-year fixed effects. Ninety-five
percent confidence intervals (in brackets) are based on 1,000 bootstrap draws. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05,
* p < 0.10.




                                                    43
