                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      COALITIONS IN THE URUGUAY ROUND:
              THE EXTENT, PROS AND CONS OF DEVELOPING COUNTRY
                             PARTICIPATION 1, 2




                              Colleen Hamilton

                                John Whalley




                           Working Paper No. 2751




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                October 1988




This is a draft of a paper prepared for a NBER/CEPR conference on Trade
Policy to be held at St. Catherine's College, is based on meetings with
country delegations to the GATT, government officials in national capitals,
and officials of various international agencies in Geneva which took place in
the fall of 1987 and spring of 1988 as part of a Ford Foundation project on
Trade Policy and the Developing World.   Since there is relatively little
written material on either the Uruguay Round itself or the events leading up
to it, much of what is stated in the paper cannot be substantiated using
documents in the public record. We are grateful to Patrick Low (on special
leave from the GATT Secretariat) for helpful comments on an earlier draft.
This paper is part of NBER'a research program in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of the National hureao
of Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper #2751
                                          October 1988


                     COALITIONS IN THE URUGUAY ROUND:
    THE EXTENT, PROS AND CONS OF DEVELOPING COUNTRY PARTICIPATION     1, 2


                                     ABSTRACT




      This paper both documents the involvement            of developing

countries in coalitional activity in the current GATT Uruguay
round thus far, and provides a rudimenting evaluation of the pros
and cons of the different options for them as far as coalitiorial

strategies are concerned. The main conclusions are that much of
the coalitional activity involving developing countries thus far
in the round has been agenda—moving and joint proposal-making,

rather than negotiating involving exchanges of concession.                       At

the same time, however, coalitional activity by a larger group of

mid-sized developed and smaller developing countries who see a

major interest in preserving the multilateral system has been
central   to the process.




Colleen Hamilton                           John Whalley
                                           Department of Economics
Department of Economics                                                      -


The University  of Western Ontario         The University of Western Ontario
                  N6A 5C2                  London, Ontario  N6A 5C2
London, Ontario
                                   2

 I    INTRODUCTION

      This paper both documents the involvement of developing
countries in coalitional activity in the current .GATT Uruguay

round thus far, and provides a rudimenting evaluation of the pros

and cons of the different options for them as far as coalitional

strategies are concerned. Coalitionai activity in this trade
round,    unlike earlier rounds, has been marked and, especially the

mid-sized market oriented, developing countries have been
centrally involved.     There has been consIderable discussion as to

whether small group coalitions offer developing countries more
ocrtnities       for dealing with theIr access problems in trade

negotiations compared to a go—it—alone country—by—country
approach, or a bloc—wide (377) strategy.     This paper is an

attempt to deal with these issues.
     Since there is little or no meaningful economic theory on

which to draw in evaluatIng coalltional options in trade

negotiations, the approach taken here is largely inductive.3       A

profile of experience thus far is assembled, and generalizations
and evaluations offered from this.

     Our main conclusions are that much of the coalitional

activity involving developing countries thus far in the round has
been agenda—moving and joint proposal—making, rather than

negotiating involving exchanges of concession.    At the sane time,


     3 See :ec'enttheoretical papers by inmore (1985) and
others.  Several of these try to develop an axiomatic approach to
ooalitional activity, but are so far removed from actual trade
negotiations as to be of lIttle help.
however,      coalitional activity by a larger group of mid—sized

developed and smaller developing countries who see a major
interest in preserving the multilateral system has been central
to the process.

     In the paper,     we argue that agenda—moving and proposal—

making coalitions seem much easier to form and maintain than
negotiatidg coalitions.      It is, therefore an open question as to

how much further scope there is for coalitional actitity by

developing countries in the later phases of the round.        As it-

accelerates towards its negotiations phase, we see an important
role for the larger coalition of both smaller developed and

middle—sized developing countries whose main concern is over the

erosion of multilateral disciplines under the     O-Afl system.

Issue—specific coaliti.ons either exclusively involving developing

countries,     or involving both developed and developing countries

we see   as   more problematic and ultimately unstable.

     Whether all of this upsurge of coalitional activity in trade

negotiations represents an improvement for developing countries
we also see as an open question.      On the one hand,   issue—specific
small group coalitions offer individual developing countries the
chance to pursue their narrower country interests and perhaps

achieve more than if such coalitions did not form.        On the other

hand, a proliferation of small group -coalitions weakens the grand

coalition of all developing countries, which takes a more

systemic approach.
                                      4

II   TRADE NEGOTIATIONS AND COALITIONS

     Although    only   at its mid-stage, the current (eighth) GATI

round of trade negotiations has already made its mark by being
different in nearly all ways from its predecessors. It has an

agenda which is dramatically broader than previous rounds in

covering such items as services,          intellectual property,

agriculture,     textiles,   investment and others.    Thus in contrast

to earlier rounds only small amounts of negotiating effort have

thus far been devoted to tariff cutting.

     Also,     during its critical phases in early 1986, the final
launch of the round reflected a major and extremely determined
effort initiated by smaller and middle—sized developed countries

(EFTA, Canada,     Australia, New Zealand) in which a number of mid-

size market-oriented developing countries (Columbia, Venezuela,

Uruguay, Zaire, Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia) played a key role.
These countries were jointly concerned over the implications for

the multilateral system should       a round    not be launched and they

were successful in influencing events in a major way.              The

direction of the round has also been significantly influenced by

two important issue—specific coalitions,          one in agriculture (the

"Cairns'   group of 14 developed and developing countries),              and the

other in services (involving ten, so—called "hardline",

developing countries opposed to the inclusion of services in the
trade round).

     Thus, while still limited,       the participation of developing

countries in the round has thus far been both more active and
                                  5

more pluralateral than in previous rounds which, defacto, were

largely EEC—US negotiations. This has led to considerable
discussion of both the merits of and possibilities for

coalitional activity in trade negotiations, especially as far as

smaller developing countries are concerned (see Ostry,    1988)

     Why   has an upsurge in this type of activity occurred now,

and why did it not occur in earlier rounds?     Is it for real,   or

will it begin to break down when the serious negotiating activity

gets underway, since what has occurred thus far has largely
involved agenda-moving coalitional activity rather than

coalitions which actually bargain via an exchange of concessions.
And what of the interests of the middle—sized and smaller

developing countries who have been especially prominent in this
activity. Can they be furthered through this activity, or are
these drawbacks to their participation in this way?

     Country Objectives in Trade Necotiations
     The reasons why countries participate in multilateral trade

negotiations are many and varied.     Early GATT rounds were based
on mercantilist bargaining,   with participating countries offering
to bind or reduce tariffs protecting the home market in return

for improvements in access to foreign markets.    But since those

days, the objectives that countries seek to achieve through GATT

negotiations have proliferated and become many and varied.
     For some, the use of an international negotiation as a way
of binding domestic policy is   a major objective; supposedly one
of the major reasons, for instance, for Mexican accession to GATT
                                     6

in 1986.     For others, the successive increase through recent

rounds in the importance of rule making as against bargaining on
trade barriers has lead them to concentrate most on influencing

the   way   rules are written via the consensual GATT rule—making

procedure.     There are also countries (such as Brazil and India,

and to a lesser extent Canada, Australia, New Zealand) whose

participation seems driven largely their search for a rule—based
rather than a power—based trading order.       Their concern is to

prevent the erosion of multilateral disciplines agreed both in
the GATT itself, and in earlier rounds.       Countries also have more

distant motives, such as Japan's desire to keep multilateral

negotiations going, since it helps in dealing with bilateral
pressures from the US congress for market opening in Japan.
Others are driven by concerns over issues which, for them,
dominate all others being 'discussed in the GATT (such as

Argentina on agriculture)    .   And finally, there are countries who,

while remaining members of GATT, participate little in

negotiations.4
       How and Why Coalitions Form
       Whether or not coalitions form during GATT trade

negotiations, and what these coalitions try to do is a direct
reflection of what the negotiations are about, and how they are


       This is the case for most of the African countries who are
GATT—contracting parties.  Their perception seems to be that
there is little of interest to them in a GATT trade negotiation
since commodity issues are not covered.  At the same time, they
have no incentive to give up contracting party membership of
GATT, since this could involve eventual loss of MFN benefits.
conducted.    Because the process of negotiation in the GATT is

sequential,   involving first an agreement on an agenda of issues
to be negotiated upon,    followed by the tabling of proposals

around the agreed agenda issues, with subsequent negotiation
based on these proposals, the process inevitably generates

several different types of coalitions.
     At one level there is pernanent and ongoing coalitional

activity in the GATT.    At present there are 96 GATT contracting

parties and 30 or so other countries with de facto GATT
nembership, and country delegations are continually in touch one
with another.    This nay be over seemingly minor procedural issues

(such as who chairs a meeting,    nr when meetings are held)   /   or
more major matters such as the rossible joint tabling of a paper,
or how to react to a proposal.

     Delegations seem to talk to or contact the sane delegations

repeatedly,   and as they jointly discuss various issues closeness

of position on a range of issues develops.      These may be groups

of African countries, discussing sinilar problems; India and

Brazil with their joint systemic concerns; Korea, Hong Kong and

Singapore with their concerns over market access for
manufacturers; or Australia, New Zealand and Canada with their

agricultural interests.     There are also more formalized groupings

of countries, such as the ASEAN countries who are currently try

to coordinate their positions on issues discussed in GATT working

groups through regular inter—country meetings at trade officer
level.   The most tightly   discipined   of all these groups is the
                                       a

12—member European Community, which, while represented through               a

single delegation,    spends much of its time trying to resolve
differences among member states on issues being discussed.

        Types of Coalitions in Trade Negotiations

        Defining coalitions in GATT trade negotiations is therefore
difficult.     We will, for convenience as much as precision, refer

to a coalition as any group of decision makers participating in

the negotiation who agree to act in concert to achieve a common

end.5    This concept of a negotiating coalition differs from
coalitional concepts used in other areas of economic analysis.

        The most widely used coalitional       concept,   in economic

thecry,6 is that of the blocking coalition, with an allocation in
the core being defined as one which cannot be blocked by any

subset of participants from the grand coalition.             There is also
the use of coalitions in voting theory.           They may try to b1occ
nrcosals made by rival groups      in legislative processes, or more

active coalitions or groups nay try to secure voting majorities

for their own prooosals.     There is also work on coalitional

activity (collusion)    between groups of firms in the industrial

organization area,     surprisingly,       however,   there is lIttle or no

economic theory which gives any guide as to how or why coalitions
are formed in trade negotiations, how they should behave to

achieve their ends, and who gains or loses from them.

       Kahier and Odell (1988) define a coalition as "two or more
actors with shared interests that influence their bargaining
behaviour toward other actors",    .
                                   :15.
         See Debreu and Scarf (1963).
                                     9

         As a result, it is also unclear what form of coalitional

activity in trade negotiations is in the interest of developing
countries.     One can argue that with a snall group issue—specific

ccalitional approach to trade negotiations, developing countries
with access difficulties in certain product areas (such as

Argentina with agriculture) can form coalitions with countries
with similar interests, and have a better chance of inproving

theirposition compared to a go—it—alone approach.         On the other

hand, such activities serve to weaken the grand coalition of all

developing countries (sffectively,       the 077 in UNCTAD)   which can

defend and hopefully improve the trade rules which apply to then

all, such as those which currently apply under the general

heading of "special and differential" treatment.7 What types at
coalitional activity in trade negotiations are good or bad for

develoing countries     are not clear a priori.

     Thus far, in the 7ruguay Round, coalitions have taken
several different forms   .   Agenda—moving coalitions   have involved

groups    of countries who have shared a common desire that

particular issues be either included or excluded from the
negotiations. The advantages to developing countries from

participating in these coalitions is fairly clear.        Issues in

     7 The GATT provisions comprising the special and
differential treatment of developing countries are 18(a)
(covering tariff renegotiations, although these are not important
because of the liberal nature of Article 28, 18(b) (for Balance—
of-Payments excetions, as amended by a 1979 agreement), 13(c)
(for infant industries, also reinterpreted in 1979), and the
Enabling Clause (1979) for trade preferences. Special arrange-
ments for developing countries also apply under the CATT codes
and regional arrangenents (Article 24).
                                  10

which they are interested can be given a higher profile than if

they try to promote them on their own.       These coalitions are

relatively easy to form since the countries who join do not have
to agree how they would make concessions      on other issues.

     With the agenda framed, coalitions have also formed to make

joint proposals.     Jointly tabled proposals usually suggest either

changes In existing trade barriers being discussed in one of
several negotiating groups, approaches to rule makIng in new

areas,   or set out joint positions indIcating the conditions under

which changes should be made.    Joint proposals have been a

comnonly used coalitionaa tactic in this round in contrast to
earlier rounds.8 Again, these coalitIons are relatively easy to
form since no common set of concessions need to be agreed by

members of the coalition.

     FInay,     there are genuine negotiating coalitions.        Thus

far, the current trade round has not entered its final phases in

whIch concessions are exchanged, and so the workability of these

coalitions has yet to be tested.       These are the most difficult to

form and maintain.    This Is because, unlike agenda—moving or

proposal-making coalitions,   they Involve two—sided agreements,



     8
       During the Tokyo Round, some developing countries proposed
that they be able to negotiate jointly on issues of concern to
them where indIvIdually they were not principal suppliers of
products. The weakness of this approach was that, when requested
to make concessions, some countries In the coalition were
reluctant to do so or would not go far enough to the taste of
other coalition members. This was because of concerns that
problems could arise in subsequent renegotiations under Article
XXVIII of GATT (re—tarfficatIon). See GATT (1974), o. 92.
                                  U
since participants in the coalition nust agree both on what they
want and what they are willing to give up.

     Issue—specific negotiating coalitions raise special
difficulties.   Requests made by the coalition will typically be
part of a set of wider demands made by each country as part of
the negotiations.    And since countries typically wish to balance
their positions across all the issues that are of interest to        it,

they need to reserve some degree of flexibility to allow for

changes in position on various issues as part of the negotiating
processes.   Such changes nay well be inconsistent with agreenents
that countries have entered into in order to join the coalition.

These coalitions are, therefore, dIfficult to naintain.       They
tend to be more resilient where the issue at stake are of cajor

importance to all the members of the coalition (such as

agriculture for most of the Cairns group countries)
     Other difficulties also arise with negotiating coalitions,

such as the need to use a common negotiator.     The single

negotiator for the whole coalition needs to have a reasonable

degree of flexibility to be able to maneuver and respond to
offers made by other parties.9    In short,   coalitions that jointly

demand seem easy to form amd can have an effect on the course of
the negotiation.    Coalitions that are forned to effect the


       The difficulties involved in negotiating as a coalition
are reflected by the ways the European Economic Community
participates in GATT negotiations. Negotiations anong the member
states on common positions and responses to requests are both
time—consuming and divisive, and take as much if not more of
their negotiating effort as dealing with non—EEC countries.
                               12

outcome of bargaining are more difficult.
                                       13

III   COALITIONAL ACTIVITY AND THE LAXJNCH CF THE URUGUAY ROUND
      Coalitional activity in the Uruguay round involving

developing countries began as part of the process through which
the round was launched, covering the period between the end of

the Tokyo Round in 1979 and the Ministerial meeting in Punta del

Este in September 1986 which launched the round.       Because of the

importance of these events to understanding how coalitional

activity in the present round has evolved,       in this section we

document these events in some detail and draw some implications
for developing countries and their involvement in coalitions.

      November 1979   —    October   1982

      At the end of the Tokyo Round in November 1979,     it was

widely felt that there was unfinished business left over from the
round, particularly in the areas on safeguards and agriculture.

There were also misgivings in some quarters about certain

features of the   Toicyo   Round results particularly the MTN codes
which introduced the threat of discrimination through the

application of conditional      MFN treatment.

      Also, although special and differential treatment for

developing countries had been given high profile in the

negotiations, there was a feeling that these provisions did not
meet the needs of the developing countries within the trading

system.   Among the developing countries (and some smaller

developed countries) there were misgivings that they had not been
able to participate more fully in the negotiations, and that they
                                       14

had simply been presented with the results on a take it or leave

it basis.

     In the years immediately following the Tokyo Round, most of

the activity in the GATT concentrated on implementing the tariff
and non—tariff barrier agreements from the round.                    The sense that

there was outstanding unfinished business created resistance in
some quarters to the idea of considering fresh initiatives for

trade liberalization.       At this time, these were coming mainly

from the US.

     A proposal   to hold   a Contracting Party Session at
Ministerial level in November 1982 was somewhat reluctantly

agreed to, amid differences in expectations among contracting
parties as to what   nigh    result.        The Cnited States, in

articular, wanted    to tackle the unfinished business from the

Tokyo Round (safeguards     and agriculturs,             and to explore the

introduction of new issues into the GATT (nc1uding services,

counterfeit and high technology).           The   Ta'S   approached this meeting
as an opportunity to prepare the way for launching a new round.

However, the EEC was clearly unwilling to contemplate trade

negotiations which included agriculture.                 This made   i.t   dIfficult
to seriously consider the launching of a new round.                   Developing
countries remained concerned about the implementation of special

and differential treatment, and how the MTN codes from the Tokyo
sound were to operate.
                                       15

       The November 1982 Ministerial

       The November 1982 Ministerial meeting was unprecedented for
the GATT.      This was the first time that such a complex agenda

spanning such a wide variety and volume of issues had been agreed
to.    It was also the first tine the Contracting Parties had gone

into   a meeting   at such   a high   level without first agreeing in

advance what the fundamentals were on which discussion in the

meeting should be based.       As a result, meeting was less than

successful,    and many stumbling blocks proved too difficult to
overcome.

       in safeguards, it was only possible to agree on an

elaboration of the words used to describe the EEC—US deadlock in

the Tokyo Round agreements,      because selectivity remained the
central issue.     Secondly, the EEC renamed adamantly opposed to
negotiations involving agriculture,         although importantly they   di
agree that a Conmittee on Trade in Agriculture be established.
       The   anbiguty of   the strength of    comitnent   to the

Standstill and Rollback in the Ministerial Declaration resulting

from the meeting (the first tine it had formally appeared) also

created a good deal of acrimony.         The EEC later issued its own

interpretation of the declaration stating it was only a "best
endeavours" commitment.       The new issues areas,    especially in
services, also proved to be a major bone of contention for the

developing countries, and specifically for Srazil and India.            In

the end, all that could be agreed to was to exchange information.
                                  16

     The 1982 Ministerial meeting was considered by all

participating countries to have been a total failure.     What might

have been the start of a process towards the launch of a new
trade round ended up being a Work Program for two years that did

not commit anyone to anything.     The Work Program proceeded during

the two years after the 1982 Ministerial Meeting.     In some areas

little progress was made, while in other areas, such as

agriculture, useful preparatory background work was completed.
     Concern began to grow, however, over what would follow now

that the Work Program was coming to an end.     How was the momentum

for trade discussions of interest to those countries concerned

over a possible future further erosion of the multilateral

trading system to be maintained?
     November 1932 to January    l96
     Early in 1984, the Japanese joined with the Americans in
calling for a new trade round, and by the end of 1934, all the
industrIal countries were on board as far as a new round was
concerned.   However,   large numbers of developing countries were
unconvinced of the justification for a new round, arguing that
unfinished business of the Tokyo Round remained unresolved and

was reflected in the policies being currently pursued by the
industrial countries. They also were fearful of pressure being

used against them in the new areas (services, intellectual

property, and trade—related investment),   and were concerned over

an erosion of special and differential treatment.    Significant
                                  17

numbers of developing countries thus continued to oppose the

launch of a new round up until mid—1985.

     Agreement to move further towards a launch of a new round
occurred in July 1985 but only after lengthy and bitter
discussions    The Preparatory Committee started its work in

January of 1986 againSt a background of uncertainty and suspicion

among the Contracting Panes as to where the process should and
could lead.   There were fundamental differences in opinion among

delegations over the introduction of new issuesinto GATT
negotiations, and over the order of negotiating priorities.
Because of these differences,   the CATT Secretariat was unable to

even draft a declaration for discussion.    This stalemate over how

to reach a draft of a declaration for the launching of the round

provided the ccnditions for subsets of normally minor players to
act as catalysts to keep events moving.    The drafting of the

declaration became an exercise in coalitional   activity,   and

through this the round was launched.
     The EFTA Process and the 910 in Early 1986

     Around May 1986, two declarations emerged from different

groups of contracting parties. One came from a group of ten
developing countries (the 910), lead by Brazil and India.     This

document proposed a narrow set of issues for negotiation and

established a number of conditions to be fulfilled before

negotiations could be launched.    This document was perceived by

others outside the group as a way of blocking negotiations, or at

least slowing down the process.
                                    18

         At approximately the same tine, six EFTA countries, Canada,

Australia and New Zealand (G9) put forward their own draft

declaration, and subsequently invited some developing countries
to   a   joint meeting in the EFTA Secretariat building in Geneva to

explore common ground.      The early meetings of this group involved

20 developing countries,     but as the process unfolded, this group

grew to nearly 50 countries. These meetings were exceptional
compared to previous rounds since the activities of this group
took place during summer, outside of the GATT, and independent of
the work of the     ?rearatory Committee. The     US,   EC and Japan were

kent outside of the process in the IPTA building, although they

were consulted and were broadly supportive of what was going         on.

The GlO also continued to meet and seek ways of refining their

prooosed declaration,     hut were unsuccessful   n attracting broader
suoport.
         As the date for the Ministerial 'ieeting approached,   it

became increasingly clear that agreement on a single text for

Ministerial approval was not going to be possible.         Argentina,

fearing implications for its agricultural interests in the round
proposed a third draft which it hoped would bridge the gap
between what had now become a solidly supported Swiss-Colombia

proposal from the EFTA process and the GlO text.         The Chairnan of

the Preparatory Committee forwarded these three texts of        a

possible declaration to the Ministers at Punta del Este.
However,     the effort on the third text came too late and was not

given serious consideration.
                                  19

     Events at Punta del Este

     Early on in the week of meetings at Punta del Este, separate
groups were established tb address agrioulture (on which there
had been   no agreement in the Swiss—Colombia text) and services.

Meanwhile, the Chairman of the Ministerial Meeting formed a

heads—of-delegations group, which went through the various issues
for negotiation.    Mid-way through the week the Chairman convened

a small group of approximately    20 ministers to hopefully break

the deadlock over the three draft declarations.     After

acrimonious exchanges of views within this group, it was finally
                                                    basis for
agreed that the Swiss—Colombia text was to form the
negotiation of the final declaration. During the next two days:
Brazil,    India and other members of the 010 issued a range of

Dr000sed amendmemts to the Swiss—Colombia text, but were again

unsuccessful.
     The groups in services and agriculture continued to meet,      as

did the Chairman's heads-of-delegations group.     Services was the

first issue settled when they managed to agree on a text which

emphasized institutional separation,   growth and development to be
                                                         in any
given priority, amd national sovereignty to be respected
negotiations. The text on agriculture was agreed next, followed

by trade related intellectual property and trade—related
investment.  Despite some last minute manoeuvreing by the BC over
the issue of how amy balance—of-benefits in the subsequent
                                                             in
negotiation was to be evaluated, the declaration was adopted
the Plenary meeting of the following day.
                                 20

     Coalitional activity was thus central to the launch of the

round,   and a successful launch would likely not have occurred

without It.    Issue—specific coalitions on agriculture and
services (discussed below) were equally important in shaping the

agenda for the round, and In framing the resulting declaration.
Thus far, the round that has followed has been more pluralistic

with wIder participation from developing countries than in any

previous round and with a larger focus on coalitional activity as
a way of achieving country objectives.   All of this is, in part,

a reflection of the way the round was launched.
                                   21

IV   THE CURRENT STATUS OF THE URUGUAY ROUND, AND HOW DEVELOPING
     COUNTRIES SEE THEIR INTERESTS

     Relative to the fSur—year timetable suggested in the Punta
del Este declaration,     the Uruguay Round is now   approachingits
intermediate stage.      The structure of the round involves fourteen

negotiating groups on goods trade issues and a group on services.
A mid-course ministerial meeting is due to be held in Montreal in
December, 1988.
     Table   1   lists the various negotiating groups in the round,

and indicates the central issues of interest to developing

ccuntries.   Among the first four groups, commonly referred to as
the access groups, tariff negotiations nay eventually taks place

on a request and offer basis, not on a general formula cut basis
as was the case for many tariff cuts in the Kennedy and Tocyo

Rounds.   While tariffs are low in developed countries,     tariff

escalation facing developing country exports remains an issue.

The possible use of tariff bindings as a way of extracting

concessions in other groups nay be an option for some developing
countries to consider.

     In the non—tariff measures group,     the main issue for

developing countries is how to bring unjustified quantitative
restrictions more fully under the system. Their concern will be

to do this in ways which do not limit their own use of

quantitative restrictions. The natural resources group also
raises tariff escalation issues, and offers interesting

possibilities for coalitions between developed and developing
                              countrins. dnnnloping in industries manufacturing keneilt
       also would agriculture in trade to harriers reduced that knlievnd is It overall, —
           countries. these help to pronidnd are measures nnsurn to want nay countries                    DATT with conform not                                                                     Netherlands
              Denninping damaning. he mold imports son-subsidized of costs incrnosnd       do which subsidies of reduction also                                                                The Agriculture.
      the imports, agricultural low—cost suksidiznd on depend that countries those for - quotas. subsidies, indsrnct and direct
                                                                                                                                                                                            of Director-General
                                                                                            including GATT; the with conforming                                                                lands)([C/Nether
                                    soybeans. in Nrazil grains, and wheat in Argentsna   not measures nvnr discipline increased 2)
      enample, for Especially, products. agricultural of suppliers country dnonioping                                                                                                        leesaa de Aart Mr.
                                                                                                   harriers import of reduction
             tinecnmpeti many for crucial markets developed-country to access ieprooed —         through access market inpronnd 1)                                                              AGRICILTURt         S.
               restrictions. new of effects the feel will euporters country dvveinping
         All growth. esport maintain and products non-flEA into diversify to
                                                                             difficslt
        too he will it Soon holes. the plug to sought has rnnnwol
                                                                   lifA tack prodocts.
          and fibres new into diversify to ability thnlr rnflncts NICs of svccnss past                                 -
      system. safeguards           effectiveand efficinnt    an   of   dnvninpinent the for implications
      important has rules GATT regular into clothing and tentiles                      in    trade   integratino       —
                                                                  steel.   as such     industries,  troubled
       other      in    trade   managed and   protection fur precndent dangerous           a set has flEA thn -
                                                                                                                                                                 -
                                                    industry. clothing and tnntile the
                                                                                                                            i4fA the dismantle to how effect,      in                              (Aaskralia)
                                                                                                                           GAIT the of workings the
       to newcomers the to especially countries,
                                                 dnvnlopinq the to importance has sent
                                                                                                                                                     into clothina                          Dathie Lindsay Mr.
      dismantle- its and GATT the of principles fran derogation major                                                              and tentiins in trade integrate
                                                                                                                       -
                                                                      the been has flEA                                           to used be coald pracedarns what
                                                                                                                                                                   1)                CLOTHING & TEXTILES         4.
                                                                            negotiations. advance to
      producers country developed-developing               anong formation coalition fnr
                                                                                                     possibility
                                                                                                     -
                                                             restraints. enport over
                                    and sapplies to access of isson general the with disciplines
v.5
                   for demands
                                                                                     deal to hnw -                                                                                                    (Australia)
                                                                                                                                                                                            Uukhie Lindsoy Mr.
                                                                                                                                                sapplies to access       3)
                                                                                            group. negotiating
                  tai'iff—      in with dealt he will it   how and escalation tariff            is issan major     -            restrictions   quantitative of use       2)             -             PRODUCTS
                                                                                                                                                 escalation tariff       1)       RESOi1RCE-NAStl) NATURAL       3.
                                                                                                                                           QRs these  back roiling
                                                                                                                             on insist to whether or negotiable,
                                                                                                                             as QR5 unjustified  treat  to whnthnr 3)
                                                                                                                              formula a of denelopinent tiations,
                                                                                                                               nego- bilateral far
                          restrictions. import and QNs of use own their over                                                                         equinalencn"
                                                                              discipline                                          establish to how methodology: 2)
        increased with faced he could countries developing mean also could
                                                                             it iiosoeonr,                                       (ORs) rnstrictinos guantitotine
                                                                                                                                                                                                   (Australia)
                enports. country devnloping of access market improved
                   -                                                                                                                                                                        Dathin Lindsay Mr.
          major has trade country developing facing measures non-tariffforofimplications -                                            inciading measures, tariff
                                                                             elimination                                    non- any of redaction or elimination 1)                  MEASURES NOii-TARIP1        2.
                                                           markets. coantry developing
                Ge access improved want who countries
                                                      developed to concessions make to                                               cuts tariff MFN to doe LDCs
      need may They harriers. tariff unbound high,
                                                    maintain countries dnnnloping many -                                   sane for margin preference of erosion
                                                                                                                                                                 4)
                                                                                                                                              product by product               Representative, Trade Special
                             countries. developing many for priority high a is hose at                                     nersus appruuch formula rethudology: 3)                   Australian & Aetsassudsr
          processing encourage to goods processed on tariffs in Neductians processed.                                                          escalation tariff 2)
                        am they as tariffs                                                                                                                                    (Australia) Dathie Lindsay Mr.
                                    escalating face hat stage, primary  the in harriers                                                                      ffs   tan
               tariff      no or little   face
                                     countries developing  to internst af prndacts   many                          -
                                                                                                                              nuisting   uf elleinatius   reductian, I)                               TARIffS    1.
                                                                  Deeelopig_çgantrins            for Significance                                          Issues Main         Chairman & Groan Negotiating
                                                                  Round Uruguay      the    in   interests Country Developing and Issues Groups,
                                                                                                           1 TAULt
6.    TROPICAl. PRODUCTS        I) increased liberalization of processed — developing countries seeking inproved access for trnpical products, fewer non—
                                   and semi-processed tropical products    tariff measures such as seasonal restrictions, health regulations that act as
Mr. Paul Leong thee Seamy       2 tariff and non-tariff liberalization     barriers
(Malaysia). H.P. fazur          3 negotiations on "fast—track"
Minister of Primary Products.   4 whether liberalization should be under — alto want progress on issoe of tariff escalation on processed goods, but nay have
Malaysia                           DSP, or on IiFN basis                   to he prepared to nevotiate reciprucally to gale concessions here. Develnped
                                5) boa each reciprocity should be          conntries seen to believe that they have gone as far as they can nnilaterally.
Mr. Siaka Coulibaly (Cute            requi red
d'lvoire), Aehassedor to        6) coverage by product                       —   will be difficult to achieve a concemsus among developing countries on liberal-
the Minister of foreign                                                          ization of tropical products. ACP countries are against liberalization - do not
Affairs. Cute d'Ieeire                                                           want to lose preferential access to tC.

                                                                             —   also discord over likely effects of trade liberalization in fannar of tropical
                                                                                 products on substitution with temperate zone products (also produced by none
                                                                                 developing cnuntries).

1.    GATT ARTICLES             The fallawing Articles have been             —   leplicatloes        for negotiations in other groups.
                                mentioned ta be reviewed and possibly
Mr. Jehe H. bieekes             uabject to negatiation:                      - changes to use of balance-nf-payments restrictions as justification fur trade
(Canada). Athassador                                                           restrictions under XVIIIb sought by some developed countries.
                                I) Article II 1(b) — tariff bindings
                                2) Article XXIV — customs onions and         —   discussion     of strengthening GATT secretariat and encouraging more land/GAIT
                                   free trade areas                              consul ta   tiun.
                                3) Articles XII, DIV. XV, XVIII -
                                     balance of payments                     - implications          nf other article negotiations for developing countries neclear.
                                4) Article XXVIII — modification of
                                   tariff schedule
                                5) Article XVII — state trading
                                6) Article XXI - security eaceptinns
                                i) Article XXV:5 — waivers
                                B) Pratacol of Provisional Application
                                9) Article XXXV - nun-application

6.    MTN   AGREEMENTS &        1) improvement, clarification or             —   especially relevant are cndes on anti—duaping, costues valuation, procerement.
      AR R.tNGEME N T S            espansion of codes                            standards, import licensing.
                                2) greater participation on codes -
Dr. Choisi Kim (Korea).                                                      —   problem of restricted application of liEN treatment. Developed caoatrles would
                                   especially by developing countries
Assistant Minister of Trade,       raising the qnestion of conditional           like more developing countries to sign more of the codes and Co take on a higher
Mieistry of Trade & Indestry,        MEN                                         level of coannitineet to disciplines with respect to import measures and eopurt
Republic of Korea                                                                subsidies.

                                                                             — code signing by developing coantries inhibited both by chat are considered
                                                                               inadequacies in the code provisions, and an unwillingness to accept some af the
                                                                               disciplines implied.

                                                                             -
                                                                                 issue whether non-signatories can participate in negotiations on improvements
                                                                                 to codes.

9.    SAfEGUARDS                I) selectivity                               —
                                                                                 perhaps the most important area of negotiations fur developing countries in this
                                2) transparency                                  Round.
Mr.   Georges A. Mactel         3) objective criteria for action,
(Brazil) Aoisassador.                including   concept of serious iejory   - aiproond     safevuards code couid help in development process in developing
Permanent Representative             or threat thereof                           coov tries hy prooidivg vreater security of access to markets and by re-
of Brazil to the Dli,           4) temporary nature of eeasnres                  establishing the role of non—discrimination.
New York                        5) degressivity
                                      advantage. their to he could iuuesSnent)
  Increasedin resnlting (and liheralieatioo requiring obligations moitilateral
                                                                                     -                                                                             Japan
                                                                                                                                          Affairs. Foreign of   Minister
ioterests.denelnpsent long-term their in Se not coy These reasons. suuereigaty                    ahjectiues denelopunent natianal                        the to Advisor
       ond developoent for practices, business restrictive incioding harriers,                 tu measures these of relationship     2)       Economic Special (Japan).
       investment strict have countrIes denelopina sony as inplications serioss      -                measures ineesteent related                Eobayashi Toaeitiba Mr.
        -                                                                                     trade— on trade us effects adverse
                                                     interests. their safeguard                  ovoid to necessary if pranisioes                          MEASURES
 to order in particIpate actively to countries denelopiog far area important an -           further on elaborate to is objective     1)   INYESTMENT   TRADE-RELATED   12.
                                                                                                  body? appropriate the OATT Is 2)
                                                                                                     gands cannterfeit in trade
                                                                                          international with dealing disciplines
                                                                                             and rules principles, of framesaurh
                                                                                          multilateral a develop to is objectine I)
                                                                                                                  SOLOSCOUNTERFEIT
                                                                                         body? appropriate the iSATT Is - RIPO is
                                                                                            conducted agreements ta relationship 3)                   Genena UN, IRA to
                                                                                                                            trade              Sweden of Representative
                                           roles. property intellectual of basis            to barriers becuww theusselnes not do                 Permanent Aabassador,
  a frau arising distortions Crade against actinus for provide rather but nnnns,            rights property intellectual enforce           (Sweden) Anell ER. tars Mr.
 property intellectualdefine shoold GATT that think not do countries daveinpisa      -         to procedures and measures ensure 2)
                                                                                                               appropriate where              GOODS COUNTERFEIT  Ill
                                                                        manner.              disciplines and rules new elaborate           TRADE INCLUUINU RIGHTS.
  discrimimatarya in trade legitimate restrict to discretion allow nut do codes                      and provIsions GATT clarify I)          PROPERTYINTELLECTUAL
   resultingensure to order In inealned actinely be should countries deneloplng      -
                                                                                                              PROPERTY INTELLECTUAL                TRADE-RELATED
                                                                                                                                          OP ASPECTS                   11.
                             munufactores. no subsidies enpnrt of elimination the
  no agreeusemts bilateral to party nat countries to or codes GATT to signatories
 sna— to teat Injury apply not does which legislation, coonternail US Especially
          roles. MTT to legislatian national uy relationship is interest of also —
                                                                       rules. Golf
    aedAr permitted currently subsidies domestic and enports distortinuu trade to
respect with cuuatries denelnped the Is discipline better see to lite noald LUCs -            generaliy subsidies production and                    LAST to tong hung of
                                                                                             sectors certain in subsidies euport                Representative Permanent
                                                codes. the by imposed disciplines              an discipline regarding questions 3)                           Kong) (hong
       to adherence greater and provisions the in improvements sent particularly                         subsidy a of defiaitloe 2)                 Cartland Michael Mr.
          and cades, the influence to endeavour should coamtries deueioping oiuere                       measures ing1 cuuntervoi
   area am is this Round. Tstya the of completion the since canatries deueiupung                  and Subsidies on Agreement MTN                  MEASURES VAILING
     frau imparts aqaiast actions CYD of use the in increase praaaanced the gives -          the and ggl, Al, Articles uf reniew 1)           COUNTER- A SUBSIDIES     10.
                                                    together. working Singapore)
  and Earea Suath Zealand, New Australia, tong. (Hong cnantries Rim Pacific fiue -
                                 safeguards. selective hy hart he also wuold who
caantries deneloped mediiaa-siaed small with formiation lionI coal for lily possihi —
                                 •
                                    future. in arrangements trade discriminatory
       worse eves face may they Raamd, Ehis doriag interests their in principles
       MEN pursue aressioely ta opportunity the neglect coantries daneloping    if
                                                                                 -
                                                                    ions.concess
    new offering in less enea ar seahimg caantries developing in point little is
there renersed, and slapped he camnat countries develapnest against discrimimata
     that measnres area prey and trade managed toward eninemest if that heliened -
                                                                                                                    lance surneil
                                                                disciplIne. SATT                      eotificatioe/consoltatios/ N)
     greater meder steel teotiles, Earn.agrical as sach areas bringing in resolt
      and trade managed tawerd tread the af halting a to lead could negotiations     -                  compeesation/retoliation 7)
                                                                                                           adjusbuent structural R)
ii. DISPUTE SETTLEMENT              1) enforcement of panel's conclusions,        - developing countries should actively participate in revising disputa settlement
                                       including possibility of binding             procedures if they dé not want to be subject to bilaterally-negotiated disputes
Mr. Julio Lacart-Muro                  arbitration process                          - it is to their advantage to ensure disputes settled in a non-discriminatory
(Uruguay) Ambassador,               2)   improvement of GATT rules as a way of      manner.
Permanent Representative of               improving the peneformance of panels
Uruguay to the GATT                                                               — developing countries are looking for greater security and equity from the disputa
                                                                                    settlement mechanism and a mechanism for enforcing recoeeeendation of panels.
                                                                                  - possibility of coalition with other smell countrias.
14. FUNCTIONING OF THE GATT         I) enhanced surveillance in GATT to           — developing country concern that there are "imbalances" in surveillance
     SYSTEM                            enable monitoring of trade policies          obligetions, giving rise to a situation where developed countries are less
                                       end practices of Contracting Parties         accountable.
Mr. Julius L. Katz (U.S.)           2) improved functioning of GATT as
Foreer Assistant                       decision-making institution through        - this is an opportunity for the developing countries ,to influence institutional
Secretary of State (U.S.)              increased ministerial involveteent           change to more adequately address developing country needs and interests.
                                    3) stronger links to other international
                                       organizations in areas on monetary         — should they neglect this opportunity, the result could be rules and procedures
                                       and financial matters                       even more discriminatory, even further alienating developing countries.
15. SERVICES                        1) definition and statistical issues      —     developing countries concerned over rights of establishment and sovereignty.
                                    2) broad concepts on which principles and
Mr. Felipe Jaramillo,                  rules for trade in services, including —    developing countries are concerned over possible trede-offs between access to
Permanent Representative               possible disciplines for individual         markets for goods end trade and investment in services.
of Colombia                            sectors, might be based
                                    3) coverage of the multilateral                developing    countries concerned   over protecting infant industries in services.
                                       disciplines and arrangements
                                    4)   existing disciplines and arrangements — increased developing country perticipation in service trade would be jeopardized ''
                                         relating to services                     if agreements reached on e bilateral or regional basis to the exclusion and
                                    5) measures and practices contributing    to, disadvantage of developing countries.
                                       or limiting, the expansion of trade   in
                                         services
                                    6) foreign investment and work permits        - developing country exporters of goods would benefit from access to less
                                    /) national treatment                          expensive, high quality services.                    -
                                    8) receiver mobility
                                    9) right of establishment




SOURCES:            GATT l985d           Unpublished document, Geneva.
                    — l986a              Ministerial Declaration of the Uruguay Round, Sept. 20, 1986, Geneva.
                        1987b            Unpublished document, Geneva.
                    — 1987c              Press Release GATT/1406, february 10, 1987, Geneva.
                            l9Bld        News of the Uruguay Round, March 16, 1987, Nur 001, Geneva.
                            l987e        News of the Uruguay Round. July 3, 1987. Nor 005, Geneva.
                    !iison G. (1987). "Developing Countries and the Liberalization of the Trade in Services".
                    IJiCTAD (1g87b) Unpublished document.
                    World Bank (1987a). World Rant World Development Report. Washington.
                                      25

countries who are both exporters of resource products (Canada and

Chile on   copper,   for instance)

     The fifth group, agriculture, is probably the key to the

round, and the European position is probably central to what
                                               to be dealt with
happens in agriculture. The two issues likely
here are domestic subsidies and export subsidies. Both the US

and the Cairns group (covering        14 developed and developing

countries) have concrete liberalization proposals.           However, the
                                                     is that, in
impression conveyed by the current European proposal
the long run, a market-sharing arrangement limiting the budget

costs of agriculture is what is sought.

     This need not significantly liberalize agricultural trade,

and could be disadvantageous     for    develoing country agricultural
                                                    in the
exporters (and particularly potential new exporters
                                                                          And
future) who could be effectively excluded from shared trade.

for the developing countries who are agrIcultural importers,

there could be higher prices rather than benefits from

agricultural subsidies.      And if    little   happens between the US,

the EEC, the other agricultural exporters, and Japan on
                                        it makes it more
agriculture, the sense seems to be that
difficult for anything of substance to happen in other

negotiating groups.
     In tropical products,    •the    central issues are again tariff

escalation, coverage, and the linkage to agricultural
                                                      and
negoUations, although there are also health, sanitary
seasonal restrictions faced by developing countries.           Tropical
                                         27

    products is one of the main areas in which the Punta del Este
    declaration indicated hopes for quick progress.10

           In the GATT articles group,    a large number   of articles have

    already been discussed and may become subject to negotiation.

    Perhaps the most important from a developing country point of
    view   is Article 18(b) dealing with balance—of—payments exceptions

    for the use of quantitative restrictions.      Developing countries
    have, however, taken a substantial interest     ifl   a number   of other

    areas including Articles 24, and      28.

           The MTN agreements and arrangements group is specifically

    focussed on the question of codes, and the anti—dumping, import

    licensing and technical barriers to trade codes are among those
    that have received the most attention. Particularly important
    here for developing countries, is the issue of restricted

    application of MTN codes through the conditionality introduced in
    the Tokyo Round.

           The safeguards group nay well prove the most important area

    of negotiation for developing countries in the round.

    Safeguards,   as is well known, was deadlocked during the Tokyo
    Round on the issue selectivity, and developing countries are
-
    under pressure once again   to allow selectivity.      They now,

         10 Tropical products is also an area where
                                                     reciprocity could
    be an important issue.   The developed countries stressed prior to
    the round they had gone as far as they could unilaterally, and
    the time had come for developing countries to reciprocate if
    further liberalization was to be achieved. The EEC has included
    a provision requesting reciprocity in their proposal. The US has
    tied progress on tropical rcducts to progress in agriculture.
    The prospects for early results here appear less optimistic than
    a year or six months ago.
                                  28

however, have stronger offensive rather than defensive objectives
in the safeguards area,    in the sense of achieving firmer

disciplines over safeguards measures by developed countries.
This,    in turn, would hopefully make it more difficult for

developed countries wishing to use voluntary export restraints

against developing countries.     Some commentators have gone so far

as to argue that    a possible deal between developed and developing
countries on Articles 19 and 18(b) might be feasible, given the

importance of each of these articles (in opposite directions) to
the two groups of countries.

        The group on subsidies and countervailing measures is

important to developing countries because they have been one of
the major targets for countervailing duty actions since the

completion of the Tokyo Round.'1       There are also questions of

export subsidies, particularly in the context of agriculture and
the wider definition of subsIdization under the subsidies code.

        The groups on intellectual property and investment are part

of the "new areas' covered In the round; the objectives being to

bring intellectual property issues into the framework of the
GATT,   and to also deal with trade—related investment measures

within the GATT framework.     Developing countries are generally

cautious about these two areas.     They see them as threatening

national sovereignty in the case of investment restrictions, and



        Abreu and Fritsch (988) note the high percentage of
affirmative CVD actions against developing country exporters in
the industrialized countries of the US, EEC, Canada and Australia
(see table 4, p.32).
                                     29

as forcing firmer national intellectual property rights in cases

where they are users of intellectual property.          There is a strong

feeling that these issues are outside of the mandate of the GATT,
and that by bringing them in, issues of longstanding concern to

developing countries will be neglected.          There are also concerns

that a broadening of the GATT in this way will ultimately be used

to put pressure on developing countries.

     In the dispute settlement area,         the main issues concern the

enforcement of panel rulings and dispute settlement procedures

covering grey areas.   Developing countries certainly have
interests in this area, especially as they would nct wish to be

subjected to bilaterally negotiated disputes.
     The functioning of the   c-ATT    system group also involves

developing country interests   .    Here the issues involve
organizational links with the      fliT,   ministerial involvement in the

decision—making in the GATT, and a surveillance body in the GATT
to enable monitoring of trade policies and practices of

contracting parties.   The developing country concern is that an

imbalance in obligations towards surveillance will result and

developed countries will be relatively less accountable.

     Finally, in the services area, there are many wide—ranging
issues, since this is the most ambitious of the various attempts
to extend the GATT to cover new areas.         First, there are

conceptual difficulties as to how to define services.         Then,

there are major data problems.       There are also differences of

coverage; developing countries want to discuss including labour
                                30

mobility, which the developed countries insist is an immigration
issue.   Developing country concerns, however, focus on national

security and sovereignty, along with their economic concerns over

protecting infant service industries.
                                       31

    V    ISSUE—SPECIFIC COALITIONS IN THE TRADE ROUND

         There have been several examples thus far of issue-specific

    coalitional activity in the round.      These involve both coalitions
    formed prior to the launch at Punta del Este, and coalitions of a

    proposal—making type which have energed subsequently. Genuine
    negotiating coalitions have yet to form.
         Services

         In the services area, 10 developing countries12 led by India

    and Brazil consistently argued against inclusion of services in

    the run up to the launch of the round.      For   a variety   of reasons,

    they did not want to see services in the round.        At a ninimun,

    they wished to separate the discussion on services from
    discussion of goods, so as to weaken the linkage between the two.

    They also wished to promote an all encompassing concept of

    special and differential treatment including services, and argued
    that the standstill and rollbacc tro'rision from the 1982

    Ministerial should be more firmly implemented before any further

    discussion of services occurred.

         The coalition initially consisted of Argentina, Brazil,

    India, Egypt and Yugoslavia —     the so—called   "Gang of Five".    It

-   formed in   1984 as the Work Program was coming to an end, when it

    was clear new issues were being given consideration without any

    progress having been achieved on unfinished business from the

    Tokyo Round.    At the time,   the group's main objective was to see


         12 The 010 consisted of Brazil, India, Egypt, Yugoslavia,
    Peru, Nicaragua, Cuba, Nigeria, Tanzania and Argentina (who
    subsequently tabled their own proposal)
                                      32

that commitnents made by developed countries in the 1982                  -




Ministerial        were fulfilled before new commitments were

undertaken.        The backlog issues, such as agriculture, safeguards,

the MFA    and other     derogatioris from the GATT represented by grey

area measures, had, in their opinion, to addressed first.

        There was also a strongly held belief, especially by India

that,    in and of itself,    liberalization in services was not

desirable, since developing countries needed strong infant

industry protection for their service industries if they were to
survive.
        Secause of the desire by the       maoc developed countries     for a

genuine multilateral negotiatio on services which would include
all contracting parties to the GATT, and its further desire to

maintain consensus in the GATT Council, these developin
countries were able to exercise sufficient leverage to have a

two—stage negotiating process establishsd in the Round whils

reporting tO a common trade negotiations committee.              The agenda-

moving effort was thus partly successful.           Since Punta del Este,

the coalition has to a large degree disbanded andeach country

has pursued its own interests.

        Agriculture
        In the agricultural area, the concerns of agricultural

exporters    ifl   the period immediately before Punta del Este led to

further issue—specific coalitional acttvity.           It began with

tlruguay initiating      a meeting in Montevideo    to discuss

agricultural liberalization in early          9S   among Southern non-
                                     33

    subsidizing countries, with Argentina, Brazil, Australia, 'New
    Zealand and Uruguay in attendance.    Their objective was to
    consolidate the views of countries and coordinate their efforts

    to defuse the subsidy war between the US and the EC.      A second

    meeting was held in Pattaya, Thailand in July, at which time the

    group expanded to include Chile, Hungary,   Thailand and Canada.

           Australia took the lead role when it hosted the third

    meeting of agricultural exporters in Cairns, Queensland, one
    nonth before the Punta del Este meeting.    Fourteen agricultural

    exporters were invited, 13 including a number of smaller ASEAN
    countries, Canada, Brazil, Argentina and Chile.    The United

    States, Japan and the EC were invited with observer status.      The

    Cairns Group, as it has become know, has become the first example
    of   a concrete developed—developing country coalition.
           The Cairns and Pattaya meetings served to dramatize the

    level of concerns among agricultural exporters over the issue at

    agricultural access.    Participants in the coalition were able to
    heighten awareness over the effects of the crisis in world

    agricultural trade, which in their view had sharply reduced farm
    incomes, depressed export earnings, reduced their capacity to
-
    import,   worsened their external debt servicing problems, reduced

    their development and growth possibilities and created social




         :3 The Cairns Group includes Australia, Argentina, Brazil,
    Canada, Chile, Colombia, Fiji, Hungary, Indonesia, Malaysia, New
    Zealand, the Philippines, Thailand and Uruguay.
                                          34

    and; in some cases, political tensions.14           Their main objective

    was to see that a clear and unequivocal commitment to

    liberalization in agriculture be included in any Ministerial

    Declaration which might emerge from Punta del Este.           The pressure

    exerted by the Cairns group was one of the factors which led the

    European COmmunity to agree in Punta del Este to an inclusion of
    discussions on agriculture in the trade round, over initial

    strong objections by France and Italy.
            Unlike in the services area since the launchiri Punta del

    Este,    the Cairns group has continued to operate as a coalitional

    grouo.     It has,     for instance, made   a group-wide negotiating

    proposal.     There have, however, been differences within the

    group,    and it is widely acknowledged that the next stage of

    agricultural negotiations within the GATT will be a test for the
    group.

            Meet:ings in    Bariochi, Argentina    in February 1968 and

    Budapest, Hovember 1968, have been called to keep the group
    fOcussed on their common interest.           However, differences of view

    over the specifics of negotiations have threatened to fracture

    the coalition.         Their position has been made especially difficult
-
    by   the fact that the US has tied progress on tropical products to

                                                                           As
    progress on their proposal for agricultural liberalization.
    there are a riuber of tropical product producers in the Cairns

    Group,    this has produced problems over differences between the

            See "Chairman's Summary of the Senior Officials Meeting
    of the non-subsidising Agricultural Producing Countries" 2217/66.
    Also see Toronto Globe and Mail, 86/07/26.
                                       35

     Cairns and US approaches to liberalization.15 It also apears
     that there has been outside pressure on some countries to weaken

     their views and thus undermine the cohesion of the group.
          A particularly divisive    issue has been that of calculating

     PSE5 (production subsidy equivalents).    Because Canada is a

     subsidizing country,    it tends to weaken the credibility of the

     coalition as a whole.    Thus, while endorsing the Cairns

     agricultural proposal in the GATT, Canada has also tabled its own

     proposal for liberalization.
          Brazil also has voiced differing views on PSE5.    Some

     developing countries, led by BrazIl, have argued strongly that
     the principle of special and differential treatment is of

     overriding importance to developing countries, and dominates
     their interests in agriculture, per se.    Brazil has therefore

     argued that any negotiated agreements which have the effect of
     bringing agriculture more fully into the GATT framework must be
     achieved in ways which respect special and differential treatment

     for agriculture.   This position caused difficulties in developing

     a common proposal within the Cairns group with some of the

     developed countries, and especially Canada,   initially taking an
--
     opposite   line.

          The Cairns group,   like the services group, has undoubtedly

     been successful in meeting its original agenda—moving objectives.

     It has, however, also persisted as a proposal—making coalition.


             See Haas (1980) for a discussion of how collaboratIve
     efforts in other areas often fall apart over disagreements over
     the distribution of benefits.
                                         36

Nonetheless, the signs of fragmentation are there,           and   it
sustainability as a negotiating coalition is in d6ubt.
        Safeguards

        Safeguards deal with the conditions under which countries
can use trade restrictions to limit import surges which cause or

threaten material injury to domestic industries.            Article 19 of

the GATT insists upon these measures being used in ways which are

non—discriminatory, but makes no mention of degressivity or
financial compensation.
        There has also been coalitiorial activity in       the   safeguards

area,    resulting in several joint proposals.        Pacific countries

who,    in   general,   have been the target for safeguards actions,

want firmer discipline over the use of these measures.             As   a

result,      a number of these countries, including South Korea,            Hong

Kong and the ASEAN countries, have made proposals to more fully
enshrine     MN   arrangements   foL'   safeguards and move towards

degressivity.       As the commonality of the demand and the

circumstances of these countries is so strong,          this may be an

area where there is more hope for the eventual emergence of an

active negotiating coalition.

        Natural esources16
        In the natural resources area, several joint proposal-type

coalitions have also resulted.            A group of four African countries

(Senegal, Cameroon, Cote d'Ivoire, Zaire) have submitted a


        1
        Natural resources includes fishery and forestry products
and non—ferrous metals.
                                    37

proposal which emphasizes the need to liberalize trade inthese
products, especially the elimination of barriers to processed and

semi—processed products.
       Another group of resource exporters has been meeting

informally for the past few years.         These include Canada,

Australia, New Zealand, Brazil, Chile, Peru, Colombia, Argentina,
Thailand, Philippines, Indonesia, Malaysia and Zaire.           Its

purpose is to discuss common interests and maintain coordinated
tactics, although has yet, it does not meet at Ministerial level.
emands by trading partners       for access to supplies is a major

concern,   and the group hopes that by raising such issues as

tariff escalation and market access in the appropriate

negotiating groups,   problems will      be dealt with on a broad basIs,

and not sectorally. As    the group's choice of tactics are central

to   their eventual impact,    they view it   as   too early in the round
to   submit joint proposals.
                                        38

    VI   DEVELOPING COUNTRY INTERESTS AND COALITIONAL ACTIVITY IN THE

         REMAINDER OF THE ROUND
         The Uruguay Round was      launched,   in part, due to the efforts

    of a coalition of developed and developing countries who acted in

    concert immediately before and during the Ministerial meeting In

    Punta del Este in September 1986.        In the afterglow, the round

    was hailed   as the round of coalitions.       As the mid—term review

    approaches in December, it may be helpful to reflect on how
    coalitional activity has progressed, what the prospects are for

    the next two years of negotiations, and whether this activity ia

    in the interests of developIng countries.

         Thus far, there have clearly been some successful agenda—

    moving issue—specific coalitions.        Developing countries have

    played central roles in these, such as Cairns in agriculture, and
    to a lesser extent the   GO     in services.   Some have been

    exclusively develoing country coalitions,        other have involved

    both developed and develoPing countries.
         As the round enters its negotiating stage,       our sense is

    there seems to be less prospect of blocking coalitions emerging

    especially as some of the more active developing countries have
-
    abandoned their previous systemic approach, and are submitting
    joint proposals with developed countries, or proposals on their

    own, which they see   as advancing   both their national interests

    and the process.    Nowhere is this more evident than in the case

    of Argentina, once   a member   of the GlO services coalition, who

    have recently tabled a paper in the group on services recognizing
                                     39

    the need for liberalized trade in services in order to aclxieve

    growth and development.
         There has also been unprecedented activity in this round in

    the form of joint proposals by countries united by a common

    interest rather than a north—south ideology.      Despite this, the

    prospects for true negotiating coalitions still seem to be
    limited.   Even members of the Cairns group emphasize that their

    group was never meant to be a negotiating coalition, but a
    coalition whose objective was to advance a common position with

    the goal of influencing rule—making.

         The major potential for coalitional activity involving

    developing countries to influence the outcome of the round could
    rest with the "de la Pair' Group.17      This group meets regularly
    to explore for common ground among its members.      It seeks to find

    ways to nake this a productive, successful round.      Their concerns

    are not issue—specific, but systemic.      These are the small and

    medium—sized countries that have the most to lose if the
    multilateral system is weakened and the trading system operates

    more and more on a power basis rather than a rules basis.      Their

    common interest lies in the preservation of the multilateral
-
    system, and their objective   to have   a successful conclusion   to

    the current round.




         17 So called because of where they meet for lunch each
    month at the Motel de la Paix in Geneva. The group consists
    mainly of Canada, Switzerland, Sweden, Australia, New Zealand,
    Colombia; South Korea, Uruguay, Hungary, Zaire, Thailand,
    Philippines, Malaysia and Singapore.
                                   40

     Many of the participating countries Were central to the

group who laid the groundwork launching the Ministerial
Declaration for the round.      They were dissatisfied with the
outcome of the Tokyo Round,     and recognized -that individually they

have little power to influence negotiations between larger

powers.    Their unity comes,   in part,   from their belief that

joining together in a coalition provides more leverage.18
     Because much of this round is about rule—making and reviving

the GATT as a major multilateral institution,       it is less centred

on traditional bargaining involving tariff barriers.         As a

result,   some potential for coalitional activity by developing

countries to influence the outcome remains.

     One issue is whether developed—developing country coalitions

will become more common as the round advances.        Such coalitions
have already occurred in the agriculture area with the Cairns

group, and nay evolve   in   other areas such as natural resources,

safeguards, and dispute settlement.        While there are

opportunities for developing countries in such coalitional

activity, both the difficulties of seeing them through as

negotiating coalitions, and the problems of the limited number of
issues where they can be used makes their widespread

proliferation less likely.      There is also the additional

difficulty that expertise in these areas is often scarce,
resources for travel and maintenance of delegations in Geneva are


     18 For the New Zealand view of the advantages of coalitional
activity, see Beeby (1986).
                                  41

limited, communications between representatives and national

capitals are difficult, and knowledge, and even interest in
multilateral trade issues by those in political and bureaucratic

leadership positions and private sector interest groups is

sparse.
     A    lot remains on the agenda for this round,   including
matters which are of substantial interest to developing

countries.    Coalitions have a role to play, in allowing

developing countries to achieve their objectives, but as more of
these form, especially if they involve both developed and

developing countries, the grand coalition of all developing
countries which seeks to change the system is weakened.      Whether

to use the system as it stands through small group coalitional

activity, or to try to change the system using the larger group
remains the issue.
                                      42

    VIII CCNCLtJOING COMMENTS
         This paper discusses coalitional activity involving
                                                              It draws
    developing countries in the present GATT trade round.
    distinctions between the various types of coalitions which now
    seen to be emerging, and suggests that although there has been

    substantial activity of this form thus far, most of it is of an

    agenda—moving or proposal—making type rather than genuine

    negotiating activity.
         Negotiating coalitions are more difficult to form and
    maintain than proposal-making coalitions because negotiating

    coalitions involve a two—sided agreement both of what the

    countries are willing to give up as well as what they want.
    Their Issue—specific nature also makes It difficult for countries

    to trade across issues.     The areas of services, agriculture,

    safeguards and natural resources are all di.cussed as examples of
    what is happening in the    coalitional area.
         The paper is inconclusive as to whether such coalitions are

    good or bad for developing countries.     On the one hand, through

    then individual developing countries can pursue their interests
    in particular trade policy issues with better hope of success.
-
    On the other hand,   a series of small group issue—specific
    coalitions tends to weaken the grand coalition of all developing

    countries who may be pushing for wider systemic change

    advantageous to all members.     The net benefit to developing

    countries is thus uncertain.
                                       43

                                   REFERENCES

Abreu, M. and W. Fritsch (1988) 'Market Access to Manufactured
     Exports from Developing Countries: Trends and Prospects" in
     Whalley (ed.)(1988).

Beeby,   C. (1986) "Two Sides to Foreign Policy", New Zealand
       Foreign Affairs Review, Vol. 36, No. 3 (July—September), p.
       8.

Binrnore, K.  (1985) "Bargaining and Coalitions" in A.E. Roth (ed.
       Game—Theoretic Models of Bargaining. New York:   Cambridge
       University Press.

"Bright Sunshine with a Chill Wind", The Economist, Vol. 300, No.
     7465 (September 27, 1986), p. 73—74.

"Chairman's Summary of the Senior Officials Meeting of the Non—
     Subsidizing Agricultural Producing Countries", 2217/86.
Dam,   (.W. (1970) The GATT: Law and International Economic
       Organization. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Debreu,    C. and H. Scarf (1963) "A Limit Theorem on the Core of an
         conomy". International Economic Review 4: 235—46.
GATT (1974) Basic Instruments and Selected Documents:           20th
       Suoplement.       Geneva.

Haas, E. (1980)   "Why Collaborate? Issue Linkage and
       International Regimes", World Politics.

Hansen,     R.D.    (1979) Beyond the North—South Stalemate.    New York:
     Council on Foreign Relations.
Keohane and Nye (1977) Power and Interdependence: World Politics
       in   Transition.     Boston:   Little,   Brown and Co.

Odell,   J. and M. Kahler (1988) "Developing Country Coalition—
       Building and International Trade Negotiations' in Whalley
       (1988).

Ostry,   5. (1987) "Interdependence, Vulnerability and
       Opportunity". 1987 Per Jacobsson Lecture. Washington:
       International Monetary Fund.

Preeg, E.H. (1970) Traders and Diplomats: An Analysis of the
     Kennedy Round of Negotiations Under the General Agreement on
     Tariffs and Trade.  Washington: Brockings Institution.
Roth,A.E.      (1985)(ed.)    Game Theoretic Models of 3argaining.     Tew
       York:       Cambridge University Press.
                                44

"Rewriting the GATT's rules for a game that has changed", The
     Economist, Vol. 300, No. 7463 (September 13, 1986), p. 63—
     69.

Toronto Globe and Mail, 1986/07/26,   1986/08/27 3.18.

Whalley, J. (1988) Rules, Power and Credibility: Thematic
     Studies from a Ford Foundation Project on Developing
     Countries and the Global Trading System. London, Ontario:
     CSIER Research Monograph.

Winham, G. (1986) International Trade and the Tokyo Round
     Negotiation. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
