                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      COMPETITIVE EFFECTS OF FEDERAL AND STATE OPIOID RESTRICTIONS:
            EVIDENCE FROM THE CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE LAWS

                                        Sumedha Gupta
                                        Thuy D. Nguyen
                                       Patricia R. Freeman
                                         Kosali I. Simon

                                       Working Paper 27520
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27520


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




This research was supported in part by the National Institute on Drug Abuse grant R01
DA039928 (PI: Perry) and the Indiana University Grand Challenges Initiative. We thank Rosalie
Pacula, David Powell, Coady Wing and seminar participants at the January 2020 Allied Social
Sciences Association (ASSA) meetings and the Indiana University Health Policy Workshop for
useful input. We are especially grateful to David Bradford for making additional data available.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27520.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Sumedha Gupta, Thuy D. Nguyen, Patricia R. Freeman, and Kosali I. Simon. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Competitive Effects of Federal and State Opioid Restrictions: Evidence from the Controlled
Substance Laws
Sumedha Gupta, Thuy D. Nguyen, Patricia R. Freeman, and Kosali I. Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 27520
July 2020
JEL No. I1,I11,I18,I28

                                           ABSTRACT

A large concern in U.S. opioid policy is whether supply side controls are effective at reducing the
quantity of opioids prescribed, without harmful substitution. An unstudied way that policy
targeted a major opioid through the federal Controlled Substance Act (CSA) was the August 2014
scheduling of tramadol products, the second most popular opioid medication at the time. Twelve
states implemented the identical policy prior to federal action, providing a unique opportunity to
compare effectiveness of the same opioid policy at state versus federal levels. This is important
because many recent opioid policy interventions have only taken the form of state actions, while
federal policy has largely been advisory. Seven weeks after tramadol's scheduling, the leading
opioid form on the market, hydrocodone combination products, was move to the more restricted
level II (no refills allowed) from level III in the CSA, allowing us to test a new question in the
opioid literature: competitive spillover effects from regulations targeting one drug. Using weekly
prescription data spanning 2007-2017, this study finds that tightening prescribing restrictions on
one opioid leads to decreases in its use, but also causes some increases in prescriptions of close
competitors, leading to no statistically detectable short-run reduction in total opioid prescriptions.


Sumedha Gupta                                     Patricia R. Freeman
Department of Economics                           Department of Pharmacy Practice
Indiana University-Purdue                         & Science
University Indianapolis                           University of Kentucky
425 University Blvd.                              Lexington, KY 40536
Indianapolis, IN 46202                            trish.freeman@uky.edu
sugupta@iupui.edu
                                                  Kosali I. Simon
Thuy D. Nguyen                                    O’Neill School of Public and
Indiana University                                Environmental Affairs
Bloomington, IN 47401                             Indiana University
thdnguye@indiana.edu                              1315 East Tenth Street
                                                  Bloomington, IN 47405-1701
                                                  and NBER
                                                  simonkos@indiana.edu
1       Introduction

Evidence of substitution between prescription and illicit sources of opioids is well established
in the literature, (e.g. Alpert et al. (2018); Evans et al. (2019)), showing that policies to limit
supply, such as introduction of abuse-deterrent versions of opioids (which make misuse less
possible) may lead to consumer-side substitution towards products which have not become
harder to obtain, and in the case of Oxycontin reformulation, results in deaths due to heroin.
    However, there is relatively little attention in the literature to substitution possibilities
between prescription drugs. If such behavior occurs, this weakens the reach of policies that
attempt to reduce harms from opioid use in general, but perhaps not as much as when sub-
stitution occurs only towards the illicit market. To address this need in the literature, we
take advantage of a series of federal policies in 2014 that changed the competitive dynamics
between two dominant products in the opioid market. We analyze these with detailed weekly
data on prescriptions from a private claims data base as well as from a federal database (Au-
tomated Reports and Consolidated Orders System; ARCOS) recently released through a U.S.
District Court. The supply restriction policies we study concern tramadol, and hydrocodone
combination products (HCPs), the two most commonly prescribed opioid analgesics in the
country, contributing roughly 15 and 46 percent of the total US opioid sales respectively since
2012 (IMS Health, 2012).1 Following increasing trends in all opioids, HCP prescriptions in-
creased from 124.1 million to 136.7 million and tramadol product prescriptions climbed from
23.3 million in 2008 to 44 million between 2008-2013 (DEA, 2018).
    Perhaps unsurprisingly, related emergency department visits involving misuse of HCPs
and tramadol also increased in parallel by 183 and 250 percent, resulting in 97,183 and 21,649
visits respectively in 2011 (Bush, 2015; Report, 2013). According to the National Survey
on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), in 2015 12.5 million and 1.6 million people in the U.S.
population, aged 12 and older, misused HCPs and tramadol products, respectively (DEA,
    1
     The third is oxycodone with a share of 13.6 percent of the total US opioid sales. HCPs, tramadol and
oxycodone products are still 1, 2 and 3 as of today, despite the total volume of opioid prescribed having
declined substantially in recent years (IQVIA, 2019)



                                                   1
2018).
   The active ingredient hydrocodone has been a highly regulated substance since the incep-
tion of the Controlled Substance Act (CSA) in 1971, and its pure form is listed with the other
commonly prescribed opioid analgesics including oxycodone (e.g. OxyContin) and morphine
(e.g. MS Contin) in the CSA schedule II. However, the majority of hydrocodone occurs in
combination with non-opioid substances like acetaminophen (e.g. Vicodin) which had re-
mained controlled according to Schedule III, with fewer restrictions on prescribing. In light
of mounting suspicion of HCP misuse, the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) requested
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) at least twice (2004 and 2009)
for a scientific and medical evaluation of available information and a scheduling recommen-
dation for HCPs. On both occasions the HHS recommended to the DEA that HCPs remain
controlled by schedule III of the CSA. 2 Similar beliefs about the limited addiction liability of
tramadol and its combination products relative to other commonly prescribed opioids (DEA,
2018; Miotto et al., 2017; Babalonis et al., 2013; Zhang and Liu, 2013; Tjaderborn et al.,
2009; Zabihi et al., 2011; Zacny, 2005) persisted since tramadol was introduced to the US
market in 1995. Consequently, tramadol remained a federally non-controlled prescription
drug until 2014.
   Following the mounting evidence of tramadol and HCPs misuse, the DEA for the first
time scheduled tramadol and its combination products as a Schedule IV (CIV) controlled
substance on July 2, 2014, and up-scheduled HCPs to a Schedule II (CII) controlled substance
effective October 6, 2014 (DEA, 2014a; DEA, 2014b). These are within-year (within months)
changes in policy that could not be separately analyzed without high-frequency data at the
weekly level. These changes led to tighter controls on prescribing of tramadol products and
HCPs.
   The controlled substances policies also give us an opportunity to study the comparative
behavioral effects when the same federal opioid restriction is earlier enacted at the state
level. State controlled substance acts are communicated and enforced in a similar way as
   2
       https://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/fedr egs/rules/2014/f r0822.htm


                                                    2
federal policy, by the state offices of drug control policy and the inspector general’s offices.
Delayed federal action lead twelve U.S. States to schedule tramadol combination products as
CIV controlled substances within their states between 2007-2014, prior to federal scheduling.
New York was the only state to up-schedule HCPs to CII of the CSA in 2013. Refill and
prescription length validity rules apply in the same way, regardless of whether it is federal
or state level (except that state laws of course only apply to prescriptions filled with state
boundaries). Specifically, refills for HCPs were prohibited, and initial prescriptions could
not be filled after 60 days from being written, and can cover at maximum 90 days worth of
medication. Thus any subsequent prescription requires a doctor to call in a new prescription,
which often involved a new visit. As a CIV controlled substance, tramadol prescriptions
became valid for up to 6 months after being written and up to 5 refills were allowed within 6
months of original prescription, with subsequent fills requiring a new prescription. Also, as a
controlled substance, in some states tramadol could no longer be prescribed by non-physician
practitioners due to scope-of-practice laws.
    No previous study we are aware of has examined the impact of tramadol scheduling,
either at the state or federal level. In the case of supply side state laws such as the heavily
studied PDMPs, days limits, pain clinic laws, and marijuana availability laws, there is no
federal version for comparison. The tramadol scheduling law is thus a unique case as it was
first enacted at the state level and then at the federal level, in identical form.3 Previous
descriptive research suggests that federal up-scheduling of HCPs is associated with decreases
in its prescribing (Jones et al., 2016; Bernhardt et al., 2016; Fleming et al., 2017; Gudin and
Lee, 2013; Murimi et al., 2019; Northrup et al., 2019); a similar finding occurs in the first
economic study of HCPs’ up-scheduling (Beheshti, 2019), which finds improved labor market
conditions in areas with baseline high intensity of HCP reliance. However, there is no study
to date that examines the spillover hypothesis to the closest competitor, tramadol. Further,
   3
     Often federal health laws are considerably stronger than state laws, for example, in the case of health
insurance policy for young adults or contraceptive mandates that were nationally part of the Affordable Care
Act but existed in weaker forms in some states prior to that. Although there have been drug-specific federal
opioid laws (e.g. Oxycontin reformulation) we are not aware of studies of prescriptive spillovers to other
unaffected drugs.


                                                     3
no economic study to date has examined how controlled substance laws affect outcomes at the
prescriber level, which allows examining extensive and intensive margins (whether prescribes
at all, and strength or days of prescribing) and heterogeneity by provider characteristics.
Thus, no study to date has assessed changes in prescribing at the intensive or extensive
margins that may result from initial scheduling of a previously non-scheduled medication–
tramadol– or compared the relative responses to state- versus federal-level (up-)scheduling
of medications, nor the spillover effects when two close competitor products in the opioid
market experience restrictions controlling their supply.
   A larger literature in economics considers the spillovers from negative information on
competitor products in pharmaceutical markets (e.g. Cawley and Rizzo (2008); Collins and
Tennyson (2013); Bala et al. (2017); Bütikofer et al. (2020); Daysal and Orsini (2015); Romley
and Shih (2017)), and in non-medical markets (e.g. Freedman (2012); Toledo and Villas-Boas
(2019)).
   The closest past literature in medical spillovers is likely in the COX-2 selective nons-
teroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) market, where Vioxx, the most popular product
at the time, was voluntarily withdrawn at FDA’s request, following evidence of heart at-
tack health harms. Collins and Tennyson (2013) finds that consumers switched to other
medications in the class (such as the close competitors Celebrex and Bextra) and to to a
closely related other class (analgesics). Six months later, Bextra was withdrawn at FDA’s
request following further studies, at which point demand dropped for all NSAIDs. Thus,
past literature and theory suggests that consumers do not always react to a change in supply
restriction on one product by switching to the closest competitor products, if they perceive
the negative information as indicating health risks about the product class in general.
   There is also a very large literature on the effects of restrictions on all prescription opioids,
which by definition cannot examine any substitution within the category. These include
PDMPs and pill mill laws, and a variety of other lesser studied state policies.
   While earlier PDMP studies found mixed results (eg Meara et al. 2016 find no change in
various measure of opioid use after adoption of a PDMP, but Kilby 2016 finds a 12% decline in

                                                4
opioid related mortality following a PDMP), more recent research has distinguished between
mandatory and non mandatory PDMPs and find that mandatory policies are effective at
reducing prescription opioid misuse (Deiana and Giua, 2018; Bao et al., 2018; Mallatt, 2018;
Buchmueller and Carey, 2018a; Grecu et al., 2019; Ali et al., 2017; Ziedan and Kaestner,
2020; Kaestner and Ziedan, 2019; Wen et al., 2019). There is also evidence that even if there
is no prior opioid use to query in the system, prescribers may reduce use because of the
hassle cost involved or because it has become more salient as a topic (Alpert et al., 2020;
Sacks et al., 2019).
   Pill mill laws impose stricter policies on pain management clinics that dispense opioids,
and appear to have reduced supply Deiana and Giua (2018); Popovici et al. (2018); Ziedan
and Kaestner (2020). This suggests that state level policy to restrict opioids have reduced
supply. There is a large literature that also studies down stream impacts of these policies.
Thus, in the face of this large set of studies, it is a gap in our understanding that there is as
yet only a small literature on federal or state level CSA restrictions.
   Using quasi-experimental designs, this study proceeds as follows: we first examine how
the up-scheduling of HCPs to a CII controlled substance and initial scheduling of tramadol
as a CIV controlled substance have changed their own prescribing. Second, we examine
the spillover effects of controlled substance status change of a drug on the prescribing of
similarly controlled and less controlled substitutes, and their consequences for the overall
prescription dispensing of opioids. We do this primarily with rich data from private claims
data, but conduct confirmatory analysis with federal data that covers other payor types.
Third,we compares the effectiveness of federal-level with state-level controlled substance
designations in reducing prescribing of controlled drugs. Fourth, we test for heterogeneous
responses by fixed vs variable costs of switching by sorting prescribers into quartiles based
on their HCPs and tramadol prescribing volume prior to the scheduling changes and examine
whether high volume prescribers responded differentially to the scheduling changes than their
low volume prescribing counterparts. Finally, we investigate whether prescribers in different
medical specialties responded heterogeneously to the scheduling changes, as some specialities

                                               5
(pain specialists) might have not changed their informational view on the medications from
re-scheduling or may have patients for whom clinical appropriateness of the medications
supersede the prescribing transactional costs.
   Stricter CSA regulations may operate through multiple economic pathways to influence
prescriber behavior. First, the restrictions on refills would require more frequent office in-
teraction with physicians for new prescriptions, which could be burdensome for patients
and prescribers. In addition to increasing healthcare utilization (additional office visits),
prescribing more strictly controlled substances would impose recurrent operating costs to
provide written or electronic prescriptions, log in to and query the state prescription drug
monitoring program before prescribing, enter new data and react to existing data. Third,
(up-)scheduling may increase prescriber perception of the risks associated with HCP and
tramadol use, thereby negatively impacting the prescriber’s perception of the net gain from
the medication for the patient, and increasing a sense of more dire consequences if now found
negligent through prescriber monitoring. Previous research on FDA drug withdrawals, FDA
black-box warnings as well as Consumer Production Safety Commission non-prescription
products (children’s toys) recalls shows that competitors in the same therapeutic class could
experience negative spillovers in some settings (Parkinson et al., 2014; Collins and Tennyson,
2013; Freedman, 2012; Cawley and Rizzo, 2008).
   In comparison to state-level scheduling changes which may feel somewhat arbitrary, fed-
eral CSA regulations may unequivocally signal the salience of the new information, resulting
in greater reductions in prescribing through this channel. Unlike in usual cases of state vs.
federal laws (e.g. young adults health insurance mandates, or mental health parity laws),
CSA policy changes are enforced the same (direct pharmacy inability to refill) in both cases.
   Our main data source is Optum’s de-identified Clinformatics® Data Mart system, a
comprehensive commercial and Medicare Advantage claims database. Our empirical analysis
utilizes claims data covering all states, from January 2007 to December 2017, and regression
discontinuity designs to study both national and state policy changes. In sensitivity analysis
for the state analysis, difference-in-difference event study methods are used to confirm the

                                              6
robustness of our estimates. We find evidence that federal (up-)scheduling of HCPs and
tramadol and state-level scheduling of tramadol were associated with significant declines in
the prescribing of both opiates, as expected. Our results suggest that both, federal and
state-level scheduling changes, are effective in conveying the risk information of a newly (up-
)scheduled drug. This finding has important implications for state policy. In case of delayed
federal action, states can effectively control prescription dispensing of substances with abuse
potential through CSA scheduling changes at the state-level.
   The majority of the decline in the prescription dispensing of HCP and tramadol was in
refills, possibly reflecting the expected reaction to the new prohibition on HCP refills as a CII
controlled substance and limits on tramadol refills as a CIV controlled substance. Although
the decline in tramadol prescribing was also more concentrated in refills, the decline in
initial tramadol prescriptions also substantively contributed to the overall decline in tramadol
prescribing. This is also as expected since the tramadol policy change was less stringent
regarding refills (CIV: max 5 fills in max 6 month prescription; CII: outright ban on refills).
   An important strength of these data is the ability to examine substitution between opi-
oids, given the presence of both HCP and tramadol prescriptions. We find that up-scheduling
of HCPs is associated with substantial increases in the prescribing of less regulated opioids
(like tramadol), and similarly regulated opioids (like oxycodone). Refills are allowed on
schedule III-schedule opioid substitutes, which lowers the variable cost per prescription for
these less regulated alternatives. And the other schedule II opioids that HCPs joined were
just as costly to prescribe as HCPs. However, in absence of less regulated opioid substitutes
to tramadol, we find only weak evidence of substitution away from tramadol following its
scheduling. Overall, the decline in the prescription dispensing of HCPs and tramadol fol-
lowing their (up)scheduling was entirely offset by the increase in prescribing of other opioid
alternatives, resulting in no net decline in the combined volume of all opioids dispensed.
Although tramadol is not available in ARCOS data, we use the newly available weekly level
ARCOS data to establish that the changes we see in Optum for other drugs are reflected in
multi-payer sources, suggesting that the patterns we see are not limited to private prescrip-

                                               7
tions. Our results suggest that Controlled Substance Act scheduling of drugs, particularly
at the federal level, is effective in curbing excessive prescribing of drugs with known depen-
dence and misuse potential, but as found in other contexts, there are unintended substitution
behaviors that may unravel the deeper intention of the policy.



2     Background and conceptual framework

Title 21 of the United States Code Controlled Substances Act (CSA) regulates substances
based on three criteria - established medical use, potential for misuse and dependence lia-
bility (DEA, 2018b). The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) are the
agencies responsible for gathering evidence to support controlled designation of a substance
and initiating legislation for its scheduling as a controlled substance. Based on the criterion
measures, designated controlled substances are placed in one of the five CSA schedules, in
descending order of control. Irrespective of whether the stricter CSA scheduling of a sub-
stance was at the federal or state level, upon controlled substance designation, each drug
(schedule) class mandates restrictions on the manufacturing, importation, distribution, pre-
scribing, possession and use of the scheduled substance, and the penalties for their violation.
Consequently, following HCPs’ up-scheduling to Schedule II, HCP prescriptions were now
valid for only ninety days after being written, and refills of HCPs were prohibited, with
any subsequent fill requiring a patient visit to receive a new prescription (see Table 1). As
a Schedule IV control substance, tramadol prescribing was relatively less controlled, with
prescriptions valid for up to 6 months after being written and no more than 5 refills al-
lowed within 6 months of original prescription, and again subsequent fills requiring a new
prescription.
    (Up-)scheduling of HCPs and tramadol as Schedule II and IV controlled substances,
respectively, may inform prescriber behavior in several ways. First, (up-)scheduling may
generally increase prescriber perception of the risks associated with HCP and tramadol use,


                                              8
Table 1: Characteristics and Regulations: Schedule Tiers under the U.S. Drug Enforcement
                            Agency Controlled Substance Act.




thus revising downwards the perceived net benefit to the patient by the provider (and possi-
ble also through a patient’s own information). For instance, earlier literature on the impact
of ‘black box’ warnings issued by the Food and Drug Administration for certain drug classes
finds that consumers/providers take such warnings to signal extra risk, leading to significant
declines in the use of those drugs (Parkinson et al., 2014). This effect may be greater in case
of federal scheduling changes, while selective state actions may seem more arbitrary. Second,
new restrictions on refills would require new prescriptions, which could be burdensome for pa-
tients and prescribers, reducing the total number of claims observed in our data. In addition
to increasing healthcare utilization (additional office visits and prescriptions), patients could
be subject to longer wait times to receive their medication and additional office visits would
entail transportation and parking costs, co-pays and lost time from work (Gudin and Lee,
2013). To avoid these added costs, prescribers may switch patients to non-opioid analgesic


                                               9
substitutes with reduced efficacy or increase the length or strength of initial prescriptions
and permitted refills, or switch patients to more potent analgesic substitutes with the inten-
tion of spreading dosage over a longer duration. Higher dosages and longer use of opioids
which could result from longer duration prescriptions, elevate the patient’s risk of develop-
ing an opioid-use disorder (Dowell et al., 2016a) and could be an unintended consequence
of up-scheduling. Alternatively, an intended outcome of the frequent patient-provider con-
tact could be recurrent reevaluations of the pain condition and timely termination of opioid
therapy.
   The effects of (re-)scheduling maybe heterogeneous for many different groups. For one,
it may differ by baseline prescribing rates of HCPs or tramadol among providers and by
specialty of provider: those with more familiarity with a drug may respond less to the
informational content, and providers may behave differently for existing patients than for new
patients, or for patients with more severe chronic pain. Fourth, in case of tramadol converting
to controlled substance status, prescribing is restricted to practitioners with a valid DEA
license numbers (in a state that allows nurse practitioner prescribing) and may eliminate
prescribing by nurse practitioners, resulting in an overall decline in tramadol prescribing.
Finally, stricter CSA scheduling may have an overall ‘chilling effect’ on the prescribing of
HCPs and tramadol; if they perceive greater risks of the medication, they maybe more
hesitant to amass a record of its prescribing.
   The timeline of state and federal scheduling changes of HCPs and tramadol is presented
in Figure 1. Between 2007-2014, and prior to tramadol’s federal scheduling, 12 U.S. States
- Arkansas, Georgia, Illinois, Kentucky, Mississippi, New Mexico, New York, North Dakota,
Oklahoma, Tennessee, Wyoming and Ohio - designated tramadol as a Schedule IV controlled
substance. At the time of scheduling tramadol as a controlled substance, the state of New
York also up-scheduled HCPs to a Schedule II controlled substance. The U.S. DEA federally
scheduled tramadol as a Schedule IV controlled substance on August 18, 2014 and seven
weeks later on October 6, 2014, up-scheduled HCPs to Schedule II. Within state boundaries,
state-level scheduling changes have similar actual enforcement as federal-level scheduling.

                                                 10
However, previous literature examining other state opioid policies that have restricted opi-
oid prescribing has noted that misuse responds to declines in the opioid prescribing by
aggressively engaging in cross state border ‘doctor shopping’ for prescriptions in neighbor-
ing states that have not implemented similar regulations (Buchmueller and Carey, 2018b).
Consumers may also perceive greater salience of the risks inherent in the medications if the
action is at the federal level. In case state-level scheduling of medication is thwarted by
similar non-compliance, we expect federal scheduling to have a larger magnitude effect on
the prescription dispensing of the affected drugs.



3        Data

3.1        Data Sources

Changes in prescription dispensing of HCPs and tramadol following the scheduling changes
are examined using Optum’s de-identified Clinformatics® Data Mart system, a comprehen-
sive commercial and Medicare Advantage claims database. The database includes claims
from all enrollees from January 2007 through April 2018. For those who were ever dispensed
a controlled substance during the study period,4 we obtained detailed information on all
claims records ever associated with them. Every state is represented in every month.
    We identify prescription dispensing of HCPs and tramadol using the National Drug
Code (NDC) and the NDC-active ingredient crosswalk of all prescription opioids, which
we obtained from Prescription Drug Monitoring Program Training and Technical Assistance
(2013). Different opioids vary in their strengths, thus following earlier literature, all drug
strengths have been converted to Morphine Equivalent Doses (MED) (CDC, 2018). Length
of a prescription is measured by the number of days of opioid supplied.
    Although tramadol products are not contained in the ARCOS system, it does contain
HCPs, and also Schedule I, II and some III opioid-based medications (DEA, 2009). The
public use version of the data provided by ARCOS is only quarterly and thus not of use for
    4
        The list of what is considered a controlled substance was determined as of 2017, thus included tramadol.


                                                        11
Figure 1: Timeline of U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency Controlled Substance Act scheduling
                             changes of HCPs and tramadol.


                                                                        Tram. federal sch. IV
                                                                            8/18/2014


                                              MS, WY           ND
                                              7/1/11         3/27/13

                                       TN            IL        NY
                                     4/7/11        1/1/12    2/23/13                    7
                      KY                                                               Wks.
            AR      12/5/08         NM                   OK              GA
          3/28/07                  3/7/11              11/1/12         4/25/14



        2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014                                                2015 2016 2017

                                                               NY
                                                             2/23/13




                                                                                 Hydro. Federal sch. II
                                                                                     10/6/2014                  1


Notes: Authors’ compilations based on states’ legislation database. See details in Table A1.




our study. However, there was a special extract of the data (years 2006-2014) made available
through a court order. Transactional (details down to the exact transaction in timing,
location and substance NDC) ARCOS data were released in 2018 on order of the United
States District Court Northern District of Ohio Eastern Division following the National
Prescription Opiate Litigation (Case No. 1:17-MD-2804, UNITED STATES DISTRICT
COURT NORTHERN DISTRICT OF OHIO EASTERN DIVISION). This enabled us to
make several advances that allows ARCOS data to be useful for our study.First, we are able
to obtain a weekly series of total HCP and other opioid morphine milligram equivalent or
morphine equivalent dose (MME or MED) for the period, to examine whether the high-
frequency trends in HCPs seen in Optum hold up in national data. While we cannot fully
tell whether there is a competitive effect as tramadol, the closest competitor, is missing,


                                                                 12
we can look for signs of competitive effects to other medications. The traditional ARCOS
cannot separate prescriptions given through community retail pharmacies (the form that is
affected by the CSA policy), with those given through hospitals and other institutions. With
the detailed transaction level ARCOS that identifies the location, we are able to do that.
   We also use Medicaid State Drug Utilization Data as a supplementary data source. These
are only at the quarter level, but represent an important specific payor, that includes tra-
madol (along with all other opioids). Although prior work found modest decreases in rates
of HCP use in the elderly following the up-scheduling of HCPs (Kuo et al., 2018), the public
use version of the CMS Medicare part D data is only annual and thus we do not use Medicare
data for our study.
   Our information on effective dates of state-level scheduling of tramadol (homogeneous
policies–all are to Schedule IV) is obtained from individual state legislative sources included
in Appendix Table A1).
   Other data sources for control variables include the Bureau of Labor Statistics for state-
level unemployment rates (BLS, 2018), National Cancer Institute’s Surveillance, Epidemiol-
ogy, and End Results Program for state level demographic information (SEER, 2018), 2010
US Census Bureau for state population rates and percent of rural population in each state,
and Area Health Resource File (AHRF) for the number of physicians, physician assistants,
and registered nurses per 100,000 in each state. This study also used the following sources for
five state-level policies as controls: (1) implementation dates of mandatory PDMPs obtained
from Nguyen et al. (2019), (2) implementation dates of the Affordable Care Act(ACA) ex-
pansion from the Kaiser Family Foundation (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2019), (3) pain clinic
regulations from the Prescription Drug Abuse Policy System (PDAPS) (PDAPS, 2018), (4)
medical marijuana laws for patients from PDAPS, and (5) day limit laws from Sacks et al.
(2019). The timeline of the other opioid policy adoptions in each of the fifty US states and
relevant sources are summarized in Appendix Table A2.




                                              13
3.2     Sample construction

Estimation of the prescribing changes in response to federal scheduling changes exploits the
fact that the exact timing of the federal scheduling changes were unanticipated, immediate,
and binding. Tramadol was first scheduled as a schedule IV controlled substance at the
federal level on August 18, 2014. This was followed seven weeks later, by the federal up-
scheduling of HCPs. To stay clear of other scheduling changes, we focus on only a narrow
5-week window around each of the federal action. Specifically, we compare prescribing of the
affected drug in the five previous weeks with its prescribing in the five weeks after its federal
regulation. Consequently, the study windows are July 13, 2014-September 20, 2014 for
tramadol and August 31, 2014-November 8,2014 for HCPs. We restrict the federal analysis
of the HCP rescheduling to the 49 states that did not up-schedule HCPs prior to its federal
scheduling and the federal tramadol scheduling to the 38 states that has not already acted
in a similar manner.
   In a separate analysis, we examine the effect of state-level scheduling of tramadol as a
schedule IV controlled substance between January 2008-August 2014, and before its federal
scheduling on August 18, 2014. The treatment sample for these analyses includes nine of
the twelve states - Illinois, Kentucky, Mississippi, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma,
Tennessee, Wyoming and Georgia - that acted on tramadol’s status prior to federal law
(refer Figure 1). Arkansas is omitted from the analysis as it scheduled tramadol in 2007,
prior to the start of our observation window. Although Ohio passed legislation for controlled
substance designation of tramadol prior to August 2014, the effective date of implementation
of Ohio’s ruling was after that. Finally, New York concurrently scheduled tramadol and up-
scheduled HCPs to a Schedule II controlled substance on the same day, February 23, 2013,
making isolation of the two effects difficult and thus is removed from the analysis as well.5
   Using the sample of the nine treatment states, centered at the timing of state-level tra-
madol scheduling, we compare prescribing of tramadol in the five prior weeks to its prescribing
   5
    New York was the only state to up-schedule HCPs to Schedule II, prior to its federal up-scheduling on
October 6, 2014, thus we cannot conduct a state level DD study for HCPs as for tramadol.



                                                   14
in the five weeks after state regulations.


3.3      Prescribing outcomes

We constructed four outcomes associated with prescribing in the Optum data. The unit of
observation is the prescriber-year-week. Prescribing of HCPs or tramadol is measured as
the weekly rate of dispensed prescriptions, the rate of patients prescribed the medications,
the average days’ supply per prescription, and the average strength of each prescription (in
standardized morphine equivalent doses (MED). The weekly rates of prescriptions, and the
number of patients prescribed the medications, are created with the denominator being the
number of unique patients to whom the prescriber prescribed medications of any type in a
week.6


3.4      Non-parametric analysis

Figure 2 graphically presents the trends in the four prescribing measures for HCPs (Panel A)
and tramadol (Panel B) between April 2013 (starting at week 12 of that year) through April
2016 (week 16 of that year). The first vertical line designates the federal initial scheduling of
tramadol on August 16, 2014. The second vertical line represents the federal up-scheduling
of HCPs seven weeks later on October 6, 2014. Figure 2, Panel A, shows HCP prescribing
(in the 49 states that did not earlier up-schedule HCPs). Similarly Figure 2, Panel B, shows
tramadol prescribing trends (in the 38 states that did not earlier schedule tramadol). These
plots capture three distinct periods. The first period spans 2013w12-2014w33, before the
federal scheduling changes for either drug. During this time, as a CIII opioid, prescribing
of HCPs was more restricted than prescribing of tramadol, a non-controlled substance. The
second period, 2014w34 - 2014w40, consists of the seven weeks after the federal scheduling of
tramadol and before the federal up-scheduling of HCPs, when the prescribing restrictions on
   6
     Prescribing across all drug classes is available for 60 percent of the prescriber sample. For the remaining
prescribers, we approximate number of unique patients as their (number of unique patients with controlled
substances/average share of prescription recipients receiving a controlled substance prescription across all
prescribers).


                                                      15
both drugs were comparable. Finally, the third period begins after the federal up-scheduling
of HCPs, when again, the prescribing of HCPs as a CII substance was much more restricted
than that of CIV tramadol.
   Several observations emerge from this descriptive analysis. In Figure 2, Panel A we find
a fairly flat trend in HCP prescribing between 2013-2016, with a sharp, one-time downward
shift in all four prescribing outcomes we study - rate of dispensed prescriptions, rate of
patients prescribed, average days’ supply per prescription and average MED per prescription -
in the fourth quarter of 2014, when HCPs were up-scheduled. Although the decline in patients
prescribed HCPs and prescriptions of HCPs written persisted, the average days’ supply and
MED per prescription begins to slowly rise after their immediate decline following the federal
HCP policy. From Figure 2, Panel B we note a strong upward trend in tramadol prescribing
throughout 2013-2016, with a one-time level increase in prescribing in the fourth quarter
of 2014, coinciding with the federal scheduling of HCPs. The level increase in tramadol
prescribing in October 2014 is visible for both the extensive and the intensive margin of
prescribing but is particularly pronounced at the extensive margin. By 2016, prescription
dispensing of tramadol exceeded its pre-scheduling level, with persistent upward trends at
the intensive margin of prescribing.
   In Figure 2, Panel A, as expected, we do not see any evidence of tramadol’s scheduling
leading to increases in prescribing of HCPs at the extensive margin, as HCPs would not
be viewed as a less regulated substitute. Prescribing of HCPs remained almost steady in
between the red lines, until it declines following federal up-scheduling. During the seven
week period between the federal scheduling of tramadol and the federal up-scheduling of
HCPs, CSA restrictions on prescribing of tramadol and HCPs were the same (as Schedule
IV and Schedule III are comparable in this regard (refer Table 1). Thus, prescribers could
now consider HCPs and tramadol as substitutes in terms of prescribing costs. If the benefit
from prescribing the more potent HCP is sufficiently large, prescribers who were previously
treating their patients with tramadol may switch to HCPs. Indeed, in Panel B we see an
interesting pattern in between the red lines, that would be missed if we did not have weekly

                                             16
data. In this short 7 week period, we detect the immediate decline in tramadol prescribing in
response to its federal scheduling, but the decline was not sustained. Tramadol prescribing
again began to significantly increase as soon as HCPs were up-scheduled, consistent with
tramadol playing the role of a less restricted substitute to HCPs. Quarterly data would
show only a consistent increase in tramadol prescribing and miss this substitution pattern,
and would make it seem like CSA policy towards tramadol was ineffective. Instead, the story
here is consistent with the policy having intended effects of reducing tramadol prescribing,
but an unintended but economics-grounded substitution spillover once HCPs became more
tightly controlled.
   Given evidence that the HCP decline in prescribing following its up-scheduling was ac-
companied by an increase in prescribing of tramadol at precisely the same time, the next
question is, what happened to all opioids as a class? In addition to tramadol, did other less
regulated opioids also see spillover increases? We next study aggregate opioid prescription
dispensing by measuring total (MED) quantity of all opioids dispensed each week. Figure 3
presents this measure between April 2013 through April 2016. In this descriptive plot, there
appears to be no net decline in aggregate total MED quantity of all opioids prescription
dispensed as a result of stricter CSA regulations on HCP and tramadol combined.
   Next, we examine the effect of state-level initial scheduling of tramadol. Figure 4 plots
tramadol prescribing trends in the nine treatment states that designated tramadol as a con-
trolled substance prior to its federal scheduling. We consider a 16 week window surrounding
the state-level tramadol scheduling, with the plots centered at the time of the state reg-
ulations. The figure presents scatter plots with the lowess regression line for each of the
four prescribing outcomes we consider. We find that controlled substance designation of
tramadol at the state-level is also associated with an immediate and sharp decline in all
measures of tramadol prescribing. Moreover, in absence of other regulatory changes (like the
federal up-scheduling of HCPs seven weeks after tramadol’s federal scheduling), the decline
in tramadol prescribing at the extensive margin following its state-level CSA designation is
sustained for longer, in the case of number of patients and number of prescriptions, although

                                             17
in both days supply and MED, there appears a rebound that starts after about 5 weeks. A
common theme we find in our research is that looking at high-frequency data is necessary
for observing effects of the policies. It is not clear why the effects dissipate so rapidly, but
using quarterly data (or annual data) would not allow research to uncover these intended
effects of the policies.




                                              18
 Figure 2: National trend in HCP and tramadol prescription dispensing relative to federal
                                  scheduling changes.
                            (Only states without prior state-level (up)scheduling.)

                                                      Panel A: HCPs




                                                    Panel B: Tramadol




Notes: Authors’ calculations based on Optum’s de-identified Clinformatics® Data Mart system, a comprehensive commercial
and Medicare Advantage claims database. Unit of observation is prescriber-week. Observation window is April 2013 to April
2016. Panel A plots the prescription dispensing of HCPs and Panel B plots the prescription dispensing of tramadol. Four
prescription dispensing outcomes are considered for both drugs - user rates (1), prescription rates (2), average days’ supply per
prescription (in Days) (3) and average Strength per Prescription (in MED) (4). The number of total patients in the database
changes throughout our study period. The data do not report the number of patients enrolled with each prescriber in every
week. Therefore, rates of patients prescribed (1) and prescriptions (2) are calculated with a denominator of the total number
of unique patients the prescriber prescribed (any opioid or non-opioid drug) to each week. The first vertical line represents the
timing of federal initial scheduling of tramadol on August 18, 2014. The second vertical line represents the federal up-scheduling
of HCPs on October 8, 2014. Prescription dispensing of HCPs19    and tramadol is considered in 3 distinct periods: period before
the federal initial scheduling of tramadol (2013w12-2014w33), period after the federal initial tramadol scheduling and before
the federal HCP up-scheduling (2014w34-2014w40) and the period after both scheduling changes (2014w41-2016w16).
   Figure 3: National trend in total MED prescription dispensed of all opioids relative to
                                 federal scheduling changes.
                            (Only states without prior state-level (up)scheduling.)




Notes: Authors’ calculations based on Optum’s de-identified Clinformatics® Data Mart system, a comprehensive commercial
and Medicare Advantage claims database. Unit of time is week. The figure plots the total MED quantity of all opioids
prescription dispensed between April 2013 to April 2016. The first vertical line represents the timing of federal initial scheduling
of tramadol on August 18, 2014. The second vertical line represents the federal up-scheduling of HCPs on October 8, 2014.
Prescription dispensing of HCPs and tramadol is considered in 3 distinct periods: period before the federal initial scheduling
of tramadol (before 2014w33), period after the federal initial tramadol scheduling and before the federal HCP up-scheduling
(2014w34-2014w40) and the period after both scheduling changes (after 2014w41).




                                                                20
Figure 4: Trend in average weekly tramadol prescription dispensing in the 14-week window
          surrounding the state-level initial scheduling of tramadol (2007-2013).




Notes: Authors’ calculations based on Optum’s de-identified Clinformatics® Data Mart system, a comprehensive commercial
and Medicare Advantage claims database. Unit of observation is prescriber-week. Includes only the 9 states states - Illinois,
Kentucky, Mississippi, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Tennessee, Wyoming and Georgia - that scheduled tramadol as
a control substance at the state-level prior to federal law. Panel is centered at the timing of the state-level tramadol scheduling,
depicted with the vertical line. This figure plots the prescription dispensing of tramadol. Four prescription dispensing outcomes
are considered - user rates (1), prescription rates (2), average days’ supply per Prescription (in Days) (3) and average Strength
per Prescription (in MED) (4). The number of total patients in the database changes throughout our study period. The data
do not report the number of patients enrolled with each prescriber in every week. Therefore, rates of patients prescribed (1)
and prescriptions (2) are calculated with a denominator of the total number of unique patients the prescriber prescribed (any
opioid or non-opioid drug) to each week.




                                                                21
    We next build on this descriptive analysis by describing our estimation strategy for iden-
tifying the impact of stricter controlled substance regulation on HCPs and tramadol on their
prescribing.



4     Methods

In line with the non-parametric analysis presented in Figure 2, we use a local linear regression
to evaluate the impact of HCPs and tramadol scheduling changes by comparing prescribing of
the affected drugs adjacent to the cut-point. The unit of analysis is the prescriber-year-week.
This is equivalent to estimating impacts on a subset of the data within a chosen bandwidth
h to the left and right of the cut-point, using the following regression model:
                                  Yst = α + β0 T + β1 ts + st                               (1)


    where α is the average value of the prescribing outcome following the scheduling changes;
Yst is the prescribing rate by prescriber s in week t; T is an indicator for the period following
the (up)scheduling and ts is a vector of indicator variables equal to 1 in the year-week
specified. The coefficient β0 , for treatment assignment represents the marginal impact of the
(up)scheduling at the cut-point.
    We also examined if the new scheduling changes affected initial prescribing or if they
affected subsequent refills, reflecting the new prohibition on HCPs refills and additional
limitations on authorized refills of tramadol. To the extent that initial prescriptions are
affected, that might reflect informational effects, whereas refills are also affected by the
mandate nature of the regulations. In our data, we are able to identify each dispensed
prescription as initial or a refill, and Model 1 was separately re-estimated for the sample of
initial prescriptions and refills.
    A concern in regression discontinuity (RD) design is whether individuals can sort across
the threshold, i.e., into or out of treatment, which would bias the empirical estimates (Haus-
man and Rapson, 2018). Usually, this can be tested indirectly and controlled for in three
possible ways. First, we can examine whether there is any discontinuity in the density of

                                               22
the treatment assignment variable at the cut-point (McCrary, 2008). In our case treatment
assignment is fully determined by the timing of the scheduling regulations, and the density
of time is uniform, thus this test becomes irrelevant.
   Another concern regarding RD designs is whether there are any discontinuities in other
opioid related regulatory changes at the time of the (up)scheduling of HCPs and tramadol
that, in theory, should not be affected by the scheduling changes. Enactment of other opioid
related policies near the timing of the scheduling changes could be evidence of some states
being more motivated to curb the over-prescribing of opioids and introducing other polices to
achieve this goal. Inability to control for these potential covariates could bias our estimates.
In Figure B1, we examine the prevalence of five state-level policy changes that have been
associated with changes in opioid use - ACA expansion (Saloner et al., 2018), mandatory
PDMPs (Buchmueller and Carey, 2018b; Meinhofer, 2018), pain clinic regulations (Dowell
et al., 2016b), medical marijuana laws (Bradford et al., 2018) and day limit laws (Sacks et al.,
2019; Davis et al., 2019a). From Figure B1, Panel A we note that there were no other opioid
related regulatory changes surrounding the federal up-scheduling of HCPs. Considering
the opioid policy environment surrounding the federal initial scheduling of tramadol, from
Figure B1, Panel B we note that one of 38 states in our treatment sample, New Hampshire,
underwent the ACA expansion just 4 weeks prior to tramadol’s federal scheduling. To avoid
confounding effects, New Hampshire, is omitted from the treatment sample for the evaluation
of the effect of tramadol’s federal initial scheduling on its prescribing. Finally, concurrent
regulations that influence opioid prescribing may affect our estimates. To investigate this
possibility, in a sensitivity test, we check for the robustness of our estimates to inclusion of
other opioid related policies in Model 1.
   As another sensitivity test we also estimate an extended specification that allows the
slope and the intercept to differ on either sides of the cut point as follows:
                             Yst = α + β0 T + β1 ts + β2 T ts + st                         (2)


   where the coefficient on the interaction term ts captures the change in slope of prescribing


                                              23
outcomes following (up-)scheduling. The remaining variables and model specifications are
identical to Model 1. Although the trend-break specification in Model 2 has the advantage of
allowing a level as well as a trend treatment effect, it increases the complexity of the model
and reduces the power of the analysis. Therefore, if our treatment estimate from Model 1
is comparable to the point estimates from the more complex Model 1, the simpler model
with the same trend in prescribing before and after the scheduling change is our preferred
specification.
   Non-parametric analysis also revealed possible substitution from HCPs towards tramadol
after the former was up-scheduled. Consequently, for the local linear regression discontinuity
estimation of the impact of federal (up)scheduling we could consider maximal bandwidths of
seven weeks before and after HCP and tramadol up-scheduling. The usual tradeoff between
precision and bias holds; using all seven weeks of data would provide more precise estimates
but results may be biased farther from the exact time of scheduling discontinuity. The op-
timal bandwidth can be determined using cross validation or equivalent ‘plug-in’ methods
(Hahn and der Klaauw, 2001) that minimize the mean square prediction error. These meth-
ods, however, are computationally demanding, particularly when the number of observations
is large, as is the case for our data. As an alternative, we estimate local linear regressions
for alternative choices of bandwidths of 3-7 weeks to test whether the estimated effect is
sensitive to the choice of bandwidth. We estimated the effect of state-level (up)scheduling
of tramadol using a prescriber-week panel of the 9 states that scheduled tramadol prior to
its federal scheduling, centered at the timing of the state-level tramadol scheduling. To get
estimates of the effect of state-level level scheduling of tramadol that are directly comparable
to the average treatment effect of the federal regulations, we first use an RD design identical
to the federal evaluation. We also use a more standard estimation strategy for state policy
variation, a difference-in-difference style (DD) event study that exploited the variation in
timing of scheduling across the nine treated states. Model specification for the sensitivity
test is detailed in Appendix C.



                                              24
5     Results

5.1     Impact of federal scheduling changes

Appendix Figure B2 plots the local linear regression discontinuity treatment estimates (Model
1) with the ninety five percent confidence intervals for alternative bandwidths. From Ap-
pendix Figure B2, we note that the federal (up)scheduling of HCPs (panel (a)) and tramadol
(panel (b)) are associated with statistically significant declines in the rate of prescriptions
and patients prescribed, as well as, average days’ of supply and MED per prescription for
the possible range of bandwidths. We also note, for both HCPs and tramadol, that the effect
sizes are very similar for all alternative bandwidths.
    To illustrate effect sizes, Tables 2 and 3 presents the estimates from the local linear regres-
sion discontinuity analysis for an arbitrarily selected bandwidth of five weeks before and five
weeks after HCP and tramadol scheduling, respectively. The tables presents three different
sets of estimates of the effect of federal (up-)scheduling on the prescription dispensing of the
effected drug itself. Panel A presents the baseline local linear regression estimate from Model
1. Panel B presents the estimated treatment effect from the extended trend-break specifi-
cation from Model 2 that allows both level and trend changes in prescription dispensing in
response to the federal (up-)scheduling changes. Finally, Panel C presents point estimates
from our baseline specification that includes controls for other opioid related policies.




                                                25
   From Table 2, we note that federal HCP up-scheduling is associated with a 10-13 percent
decline in patients prescribed HCPs and HCP prescriptions dispensed and 8 percent decline in
average days’ of supply and MED per HCP prescription (Panel A). As expected, prescribing
declines were more concentrated in refills (days supply of refills fell by 71 percent), possibly
reflecting the new prohibition on HCP refills as a CII controlled substance. In comparison,
days supply of initial Rx only fell by 6 percent.These estimates capture well the change
in prescription dispensing due to the federal HCP up-scheduling and results do not change
much if we allow for an additional change in trend response (Panel B). Finally, our treatment
estimates do not appear to be driven by other opioid related policies in effect during this
time, as Panel C shows that the effects are not substantially affected by their inclusion. In
the federal policy case, there is in fact no reason to expect that inclusion of these additional
policies would shift our point estimates at all as there is no similar discontinuity in these
policies at the exact time of HCP federal up-scheduling (noted in Figure 3).
   From Table 3, Panel A we note that the federal initial scheduling of tramadol as a sched-
ule IV controlled substance is associated with more modest prescribing declines. Tramadol
prescribing declines by 5-7 percent at the extensive margin - patients prescribed and pre-
scriptions written - and by 2-3 percent at the intensive margin - average days’ of supply and
MED per tramadol prescription. Reductions in both initial prescriptions (27 percent decline)
and permitted tramadol refills (48 percent decline) contributed to this decline. Again, our
treatment estimates are robust to alternative model specification (Panel B) and inclusion of
controls for other opioid related policies (Panel C).




                                              26
 Table 2: Regression discontinuity: Effect of federal up-scheduling of HCPs on prescription
                                    dispensing of HCPs.

                      Patients                     Rx       Days/Rx          MED/Rx
   Panel A. Baseline local linear regression
   Estimate           -0.01007***             -0.01538*** -0.7194***        -5.1220***
                      (0.0007)                  (0.0008)    (0.0584)          (0.4789)
   Panel B. with additional trend-break treatment effect
   Estimate           -0.01164***             -0.01693*** -0.7860***        -5.6065***
                      (0.0007)                  (0.0008)    (0.0595)          (0.4877)
   Panel C. Baseline local linear regression with controls for other opioid related policies
   Estimate           -0.01002***             -0.01531*** -0.7145***        -5.0346***
                      (0.0007)                  (0.0008)    (0.0584)          (0.4778)
   Dep. variable mean 0.1000                     0.1200      8.6300            64.220
   Dep. variable SD   (0.14125)                 (0.1595)   (11.8033)         (96.5538)
   N                  677,338                   677,338     677,338           677,338


Notes: Authors’ calculations based on Optum’s de-identified Clinformatics® Data Mart system, a comprehensive commercial
and Medicare Advantage claims database. Unit of observation is prescriber-week. Observation window is June 2014 to October
2014. Unit of observation is prescriber-year-week. Eight tramadol prescription dispensing outcomes are considered - user rates
for all prescriptions dispensed (1), prescription rates for all prescriptions dispensed (2), average days’ supply per prescription (in
Days) for all prescriptions dispensed (3), average strength per prescription (in MED) for all prescriptions dispensed (4), average
days’ supply per initial prescription (5), average days’ supply per refill prescription (6), days’ supply for all initial prescriptions
(7), and days’ supply for all refill prescriptions (8). The number of total patients in the database changes throughout our study
period. The data do not report the number of patients enrolled with each prescriber in every week. Therefore, rates of patients
prescribed (1) and prescriptions (2) are calculated with a denominator of the total number of unique patients the prescriber
prescribed (any opioid or non-opioid drug) to each week. Panel A presents estimation results from baseline Model 1. Panel B
presents estimation results from the extended Model 2 that allows the slope of the prescription dispensing to also vary on either
side of the discontinuity. Panel C presents estimation results from baseline Model 1 with additional controls for other opioid
related policies in effect in the prescriber’s state in the given year-week. * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.




                                                                 27
          Table 3: Regression discontinuity: Effect of federal initial scheduling of tramadol on prescription dispensing of tramadol.

                            Patients               Rx        Days/Rx      MED/Rx Days(Initial)                              Days(Refill) Days/Rx(Initial)            Days/Rx(Refill)
        Panel A. Baseline local linear regression
        Estimate            -0.002179*** -0.001885*** -0.1177** -0.8943**                1.2616***                          -1.4931***            0.9000***             -1.2189***
                            (0.0004)            (0.0004)     (0.0593)      (0.3708)       (0.0761)                          (0.0501)               (0.0523)              (0.0388)
        Panel B. with additional trend-break treatment effect
        Estimate            -0.002678*** -0.002476*** -0.2049*** -1.3666***              1.2604***                          -1.6303***            0.8984***             -1.3261***
                            (0.0004)            (0.0004)     (0.0604)      (0.3771)       (0.0774)                          (0.0509)               (0.0533)              (0.0396)
        Panel C. Baseline local linear regression with controls for other opioid related policies
        Estimate            -0.002135*** -0.001832*** -0.1102* -0.8553***                1.2729***                          -1.4885***           0.9062***              -1.2157***
                            (0.0004)            (0.0004)     (0.0593)      (0.3703)       (0.0759)                          (0.0500)              (0.0523)               (0.0389)
        Dep. variable mean .0314009            .0400771      5.771567      30.68678      4.595367                           3.106079              3.773882               2.616283
        Dep. variable SD    (0.0801318)       (0.0915527) (12.32353) (77.30613)         (14.61966)                          (11.95018)           (10.36288)             (9.017157)
        N                   696,784             696,784       696,784       696,784       696,784                           696,784               696,784                 696,784


     Notes: Authors’ calculations based on Optum’s de-identified Clinformatics® Data Mart system, a comprehensive commercial and Medicare Advantage claims database. Unit of
     observation is prescriber-week. Observation window is June 2014 to October 2014. Unit of observation is prescriber-year-week. Eight tramadol prescription dispensing outcomes are
28




     considered - user rates for all prescriptions dispensed (1), prescription rates for all prescriptions dispensed (2), average days’ supply per prescription (in Days) for all prescriptions
     dispensed (3), average strength per prescription (in MED) for all prescriptions dispensed (4), average days’ supply per initial prescription (5), average days’ supply per refill
     prescription (6), days’ supply for all initial prescriptions (7), and days’ supply for all refill prescriptions (8). The number of total patients in the database changes throughout
     our study period. The data do not report the number of patients enrolled with each prescriber in every week. Therefore, rates of patients prescribed (1) and prescriptions (2)
     are calculated with a denominator of the total number of unique patients the prescriber prescribed (any opioid or non-opioid drug) to each week. Panel A presents estimation
     results from baseline Model 1. Panel B presents estimation results from the extended Model 2 that allows the slope of the prescription dispensing to also vary on either side of
     the discontinuity. Panel C presents estimation results from baseline Model 1 with additional controls for other opioid related policies in effect in the prescriber’s state in the given
     year-week. * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.
5.2    Substitution to other prescription opioids

Following the descriptive evidence of spill-over effects of scheduling changes on the prescrip-
tion dispensing of other prescription opioids noted above, we formally estimate changes in
the prescription dispensing of other opioids following the federal (up-)scheduling of HCPs
and tramadol. Prescribers may respond to the new HCP regulation by switching patients
to less restrictive CIV opioids, including the next most popular US opioid, tramadol, which
now involve relatively less hassle cost to prescribe. Alternatively, prescribers may now per-
ceive the risk of HCP use to their patients as equivalent to that from using more potent CII
opioids like oxycodone. Being equally ‘costly’ to prescribe, prescribers may even switch their
patients from HCPs to the more potent substitutes. Table 4 presents estimated changes
in the prescription dispensing of tramadol (Panel A), other CIII-IV opioids (Panel B) and
other CII opioids (Panel C), in response to the federal up-scheduling of HCPs. We find that
both the rates of users and prescriptions of tramadol and other schedule IV opioids increased
(by ≈12 percent and ≈65 percent, respectively) as a result of HCPs’ federal up-scheduling.
Despite the large magnitude increase in prescribing of other CIII-IV opioids their share in
total opioid prescribing remained small. Prescribing of tramadol also increased at the inten-
sive margin - 5 percent more days’ of supply and higher MED per prescription of tramadol
were authorized - but increases at the intensive margin were more modest. Additionally, as
the prescription dispensing of HCPs reduced, the rate of users and prescriptions of other
CII opioids increased by 7 percent and 3 percent, respectively. Average length of authorized
CII opioid prescriptions also increased slightly by 2 percent. These analyses with HCPs’
policy provides evidence that drug scheduling changes may have unintended consequences
on related drugs, which must be taken into account for optimal policy formulation.
   The case of tramadol policy spillovers is a little more complicated than for HCPs’ policy
change. For the short seven week period after the federal scheduling of tramadol as a CIV
controlled substance and before the federal up-scheduling of HCPs, prescription dispensing
of tramadol and HCPs were subject to similar controls. Table 5 presents changes in the



                                              29
prescription dispensing of HCPs and other CIV opioids following tramadol’s federal initial
scheduling. Unlike evidence of substitution from HCPs to other opioids following its tighter
regulation, we find little evidence of substitution from tramadol towards other opioids. In
fact, from Table 5 Panel A, we note that if anything, the rates of users of HCPs slightly
decreased following tramadol’s scheduling (1 percent decline), possibly reflecting the fact
that, despite its scheduling, tramadol prescribing remained relatively less restrictive than
the prescribing of other more tightly controlled opioids. But, the small decline in HCP users
was at least partly compensated by a 2 percent increase in average days’ of supply and MED
per prescription of HCPs that WERE dispensed. In light of evidence suggesting substitution
towards the other opioids, we examine next the net change in the total (MED) quantity of
opioids dispensed, following the (up)scheduling of HCPs and tramadol.




                                             30
            Table 4: Regression discontinuity: Effect of federal up-scheduling of HCPs on prescription dispensing of other opioids.

                                             Patients          Rx          Days/Rx        MED/Rx        Days(Initial) Days(Refill) Days/Rx(Initial) Days/Rx(Refill)
               Panel A. Tramadol
               Estimate             0.00465*** 0.00404*** 0.2865***                      1.3828***        0.4664***       -0.1242***          0.3136***              -0.05415
                                       (0.0004)   (0.0005)   (0.0603)                     (0.371)          (0.081)         (0.0473)            (0.0548)              (0.0372)
               Dep. variable mean       0.03026   0.03867    5.62567                     29.81785         5.524353         1.941012           4.412845               1.695663
               Dep. variable SD        (0.0787) (0.0901552) (12.0826)                    (73.9788)        (16.4943)        (8.8489)           (11.0837)              (7.0846)
               Panel B. Other CIII-CIV opioids
               Estimate            0.004935*** 0.005637*** 0.2145***                     4.8698***        0.3272***        -0.008631          0.2200***              -0.05805
                                       (0.0003)   (0.0004)   (0.0317)                     (1.7961)         (0.0455)         (0.0191)           (0.0285)              (0.0409)
               Dep. variable mean       0.01000   0.02000      1.5500                      26.850           1.5100           0.4100             1.2400                2.0700
               Dep. variable SD       (0.06000)  (0.07000)   (6.2700)                     (356.46)         (8.4300)         (3.7600)           (5.6200)              (7.8400)
               Panel C. Other C2 opioids
               Estimate            0.004480*** 0.002365**    0.1269**                      -0.7237           n/a              n/a                n/a                   n/a
                                       (0.0006)   (0.0009)   (0.0561)                     (8.4712)           n/a              n/a                n/a                   n/a
               Dep. variable mean       0.05733   0.08891    6.40819                      367.8313           n/a              n/a                n/a                   n/a
               Dep. variable SD       (0.12593)  (0.18548)  (11.26661)                   (1695.506)          n/a              n/a                n/a                   n/a
               N                        677,338   677,338     677,338                      677,338         677,338          677,338            677,338               677,338
31




     Notes: Authors’ calculations based on Optum’s de-identified Clinformatics® Data Mart system, a comprehensive commercial and Medicare Advantage claims database. Unit of
     observation is prescriber-week. Observation window is August 2014 to November 2014. Unit of observation is prescriber-year-week. Eight HCP prescription dispensing outcomes are
     considered - user rates for all prescriptions dispensed (1), prescription rates for all prescriptions dispensed (2), average days’ supply per prescription (in Days) for all prescriptions
     dispensed (3), average strength per prescription (in MED) for all prescriptions dispensed (4), average days’ supply per initial prescription (5), average days’ supply per refill
     prescription (6), days’ supply for all initial prescriptions (7), and days’ supply for all refill prescriptions (8). The number of total patients in the database changes throughout our
     study period. The data do not report the number of patients enrolled with each prescriber in every week. Therefore, rates of patients prescribed (1) and prescriptions (2) are
     calculated with a denominator of the total number of unique patients the prescriber prescribed (any opioid or non-opioid drug) to each week. Baseline Model 1 estimates of change
     in prescription dispensing of tramadol (Panel A), other CIV opioids (Panel B) and other CII opioids (Panel C) in response to the federal up-scheduling of HCPs. * p<0.05, **
     p<0.01, *** p<0.001.
       Table 5: Regression discontinuity: Effect of federal initial scheduling of tramadol on prescription dispensing of other opioids.

                                       Patients     Rx     Days/Rx    MED/Rx Days(Initial) Days(Refill) Days/Rx(Initial) Days/Rx(Refill)
               Panel A. Hydrocodone
               Estimate             -0.001250* 0.000006   0.1651*** 1.2107***    -0.01474    0.1636*       0.09734*        0.1170***
                                       (0.0007) (0.0008)    (0.057)   (0.4657)    (0.147)   (0.0856)       (0.0535)         (0.0413)
               Dep. variable mean    0.0991863 0.1267131   8.452351   62.73915   10.88847   4.223858       6.896451         2.874367
               Dep. variable SD    (0.1445665) (0.163525) (11.57943) (94.51519) (30.24867) (17.27352)     (10.84808)       (8.383091)
               Panel B. All other CIII-CIV opioids
               Estimate              -0.000203 -0.000105    0.01029     0.2569    0.02947   -0.01140        0.01936         -0.01394
                                       (0.0003) (0.0003)   (0.0293)   (1.7058)   (0.0399)   (0.0178)       (0.0261)         (0.0152)
               Dep. variable mean       0.01000   0.02000    1.3500     25.150    1.3000     0.3700         1.0600            0.3500
               Dep. variable SD         0.06000 (0.07000)  (5.8500)   (347.93)     (8.00)   (3.5600)       (5.2100)         (3.0400)
               N                        696,784   696,784   696,784    696,784   696,784    696,784         696,784          696,784

     Notes: Authors’ calculations based on Optum’s de-identified Clinformatics® Data Mart system, a comprehensive commercial and Medicare Advantage claims database. Unit
     of observation is prescriber-year-week. Observation window is June 2014 to October 2014. Unit of observation is prescriber-year-week. Eight tramadol prescription dispensing
     outcomes are considered - user rates for all prescriptions dispensed (1), prescription rates for all prescriptions dispensed (2), average days’ supply per prescription (in Days) for all
     prescriptions dispensed (3), average strength per prescription (in MED) for all prescriptions dispensed (4), average days’ supply per initial prescription (5), average days’ supply per
     refill prescription (6), days’ supply for all initial prescriptions (7), and days’ supply for all refill prescriptions (8). The number of total patients in the database changes throughout
32




     our study period. The data do not report the number of patients enrolled with each prescriber in every week. Therefore, rates of patients prescribed (1) and prescriptions (2) are
     calculated with a denominator of the total number of unique patients the prescriber prescribed (any opioid or non-opioid drug) to each week. Baseline Model 1 estimates of change
     in prescription dispensing of HCPs (Panel A) and other CIV opioids (Panel B) in response to the federal initial scheduling of tramadol. * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.
   Table 6 presents the regression discontinuity estimates of the effect of up-scheduling
of HCPs (Panel A) and the initial scheduling of tramadol (Panel B) on the total (MED)
quantity dispensed of each specific opioid (class) - HCPs, tramadol, other CIII-IV and other
CII opioids - and the aggregate prescription dispensing across all opioids. From Panel
A we note that federal up-scheduling of HCPs led to a 12 percent decline in total MED
quantity of dispensed HCPs. However, the decline in the prescription dispensing of HCPs
was compensated by a 4 percent increase in total MED of dispensed tramadol. Overall, the
total MED quantity of all opioids dispensed declined by 1 percent following HCPs’ policy,
and the decline is not statistically significant at conventional levels of significance.
   In Panel B, we note that the total MED of tramadol dispensed declined by 4 percent
following the federal initial scheduling of tramadol. In line with evidence from Table 5,
tramadol’s policy did not significantly impact the prescription dispensing of other opioids in-
dividually. But, altogether, the small magnitude increases in prescription dispensing of more
potent substitutes (HCPs and other CII opioids) following tramadol’s scheduling washed out
the decline in total MED quantity of dispensed tramadol, leaving the total MED quantity of
all opioids dispensed unchanged, statistically speaking. It is noteworthy, that seven weeks
later when HCPs were federally up-scheduled, the 4 percent decline in total MED of tra-
madol dispensed that resulted from its scheduling was completely undone by a 4 percent
increase in its total MED dispensed (Panel A). Therefore, as noted earlier (discussion of Fig-
ure 2), if we were to abstract away from the interim seven week window between the federal
initial scheduling of tramadol and up-scheduling of HCPs, it would appear as if tramadol’s
scheduling had no impact on its prescribing, and tramadol prescribing consistently increased
throughout.
   Appendix Figure E1 shows long term trends in total MED of 5 different drug classes -
HCPs, other CII opioids, tramadol, other CIII-CIV opioids and the aggregate of all opioids
- in Optum between 2007-2018. The vertical dashed line represents the timing of federal
HCP up-scheduling. We note a plateauing off of HCP prescribing starting in 2013 after a
steady increase throughout 2007-2012, and a steep decline in prescribing following its federal

                                               33
up-scheduling (green dotted line). Total MED prescribed of other CII opioids continues to
gradually decline throughout 2013-2014, and then begins to creep up again before declining
sharply in 2017 (blue dashed line). Total MED of prescribed tramadol steadily increased
though out 2007-2016, with only a very slight dip in 2014q3 when it was initially federally
scheduled as a controlled substance, followed again by a slow and steady increase after
HCPs’ up-scheduling. The increase in prescribing of other less controlled opioids is even
more apparent right after the up-scheduling of HCPs (black dashed-dotted line). Overall,
the federal up-scheduling of HCPs does not have a large visible impact on the aggregate
MED prescribed across all prescription opioids (solid black line), which continues along its
pre-upscheduling slight downward trend, followed by an increase in 2015q1. This descriptive
evidence reiterates that HCP up-scheduling does not appear to have led to a substantive
decline in the aggregate MED prescribed of all opioids in the longer run as well.
   To ensure that our finding of competitive spillover effect of federal HCP up-scheduling
on aggregate opioid prescribing is not simply an artifact of claims in the private sector (Op-
tum), we also examined changes in aggregate opioid prescribing in two additional samples -
(1) transactional ARCOS data and (2) Medicaid State Drug Utilization Data. The ARCOS
data are available at the transaction level for the years 2006-2014. In the public use version
of ARCOS, the total mmes are provided only quarterly, not weekly, and only at a very ag-
gregate level, combining both retail community pharmacies (which are affected by CSA) and
hospitals and other institutions (which are not). The CSA only covers the retail community
pharmacies. We observe in our detailed ARCOS data (at the weekly level, and separates
transactions by type of outlet) that only one fifth of the total HCP MMEs per week during
our study period is distributed through retail community pharmacies, which suggests that
there is high value added in using the transactional version for our study. However there
is a large drawback: tramadol is not tracked in ARCOS, thus we cannot study the effects
of its rescheduling nor the spillover from HCP rescheduling. We nevertheless can study the
own policy effect of HCP rescheduling and possible spillovers of it to other CII-C1V drugs
tracked in ARCOS. We obtained a county-week panel of total MME supplied of 4 drug classes

                                             34
between 2011-2014 - HCPs (1), CIII-CIV tracked in ARCOS (select codeine products and
buprenorphine products for pain) (2), other CII opioids excluding HCPs (3) and all opioids
(4).7 As in our Optum results, in Figure E2, raw trends in ARCOS retail supply of the 4
drug classes shows a steep decline in HCP supply following its up-scheduling (vertical red
dashed line), increase in retail supply of select CIII-CIV opioids starting slightly prior to
the the federal up-scheduling of HCP and continuing several weeks after (panel 2) and no
significant change in MME supplied of other CII opioids (panel 3). Overall, there appears to
be a slight shift down in aggregate supply of all opioids right after HCP up-scheduling but
this decline appears small in magnitude and not sustained.
   Table E1 presents regression discontinuity estimates of the effect of federal HCP up-
scheduling on MME of opioids supplied as recorded in the transactional ARCOS data. To
facilitate comparison, we again consider the 14-week period surrounding the federal up-
scheduling of HCPs (2014w34-2014w48). From results presented in Table E1 we note a
large shift down in the aggregate supply of HCP for retail purposes following the drugs up-
scheduling. The decline in HCP supply is accompanied by an significant upward trend in
supply of the less controlled CIII-CIV opioids like codeine products and buprenorphine for
pain (column 2). HCP up-scheduling does not have a significant impact on the supply of other
CII opioids. Finally, although the aggregate supply of all opioids for retail purposes declines
after the federal up-scheduling of HCPs, this decline is again not statistically significant at
any conventional levels.
   In Figure E3 we present long term trends in prescribing of 4 opioid classes - HCPs,
tramadol, other CII opioids and all opioids between 2011-2018 for the Medicaid State Drug
Utilization Data (SDUD).8 . From Figure E3 it appears that for the SDUD sample HCP
prescribing increased prior to its federal up-scheduling and then returned to its pre-increase
level following its up-scheduling. Moreover, there appears to no impact of HCP up-scheduling
on the prescribing of other opioid classes and the overall prescription of all opioids remains
   7
     We are extremely grateful to David Bradford for providing us these data.
   8
     The SDUD do not record the length of the prescription and for purposes of analysis each prescription
is approximated to be 14 days long


                                                   35
unchanged. Regression discontinuity estimates in Table E2 find no statistically significant
effect of federal HCP up-scheduling on any of the drug classes considered in the SDUD
sample.
   This analysis reveals that the tighter CSA controls on HCPs and tramadol were effec-
tive in reducing the prescription dispensing of the affected drugs. However, the declines in
the prescription dispensing of HCPs and tramadol were completely offset by increased pre-
scription dispensing of other less regulated or equally regulated (but more potent) opioids,
resulting in no net change in dispensed total MED quantity of all opioids (as noted earlier
in Figure 3. In this sense, the federal scheduling changes did not have their intended effect.




                                             36
       Table 6: Regression discontinuity: Effect of federal up-scheduling of HCPs and initial scheduling of tramadol on total MED of
                                                              opioids dispensed.

                                                                                               Total MED
                                  hydrocodone tramadol Other                     CIII-CIV opioids Other CII opioids            All CIII-CIV      All CII     All opioids
               Panel A. Impact hydrocodone federal upscheduling
               Estimate             -1.1806*** 0.1986***                          0.6375**                    0.7643             0.8360***        -0.4163      0.4197
                                       (0.1201)    (0.0629)                       (0.2970)                   (2.4255)             (0.3043)       (2.4449)     (2.4741)
               Dep. variable mean        11.680     3.8600                          3.4200                    90.670               7.2800          102.35      109.63
               Dep. variable SD        (24.490)    (12.540)                       (59.260)                   (488.16)             (60.670)       (491.86)     (497.27)
               N                        677,338    677,338                         677,338                   677,338              677,338        677,338      677,338
               Panel B. Impact tramadol federal initial scheduling
               Estimate                 0.07102 -0.1859***                        0.02749                     2.0998               -0.1584        2.1708       2.0124
                                       (0.1205)    (0.0630)                       (0.2728)                   (2.3775)             (0.2805)       (2.3960)     (2.4212)
               Dep. variable mean        11.650     4.0300                         3.0100                     87.810                7.0400        99.460       106.50
               Dep. variable SD        (24.720)    (13.380)                       (51.470)                   (484.06)             (53.310)       (487.92)     (492.62)
               N                        696,784    696,784                        696,784                    696,784              696,784        696,784      696,784
37




     Notes: Authors’ calculations based on Optum’s de-identified Clinformatics® Data Mart system, a comprehensive commercial and Medicare Advantage claims database. Unit of
     observation is prescriber-year-week. Observation window is August 2014 to November 2014 (Panel A) and June 2014 to October 2014 (Panel B). Presented coefficients are regression
     discontinuity estimates from baseline Model 1 of the effect of the federal up-scheduling of HCPs (Panel A) and the federal initial scheduling of tramadol (Panel B) on the total
     (MED) quantity dispensed of each specific opioid (class) - HCPs, tramadol, other CIV opioids, other CII opioids, and the aggregate prescription dispensing across all opioids. *
     p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.
5.3       Impact of state-level scheduling changes

We investigate the effect of tighter state-level scheduling changes on prescribing in the nine
states that scheduled tramadol prior to its federal scheduling, using the local-linear regression
Model 1.9 Centering the prescriber-year-week panel at the timing of state-level tramadol
scheduling, the effectiveness of the controlled substance designation of tramadol at the state
level is evaluated by comparing prescribing of tramadol in the five weeks prior to with its
prescribing in the five weeks after state regulations.
      Estimated coefficients of the impact of state-level tramadol initial scheduling on its’ pre-
scribing are presented in Table 7. Similar to the federal CSA case, we present estimates
from the baseline specification (Panel A), extended specification that allows level and trend
treatment effects (Panel B) and baseline specification with controls for other opioid related
policies (Panel C). From Table 7 we note that state tramadol scheduling is associated with
≈5 percent decline in all tramadol prescribing outcomes (Panel A). Similar to the federal
effect, due to the new limits on refills, prescribing declines were larger for refills than for
intial prescriptions - days’ of supply of refills fell by 20 percent, whereas days’ of supply of
initial prescriptions fell by 10 percent. Our results do not change if we allow for an additional
change in trend response (Panel B). Finally, the treatment estimates are also not sensitive
to the inclusion of controls for other opioid related policies in effect during this time (Panel
C).
      Our treatment group consists of 9 states that designated tramadol as a controlled sub-
stance at the state-level at different dates between 2007-2013, before its federal scheduling.
Usually in such situations, a typical approach would be a difference-in-difference (DD) event
study, exploiting the variation in timing of scheduling across states. The DD event study
has two advantages over our regression discontinuity approach. First, the DD event study
would utilize prescribing data from both the treated and non-treated states to estimate the
change in tramadol prescribing in states that regulated tramadol relative to states that did
      9
     There was a singular instance of state-level up-scheduling of HCPs. New York up-scheduled HCPs to
schedule II on February 23, 2013, prior to its federal scheduling. However, New York concurrently scheduled
tramadol as a CIV controlled substance,and, therefore, we cannot distinguish between the two effects.

                                                    38
not. Second, the DD event study would allow us to examine longer-term dynamic response
of prescription dispensing to tramadol’s controlled substance designation. Keeping these
advantages in mind we estimated the effect of state-level level scheduling of tramadol using
a standard difference-in-difference (DD) event study (refer Appendix C for details).
    Results from Table C1 broadly confirm our regression discontinuity treatment effect es-
timates - prescribing of tramadol significantly declined following its state CSA scheduling.
Again, rates of users and prescriptions (extensive margin) declined more (≈ 17% decline)
than the average days’ of supply and MED per prescription (≈ 11% decline at the intensive
margin) following its scheduling. Compared to the RD estimates the larger DD effect sizes
are to be expected since the DD analysis considers a much longer post-treatment period and
effects may build over time as previously authorized refills run out. Estimated effects are also
robust to inclusion of controls for other opioid-related policies (and prescriber fixed effects;
details in Appendix C). Comparing the magnitude of the effect sizes, the estimated declines
in opioid prescribing from the DD regression are twice those calculated using our regres-
sion discontinuity specification, possibly reflecting larger cumulative effects of the scheduling
changes in the long-run.
    Despite the advantages of using a DD event study approach, we cannot use a similar
approach to evaluate the impact of the federal tramadol scheduling since the regulation con-
currently impacted all states.10 Moreover, the estimated average treatment effect from the
DD evaluation of the state regulations is not directly comparable with regression discontinu-
ity based average treatment effect of the federal regulations. Therefore, behavioral responses
to federal and state scheduling regulations are compared using the regression discontinuity
based average treatment effects of the state and federal controlled substance designation
of tramadol. Our estimates indicate that federal and state-level schedulings were almost
equally effective in reducing the prescribing of the affected drugs. This may be because a
  10
    Even the states that had previously (up)scheduled HCPs and tramadol at their individual state-levels
may be impacted by the federal scheduling regulation and would therefore not serve as an appropriate control
group. Appendix Figure D1 show that states that had previously (up)scheduled tramadol and states that
had not were both affected by the (up)scheduling changes at the federal level.



                                                    39
drug’s controlled substance status is enforced similarly at the point of dispensation (e.g. di-
rect pharmacy inability to refill) irrespective of whether the (up)scheduling was at the federal
or state level. In this sense, CSA policy changes are distinct from most other instances of
federal versus states regulation, such as the Affordable Care Act young adult laws, where
federal policy has been noted to have a larger impact. In terms of policy implications, our re-
sults suggest that states can effectively implement CSA scheduling changes at the state-level
to better control the prescribing of substances with high incidence of misuse.




                                              40
        Table 7: Regression discontinuity: Effect of state-level initial scheduling of tramadol on prescription dispensing of tramadol.

                              Patients          Rx                             Days/Rx          MED/Rx          Days(Initial)       Days(Refill)      Days/Rx(Initial)         Days/Rx(Refill)
      Panel A. Baseline local linear regression
      Estimate            -0.001440** -0.001648**                            -0.1971**         -1.2154**         0.3068***          -0.5095***            0.2865***              -0.4579***
                                     (0.0007)             (0.0008)            (0.096)           (0.614)           (0.0978)           (0.0836)              (0.0798)               (0.0682)
      Panel B. with additional trend-break treatment effect
      Estimate             -0.001479** -0.001758**                            -0.1901*          -1.1317*         0.3634***          -0.5543***            0.3357***              -0.4964***
                                     (0.0007)             (0.0008)            (0.0974)          (0.6228)          (0.0992)           (0.0848)              (0.081)                (-0.0692)
      Panel C. Baseline local linear regression with controls for other opioid related policies
      Estimate             -0.001705** -0.002078***              -0.1372        -0.8847       0.2949***                             -0.4308***            0.2866***              -0.3917***
                                     (0.0007)             (0.0008)            (0.0968)          (0.6192)          (0.0986)            (0.0843)             (0.0805)               (0.0688)
      Dep. variable mean             0.02789             0.036226             4.632285         24.98299          3.203784            2.549688             2.815435                2.233721
      Dep. variable SD              (0.07749)            (0.08884)           (11.02984)        (70.7774)         (10.7154)           (10.1805)             (8.8615)               (8.2719)
      N                              209,133              209,133              209,133          209,133           209,133             209,133              209,133                 209,133
     Notes: Authors’ calculations based on Optum’s de-identified Clinformatics® Data Mart system, a comprehensive commercial and Medicare Advantage claims database. Unit of
41




     observation is prescriber-year-week. Estimating sample includes only the 9 states - Illinois, Kentucky, Mississippi, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Tennessee, Wyoming
     and Georgia - that scheduled tramadol as a control substance at the state-level prior to federal law. Panel is centered at the timing of the state-level tramadol scheduling. Eight
     tramadol prescription dispensing outcomes are considered - user rates for all prescriptions dispensed (1), prescription rates for all prescriptions dispensed (2), average days’ supply per
     prescription (in Days) for all prescriptions dispensed (3), average strength per prescription (in MED) for all prescriptions dispensed (4), average days’ supply per initial prescription
     (5), average days’ supply per refill prescription (6), days’ supply for all initial prescriptions (7), and days’ supply for all refill prescriptions (8). The number of total patients in the
     database changes throughout our study period. The data do not report the number of patients enrolled with each prescriber in every week. Therefore, rates of patients prescribed
     (1) and prescriptions (2) are calculated with a denominator of the total number of unique patients the prescriber prescribed (any opioid or non-opioid drug) to each week. Panel A
     presents estimation results from baseline Model 1. Panel B presents estimation results from the extended Model 2 that allows the slope of the prescription dispensing to also vary
     on either side of the discontinuity. Panel C presents estimation results from baseline Model 1 with additional controls for other opioid related policies in effect in the prescriber’s
     state in the given year-week. * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.
6        Sensitivity Analyses

6.1      Heterogeneity by baseline prescribing

In the same vein with prior work (Beheshti, 2019), our conceptual discussion highlighted
the heterogeneity of response that may depend on baseline rates of tramadol and HCP
prescribing.11 We thus next examine if the prescribing changes in response to the federal up-
scheduling of HCPs and control substance designation of tramadol differs by prescriber-level
heterogeneity in HCP and tramadol prescribing volumes at baseline in the newly federally
treated states. High volume HCP and tramadol prescribers may be more impacted by the
scheduling changes, or they may feel that their familiarity with the drug means they are less
influenced by the new policy in terms of the risks they perceive in prescribing the medication,
thus it is ambiguous whether we should expect their prescribing to respond the most. To
test for heterogeneous treatment effects, we sort prescribers into quartiles based on their
prescribing of the affected drug in the 15 months (April 2013-July 2014) prior to the federal
scheduling changes. We re-estimate Model 1 using these stratified samples. Results in Table
8 and 9 compare prescribing changes for the bottom quartile of baseline HCP and tramadol
prescribers (Panel A) to that for the top quartile of baseline HCP and tramadol prescribers
(Panel B).
     The estimating sample for these secondary analyses is a balanced panel of the federally
treated states - 49 states for HCPs and 37 states for tramadol. The observations windows
capture prescribing between July 13, 2014-September 20, 2014 for tramadol and August 31,
2014- November 8, 2014 for HCPs. Table 8 presents changes in total MED quantity pre-
scribed of HCPs, tramadol, other CIV opioids, other CII opioids and aggregate of all opioids
by the bottom and top quartile of high volume HCP prescribers at baseline, following HCP
federal up-scheduling. First, we note that the decline in HCP prescribing was concentrated
in the baseline high volume HCP prescribers (Panel A). Second, following HCPs’ federal
    11
     Beheshti (2019) shows a clear drop in the amount of hydrocodone distributed in the zip3s with higher
pre-existing levels of hydrocodone consumption following the federal up-scheduling of HCPs.



                                                   42
scheduling, prescribers who were previously prescribing high volumes of HCPs increased
their prescribing of tramadol (and other CIV and CII opioids, but these are statistically
insignificant), whose prescribing was generally less restricted than HCPs.
   Similarly, for high and low baseline volume tramadol prescribers, Table 9, presents
changes in prescribing of tramadol, HCPs, other schedule IV opioids, other schedule II opi-
oids and the aggregate of all opioids in response to tramadol’s initial CSA federal scheduling.
Again, tramadol prescribing falls more sharply for the high volume prescribers, and in fact
even increases for the low volume prescribers. However, unlike HCPs, we find no evidence of
substitution from tramadol to HCPs or other CIV opioids following the federal scheduling
of tramadol.




                                              43
        Table 8: Effects of Federal HCP Rescheduling on HCP prescribing: Heterogeneity by provider baseline prescribing volume.

                                                               Total MED
                                  hydrocodone tramadol Other CIII-CIV opioids                             Other C2 opioids All CIII-CIV             All CII     All opioids
               Panel A. Bottom 25 percent baseline hydrocodone prescribers
               Estimate                -0.06046 -0.07940            -0.008180                                   12.199              -0.08758         12.138        12.051
                                       (0.2064) (0.2542)             (0.9048)                                  (9.2433)             (0.9377)        (9.2421)      (9.2731)
               Dep. variable mean        3.4300    5.5000             2.8400                                    101.74               8.3500          105.17        113.52
               Dep. variable S.D.        12.830 (17.410)             (63.850)                                  (633.28)             (65.960)        (633.05)      (635.33)
               N                         73,741    73,741             73,741                                    73,741               73,741          73,741        73,741
               Panel B. Top 25 percent baseline hydrocodone prescribers
               Estimate             -1.9193*** 0.2905***            1.4805***                                   0.3945             1.7710***         -1.5248       0.2463
                                       (0.2237) (0.0941)             (0.5077)                                  (4.0039)             (0.5182)        (4.0460)      (4.1025)
               Dep. variable mean        19.480    4.3900             4.9000                                    127.96               9.2800           147.44       156.72
               Dep. variable S.D.        31.660    12.970             69.380                                    557.30               70.760           562.86       570.03
               N                        329,775 329,775              329,775                                   329,775              329,775         329,775       329,775

     Notes: Authors’ calculations based on Optum’s de-identified Clinformatics® Data Mart system, a comprehensive commercial and Medicare Advantage claims database. Unit of
44




     observation is prescriber-week. Observation window is August 2014 to November 2014. Unit of observation is prescriber-year-week. Presented coefficients are regression discontinuity
     estimates from baseline Model 1 of the effect of federal up-scheduling of HCPs on the total (MED) quantity dispensed of each specific opioid (class) - HCPs, tramadol, other CIV
     opioids, other CII opioids, and the aggregate prescription dispensing across all opioids. We used total MED quantity of HCPs prescribed during of April 2013-July 2014 to identify
     low volume prescribers (bottom quartile) and high volume prescribers (top quartile). Standard errors in parentheses.* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.
            Table 9: Effects of Federal initial scheduling of Tramadol on Tramadol Prescribing: Heterogeneity by provider baseline
                                                               prescribing volume.

                                                                Total MED
                                  hydrocodone tramadol Other CIII-CIV opioids                              Other C2 opioids All CIII-CIV              All CII     All opioids
               Panel A. Bottom 25 percent baseline tramadol prescribers
               Estimate                 0.04562 0.4601***              0.1523                                     1.3948               0.6124         1.4404         2.0529
                                       (0.2139)    (0.0605)           (0.4641)                                   (4.3634)             (0.4683)       (4.3855)       (4.4166)
               Dep. variable mean        9.6400     0.7800              1.6200                                    61.620               2.4000         71.250         73.650
               Dep. variable S.D.      (18.770)    (3.1200)           (36.120)                                   (391.53)             (36.250)       (393.66)       (395.81)
               N                         130846     130846             130846                                     130846               130846         130846         130846
               Panel B. Top 25 percent baseline tramadol prescribers
               Estimate                  0.3237 -1.5783***             -0.3927                                    7.5701             -1.9710**        7.8938         5.9227
                                       (0.3663)    (0.2805)           (0.7137)                                   (5.5322)             (0.7675)       (5.6425)       (5.7527)
               Dep. variable mean        13.080     12.450              4.4000                                    94.370               16.840         107.45         124.29
               Dep. variable S.D.      (31.810)    (25.700)           (57.990)                                   (474.74)             (63.470)       (484.57)       (493.18)
               N                         123684     123684             123684                                     123684               123684         123684         123684
45




     Notes: Authors’ calculations based on Optum’s de-identified Clinformatics® Data Mart system, a comprehensive commercial and Medicare Advantage claims database. Unit of
     observation is prescriber-year-week. Observation window is June 2014 to October 2014. Presented coefficients are regression discontinuity estimates from baseline Model 1 of the
     effect of initial federal scheduling of tramadol on the total (MED) quantity dispensed of each specific opioid (class) - HCPs, tramadol, other CIV opioids, other CII opioids, and the
     aggregate prescription dispensing across all opioids. We used total MED quantity of tramadol prescribed during of April 2013-July 2014 to identify low volume prescribers (bottom
     quartile) and high volume prescribers (top quartile). Standard errors in parentheses.* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.
6.2    Heterogeneity by prescriber specialty

Another dimension of heterogeneous response to scheduling changes may be along the lines
of prescriber specialty. Opioid use for acute care, for instance post-surgery, is considered
clinically appropriate. In this case, we expect tighter CSA controls on HCPs and tramadol
to have lesser impact on the prescribing of these drugs by surgeons than other specialists for
whom opioid prescribing may be clinically confirmed therefore would respond to the negative
information signals and transactions costs of prescribing. We explore heterogeneous responses
to the scheduling changes of HCPs and tramadol by re-estimating Model 1 within stratified
samples of prescribers in seven different specialties - primary care, registered nurses/physician
assistants/nurse practitioners, pain management, surgery, hematology, neurology and other
physicians.
   Table 10, presents changes in total MED quantity of HCPs (Panel A) and tramadol (Panel
B) prescribed, by specialty, following their federal (up)scheduling. In Table 10 we note het-
erogeneous impacts of federal HCP and tramadol (up)scheduling by prescriber specialty. At
baseline, pain specialists prescribe the highest total MED quantity of HCPs per week, 2.5
times that of the next highest prescribers, primary care givers. After HCPs were federally
up-scheduled, the total MED quantity of HCPs declined for most specialties except pain spe-
cialists, neurologists and hematologists. It could be that pain specialists are the providers
for whom the information in the rescheduling is least novel thus does not change their be-
havior, or it could be that they see the most severe cases and thus the transactional costs
are not as important as clinical benefits of retaining the same therapy; future work should
examine whether there are changes in the types of patients for whom the affected drugs are
continued vs. patients who are switched to other medications. The largest decline in total
MED quantity of HCPs prescribed was for registered nurses/physician assistants/nurse prac-
titioners prescribers (15 percent), followed by primary care and surgeons (13 percent). After
the federal controlled substance designation of tramadol total MED quantity of tramadol
prescribed declined significantly only for registered nurses/physician assistants/nurse prac-



                                               46
titioners, who could no longer prescribe tramadol as a controlled substance in some states
(scope of practice laws).




                                           47
       Table 10: Regression discontinuity: Effect of federal up-scheduling of HCPs and initial scheduling of tramadol on prescription
                                        dispensing of HCPs and tramadol by prescriber specialty.

                                         Primary    RN/NP/SA/PA                           Pain          Surgery       Hematology        Neurology      Other physician
                     Panel A. Total MED of HCPs
                     Estimate           -20.516***    -14.549***                        -11.425       -5.4315***         -5.5365          -14.811           -7.0870*
                                         (2.2797)       (2.9569)                       (47.4851)       (1.9621)         (4.2145)        (10.9235)           (4.1402)
                     Dep. variable mean   157.675         94.34                          404.70          42.61            57.89            130.59            90.486
                     Dep. variable S.D.  (319.57)       (234.09)                       (1006.82)        (98.33)         (109.30)         (254.31)           (420.23)
                     N                    294932         89254                            7780           39080            11141             8565             170358
                     Panel B. Total MED of tramadol
                     Estimate             -1.547      -4.7952***                        -7.4183       -0.2228073          0.7671          4.1465           -2.0498*
                                         (1.0207)      (1.1986)                        (8.2331)        (0.76649)         (1.6823)       (5.8488)           (1.0938)
                     Dep. variable mean 65.26138       35.73639                        62.0554         7.790335         8.834928        52.08554           20.05068
                     Dep. variable S.D. (139.3044)    (93.44927)                      (177.4929)      (39.93038)       (37.55955)        (142.04)         (115.3392)
                     N                    302178         93217                          174129            7717            11321            8905             40141
48




     Notes: Authors’ calculations based on Optum’s de-identified Clinformatics® Data Mart system, a comprehensive commercial and Medicare Advantage claims database. Observation
     window is August 2014 to November 2014 (Panel A) and June 2014 to October 2014 (Panel B). Unit of observation is prescriber-year-week. Presented coefficients are regression
     discontinuity estimates of the effect of up-scheduling of HCPs (Panel A) and initial scheduling of tramadol (Panel B) on the total (MED) quantity prescription dispensed of HCPs
     and tramadol, respectively, from baseline Model 1, by prescriber specialty. Prescribing changes in response to the scheduling changes are considered for seven different specialties -
     primary care, registered nurses/physician assistants/nurse practitioners, pain management, surgery, hematology, neurology and other physicians. Standard errors in parentheses.*
     p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.
7     Discussion and conclusion

In response to well established evidence of the opioid epidemic facing the US, state and
federal policies have attempted to control opioid prescribing through several channels. While
PDMPs and other state restrictions on prescribers have been often studied, there is less
evidence on another route to restricting opioid prescription supply, through the DEA CSA. In
2014, two very large-market-share products experienced a sudden stricter regulation, enabling
us to answer several questions new to the literature. The results in this study consider the
impact of CSA regulations in scheduling and up-scheduling, on own and competitor market
shares, and how federal and state versions of the same laws compare in their effects on
opioid prescribing. Using claims data from a large, commercially insured population, this
study finds that prescribing of HCPs, tramadol and other opioid analgesics significantly
changed in response to the DEA designating tramadol as a controlled substance for the first
time in July 2014 and moving HCPs to a more restrictive CSA tier in October 2014. We
find evidence that (up-)scheduling of HCPs and tramadol were associated with significant
declines in the prescribing of both opiates. However, the decline in tramadol prescribing was
not sustained. After an initial decline in prescribing after its control substance designation,
tramadol prescribing again began to significantly increase immediately following the up-
scheduling of HCPs, when it became a less ‘costly’ substitute to HCPs.
    Stricter CSA regulations could reduce prescribing of HCPs and tramadol by raising the
marginal cost of prescribing. For instance, due to restrictions on refills that will require
more frequent office visits and mandatory PDMP reviews prior to any prescribing. The
higher marginal cost of prescribing a more tightly controlled substance would only impact
the extensive margin of prescribing - rates of prescriptions and patients prescribed - but, not
increase with the authorized days’ supply or dosage per prescription. CSA (up)scheduling
may also increase the prescriber’s perception of the risk associated with the use of the affected
drug and result in reduced prescribing at both the extensive as well as intensive margin.
    We find that following federal- and state- level scheduling changes, prescribing declined at


                                               49
both the extensive margin of prescribing, i.e. lowered the rates of prescriptions and patients
prescribed and at the intensive margin - average days’ supply and MED per prescription.
The decrease in prescribing of the effected drug at the intensive margin suggests that stricter
CSA scheduling changes provide valuable negative information and salience about the asso-
ciated risks from use, in addition to the simple regulation. Moreover, federal and state-level
scheduling scheduling changes appear equally effective in reducing prescribing of the effected
drug by sending a clear signal of the higher abuse liability of the drugs than was previously
known.
   Another important insight from our results is that scheduling changes not only impact
the prescribing of the affected drugs, but also have significant spillover effects on the prescrib-
ing of less regulated or ‘costly’ substitutes, which must be taken into account for optimal
policy formulation. Up-scheduling of HCPs lead to significant increase in the prescribing
of tramadol and, to a lesser extent, increase in the prescribing of other CIV and CII opi-
oids. Any evaluation of HCP up-scheduling that does not take into account the unintended
substitution from HCPs towards the other opioids would overestimate the effect of HCP
regulation in limiting opioid prescribing. Our results reveal that the substantial decline in
prescribing of HCPs and tramadol following their CSA (up)scheduling was completely offset
by a compensatory increase in the prescribing of related drugs. In this sense, the regulations
were not effective in reducing the total prescription dispensing of all opioids.
   Overall, the regulations did not result in a decline in the aggregate prescription dispensing
of all opioids. Our findings imply that the Controlled Substance Act (CSA) scheduling of
drugs can serve as an important policy tool to curb high levels of opioid prescribing. However,
the efficacy of CSA scheduling is undermined in the presence of substitutes.




                                                50
References
Ali, M. M., Dowd, W. N., Classen, T., Mutter, R., and Novak, S. P. (2017). Prescription
  drug monitoring programs, nonmedical use of prescription drugs, and heroin use: Evidence
  from the national survey of drug use and health. Addictive behaviors, 69:65–77.
Alpert, A., Dykstra, S., and Jacobson, M. (2020). How do prescription drug monitoring
  programs reduce opioid prescribing? the role of hassle costs versus information. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Alpert, A., Powell, D., and Pacula, R. L. (2018). Supply-side drug policy in the presence
  of substitutes: Evidence from the introduction of abuse-deterrent opioids. American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Economic Policy, 10(4):1–35.
Babalonis, S., Lofwall, M., Nuzzo, P., Siegel, A., and Walsh, S. (2013). Abuse liability and
  reinforcing efficacy of oral tramadol in humans. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 129:116–
  124.
Bala, R., Bhardwaj, P., and Chintagunta, P. K. (2017). Pharmaceutical product recalls:
  Category effects and competitor response. Marketing Science, 36(6):931–943.
Bao, Y., Wen, K., Johnson, P., Jeng, P. J., Meisel, Z. F., and Schackman, B. R. (2018).
  Assessing the impact of state policies for prescription drug monitoring programs on high-
  risk opioid prescriptions. Health Affairs, 37(10):1596–1604.
Beheshti, D. (2019). The impact of opioids on the labor market: Evidence from drug
  rescheduling. Technical report, Working Paper.
Bernhardt, M., Taylor, R., Hagan, J., Patel, N., Chumpitazi, C., Fox, K., and C., G. (2016).
  Evaluation of opioid prescribing after rescheduling of hydrocodone-containing products.
  American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy, 74(24):2046––2053.
Bradford, A. C., Bradford, W. D., Abraham, A., and Adams, G. B. (2018). Association
  between us state medical cannabis laws and opioid prescribing in the medicare part d
  population. JAMA internal medicine, 178(5):667–672.
Buchmueller, T. C. and Carey, C. (2018a). The effect of prescription drug monitoring pro-
  grams on opioid utilization in medicare. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
  10(1):77–112.
Buchmueller, T. C. and Carey, C. (2018b). The effect of prescription drug monitoring pro-
  grams on opioid utilization in medicare. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
  10(1):77–112.
Bush, D. (2015). The cbhsq report: Emergency department visits for adverse reactions
  involving the pain medication tramadol. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
  Administration, Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality. Rockville, MD.
Bütikofer, A., Cronin, C. J., and Skira, M. M. (2020). Employment effects of healthcare
  policy: Evidence from the 2007 fda black box warning on antidepressants. Journal of
  Health Economics, page 102348.
Cawley, J. and Rizzo, J. (2008). Spillover effects of prescription drug withdrawals. Advances
  in Health Economics and Health Services Research, 19:119–144.
CDC (2018). Multiple cause of death data on cdc wonder. department of health and human
  services. Atlanta, GA. http://wonder.cdc.gov/mcd.html.
Collins, M., K. S. and Tennyson, S. (2013). Drug withdrawals and the utilization of ther-
  apeutic substitutes: The case of vioxx. Journal of Economic Behavior Organization,
  86(Feb):148–168.

                                             51
Davis, C. S., Lieberman, A. J., Hernandez-Delgado, H., and Suba, C. (2019a). Laws limiting
  the prescribing or dispensing of opioids for acute pain in the united states: A national
  systematic legal review. Drug and alcohol dependence, 194:166–172.
Davis, C. S., Lieberman, A. J., Hernandez-Delgado, H., and Suba, C. (2019b). Laws limiting
  the prescribing or dispensing of opioids for acute pain in the united states: A national
  systematic legal review. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 194:166–172.
Daysal, N. M. and Orsini, C. (2015). Spillover effects of drug safety warnings on preventive
  health care use. The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 15(1):179–208.
DEA (2009).         Automation of reports and consolidated orders system (arcos).
  https://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/arcos/index.html.
DEA (2018). Tramadol. diversion control division. drug and chemical evaluation section.
  Technical report.
DEA, 2014a. Schedules of controlled substances: Placement of tramadol into schedule iv.
  final rule.
DEA, 2014b. Schedules of controlled substances: Rescheduling of hydrocodone combination
  products from schedule iii to schedule ii. final rule.
Deiana, C. and Giua, L. (2018). The US Opidemic: Prescription Opioids, Labour Market
  Conditions and Crime. MPRA Paper, University Library of Munich, Germany.
Dowell, D., Haegerich, T., and Chou, R. (2016a). Cdc guideline for prescribing opioids for
  chronic pain — united states. MMWR, 65(1):1–49.
Dowell, D., Zhang, K., Noonan, R. K., and Hockenberry, J. M. (2016b). Mandatory provider
  review and pain clinic laws reduce the amounts of opioids prescribed and overdose death
  rates. Health Affairs, 35(10):1876–1883.
Evans, W. N., Lieber, E., and Power, P. (2019). How the reformulation of oxycontin ignited
  the heroin epidemic. Review of Economics and Statistics, 101.
Fleming, M., Driver, L., Sansgiry, S., Abughosh, S., Wanat, M., Sawant, R., Ferries, E.,
  Reeve, K., and Todd, K. (2017). Physicians’ intention to prescribe hydrocodone combi-
  nation products after rescheduling: A theory of reasoned action approach. Research in
  Social and Administrative Pharmacy, 13(3):503–512.
Freedman, S., K. M. . L. M. (2012). Product recalls, imperfect information, and spillover
  effects: Lessons from the consumer response to the 2007 toy recalls. The Review of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics, 94(2):371–388.
Grecu, A. M., Dave, D. M., and Saffer, H. (2019). Mandatory access prescription drug moni-
  toring programs and prescription drug abuse. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
  38(1):181–209.
Gudin, J. and Lee, A. (2013). The downside of upscheduling. Pain Medicine, 14(11):1628–
  –1629.
Hahn, J., P. T. and der Klaauw, W. V. (2001). Identification and estimation of treatment
  effects with a regression-discontinuity design. Econometrica, 69(1):201–209.
Hausman, C. and Rapson, D. (2018). Regression discontinuity in time: Considerations for
  empirical applications. Annual Review of Resource Economics, 10(1):533–552.
Hollingsworth, A., Ruhm, C. J., and Simon, K. (2017). Macroeconomic conditions and opioid
  abuse. Journal of Health Economics, 56:222–233.
IMS Health (2012).        Top 25 medicines by dispensed prescriptions (u.s.).        https:
  //www.imshealth.com/deployedfiles/imshealth/Global/Content/Corporate/
  Press%20Room/2012_U.S/Top_25_Medicines_Dispensed_Prescriptions_U.S..pdf,

                                            52
  note = ”[Online; accessed 28-June-2019]”.
IQVIA       (2019).              Medicine      use      and     spending      in     the    u.s.
  https://www.iqvia.com/insights/the-iqvia-institute/reports/
  medicine-use-and-spending-in-the-us-a-review-of-2018-and-outlook-to-2023,
  note = ”[Online; accessed 28-June-2020]”.
Jones, C., Lurie, P., and Throckmorton, D. (2016). Effect of us drug enforcement adminis-
  tration’s rescheduling of hydrocodone combination analgesic products on opioid analgesic
  prescribing. JAMA Internal Medicine, 176(3).
Kaestner, R. and Ziedan, E. (2019). Mortality and socioeconomic consequences of prescrip-
  tion opioids: Evidence from state policies. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Kaiser Family Foundation (2019). Status of state action on the medicaid expansion decision.
  Technical report.
Kilby, A. (2016). Opioids for the masses: welfare tradeoffs in the regulation of narcotic pain
  medications. In 2016 Fall Conference: The Role of Research in Making Government More
  Effective. APPAM.
Kuo, Y.-F., Raji, M. A., Liaw, V., Baillargeon, J., and Goodwin, J. S. (2018). Opioid pre-
  scriptions in older medicare beneficiaries after the 2014 federal rescheduling of hydrocodone
  products. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 66(5):945–953.
Mallatt, J. (2018). The effect of prescription drug monitoring programs on opioid prescrip-
  tions and heroin crime rates. Available at SSRN 3050692.
McCrary, J. (2008). Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity
  design: A density test. Journal of Econometrics, 142:698–714.
Meara, E., Horwitz, J. R., Powell, W., McClelland, L., Zhou, W., O’Malley, A. J., and
  Morden, N. E. (2016). State legal restrictions and prescription-opioid use among disabled
  adults. New England Journal of Medicine, 375(1):44–53.
Meinhofer, A. (2018). Prescription drug monitoring programs: The role of asymmetric infor-
  mation on drug availability and abuse. American Journal of Health Economics, 4(4):504–
  526.
Miotto, K., Cho, A., Khalil, M., Blanco, K., Sasaki, J., and R, R. (2017). Trends in tramadol:
  Pharmacology, metabolism, and misuse. Anesth Analg, 124(1):44–51.
Murimi, I., Chang, H., Bicket, M., Jones, C., and Alexander, G. (2019). Using trajectory
  models to assess the effect of hydrocodone upscheduling among chronic hydrocodone users.
  Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf., 28(1):70–79.
Nguyen, T. D., Bradford, W. D., and Simon, K. I. (2019). How do opioid prescribing restric-
  tions affect pharmaceutical promotion? lessons from the mandatory access prescription
  drug monitoring programs. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Northrup, T., Carroll, K., Suchting, R., Villarreal, Y., Zare, M., and Stotts, A. (2019). The
  impact of increased hydrocodone regulation on opioid prescribing in an urban safety-net
  health care system. The Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine, 32 (3):362–
  374.
Parkinson, K., Price, J., Simon, K. I., and Tennyson, S. (2014). The influence of fda advisory
  information and black box warnings on individual use of prescription antidepressants.
  Review of Economics of the Household, 12(4):771–790.
PDAPS (2018). Prescription drug abuse policy system. http://pdaps.org. Accessed:
  2018-01-30.

                                              53
Popovici, I., Maclean, J. C., Hijazi, B., and Radakrishnan, S. (2018). The effect of state laws
  designed to prevent nonmedical prescription opioid use on overdose deaths and treatment.
  Health Economics, 27(2):294–305.
Report, T. D. (2013). Substance abuse and mental health services administration, center
  for behavioral health statistics and quality. Highlights of the 2011 Drug Abuse Warning
  Network (DAWN) Findings on Drug-Related Emergency Department Visits, February.
Romley, J. and Shih, T. (2017). Product safety spillovers and market viability for biologic
  drugs. International Journal of Health Economics and Management, 17(2):135–158.
Sacks, D. W., Hollingsworth, A., Nguyen, T. D., and Simon, K. I. (2019). Can policy affect
  initiation of addictive substance use? evidence from opioid prescribing. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.
Saloner, B., Levin, J., Chang, H.-Y., Jones, C., and Alexander, G. C. (2018). Changes in
  buprenorphine-naloxone and opioid pain reliever prescriptions after the affordable care act
  medicaid expansion. JAMA network open, 1(4):e181588–e181588.
Tjaderborn, M., Jönsson, A., Ahlner, J., and Hägg, S. (2009). Tramadol dependence: a
  survey of spontaneously reported cases in sweden. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf, 18:1192–
  –1198.
Toledo, C. and Villas-Boas, S. B. (2019). Safe or not? consumer responses to recalls with
  traceability. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 41(3):519–541.
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT NORTHERN DISTRICT OF OHIO EASTERN
  DIVISION. National prescription opiate litigation (case no. 1:17-md-2804).
Wen, H., Hockenberry, J. M., Jeng, P. J., and Bao, Y. (2019). Prescription Drug Monitoring
  Program Mandates: Impact On Opioid Prescribing And Related Hospital Use. Health
  Affairs, 38(9):1550–1556.
Zabihi, E., Hoseinzaadeh, A., Emami, M., Mardani, M., Mahmoud, B., and Akbar, M.
  (2011). Potential for tramadol abuse by patients visiting pharmacies in northern iran.
  Subst Abuse, 5:11––15.
Zacny, J. (2005). Profiling the subjective, psychomotor, and physiological effects of tramadol
  in recreational drug users. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 80:273–278.
Zhang, H. and Liu, Z. (2013). The investigation of tramadol dependence with no history of
  substance abuse: a cross-sectional survey of spontaneously reported cases in guangzhou
  city, china. Biomed Research International, 283425.
Ziedan, E. and Kaestner, R. (2020). Effect of prescription opioids and prescription opioid
  control policies on infant health. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                              54
     A      Effective dates of opioid related state policies

     Table A1: Effective dates of state-level scheduling of tramadol as a CSA Schedule IV controlled substance, prior to its federal
                                                         scheduling in June 2014.
     State            Effective Date       Source
     Arkansas         March 3, 2007        http://www.arkleg.state.ar.us/assembly/2007/R/Pages/BillInformation.aspx?measureno=HB2347
     Georgia          April 29, 2014       https://gdna.georgia.gov/blog/2014-05-02/tramadol-now-schedule-iv-controlled-substance-georgia
     Illinois         January 1, 2012      http://ilga.gov/legislation/ilcs/ilcs4.asp?DocName=072005700HArt%2E+II&ActID=1941&ChapterID=53&SeqStart=600000&SeqEnd=2600000
     Kentucky         December 5, 2008     https://pharmacy.ky.gov/BoardInformation/2008%20Board%20Meetings/December%2017%202008.pdf
     Mississippi      July 1, 2011         https://www.mbp.ms.gov/Newsletters/July%202011%20Newsletter.pdf
     New Mexico       March 7, 2011        http://www.rld.state.nm.us/uploads/files/Regulation%2020%20Controlled%20Substance%20Additions(1).pdf
     New York         February 23, 2013    https://opwdd.ny.gov/opwdd_resources/information_for_clinicians/As_Part_of_the_I
     North Dakota     March 23, 2013       https://www.legis.nd.gov/assembly/63-2013/session-laws/documents/foods.pdf
     Ohio†            September 1, 2014    https://nabp.pharmacy/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/OH082014.pdf
     Oklahoma         November 1, 2012     http://www.oklegislature.gov/cf_pdf/2011-12%20ENR/hb/hb2942%20enr.pdf
     Tennessee        April 7, 2011        https://www.tn.gov/content/dam/tn/health/documents/Tramadol.pdf
     Wyoming          July 1, 2011         https://www.wyoleg.gov/Legislation/2011/HB0062


     Notes: † The state of Ohio passed legislation for state-level scheduling of tramadol prior to its federal scheduling however the state law did not come into effect prior to the federal
55




     ruling.
          Table A2: Implementation dates of other opioid related state policies.

                       Must Acces                                                   Delegate
                                       Alternative                                                 Day Limit
       State             Date1                          Schedules Monitored2        Allowance
                                         Date1                                                      Date3
                                                                                      Date3
Alabama                                                 II-V & Drugs of Concern      06/28/07
Alaska                  07/17/17                        II-IV only                   01/01/12       07/26/17
Arizona                 10/16/17                        II-V only                    12/01/08
Arkansas                01/08/17                        II-V & Drugs of Concern      05/16/13
California              04/02/18                        II-IV only                  2009 - Q 4
Colorado                                                II-V only                    02/04/08
Connecticut             10/01/15                        II-V & Drugs of Concern                     07/01/16
Delaware                03/01/12      No must access    II-V & Drugs of Concern      08/21/12       04/01/17
District of Columbia                                    II-V & Drugs of Concern
Florida                                                 II-V only                    10/17/11
Georgia                 07/13/14                        II-V only                    07/01/13
Hawaii                                                  II-V & Drugs of Concern     1997 - Q 1      07/01/16
Idaho                                                   II-V & Drugs of Concern      06/01/99
Illinois                01/01/18                        II-V & Drugs of Concern                     01/01/12
Indiana                 07/01/14                        II-V & Drugs of Concern     2005 - Q 1      07/01/17
Iowa                                                    II-IV only                   03/19/09
Kansas                                                  II-IV & Drugs of Concern     04/01/11
Kentucky                07/20/12                        II-V & Drugs of Concern      07/01/99       06/29/17
Louisiana               07/01/12      No must access    II-V & Drugs of Concern      01/01/09       08/01/17
Maine                                                   II-IV only                   01/01/05       01/01/17
Maryland                07/01/18                        II-V only                    12/20/13       05/25/17
Massachusetts           07/01/14                        II-V & Drugs of Concern     2011 - Q 1      03/14/16
Michigan                                                II-V only                   2003 - Q 1
Minnesota               01/01/17                        II-V & Drugs of Concern      04/15/10       07/01/17
Mississippi                                             II-V & Drugs of Concern                     Pre1989
Missouri                                                II-IV only                  2006 - Q 1
Montana                                                 II-V only                    11/01/12
Nebraska                                                II-V & Drugs of Concern      04/14/11
Nevada                  10/01/07         10/01/15       II-IV only                   07/01/97       06/16/17
New Hampshire           01/21/16                        II-IV only                   10/16/14       01/01/17
New Jersey              11/01/15                        II-V & Drugs of Concern      01/05/12       05/16/17
New Mexico              09/28/12                        II-V only                    08/01/05
New York                08/27/13                        II-V & Drugs of Concern      02/01/10       07/22/16
North Carolina                                          II-V only                    10/01/07       01/01/18
North Dakota                                            II-V & Drugs of Concern      09/01/07
Ohio                    03/01/12         12/31/15       II-V & Drugs of Concern      10/02/06       08/31/17
Oklahoma                03/01/11         11/01/15       II-V & Drugs of Concern     2006 - Q 3
Oregon                                                  II-IV & Drugs of Concern     09/01/11
Pennsylvania            01/01/17                        II-V only                                   01/03/17
Rhode Island            06/28/16                        II-IV only                  2012 - Q 3      03/22/17
South Carolina          05/19/17                        II-IV only                   09/01/08       06/13/07
South Dakota                                            II-V only                    03/01/12
Tennessee               07/01/13                        II-V & Drugs of Concern      01/01/07       10/01/13
Texas                   09/01/19                        II-V only                    01/01/82
Utah                    05/09/17                        II-V & Drugs of Concern      01/01/97       03/22/17
Vermont                 11/15/13                        II-IV only                   04/01/09       07/01/17
Virginia                07/01/15         11/01/13       II-V & Drugs of Concern      06/01/06       03/15/17
Washington                                              II-V & Drugs of Concern      01/04/12
West Virginia           06/08/12                        II-V & Drugs of Concern     2005 - Q 1
Wisconsin                                               II-V & Drugs of Concern      06/01/13
Wyoming                                                 II-V & Drugs of Concern      10/01/04


Sources:
1 - National Alliance for Model State Drug Laws (www.namsdl.org) and Prescription Drug Abuse Policy System
(www.pdaps.org)
2 - Prescription Drug Monitoring Program Training and Technical Assisrance Center (www.pdmpassist.org).
Drugs of concern include substances that are not in the Schedules monitored and vary by state.
3 - Prescription Drug Abuse Policy System (www.pdaps.org).
4 - Davis et al. (2019b)




                                                       56
B   Identification Tests for Regression Discontinuity De-
    signs




                           57
 Figure B1: Changes in other opioid related policies around the time of federal scheduling
                            changes of HCPs and tramadol.
            Panel A: Other state opioid policy changes around federal HCP up-scheduling




            Panel B: Other state opioid policy changes around federal tramadol scheduling




Notes: Five other opioid-related policies are considered - ACA expansions, mandatory PDMP laws, pain clinic regulations,
medical marijuana laws and day limit laws (refer Appendix Table A2 for relevant dates and source of information). Panel A
plots the number of states in which each policy was in effect in the 14-week window surrounding the federal up-scheduling of
HCPs (2014w34-2014w47). In Panel A the vertical line represents the federal up-scheduling of HCPs on October 8, 2014. Panel
B plots the number of states in which each policy was in effect in the 14-week window surrounding the federal initial scheduling
of tramadol (2014w27-2014w40). In Panel B the vertical line represents the timing of federal initial scheduling of tramadol on
August 18, 2014.




                                                              58
Figure B2: Plots of relationship between bandwidth and RD estimate, with 95% confidence
                                        intervals.
                                                      Panel A: HCPs




                                                    Panel B: Tramadol




Notes: Authors’ calculations based on Optum’s de-identified Clinformatics® Data Mart system, a comprehensive commer-
cial and Medicare Advantage claims database. Unit of observation is prescriber-week. Observation window is August 2014
to November 2014 (Panel A) and June 2014 to October 2014 (Panel B). Unit of observation is prescriber-year-week. Four
prescription dispensing outcomes are considered for both drugs - user rates (1), prescription rates (2), average days’ supply per
prescription (in Days) (3), and average strength per prescription (in MED) (4). The number of total patients in the database
changes throughout our study period. The data do not report the number of patients enrolled with each prescriber in every
week. Therefore, rates of patients prescribed (1) and prescriptions (2) are calculated with a denominator of the total number
of unique patients the prescriber prescribed (any opioid or non-opioid drug) to each week. Effect of scheduling changes from
regression discontinuity estimation with 95% confidence intervals are presented for alternative bandwidths of 3-7 weeks.




                                                              59
C      Difference-in-difference treatment estimates of state
       initial scheduling of Tramadol
We estimated the effect of state-level level (up)scheduling of HCPs and tramadol using a
standard difference-in-difference (DD) event study that exploited the variation in timing of
scheduling across states and and over time; 9 states provide variation in tramadol policy,
but only one state for HCPs. The event study allows us to examine dynamic response of
prescription dispensing, allows us to shed light on the equality of prescribing trends be-
tween treated and control observations in the pre-intervention time period, the underlying
identifying assumption. The event study was specified as:

                        X
                Yst =       βt ((Up)scheduled During t)st + Xst δ + γs + τt + st             (C1)
                        t


    The key outcome (Yst ) represents the prescription dispensing rate in state s in quarter
t. The key independent variable is (Up)scheduled During T st , a vector of indicator variables
equal to 1 in the year-quarter specified. The week before implementation was omitted as the
reference period. Xst represents a number of potential time-varying characteristics of the
state that may be correlated with prescribing, including unemployment rate (Hollingsworth
et al., 2017), percent of state population that is black, percent of state population that is other
non-white race, percent of state population that is over age 65, percent of state population
that is male, and the number of physicians, registered nurses and physician assistants per
100,000 persons in the state as a measure of provision of health care. All specifications also
include state fixed effects and year-by-quarter fixed effects. Regressions are weighted by state
population, and standard errors are clustered at the state level.As a sensitivity test, we also
estimate a version of Model C1 with prescriber fixed effects, instead of state fixed effects.
    Average effects of the new CSA regulations of HCPs and tramadol on the prescription dis-
pensing is estimated using the coefficient on the indicator for whether the state (up)scheduled
HCPs or tramadol in that quarter ((U p)scheduledst ) in Model C2:



                        Yst = β((U p)scheduledst ) + Xst δ + γs + τt + st                    (C2)

    The remaining variables and model specifications are identical to Model C1.
    In line with our main regression discontinuity estimates, we also examined whether the
new scheduling changes affected initial prescribing or if they affected subsequent refills by
re-estimating Model C1 and Model C2 separately for the sample of initial prescriptions and


                                                60
refills.




           61
                   Figure C1: Event study estimates of the effect of state-level initial scheduling of tramadol on its prescribing

                                   .02                                                                                                     .02




                                                                                                                                             0

                                       0




                                                                                                                                           -.02




                                  -.02


                                                                                                                                           -.04




                                  -.04
                                                                                                                                           -.06


                                           ≤-12-11 -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10 11 ≥12                 ≤-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2    3   4   5       6       7       8    9 10 11 ≥12
                                                                               Quarters                                                                                              Quarters



                                                      (a) Rate of patients prescribed                                                                 (b) Rate of dispensed prescriptions
62




                                  .5
                                                                                                                                    40




                                                                                                                                    20

                                  0




                                                                                                                                     0




                                 -.5


                                                                                                                                    -20




                                                                                                                                    -40
                                  -1



                                       ≤-12-11 -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1         2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10 11 ≥12         ≤-12-11 -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1     2   3   4   5       6       7       8       9 10 11 ≥12
                                                                           Quarters                                                                                           Quarters



                                (c) Average days’ supply per prescription (in days)                                                 (d) Average strength per prescription (in MED)

     Notes: Authors’ calculations based on Optum’s de-identified Clinformatics® Data Mart system, a comprehensive commercial and Medicare Advantage claims database. Sample
     only includes the state of New York. Observation window is 2007q1 to 2014q2. Unit of observation is prescriber-quarter. Four tramadol prescription dispensing outcomes are
     considered - user rates (a), prescription rates (b), average days’ supply per Prescription (in Days) (c) and average Strength per Prescription (in MED) (d). The number of total
     patients in the database changes throughout our study period. Therefore, rates of patients prescribed (1) and prescriptions (2) are calculated as the number of enrollees with
     tramadol claims divided by total enrollees. The quarter prior to the state-level initial scheduling of tramadol is treated as the reference period. DD event-study estimation controls
     for state fixed effects and quarter-year fixed effects. Time-variant controls include median income, unemployment rates, and poverty rates. Robust standard errors, clustered on
     state.
        Figure C2: Event study estimates of the effect of state-level initial scheduling of tramadol on its initial vs. refill prescribing

                                       .2                                                                                                     .2




                                        0                                                                                                      0




                                       -.2                                                                                                    -.2




                                       -.4                                                                                                    -.4




                                       -.6                                                                                                    -.6

                                             ≤-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2   3   4   5   6   7       8    9 10 11 ≥12                 ≤-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2   3   4   5   6   7       8    9 10 11 ≥12
                                                                                Quarters                                                                                               Quarters



                                                    (a) Rate of initial prescriptions                                                                       (b) Rate of refill prescriptions
63




                                                                                                                                      5
                               5




                                                                                                                                      0
                               0




                               -5                                                                                                     -5

                                    ≤-12-11 -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1     2   3   4   5   6   7       8       9 10 11 ≥12         ≤-12-11 -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1     2   3   4   5   6   7       8       9 10 11 ≥12
                                                                        Quarters                                                                                               Quarters



                                (c) Average days’ supply per initial prescription                                                          (d) Average days’ supply per refill prescription

     Notes: Authors’ calculations based on Optum’s de-identified Clinformatics® Data Mart system, a comprehensive commercial and Medicare Advantage claims database. Sample
     only includes the state of New York. Observation window is 2007q1 to 2014q2. Unit of observation is prescriber-quarter.
                                           Table C1: DD estimates: State-level initial scheduling of Tramadol

                                         (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)            (5)              (6)                 (7)                   (8)
                                 Patients        Rx    Days/Rx             MED/Rx       Days(Initial) Days(Refill)        Days/Rx(Initial) Days/Rx(Refill)
      Panel A.Baseline model (no other state policies)
      Post×Reschedule            -0.014*** -0.020***    -2.02**              -10.3**         -0.10           -0.23***             -0.79               -1.75***
                                   (0.0035) (0.0047)     (0.62)               (3.28)        (0.066)           (0.045)            (0.51)                (0.38)
      Dep. Variable Mean                0.08         0.11       15.96        88.14            1.26             0.83               9.97                  7.69
      Dep. Variable SE                  0.20         0.26       42.26        261.70           3.80             3.27              28.92                 27.57
      Obs.                            8307483      8307483     8307483      8307483         8307483          8307483            8307483               8307483
      R-squared                         0.02         0.02        0.02         0.02            0.01             0.00               0.02                  0.01
      Panel B.Control for state policies

      Post×Reschedule                  -0.010** -0.015**        -1.30*        -6.92*         -0.039          -0.19***              -0.34              -1.41***
                                       (0.0035) (0.0047)        (0.54)        (2.84)        (0.086)           (0.027)             (0.55)               (0.24)
      Post×Medicaid expansion           -0.0047 -0.0047          -0.29         -1.11         -0.066            -0.052              -0.19                -0.22
                                       (0.0038) (0.0044)        (1.29)        (6.60)        (0.053)           (0.037)             (0.86)               (0.74)
      Post×Mandatory PDMPs             -0.012** -0.016***      -2.21**       -10.4**         -0.14*          -0.16***            -1.09+               -1.38***
64




                                       (0.0035) (0.0045)        (0.76)        (3.76)        (0.057)           (0.030)             (0.55)               (0.35)
      Post×Pain clinic laws             0.013** 0.016**           0.89          1.44          0.18*             0.061               0.90                 0.20
                                       (0.0047) (0.0055)        (1.38)        (7.03)        (0.076)           (0.048)             (0.89)               (0.70)
      Post×Medical cannabis laws        -0.0038 -0.0053          -0.28         0.19         0.0080             -0.025              -0.15                -0.32
                                       (0.0031) (0.0033)        (0.75)        (3.77)        (0.036)           (0.026)             (0.50)               (0.38)
      Post×Days limits                 -0.00097 -0.00050         -0.48         -2.07         -0.088           0.0098               -0.54                0.078
                                       (0.0043) (0.0053)        (0.70)        (3.43)        (0.097)           (0.024)             (0.71)               (0.22)
      R-squared                         0.02        0.02         0.02         0.02            0.01             0.00               0.02                  0.01
      Panel C.Control for provider fixed effects

      Post×Reschedule                  -0.012** -0.018***       -2.18*       -10.3*          -0.089          -0.22***             -0.88               -1.94***
                                       (0.0037) (0.0051)        (0.87)       (4.68)         (0.068)           (0.054)            (0.67)                (0.51)
      R-squared                         0.46        0.47         0.64         0.58            0.43             0.43               0.56                  0.57

     Notes: Authors’ calculations based on Optum’s de-identified Clinformatics® Data Mart system, a comprehensive commercial and Medicare Advantage
     claims database. Sample only includes the state of New York. Observation window is 2007q1 to 2014q2. Unit of observation is prescriber-quarter. The
     eight tramadol prescription dispensing outcomes are considered - user rates for all prescriptions dispensed (1), prescription rates for all prescriptions
     dispensed (2), average days’ supply per prescription (in Days) for all prescriptions dispensed (3), average strength per prescription (in MED) for all
     prescriptions dispensed (4), days’ supply for initial prescriptions (5), days’ supply for refill prescriptions (6), average days’ supply per initial prescription
     (in Days) (7), and average days’ supply per refill prescription (in Days) (8). The number of total patients in the database changes throughout our study
     period. Therefore, rates of patients prescribed (1) and prescriptions (2) are calculated as the number of enrollees with tramadol claims divided by total
     enrollees. In baseline model (Panel 1), we control for state fixed effects and quarter-year fixed effects. Time-variant controls include median income,
     unemployment rates, and poverty rates (Panel 2). Robust standard errors, clustered on state, were reported in parentheses. * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, ***
     p<0.001. Standard errors in parentheses.
D   Trends in HCP and tramadol prescribing surround-
    ing state-level scheduling changes




                           65
                                                                                   Figure D1: Trends in tramadol prescribing (2007-2017).

              .05                                            .05                                          .05                                           .1                                            .07                                           .1

              .04                                            .04                                          .04                                                                                         .06                                          .08
                                                                                                                                                       .08
                                                                                                                                                                                                      .05
              .03                                            .03                                          .03                                          .06                                                                                         .06
                                                                                                                                                                                                      .04
              .02                                            .02                                          .02                                          .04                                                                                         .04
                                                                                                                                                                                                      .03
              .01                                            .01                                          .01                                          .02                                            .02                                          .02

                  2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1           2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1         2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1      2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1           2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1         2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1
                                   Arkansas                                       Kentucky                                    New Mexico                                 Arkansas                                       Kentucky                                    New Mexico



              .035                                           .04                                          .04                                          .08                                             .1                                           .1

                                                                                                                                                                                                      .08                                          .08
                  .03
                                                             .03                                          .03                                          .06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .06
              .025                                                                                                                                                                                    .06
                                                                                                          .02                                                                                                                                      .04
                                                             .02                                                                                       .04                                            .04
                  .02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .02
                                                                                                                                                                                                      .02
              .015                                           .01                                          .01                                          .02                                                                                          0
                      2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1       2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1         2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1      2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1           2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1         2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1
                                      Tennessee                                  Mississippi                                   Wyoming                                  Tennessee                                      Mississippi                                   Wyoming



              .05                                                .04                                      .035                                         .12                                             .1                                          .08
                                                             .035                                                                                       .1
                                                                                                              .03                                                                                     .08
              .04                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .06
                                                                 .03                                                                                   .08
                                                                                                          .025                                                                                        .06
              .03                                            .025                                                                                      .06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .04
                                                                 .02                                          .02                                                                                     .04
                                                                                                                                                       .04
              .02                                            .015                                         .015                                         .02                                            .02                                          .02
                  2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1             2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1         2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1    2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1           2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1         2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1
                                   Illinois                                        Oklahoma                                     New York                                 Illinois                                      Oklahoma                                      New York



              .05                                                .04                                                                                   .06                                             .1
              .04                                            .035
                                                                                                                                                                                                      .08
              .03                                                .03                                                                                   .04
                                                                                                                                                                                                      .06
              .02                                            .025
                                                                                                                                                       .02
                                                                                                                                                                                                      .04
              .01                                                .02
                  0                                          .015                                                                                       0                                             .02
                  2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1             2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1                                                 2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1           2007m12009m12011m12013m12015m12017m1
                                 North Dakota                                     Control states                                                                       North Dakota                                   Control states




                                                                              (e)                                                                                                   (f) Rate of dispensed prescriptions

              8                                              6                                            8
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Average MED per Prescription
                                                             5                                                                                         50                                             30                                           40
              6                                                                                           6
                                                             4                                                                                         40
                                                                                                                                                                                                      25                                           30
              4                                                                                           4
                                                             3                                                                                         30
                                                                                                                                                                                                      20                                           20
              2                                              2                                            2                                            20

              2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1      2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1    2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1    10                                             15                                           10
                                 Arkansas                                       Kentucky                                    New Mexico
                                                                                                                                                        2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1      2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1    2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1
                                                                                                                                                                           Arkansas                                       Kentucky                                    New Mexico

              6                                              6                                            8

              5                                              5                                            6                                            30                                                                                          50
                                                                                                                                                                                                      25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   40
              4                                              4                                            4                                            25                                             20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   30
                                                             3                                                                                                                                        15
              3                                                                                           2                                            20                                                                                          20
                                                             2                                                                                                                                        10                                           10
              2                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                       15
              2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1      2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1    2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1                                                    5                                            0
                                Tennessee                                      Mississippi                                   Wyoming                    2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1      2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1    2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1
                                                                                                                                                                          Tennessee                                      Mississippi                                   Wyoming

              8                                              7                                            6
                                                                                                                                                                                                      35                                           30
                                                             6                                            5                                            40
              6                                                                                                                                        35                                             30                                           25
                                                             5                                            4
                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                                                                                                      25                                           20
              4
                                                             4                                            3                                            25
                                                                                                                                                                                                      20                                           15
                                                                                                                                                       20
              2                                              3                                            2
                                                                                                                                                       15                                             15                                           10
              2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1      2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1    2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1
                                  Illinois                                     Oklahoma                                      New York                   2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1      2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1    2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1
                                                                                                                                                                            Illinois                                     Oklahoma                                      New York


              6                                              7
                                                                                                                                                       30                                             35
                                                             6
              4                                                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                             5
                                                                                                                                                                                                      25
              2                                              4                                                                                         10
                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                             3
              0                                                                                                                                         0                                             15
              2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1      2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1                                                  2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1      2007m1 2009m1 2011m1 2013m1 2015m1 2017m1
                               North Dakota                                   Control states                                                                             North Dakota                                   Control states




                           (g) Average days’ supply per prescription (in days)                                                                                     (h) Average strength per prescription (in MED)

Notes: Authors’ calculations based on Optum’s de-identified Clinformatics® Data Mart system, a comprehensive commercial and Medicare Advantage claims database. Arkansas
and Georgia were excluded from these plots. Control states include 41 states did not up-schedule tramadol prior to July 2014.
E         Checks for changes in total MED

         Figure E1: Long-term trends in prescribing of different opioid classes in OPTUM.




Notes:
    Figure E2: Aggregate Retail MME supply of HCPs, CIII-CIV opioids (select codeine
   products and buprenorphine for pain), other CII opioids (excluding HCPs) and All Rx
                         Opioids per week, 2011-2014 (millions)




Notes:

Table E1: RD estimates: Impact of federal up-scheduling of HCPs on opioid prescribing in
                           Transactional ARCOS sample.

                         (1)              (2)                (3)                                   (4)
                     MME Hydro CP MME Codeine/bup pain MME Other CII                          MME All
 Impact rescheduling        -23.939**   0.9716             -64.677                              -87.644
                          (10.5725)    (2.0314)          (55.1342)                            (64.7989)
 Trend after                -1.9846     0.7120***          10.494                                9.2214
                           (1.3115)    (0.2520)           (6.8392)                             (8.0380)
 Observations                 42709     42709               42709                                42709
 Baseline DV mean            201.95     28.460             1085.9                               1316.3

Notes:  Authors’ calculations based on transactional ARCOS data released on order of the United States
District Court Northern District of Ohio Eastern Division following the Natonal Prescription Opiate Litiga-
tion (Case No. 1:17-MD-2804, UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT NORTHERN DISTRICT OF OHIO
EASTERN DIVISION). Observation window is 2014w34 to 2014w47. HCPs were federally up-scheduled
from CIII to CII in 2014w40. Unit of observation is county-week-year. Changes in aggregate MME supplied
of 4 different opioid drug classes for retail class - HCPs (1), CIII-CIV tracked in ARCOS (select codeine
products and buprenorphine products for pain) (2), other CII opioids excluding HCPs (3) and all opioids
(4). * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. Standard errors in parentheses.
         Figure E3: Trends in prescribing of different opioid classes in SDUD.




Notes:
            Table E2: RD estimates: Impact of federal up-scheduling of HCPs on opioid prescribing in SDUD sample.

                                                                               Total log MED
                    hydrocodone tramadol Other CIII-CIV                    opioids Other C2 opioids         All CIII-CIV All CII All opioids
 Estimate                -0.1681 -0.09129        0.1422                                  -0.02082             -0.01304   -0.05614 -0.05124
                        (0.2792) (0.2660)       (0.2733)                                 (0.2555)             (0.2632)   (0.2529) (0.2524)
 Dep. variable mean       15.260  13.980         13.270                                   16.690               14.410     16.950   17.030
 Dep. variable SD       (1.3900) (1.3200)       (1.3400)                                 (1.2700)             (1.3100)   (1.2500) (1.2500)
 N                           312    312            312                                      312                  312        312      312

Notes:   Authors’ calculations based on SDUD sample. Observation window is 20013q3 to 2014q2. Unit of observation is state-quarter. Changes in
prescribing of 8 different opioid drug classes - HCPs (1), tramadol (2), other CIII-CIV opioids excluding tramadol (3), other CII opioids excluding HCPs
(4), all CIII-IV opioids (5), all CII opioids (6) and all opioids (7) - are measured as log total MED. * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. Standard errors
in parentheses.
