                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE INCENTIVE EFFECTS OF CASH TRANSFERS TO THE POOR

                                         Anna Aizer
                                          Shari Eli
                                    Adriana Lleras-Muney

                                     Working Paper 27523
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27523


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2020




We are very grateful to Joe Price who directed the team of researchers at the BYU Record
Linking Lab, and without whom this project would not have been feasible. We also want to thank
the excellent research assistants who have worked on this project: Amanda Loyola Heufemann,
Ariadna Jou, Keyoung Lee, Xuan Zhang, Tomas Guanziroli and Diego Zúñiga. We are very
grateful to Nathan Hendren and Ben Sprung-Keyser who helped us with the MVFP computations
in this paper. We have benefitted from conversations with Pedro Dal Bó, Bo Honoré, Caroline
Hoxby, Petra Persson, Robert Pollack, Aloysius Siow and from the comments of the seminar
participants at Carnegie Mellon University, the NBER Summer Institute, University of
Minnesota, Princeton University, Queen’s University, RAND, University of British Columbia,
University of Toronto, University of Urbana-Champaign, Wharton, Washington University,
UCLA, and Yale University. This project was supported by the California Center for Population
Research at UCLA (CCPR), which receives core support (P2C- HD041022) from the Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) and from
NIH grant 1 R01 HD077227-01. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Anna Aizer, Shari Eli, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Incentive Effects of Cash Transfers to the Poor
Anna Aizer, Shari Eli, and Adriana Lleras-Muney
NBER Working Paper No. 27523
July 2020
JEL No. I12,I14,I18,I32,I38,J16,N32

                                          ABSTRACT

All redistributive and social insurance programs trade off the potential benefits of transfers with
the disincentives these programs generate. We investigate this trade-off using newly collected
lifetime data for 16,000 women who applied to the Mothers’ Pension Program, the first cash
transfer program in the US. In the short-run cash transfers reduced geographic mobility and
delayed marriage of recipients but did not affect who they married or where they moved to. In the
long run transfers had no effect on work, marriage or fertility behaviors. They also did not
improve the economic conditions of recipients or their longevity.


Anna Aizer                                       Adriana Lleras-Muney
Brown University                                 Department of Economics
Department of Economics                          9373 Bunche Hall
64 Waterman Street                               UCLA
Providence, RI 02912                             Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER                                         and NBER
anna_aizer@brown.edu                             allerasmuney@gmail.com

Shari Eli
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
shari.eli@utoronto.ca
1        Introduction

Spending on means-tested anti-poverty programs in the US accounted for $688 billion dollars, or
16% of total federal government expenditures in 2012, and are projected to increase to $877 billion
by 2023.1 All large redistributive and social insurance programs trade oﬀ the potential benefits of
transfers with their costs, which include the distortions they generate through eligibility rules. All
social insurance programs today (the EITC, TANF, social security, food stamps) include eligibility
criteria based on some combination of income, work status, and family size, creating incentives
for individuals to reduce their work eﬀort and income, remain single and increase their fertility.
These distortions increase the cost of the program and might have other undesirable eﬀects on the
wellbeing of the families.2 For these reasons, incentive eﬀects have received considerable attention
in academic and policy circles (see Moﬃtt, 1992).
        While there is a long theoretical literature exploring the negative incentive eﬀects of means-
tested anti-poverty programs, there is mixed evidence regarding the empirical importance of these
incentive eﬀects and no known estimates of long-term eﬀects. We estimate the short- and long-run
incentive eﬀects of the first welfare program in the United States, known as the Mothers’ Pension
program (MPP). First implemented in 1911 in Illinois, it had been enacted in 47 states by 1930. In
1935, it was replaced by the federal Aid to Dependent Children (ADC) program, the precursor to
Temporary Aid to Needy Families (TANF), today’s welfare program. Like TANF, the objective of
the MPP was to improve the long-term outcomes of children growing up in poverty. Before 1910,
mothers who could not care for their children were forced to place their children in orphanages or
training schools. But in response to evidence that children in orphanages fared very poorly, states
established Mothers’ Pension programs to provide cash transfers to poor mothers with dependent
children to allow them to care for their children at home. Aizer et al. [2016] documents that boys
of recipient mothers had higher schooling levels, lower rates of malnutrition, higher earning levels
as adults and ultimately lived longer.
        We now assess whether the mother’s lifetime behaviors and outcomes were aﬀected by receipt of
the transfer. The Mothers’ Pension program, like many transfer programs today, had built-in incen-
tive eﬀects related to eligibility and benefit level. Mothers who remarried would lose the transfer,
encouraging women to remain unmarried. Moreover, the transfer was an increasing function of the
number of children, encouraging out-of-wedlock fertility. There were also residency requirements,
    1
    http://poverty.ucdavis.edu/sites/main/files/file-attachments/43935-means-tested-infographic.pdf
    2
    For example, marriage and low fertility are both associated with improved outcomes among children and adults
both (see Chetty et al. [2014] for family structure and Rosenzweig and Zhang [2009] for fertility) though debate
remains on whether these eﬀects are causal and universal.



                                                       2
which aﬀected mobility: only those who had resided for a certain amount of time in the county
would be eligible, and those who left would lose benefits. Finally, most states required women to
stay home and care for their children, which discouraged recipient mothers from working.
   To answer the question of whether this welfare program generated negative incentive eﬀects in
the short and long run, we construct a novel dataset of about 16,000 women who applied for the
program between 1911 and 1930, and follow them from the time of application until their death.
We match data from the program’s administrative records to family trees from FamilySearch.org,
federal census records and vital statistics records. This allows us to observe how the transfers
aﬀected marriage market outcomes (remarriage, duration to remarriage and characteristics of the
new husband), fertility (before and after application to the program), labor market outcomes (labor
force participation, work and earnings), and geographic mobility. Many of these outcomes have
not been studied before because of data limitations. These outcomes are of interest not only
because they aﬀect the cost of the program but also because they can indirectly aﬀect the wellbeing
of recipients and their children. We also directly investigate the long term eﬀects of welfare on
maternal wellbeing, measured by family income and longevity.
   We make several contributions to the literature in economics investigating the incentive eﬀects
of welfare programs and other anti-poverty programs. First, our unique data allow us to improve
upon previous estimates in many dimensions. We can look at lifetime behaviors, and compare short-
and long-term eﬀects of the transfers. We can do this for a large sample of women, all of whom
are known to have applied for and/or received the transfers. Typical studies in the literature are
limited to small samples of women whose welfare status is often unobserved or mis-measured, and
who can only be tracked for a short period. Second, we employ a diﬀerent identification strategy.
Rather than leveraging changes in state laws or policies over time that modify benefit levels or
eligibility requirements (an intensive margin), where we might expect more limited eﬀects (Bitler
et al., 2004; Blank, 2002; Blundell et al., 2016; Grogger and Karoly, 2005), we identify the eﬀects of
the program at the extensive margin. We do so by comparing the outcomes of women who applied
and received cash transfers to women who applied and were deemed initially eligible but were denied
upon investigation. In previous work, we documented that on average rejected women appeared
slightly richer (Aizer et al., 2016). We again verify this claim using newly collected information
about recipients.
   We use a basic search model to make predictions about how the cash transfers aﬀect marriage,
fertility and work decisions of recipients. The model predicts that welfare receipt should increase
duration to remarriage and the quality of the new match. It should also increase fertility. Similarly



                                                  3
transfers will increase non-employment spells, but increase the wages of those who are employed.
Finally, the model predicts that mobility will decline, but that those who move will move to better
locations. Similar to the unemployment literature based on search models, our empirical findings
reject many of its predictions. We find no diﬀerences in the remarriage rates of women who received
transfers and those who did not—about 47% of them remarried, regardless of welfare receipt. Among
those that remarried, those with transfers took an average of a year longer to find a new husband.
Despite longer durations and contrary to the predictions of the theory, cash recipients did not marry
higher quality partners. Cash recipients were not more likely to have children after the transfer,
and they were not less likely to work. They were, however, more likely to remain in the county in
which they applied for the transfer, but when they moved, they were not more likely to move to a
location with better economic or marriage markets as theory would predict.
      Our results suggest that that current concerns over behavioral distortions in social programs
may be overstated. The average cash transfer we study amounted to about 30% of family income
and was available to recipients so long as they had children under the age of 14 or 16 (depending
on the state). By modern standards this program was very generous, yet we find rather modest
behavioral responses. While welfare programs and welfare recipients today are very diﬀerent, our
results are in fact in line with research on the incentive eﬀects of contemporary welfare with respect
to fertility, marriage and work. Similar to our findings, research examining contemporary welfare
reform eﬀects in the US has found negligible eﬀects on fertility (see for example Kearney, 2004 or
Grogger and Bronars, 2001). While some research finds large eﬀects of welfare reform in the US on
marriage (Low et al., 2018a), we show these large eﬀects on marriage are only observed in the short
run and for a rather small number of recipients. In the long run, marriage rates are not diﬀerent
between those with and without welfare. Our findings on work disincentives mirror the findings
from anti-poverty programs in developing countries today which also find modest eﬀects of cash
transfers on labor supply (Banerjee et al., 2018).
      These findings raise the question of why basic economic predictions are not borne out in the
data. Our results suggest that program incentives were likely small relative to other factors that
determine maternal behaviors. First, while transfers were relatively large as compared to modern
standards, they were insuﬃcient for women to provide for their families, and so women still had
to find alternative or additional sources of income through marriage, work or family. Second,
remarriage rates fall rather dramatically with age in our data, and this cost of delaying marriage
likely outweighed the benefits of receiving the transfer for longer. Economic opportunities also fell
with age.3 Third, there were important norms regulating marriage and work behavior as well as
  3
      Labor force participation rates fall among all women in the 1940 census and among MP moms after age 50. They


                                                         4
potential stigma associated with welfare receipt that might have encouraged women to remarry or
remain out of the labor force (Jayachandran [2020], Goldin [2006])4 . Indeed once stigma is added to
the model, the theoretical predictions become ambiguous and can be reconciled with the empirical
findings. Many of these factors are still relevant today.
    Finally we find no eﬀects on the long term economic outcomes of aﬀected mothers and positive
but small and statistically insignificant eﬀects on their longevity. Thus in the long run, maternal
outcomes were neither diminished nor improved by the program. We compute the marginal value of
public funds (MVPF) using the methodology of Hendren and Sprung-Keyser [2019] for this program,
and show that it is less than 1 when we only consider eﬀects on maternal behaviors and outcomes.
However if there are even modest benefits to the children in terms of longevity or income, the
program pays for itself. This suggests that the overall evaluation of the program depends crucially
on children’s outcomes and less so on maternal incentive responses.
    This paper is organized as follows. We start by providing background on the Mothers’ Pension
program and on the conditions of women with children before the program was implemented (Section
2). Section 3 models the marriage market and investigates the theoretical eﬀects of welfare transfers
on behaviors. Sections 4 and 5 discuss the data and empirical strategy. Section 6 presents our
results with respect to welfare receipt and the remarriage decision, the duration to remarriage, and
the eﬀects on quality of the match; and also presents results for other outcomes (fertility, labor force
participation and wages, mobility and welfare). Section 7 discusses the results, their applicability
to modern settings and their limitations. Section 8 concludes.


2     Background: Poor Women with Dependent Children and the
      Mothers’ Pension Program

2.1    The status of poor women with children in 1910

At the turn of the twentieth century, before the Mothers’ Pension program was introduced, women
whose husbands died or abandoned them had few options to work or otherwise make a living to
support their children. They could work in the formal labor market but these types of work were
often poorly paid and required long hours (Goldin, 2006). Those who had farms could remain on
their land if they could get additional hands to help work the land. Whether they rented or owned
their home, many women supplemented their income by taking in renters. Still others supported
start falling earlier in the population compared to MP mothers. Results available upon request.
   4
     The “substantial social stigma” associated with work prior to 1930 was due largely to the nature of the work
which was often “dirty, dangerous, reptetitive and long in hours per day and days per week.” Goldin [2006]


                                                       5
themselves by oﬀering laundry and cooking services. Some women chose to move in with relatives,
if they had any who would receive them and their children, and others chose to remarry. However,
if none of these options was feasible, women in poverty would often be forced to place their children
in institutions for the poor or orphanages.
    Data from the 1910 census suggests that marriage was by far the most common option (Appendix
Table 1). In 1910, the vast majority of white women with children were married (92%) and very
few of them worked (4.7%). This low labor force participation and high marriage rate among white
women can be explained by both social norms and the lack of demand for female labor at the
time (Goldin, 2006). However, among women who were not married, 40% worked in the formal
labor market, 20% worked on their farms, 11% lived with adult males who were not relatives (and
who may be boarders) and 30% lived with their relatives. With limited ability to provide for their
children, many poor, single mothers did in fact place their children in orphanages (see Skocpol,
1995, p.425).
    Early in the 20th century this system of institutionalizing poor children became less popular for
several reasons. Reports appeared in the press that children in institutions fared poorly. And at the
same time, there was a realization that maternal care was often superior for children’s development
(Aizer et al. 2016). There was also great sympathy for widows, who found themselves in poor
circumstances through no fault of their own Skocpol [1995]. This resulted in a movement away from
the state paying institutions to care for children, towards a system in which the state would pay
mothers to stay home and look after their children. After Illinois passed the first Mother Pensions’
Program in 1911, most states followed suit and passed their own welfare programs. We study 11
states with early programs for which we obtained data: Connecticut (1919), Dakota (1915), Idaho
(1913), Illinois (1911), Iowa (1913), Minnesota (1913), Ohio (1913), Oklahoma (1915), Oregon
(1913), Washington (1913) and Wisconsin (1913).


2.2    Structure of the Mothers’ Pension Program5

The Mothers’ Pension program was administered by individual counties, but only after each state
first passed legislation allowing counties to establish a program. Not every county chose to do so.
It was most often administered through the county’s juvenile court or county clerks oﬃce. Women
would apply to the program, pass an initial review, and then a judge (or a panel) would make a
final determination regarding the application and the amount that would be granted. Some states
required periodic re-application, while others granted the payment until the child turned 14 or 16
  5
    We give only a brief description of the program here. More details are provided in Aizer et al. [2016] and on the
Mothers’ Pension Project website: http://individual.utoronto.ca/shari_eli/mp.html.


                                                         6
years of age.
        Eligibility criteria for aid diﬀered slightly across states. The details for the states we study are
given in Appendix Table S1 of Aizer et al. [2016]. Widows, women with husbands in jail or an
asylum, and women with disabled husbands were almost always eligible.6 However, women who
had been deserted or divorced were eligible in some states but not others, though over time more
states made these women eligible.
        The program created varying degrees of disincentives to marry, have children, work or move
residence. Women who remarried were immediately ineligible and would lose the transfers. This
was true in all states. Transfers increased with the number of children. State rules would specify
the maximum amount per child that a woman could receive. Typically, these amounts ranged from
$9 to $15 per month for the first child and $4 to $10 for each additional eligible child. With respect
to work disincentives, in several states (6 out of the 11 that we study) women were required to
stay home as a condition of the transfers, since the cash transfer was given in exchange for looking
after the children. Other states limited the hours women could work; others levied a 100% tax on
earnings, with the transfer decreasing one-to-one for each dollar earned in the labor market. More
generally, working women were by definition less likely to be deemed eligible since they had a source
of income.7 Finally the program created strong disincentives to move. Typically, women had to
prove they had resided in the county for 1-3 years prior to applying for the transfers, and if they
moved out of the county, they would lose the transfer.


3        A Model of Welfare Receipt and Maternal Behaviors

We adapt the canonical model of search in the labor market with unemployment insurance, first
developed by McCall [1970], to model search in the marriage market with cash transfers. We then
extend the model to include decisions with respect to employment and fertility. We also discuss
sources of heterogeneity and explore how relaxing some key assumptions aﬀects the key predictions
of the model.
        In McCall’s original model, an unemployed worker searches for an oﬀer of employment. Oﬀers
    6
    In three out of the eleven states that we study, only widows were eligible.
    7
    While the Mothers’ Pension program has many similarities to modern day welfare, there are important diﬀerences.
Both are means-tested programs that oﬀer unconstrained, but limited, cash transfers. The Mothers’ Pension program
terminated eligibility upon remarriage (to any man), creating strong disincentives to remarry. The modern-day welfare
program terminates benefits upon marriage or cohabitation with the child’s father, not necessarily any man. The MP
program discouraged work–several states required women to stay home as a condition for the transfer, although some
regulated the amount of work or simply lowered the transfers when women brought income home. This continued
to be the case in most states until the 1995 welfare reform which capped lifetime benefits and required recipients to
work.



                                                         7
of employment vary in quality, as measured by the wage, with a known distribution. Unemployed
workers receive oﬀers, which arrive at a given rate, and accept an oﬀer if the oﬀered wage exceeds
the worker’s reservation wage. If the worker rejects the oﬀer and remains unemployed, he retains
the option of waiting for another potentially better oﬀer in the next period. In this model, unem-
ployment insurance increases the value of remaining unemployed, thereby increasing the reservation
wage. The model yields two important predictions. First, workers with unemployment insurance
will remain unemployed for longer than those without. Second, when workers with unemployment
insurance do accept an oﬀer, the wage will be higher.8
      We adapt this model to the marriage market where women are searching for husbands and oﬀers
of marriage arrive at an expected rate. Like oﬀers of employment, oﬀers of marriage also vary in
quality. Cash transfers (welfare) have the same eﬀects on the marriage market that unemployment
insurance has in the labor market: it increases her outside option and therefore the “reservation
quality of the match,” extending her duration of search (the time to marriage), and resulting in a
higher quality husband when she does remarry.


3.1     A basic model of search in the marriage market

A single woman must decide every period whether to marry or to stay single. If she stays single
she has the option to marry the next period. If she marries, she will stay married forever.9 She
has a patience level given by her discount rate . She searches for partners, and prospects arrive
at a Poisson rate . Each prospect has a value of q, which summarizes his quality as a husband.
                                                                                ⇥ ⇤
This value has an unknown distribution in the population, q ⇠ F (q) with support q, q̄ and q̄ > b.
While she is single she receives a cash transfer of value b every period, but this transfer is lost upon
remarriage.
      The value of being single is given by

                                       Z    q̄
                        Vs = b +                 max {Vm (q), Vs } dF (q) + (1   )Vs .
                                           q=q

      and the value of being married to prospect q is given by:

                                                                       q
                                      Vm (q) = q + Vm (q) =                .
                                                                   1
      In this set-up, the agent accepts an oﬀer to marry prospect q if Vm > Vs . Since the value of
  8
    Other features have since been added to this model, such as simultaneous oﬀers (Burdett and Judd [1983]).
  9
    This is a simplifying assumption, but it is well supported by the data. Most women in our sample marry only
once (only 5.6% married more than once after the transfer).



                                                          8
marriage is strictly increasing in q, the agent will follow a cut-oﬀ rule. There is a q ⇤ such that she
will accept all prospects with q > q ⇤ . The cut-oﬀ rule is implicitly defined as


                                              Vm (q ⇤ ) = Vs .

   Considering that, and rearranging the definition of Vs , we can write
                                           Z q̄
                         V s = b + Vs +           max {Vm (q) Vs , 0} dF (q),
                                                       q=q
                                                   Z    q̄
                           V s = b + Vs +                           Vm (q)    Vs dF (q),
                                                       q=q ⇤
                                                         Z     q̄
                           V s = b + Vs +                              1     F (q) dq,
                                            1                q=q ⇤
                                            Z q̄
                   (1     )Vs = b +                      1          F (q) dq,
                                      1      q=q ⇤

   This function is continuous and positive at q ⇤ = b and negative at q ⇤ = q̄, so there exists a
solution, and because it is strictly decreasing, the solution is unique. Intuitively, this equation
means that the value of the minimum acceptable marriage, q ⇤ should be equal to the benefit, b, plus
the option value of holding out for a good match. Given a reservation quality, q ⇤ , the probability of
marriage is   (1   F (q ⇤ )) and the average match quality is E[q|q > q ⇤ ]. The duration until marriage
is given by D = 1/ (1      F (q ⇤ )) . It is decreasing in the arrival rate and increasing in reservation
quality.
   The following propositions follow from this model and its extensions. All proofs are provided in
the Appendix. We discuss each and how we test it in the data.

Proposition 1. @D/@b > 0 and @ E[q|q > q ⇤ ]/@b > 0: An increase in benefits b increases the
number of periods the woman stays single and the average quality of the marriage.

   We can easily test whether receiving a transfer leads to longer durations until re-marriage.
Testing whether the quality of the match increases among those who marry is more diﬃcult because
there is no single indicator of the quality of a match. Suppose instead that there are many traits
X that matter but that prospects can be ranked using a single index function q(X) as in Becker
(1965). If this function is known then we can test the predictions in Proposition 1. Otherwise, we
need another way to test whether the quality of the match has increased. This is given in the next
proposition, under the assumption that q is increasing in all its arguments X.

Proposition 2. Without further assumptions about the joint distribution of X and the production
function q(X), the sign of @ E[xi |q > q ⇤ ]/@b is ambiguous for all i. However, the sign of @ E[xi |q >

                                                          9
q ⇤ , x i ]/@b > 0 for all xi so long as all relevant X are observed.

       This proposition states that the theory does not provide any guidance about the eﬀect of transfers
on any “input” into quality without knowing their joint distribution and how women trade-oﬀ these
characteristics. For example, if women care about income and kindness, it is not clear that the
average income (or the average kindness) among those who marry will increase by increasing the
transfers. In fact, without further assumptions, both might go down, even though the average
quality among those who marry is going up.             10   However, the theory does predict that conditional
on kindness (income), the average income (kindness) will increase when the transfer increases. If
both income and kindness are observed, we can test this empirically by conditioning on one trait
and estimating the impact of the transfer on another trait.


3.2      Incorporating Age and Stigma

This model is also stationary. It assumes that the arrival rate of oﬀers and their distributions
remains constant every period. But contemporary data shows that marriage rates fall with age
(Low [2014]). A natural extension would be to let                   vary with maternal age. While a proper
treatment of this would require writing a full dynamic model, we can allow                     to fall with age in a
simple extension to derive testable implications.

Proposition 3. If the arrival rate            falls with age then @ E[q|q > q ⇤ ]/@b > 0 and @D/@b > 0.

       This proposition states that the eﬀects of the transfers are to delay marriage and increase the
quality of marriage, and this is true even when the arrival rate falls with age. However in this case,
the expected magnitude of the eﬀects of the transfer on duration and quality declines because the
cost of delay increases relative to the case where the arrival rate is constant.
       Another important and natural extension is whether there is stigma associated with getting
benefits. Moﬃtt et al. [1983] and an extensive literature in social science disciplines related to
economics has documented that many individuals are reluctant to apply and collect any type of
government benefit because there will be negative social judgments associated with this behavior
Leﬀ [1973] Machtinger [1999] Mink [1996] Abramovitz et al. [1996] Handler and Hollingsworth [1969]
Kasman [1945]. If so, b may lower the rate of arrival of prospects                    because potential husbands
might consider women on welfare less attractive.
  10
    For example, consider a quality function q(x1 , x2 ) = x1 x2 . The joint distribution of the traits is uniformly
distributed over three mass points (1, 10); (10, 1); (4, 4). Suppose that, initially, the cutoﬀ is q ⇤ = 10. The average
of each trait conditional on a match is equal to 5. Consider a small increase in the cutoﬀ (10 < q ⇤  16). The new
average of each trait is 4.



                                                            10
Proposition 4. If b lowers rate of arrival of prospects                 (in addition to increasing the per period
utility) then the sign of @ E[q|q > q ⇤ ]/@b and @D/@b becomes ambiguous.

          When     falls and b is unchanged, the cutoﬀ quality q ⇤ falls, and the eﬀect of b on duration
D and is ambiguous. If lowering b also lowers , then combining the results from Proposition 1
(lowering b) with the eﬀects of lowering , it becomes clear that the overall eﬀects are ambiguous.
11




3.3         Adding work, fertility and mobility

So far we have considered a simple model in which marriage is the only option for a woman. We
can include another option: work in the formal sector. In each period a woman might receive a
job oﬀer with an associated wage, and decides whether to accept it or wait one more period. A
woman can now make two choices: whether to marry and whether to work. Assume further that
married women do not work, which approximates of what we observe in 1910. In this model, single
unemployed women get b but they lose the transfer if they either work or marry. There are now three
states: SU (single and unemployed), SE (Single and Employed) and MU (married and unemployed),
where married and unemployed is the absorbing state. There are now three cutoﬀs to be chosen by
the woman: qsu
            ⇤ (the quality of husband that is acceptable for unemployed single women to marry),

 ⇤ (the quality of the husband that is acceptable for a single employed woman to marry) and
qse
 ⇤ (the wage rate that is acceptable for a single unemployed woman to become employed). Adding
wsu
this simple extension does not change the predictions for the marriage market. But we have new
predictions for the labor market which match exactly those in McCall (1970).

Proposition 5. An increase in benefits b increases the number of periods the woman stays single
and the average quality of the marriage. An increase in benefits b also increases the number of
periods the woman stays unemployed and the average wages of the women that become employed.

          We consider two more extensions to the model. First we show that in this model if the transfer
increases with the number of children, then women will have more children, if children are costless
and do not otherwise aﬀect marriage and labor market prospects. But if the number of kids lowers
the arrival rate of marriage or jobs, then the fertility predictions become ambiguous.

Proposition 6. If b is an increasing function of the number of children then fertility will increase
when b increases. But if having more children while single lowers the rate of arrival of prospects in
     11
    If stigma aﬀects the quality of oﬀers instead of the rate of arrival, the results are the same. In particular, suppose
stigma makes the distribution of oﬀers worse in a first-order stochastic dominance sense. This eﬀect, by itself, will
lower the cutoﬀ quality and have an ambiguous eﬀect on duration.


                                                           11
the labor and marriage market, then the predictions about fertility become ambiguous.

         Finally, we consider the eﬀects of the transfer on mobility. Suppose that each period the woman
has the opportunity to move to a location j with diﬀerent labor and marriage market prospects
(diﬀerent         0 s).   But if she does move she will lose the transfer (for at least some periods). Then
moving is attractive only if the alternative location has better opportunities (higher        0 s).



Proposition 7. If b increases, then mobility falls, and those who do migrate, move to better loca-
tions.

         It is worth mentioning three important choices we made that might aﬀect our predictions. We
choose a partial equilibrium model that holds the supply of marriageable partners constant and
ignores general equilibrium eﬀects. We think this is justified because the aﬀected population in the
MP program was small relative to the population of poor women (the MP program was small). For
models that do consider these issues see Chiappori and Salanié [2016]. Second, this model does not
incorporate the decision of women to apply for welfare. We do not have data on women who did not
apply for welfare so we cannot test predictions related to this behavior. Third, we do not consider
ex-ante eﬀects of welfare, namely how the existence of a welfare safety net aﬀects fertility, mobility,
work and marriage decisions of women who know they might eventually rely on the program but
who have not yet applied or become eligible. The fact that most women gained eligibility for the
program due to the accidental deaths of their husbands suggests that eligibility for most should be
characterized as an unanticipated shock.
         In summary, the simple model suggests that having (higher) transfers will increase the duration
to remarriage and unemployment, but increase the quality of matches and increase wages among
those who chose to marry or become employed. It will also increase fertility and lower geographic
mobility. However, if there are strong declines in marriage or labor market prospects with age,
the expected eﬀects will be small and possibly zero. Furthermore, if transfers are associated with
stigma, then the model’s predictions are ambiguous.


4         Data

4.1         Data collection

Administrative data on Mothers’ Pension applicants was collected directly from state and county
archives in 14 states.12 To track MP mothers and their children, we match these administrative data
    12
         A more extensive discussion of this data collection is in Aizer et al. [2016].


                                                                12
to family tree data available on FamilySearch.org, which includes more than 1.2 billion people.13
The mother’s name combined with the names and dates of birth of her children enables us to
locate the mother on a family tree. Once a mother has been found, we observe her maiden name,
her date of birth and date of death, and the names, dates of birth and dates of death of all her
husbands and children. If there was no existing tree, we create one. For all women in our sample,
we searched for any evidence that she married after the MP program, regardless of whether there
was an existing tree or not.14 We also observe marriage dates for all spouses. If this information
is not already in the tree, we attempt to find it using all other records available to genealogists
on Ancestry.com and FamilySearch (e.g. the Social Security Death Master File, other state death
records, cemetery records, birth certificates and marriage certificates). Finally, we manually link
mothers and their post-MP husbands (if they have them) to 1910, 1920, 1930 and 1940 Census
Records. These data allow us to determine if women ever remarried, the duration until the marriage
and the characteristics of her new husband. They also allow us to track all the children that the
women ever had, before and the program. And we can observe employment and occupation in each
of the census years and income in 1940.


4.2      Summary statistics

We make a few sample restrictions for our analysis: we drop mothers who applied after 1930 and
records of mothers who applied multiple times so that mothers only appear once in the data.15 We
also drop individuals who we discovered were not in fact the mother (a handful of grandmothers,
sisters and step-mothers) after searching family tree records.16 This leaves us with a total of 16,228
applicants in 130 counties across 11 states.
       Table 1 shows the summary statistics for our sample. We show them for the full sample and
pay particular attention to the sub-sample of unmarried women. 13,383 (82%) of them were not
married at the time of the application. The rest had husbands who were disabled or in jail, mental
institutions or sanatoriums. Very few were divorced. About 10% of the applicants are rejected. The
average woman in our sample was 37 years old at the time she applied and listed 2.6 children under
  13
      While the tree database is large, it might not be representative. Recent research (Kaplanis et al 2018) suggests
that although trees are posted by individuals and completed or created by volunteers, they are quite accurate when
validated using genetic information. The information also appears to be representative of the population, as life
expectancy and other summary measures derived from the trees reproduce the patterns that have been described
elsewhere.
   14
      Trees were updated using the information we collected.
   15
      We only look at individuals who applied between 1911 and 1930 because the programs lost funding during the
Great Depression.
   16
      For the cases with multiple records we proceed as follows: (i) Keep only the observations of the first successful
attempt. (ii) If applied successfully more than once the same year, keep the application with more children listed. (iii)
Keep the smallest family id if applied successfully more than once the same year, with the same number of children.


                                                           13
the age of 14 in the application. 98% are white, and 17% are foreign born. As discussed in Aizer et
al (2016), transfer payments comprised roughly one third of women’s income and lasted three years
for the median mother.17
       Forty seven percent of unmarried MP mothers eventually remarried, but on average they waited
6.4 years to do so, with only 15% of all unmarried mothers married within 3 years of applying for
welfare. Women married men who lived almost as long as they did (71 years for men and 74 years
for women) but who were less educated than them on average (the education gap is -0.23). Post
welfare receipt fertility was low with only 0.27 children born on average after applying for welfare,
suggesting that any fertility eﬀects are likely to be small.
       The information on maternal work, income and location comes from decennial census data so
we cannot observe the entire history of employment, income and location. Only 12% of MP moms
were in the labor force in 1910–many of them were still married at this time. Women’s labor force
participation remained low: rising to a max of 37% in 1930 and falling to 26% by 1940. Their wages
and occupational scores were low, and so were their incomes. Appendix Figure 1 shows that the
distribution of family income and wages among MP moms still alive in 1940 is low.


4.3      Data Quality and Limitations

The advantages of using historical administrative data for this analysis are that it allows a long
follow-up period and lower attrition than modern survey data. However, there are a number of
data limitations related to missing data and matching errors. For example, of the sample of 13,354
mothers who were unmarried at the time of application for welfare benefits, we found remarriage
data for 80% of the sample. Among those who remarry (5,435), we are missing the exact date
of marriage for 30%. We determined maternal longevity for 80% of mothers and found maternal
education for 68% of those who were alive in 1940.
       These match rates compare very favorably with recent work using US census data from the
early part of the twentieth century.18 They also compare favorably with attrition rates in survey
data, which can be especially high for poor families. For example, the attrition rate in the SIPP is
about 37% over 12 waves (Zabel, 1998). In the PSID, the attrition rate over 35 years for mothers
collecting welfare is 63.7%. Moreover, all of the data were hand-matched across multiple sources
and all data entry double checked. A validation exercise showed the accuracy of the matches to the
  17
     We have data on the duration of the transfer or reason for termination for only a small subset of the sample.
Therefore we cannot perform “common” tests in the UI literature such as testing whether people marry just before
the end of the transfer.
  18
     For example, Abramitzky et al. [2014] estimating the impact of migration on earnings trajectories achieve match
rates of 16% for the native born and 12% for foreign born men.



                                                        14
tree, the death certificates and the 1940 census to be very high (above 97% in all three cases). We
discuss strategies to address missing data and data quality below. Because of the small number of
women who were rejected (only 10% of the sample), we cannot conduct heterogeneity analysis with
any precision, though we do present results in an appendix. A final data limitation relates to our
inability to generalize our results to African American mothers who accounted for only 1.3% of the
population in the counties we study, and they account for only 2% of applicants in our data. States
and counties with large black populations often did not implement the Mothers’ Pension program
(Eli et al., 2020), and when they did, they appear to have systematically discriminated against them
as many were never deemed eligible (Eli and Salisbury, 2016, Roberts, 1993, Ward, 2009).


5         Empirical strategy and identification

5.1         Empirical Strategy

We test the model’s predictions with respect to remarriage, maternal employment, fertility, loca-
tion/migration and husband quality. To do so, we estimate the eﬀects of the transfer on these
outcomes using the following equation:


                                  yict =   0   +   1 Acceptedi   + ✓Xict +   c   +   t   + "ict

         where yict is an outcome for woman i applying to the program in county c in year t. Accepted is
a dummy equal to one if the mother was given a cash transfer and it is equal to zero if she applied
for the transfer but was denied after investigation. Our main coeﬃcient of interest is                           1,   which
represents the impact of welfare receipt on the outcome. Thus, our strategy consists in comparing
the mean outcomes of accepted and rejected mothers.
         If rejection was as good as random, then without any further controls                     1   would estimate the
causal eﬀect of transfers on outcomes. However, our work suggests that accepted and rejected
women are not identical. In Aizer et al. [2016] we show that accepted mothers were slightly worse
oﬀ. (We discuss diﬀerences between these groups in more detail below.) Thus, we will present
estimates without any controls, and with all the predetermined controls that are available to us.
These include county and year of application fixed eﬀects                c   and     t,   a vector of controls (Xict ) that
includes the characteristics of the mother and family at the time of application: the number of
children, age of the oldest and youngest, her marital status at application (widowed, divorced or
missing), and maternal age at application, and county-level and state-level time varying covariates.19
    19
         County controls include: sex ratio (M/F) aged 18-55, share females in the labor force aged 18-55, share black


                                                             15
We report standard errors computed three ways: corrected for heteroskedasticity, clustered at the
county*year, and clustered at the county level. This will allow us to assess the robustness of the
results to diﬀerent assumptions about the structure of the error term.


5.2     Rejected mothers as counterfactual

Our identification strategy relies upon using rejected mothers as the counterfactual for mothers
who received welfare. For rejected mothers to be an appropriate counterfactual, it must be the case
that they are not otherwise diﬀerent than mothers who were accepted. Three pieces of evidence
presented in our 2016 paper (Aizer et al, 2016) showed that rejected mothers were slightly better
oﬀ.
      First, investigating the basis for rejection in counties that recorded such, we found the most
common was “other means of support” (35%). Second, comparing accepted and rejected mothers,
we found that the rejected had on average fewer children and that their children were older. We
used these characteristics and marital status to predict family income using the 1915 Iowa State
Census—the only income data available in the US prior to 1940. Women who were rejected from the
program have higher predicted income than those who were accepted, consistent with the evidence
on reasons for rejection.
      A third piece of evidence comes from a comparison of the pre-application characteristics of
accepted and rejected mothers whom we can find in either the Iowa State Census of 1915 (for the
Iowa sample of mothers) or in the 1900-1920 US Federal Census for the Ohio sample of mothers.20
Because the census data do not include date of birth, the match rate is relatively low (10% for
Ohio and 58% for Iowa). Moreover, for the Iowa sample, we find accepted mothers at significantly
lower rates (10 percentage points lower), suggesting caution when interpreting the Iowa results. For
Ohio, we find that accepted mothers are less likely to be native born, less likely to be homeowners
and that their first husband’s income (as imputed based on occupation) is lower. In Iowa accepted
mothers have lower family income, are less likely to be a homeowner, and conditional on ownership,
the value of the home is lower and they have higher debt. Also, their husbands are less likely to be
literate. However, in the Iowa sample the husbands do have significantly more years of schooling.
(See Table 2 of Aizer et al., 2016.)
aged 18-55, share rural aged 18-55. County controls match linear interpolated information from the 1910, 1920
and 1930 census with the year of application to the program. State-varying controls include: manufacturing wages,
education/labor laws (age must enter school, age can obtain a work permit, and whether a continuation school law
is in place), state expenditures in logs (education, charity, and total expenditure in social programs), state laws
concerning MP transfers (work required, reapplication required, the maximum legislated amount for the first child,
and the legislated amount for each additional child).
   20
      We focused on Ohio because a large portion of our records come from Ohio.


                                                        16
       Therefore, we use our newly collected data to further assess the determined diﬀerences between
the two groups. Specifically, we now have information on the mother’s educational attainment (from
1940 census records), her date of birth, place of birth, race and ethnicity, the longevity of her first
husband, and information on all her children, including those who died prior to applying for the
pension, and those who were too old to be eligible (and were therefore not listed in the Mothers’
Pension records) but could potentially provide income or other resources to their mothers. We also
observe the number of siblings the mother had as they might represent an alternative means of
support.
       Appendix Table 2 shows the mean diﬀerences in predetermined characteristics for all moms and
for single moms. We continue to find that rejected mothers were slightly better oﬀ compared to
accepted mothers. Controlling for county and year of application fixed eﬀects, we find that accepted
mothers had more children who died before the application (which is significant for the sample of
unmarried mothers) and fewer kids over the age of 14 who could help support them. They were also
younger and had husbands who were younger when they died and their husbands had died more
recently. All other diﬀerences (number of siblings, black, foreign born status, work and occupation
in 1910 or education levels in 1940) are not statistically significant in the full sample or in the sample
of unmarried mothers.
       How large are these diﬀerences? To assess this we predict income again using the 1915 Iowa
census with all the new data we have. Figure 1 shows the distribution of predicted income by
accepted status. Accepted mothers are more likely to be at the lower end of the distribution. But
these diﬀerences are modest. The predicted income of accepted mothers is about 50 dollars lower
than that of rejected mothers, or about 6-7 percent lower (Appendix Table 2). Thus accepted
mothers appear to be on average somewhat poorer than rejected mothers.
       We conduct two exercises to assess the extent of omitted variable bias. First, we present results
with and without covariates and compare estimates. We also report bounds for                 1   using Oster’s
(2017) proposed correction to assess the extent to which our assumptions about unobservables aﬀect
the coeﬃcient estimates.21
  21
    To compute these bounds we assume that the R-max is 1.3 times greater than the R-squared that is estimated
in the regression with controls, as suggested by Oster. We assume that = (-1, 1) for lower and upper bounds to
capture that the omitted variables are positively or negatively correlated with the regressor of interest.




                                                     17
5.3      Assessing the potential impact of missing or low quality data on our esti-
         mates

Missing data. Although we have fewer missing data compared to most long-term studies, missing
data can bias our results if the data are missing diﬀerentially for accepted and rejected mothers.
We investigate whether being accepted predicts missing data on outcomes. Appendix Table 3
shows that conditional on covariates, the only marriage-related outcome that is predicted by being
accepted (at the 5% level) is whether the longevity of the post-MP husband is missing. For labor
force outcomes the concern with missing data is larger: labor force participation, occupation scores
and family income in 1940 are all less likely to be missing for accepted mothers (Appendix Table
4). Conditional on controls, the diﬀerences are about 10%. The same is true for location and
family income in 1940 (Appendix Table 5). Working or longevity on the other hand are not missing
diﬀerentially. These results suggest missing data remains a particular concern for economic outcomes
and location.
       To address diﬀerential missing data, we take two approaches. First we estimate bounds based
on Lee [2009]. Because these bounds cannot be computed with additional controls, we also estimate
models that account for attrition using the semi-parametric approach proposed by Newey [2009].
This consists of a two-stage model, where in the first stage we predict attrition, ideally including
some predictors that are not part of the main equation of interest. We use research assistant (RA)
fixed eﬀects as instruments for selection, based on the idea that RA quality aﬀects the likelihood of
finding a match. Because records are assigned to RAs arbitrarily, diﬀerences in finding rates reflect
RA ability rather than underlying likelihood that the record can be matched based on observables. In
the second stage, we estimate a linear regression of the outcome on controls and on a fourth degree
polynomial of predicted values from the first stage, i.e. a semi-parametrical selection correction
term. We report these results in all tables.
       Mis-matched data. There is considerable debate in the economic history community about
the quality of linked data and how it varies based on various matching methods (Bailey et al., 2017,
Abramitzky et al., 2019). We test whether the quality of the match influences our results. To do
this, we compute measures of the quality of matches and re-estimate results using only high quality
matches.22 We also present results using data from multiple sources–for example we can compare
our marriage information from the trees to the information that is gleaned from the census. If
the results are similar across diﬀerent data sets, then the concern that matches to one source of
  22
    A high quality match is a match with quality above the median. The quality measure is a weighted sum of
jarowinkles assessing the similarity of the name, place of birth and age match between the diﬀerent datasets. The
data codebook details how we compute each quality measure.


                                                       18
information are incorrect is reduced.


6     The Eﬀects of Welfare on Marriage and Fertility

6.1   How does welfare aﬀect marriage decisions?

For this analysis we use only the subsample of women who were not married at the time they applied
for transfers. Mothers on welfare are not less likely to remarry over their lifetime (Table 2, Column
1). Accepted mothers are slightly (1 percentage point) less likely to remarry than rejected mothers,
but the diﬀerence is not statistically significant and it is small relative to the mean for rejected
mothers (47 percent). This eﬀect remains small and statistically insignificant when we control for
covariates and is not sensitive to how we estimate the standard errors. The results are similar when
we estimate bounds, correct for missing data or drop the lowest quality matches. Using the largest
Oster bound, being accepted lowered the probability of remarriage by 0.02 percentage points. The
next three columns use observations from the census to assess eﬀects on marital status using a
diﬀerent data source. Here we find that while there are no diﬀerences in marriage rates in 1930 or
1940, there is a statistically significant 25% decrease in the likelihood of being married in 1920 (in
the smaller sample of those who applied before 1920). This suggests that cash transfers increased
the duration until marriage in the short run, but not the medium or long term.
    We investigate this further in Figure 2. The histogram of the duration to remarriage suggests
that rejected mothers were more likely to marry soon (within two years) after applying (Figure 2a).
Kaplan-Meier survival estimates of the probability of remaining single, where the clock starts the
day of the MP receipt and ends at death, show a similar pattern: accepted mothers remain single
for longer and are more likely to remarry later (Figure 2b). While women on welfare are not less
likely to ever remarry, we do find that they do wait longer to do so.
    How much longer? We show results of regression of time to remarriage on accepted for the
sample of women who remarried. We find that accepted moms wait 0.97-1.3 years longer to marry,
depending on whether controls are included (Table 3). The coeﬃcients are a bit larger for the largest
Oster bound (1.4) but smaller (0.9) if we drop low quality matches. Relative to the duration of 5.47
years to remarriage for rejected mothers, this represents an increase of 20-24 percent relative to the
mean. When we estimate an Accelerated Failure Time model (AFT), using the log of the duration
as the outcome, we find similar significant increases in duration (Table 3, column 2).
    Figures 2a and 2b suggest that the main diﬀerences between accepted and rejected mothers in
terms of duration to remarriage occur in the short run, with accepted mothers less likely to remarry


                                                 19
immediately and more likely to remarry after 8 years. To explore this, we estimate regressions where
the dependent variable is whether the mother remarries within a year, two years, five years, etc.
For these regressions mothers who did not ever remarry are coded as zero. Mothers whose marital
status could not be defined, or who are missing marriage dates are excluded.
       We find a marginally significant eﬀect of receiving a pension on short durations but no significant
diﬀerences on longer durations, consistent with the figures (Table 3, last 5 columns). Because the
baseline is low, the relative eﬀects are relatively large: only 4 percent of mothers marry within a
year so the transfer lowers the likelihood of re-marriage by 60% within a year, but falls to 15%
within 5 (Figure 2c). The eﬀect of receiving welfare on duration till marriage becomes insignificant
after five years.23 These short run eﬀects are larger if we drop low quality matches and they are
still small and insignificant starting in year five.
       In sum, duration to remarriage is increased by the cash transfer, but only in the short run.
Duration to remarriage increased between 0.9 to 1.4 years and this increase corresponds to delaying
marriages within 3-4 years of the transfer. Thus, our eﬀects are consistent with previous findings
looking at immediate eﬀects of welfare reforms(Low et al., 2018b), but we also show that over a
longer follow-up period, the diﬀerence falls to zero.


6.2       Who do mothers on welfare remarry?

Were these marriage delays associated with increases in the quality of the marriage match? To
answer this, we investigate 5 measures of the desirability of the new match: 3 characteristics of
the husband and two measures of the match. The former includes his longevity, his education
and his occupation score, which serves as a measure of lifetime income. Longevity is an excellent
measure of health and also an indirect measure of his lifetime resources, as it reflects the socio-
economic conditions he experienced as a child and as an adult.24 Education is a good predictor of
permanent income and is also associated with marital stability Lundberg et al. [2016]. But it can
only be observed in the 1940 census and 18% of remarried husbands died prior to 1940, so it is not
observed for all. Finally, we predict the husband’s lifetime income (in 1950 dollars) using the latest
pre-marriage occupation observed in 1910, 20, 30 or 40.25
  23
     We also estimate Logit models. The results (available upon request) are very similar to those reported here.
  24
     Many papers document that conditions in utero aﬀect health and longevity (for a review see Almond and Currie
[2011]). Another extensive literature shows that individuals nutrition as well as their parents’ income and education
while growing up predict health (Case et al., 2002; MD and Gorman [2004], see Almond et al. [2017] for a review).
Finally, socio-economic status (education, occupation and income) in adulthood are very large predictors of longevity
(Cutler et al. [2006], Cutler et al. Chetty et al. [2016]).
  25
     We use the IPUMS constructed “occscore.” This measure assigns income to individuals based on their occupation,
imputing income in that occupation in 1950. We assign each man the occupation score we observe in the latest census
where he is observed before marriage under the assumption this is the most likely occupation that the MP woman


                                                         20
    We construct 2 measures of the quality of the match: the age and education gaps between
spouses. Empirically, small age gaps predict greater satisfaction (Lee and McKinnish, 2018) and
lower divorce rates (Lillard et al., 1995), and they are preferred in online dating (Hitsch et al.,
2010). However, in most populations husbands are older than wives. Based on the work of Grow
and Van Bavel [2015], we assume that the optimal gap is 2.5 years, so that gaps are considered
sub-optimal if there are larger or smaller than 2.5. Equal education levels are preferred in dating
markets (Hitsch et al. [2010]). Female bargaining power is also larger if she is more educated relative
to her husband (Doss, 2013). We can only compute this for couples in which neither has died prior
to 1940.
    We combine these measures of husband and match quality into a single index, using two methods.
First, we standardize all the measures and sum them, giving each equal weight.26 Alternatively, we
combine them using the model calibrated by Grow & Van Bavel (2015) which combines age gaps,
education gaps and earnings potential into a single utility based measure which is highly predictive
of marriage patterns in contemporary Europe.27 Note that this is not a sorting index like those
used in Becker’s assortative matching models. It corresponds to the utility associated with a given
match, which can be a function of both the woman’s and the men’s traits.
    The basic model predicts that if women delay marriage they will marry more desirable husbands.
Duration to remarriage is indeed positively and statistically significantly related to husbands’ edu-
cation, occupation, and longevity; duration is also statistically significantly associated with smaller
education gaps and age gaps (Appendix Figure 2). To our knowledge this is the first paper docu-
menting that there is a strong correlation between waiting to marry and the quality of the husband
(among women with children). These patterns are consistent with the model’s prediction that
waiting results in a better match in the absence of stigma.
    But does welfare receipt result in better husbands? Figure 3 shows the estimated densities of
match quality measures for accepted and rejected mothers. The new husbands of welfare recipients
appear to live longer. However, husband education and occupation-based income do not appear to
diﬀer much on average and appear lower for accepted mothers. The distribution of match quality
would have observed at the time of the marriage decision.
  26
     To do this we first normalize each measure (subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation) and
them sum them together as in Kling et al.. To maximize sample size we use any measure available, so the index is
defined for those that have any measures.
  27
     We use the utility
                   ⇣ function and⌘ the
                                     ⇣ parameters
                                           ⌘ ⇣ defined and⌘calibrated in Grow and Van Bavel (2015). The index
                                  ws         wy   A      |↵   ↵ |   wa
                            |si sj|
is given by vij = SmaxSmax                yi
                                        Ymax
                                                     max
                                                        Amax
                                                            i  j
                                                                      . The first term of the equation is the similarity
of education, the second term is the earnings prospects and, the last term is the age gap. We follow the same
categorization of variables as in the original paper, except for education, where we divide it in 4 quintile categories
instead of the four categories in the paper (no schooling, primary, secondary and tertiary). The calibration parameters
are given by Smax = 4; Y max = 5; Amax = 800; ws = 0.385; wy = 1.201; wa = 10.833.



                                                          21
(age and education gaps) is very similar for both groups. In fact we cannot reject the null that
the distributions of any trait are identical for accepted and rejected. (p-values are reported in the
figures.)
    Regression analysis yields the same findings. The results without controls (Panel A Table 4) and
with controls (Panel B Table 4) suggest that mothers on welfare marry husbands who are roughly
similar in terms of longevity, education, and occupation-based income: nearly all the coeﬃcients
for accepted are statistically insignificant. And while some estimated eﬀects are positive (longevity)
several are negative (occupation score and education). Estimates of the impact of welfare receipt
on match quality (age and education gaps) are also insignificant and often of diﬀerent signs. A joint
test (column 6) shows that we cannot reject the null that all coeﬃcients are equal to zero at the 5
percent level.
    However, the theory predicts that results for individual measures of husband or match quality
are not meaningful: we would want to examine the impact of welfare receipt on a single measure
or index of quality. When we aggregate the multiple measures of husband quality using the utility-
based index from Grow & Van Bavel, we find that on net, with or without controls, accepted mothers
had husbands that were not diﬀerent in their overall quality (column 9). If we construct an index
in which we give all measures equal weights then we find a positive and significant eﬀect on the
index, but this result is mostly driven by the positive impact on longevity and it is small, on the
order of 10 percent of a standard deviation in the index (columns 7 and 8). In Appendix Table 6 we
show results for several other traits of the new husband (1940 income or earnings score, foreign born
status, farming status and number of children). The coeﬃcients on accepted are never statistically
significant and vary in their sign.
    These results, however, rely on strong assumptions about how women value diﬀerent traits.
If instead we conduct the conditional test for each covariate, as suggested in proposition 2, the
evidence, in Panel C of Table 4, is again ambiguous: only longevity has a coeﬃcient that moves in
the right direction and all coeﬃcients are statistically insignificant. These results are not aﬀected by
Oster corrections, corrections for missing data or corrections for the quality of the data (Panel E),
though again the sample size is small. We further test this result by examining whether husband and
wife live together in 1930 or 1940, an indicator that the marriage was long lasting and therefore a
good match. We find that accepted mothers are less likely to be living with their spouses, consistent
with these matches being of worse, not better quality (Appendix Table 6).
    We conclude that the transfers did not meaningfully improve the quality of the matches, nor did
it aﬀect assortative mating (Appendix Figure 3). More educated women were more likely to marry



                                                  22
more educated men. This is equally true among both accepted and rejected.                   28

       Why does the theory fail? We consider three possibilities. First, waiting to marry a higher
quality husband might result in a depreciation of the mother’s own quality or attractiveness (her
age). Appendix Figure 4 shows that, as in other settings, women are much less likely to marry as
they get older. Theory (proposition 3) suggests this should not aﬀect the predictions of the eﬀects
of the cash transfer–those who receive the transfer should still find better men, but it does suggest
that the eﬀects might be small if waiting to marry reduces her attractiveness. Panel D of Table 4
shows that if we control for the age at marriage of the mother, our conclusions are unchanged.
       A second possibility is that there is selection into marriage. Perhaps women who marry late are
negatively selected in some way, but there is little evidence of this. There are no predetermined
characteristics that predict duration to remarriage, aside from the number of children (Appendix
Table 7), suggesting that negative selection likely does not explain this.
       A third possibility is that stigma associated with welfare receipt reduces the quality of the
husband (proposition 4). Once stigma is included in the model, the predictions with respect to
partner quality can reverse, even if duration is increasing.29 We try to assess this empirically by
stratifying the sample by whether we think there is more or less stigma associated with welfare
receipt in the state. We assume that in states that accepted only widows, MP recipients would be
less stigmatized. We also assume that in states that required women to stay home and encouraged
them not to work, stigma would be lower.
       When we stratify the sample based on this characterization, we find some weak support for
stigma (Appendix Table 8A). In states that only accepted widows, duration to remarriage is longer
and the quality of the match appears to increase more for longevity but the age gap increases. But
these diﬀerences are not statistically significant across the two groups of states. When we split
by work requirements we find no diﬀerences at all. While crude, these tests provide at best weak
evidence for stigma.
       The bulk of the evidence presented here suggest that the transfers did initially delay marriage,
but that in the long run, women who received welfare married similar men, at similar rates relative
to women who did not receive welfare. Overall the negative eﬀects of age and the eﬀects of stigma
appear to be the best explanations for the findings but our evidence does not conclusive prove these
are the causes.
  28
      There is a small decrease in the degree of assortativeness based on education among accepted mothers, but no
change based on longevity or age.
   29
      The predictions of the model with respect to quality are still ambiguous even though duration increases. This is
because a duration increase is to be expected even if quality didn’t change. The only way duration could decrease is
if the quality cutoﬀ was substantially lower with the transfer. In other words, both an increase and a small decrease
in quality are consistent with duration increasing.


                                                         23
6.3    Eﬀects on Fertility

Though the program included incentives to increase fertility, there is little empirical evidence to
support an increase in child bearing as a result of the transfer. Fertility post application to the
Mothers’ Pension program was relatively modest: 86% of mothers did not have any children and
the diﬀerences across the two groups are very small (Figure 4). Though women on welfare did have
0.414 more children on average, this diﬀerence pre-existed welfare receipt (Table 5 Panel A column
1 & 2). Moreover, once we control for the younger maternal age of welfare recipients and greater
number of children at application in Panel B, welfare recipients appear to have fewer children though
this is statistically insignificant (Table 5 Panel B column 1 & 2). To rule out that this is due to the
relatively old age of mothers in our sample (age 37), we show that the results are identical if look
at only the youngest mothers in the sample (Appendix Table 8B).
    These results are based on the data from the family trees. A second measure of fertility is derived
from the number of children in her household as measured in the 1930 and 1940 census (Table 5,
columns 3, 4, 7 and 8). This conditions on the mother surviving to 1930 and 1940. We see the same
pattern: more children to mothers on welfare when we do not control for maternal characteristics
at application (Panel A), but little diﬀerence once we do (Panel B). Again these conclusions are
not changed when we look at Oster bounds, correct for missing data or drop observations with low
quality. The largest eﬀects we find (Oster bound) are increases in the number of children: 0.14 in
the full sample, and 0.17 for unmarried mothers, still very small numbers of additional children.
    In sum, we find no significant eﬀects on fertility. Perhaps this is due to the fact that the average
age of mothers in our sample is 37. But Appendix Table 8b shows our results are identical if we
split the sample based on the median age of the mother at the time of the application.


7     Work, mobility and lifetime maternal welfare

7.1    Transfers, labor force participation and earned income

We estimate the impact of welfare receipt on mothers’ labor force participation, occupation and
mobility, using data from the 1930 and 1940 censuses.30 Theory predicts that the transfer would
increase the quality of the employment match just as UI would. Among women who were rejected by
the Mothers’ Pension program, 33 percent were part of the labor force and 29 percent were working
in 1930 (Table 6, top row). By 1940, those numbers had fallen to 21 and 19 percent, respectively,
  30
     We can include results for 1920 but there are several issues with the 1920 data. First a large number of mother
have not yet applied to the program, so the sample for whom 1920 is a post-period is smaller. Second our match rate
for 1920 is lower than for other censuses. Last, 1920 does not include labor force participation and work separately.


                                                         24
which is consistent with women remarrying over time leading to lower labor force participation.
       Without controls (Table 6 Panel A), mothers receiving welfare are roughly five percentage points
more likely to be in the labor force or work in both 1930 and 1940. However, once we control for
their greater underlying disadvantage, the point estimates fall by roughly half their size and are no
longer significantly diﬀerent from zero in most of the specifications (Table 6, Panel B).
       For women who participated in the labor force, we can examine their occupational scores in 1930
and 1940 and their earned incomes in 1940. The density of these outcomes is shown in Figure 4:
they are similar for accepted and rejected, and a formal test cannot reject that they are the same.
Regression estimates that include controls (Table 6) confirm that there are no large or significant
eﬀects of welfare receipt on short or long term labor market outcomes. When we consider bounds for
omitted variable bias as in Oster (2017) or the Newey 95% CI, we can still rule out any meaningful
diﬀerences in employment, occupation or income between those who received welfare and those who
did not.    31




7.2      Transfers and geographic mobility

Welfare receipt created a disincentive for geographic mobility since the transfer was lost once women
left the county of application. To examine whether welfare receipt reduced mobility empirically, we
examine whether women remained in the same county in which they applied for welfare in 1930 and
1940 and if they moved, what the characteristics were of the county to which they moved.
       As of 1930, 65 percent of rejected women who applied for mothers pension but were rejected
still lived in the same county and 85 percent still lived in the state. By 1940, that number had
fallen slightly to 59 percent and 83 percent, respectively. In contrast to labor market outcomes,
geographic mobility does appear to be aﬀected by the receipt of cash transfers. Women who receive
welfare are about eight percent more likely to live in the same county as they did when they applied
for welfare than mothers who applied and were rejected (Table 7 Columns 1 and 3). The Oster
bounds are tight for these outcomes (Table 7 Panel C). The largest upper bound we estimate for the
eﬀect is 0.10 (from the CI of the Newey estimates), which is a 15 percent increase in the likelihood
of remaining in the same county.
       Theory predicts that not only would women on welfare be less likely to move, but that when
they do, they should move to “better” neighborhoods. We test this by proxying for the quality of the
neighborhood with the average level of education in the county, the sex ratio in the county (more
  31
    For example the upper bound for 1940 income is 16 dollars relative to a mean of 479, so a 3.5 percent increase
at most. For work, the Oster bounds do not include negative values, though the Newey 95% CI includes 10 percent
decreases. Newey results available upon request.



                                                       25
males, better), and average female labor force participation rates in the county (higher rates better
for single mothers) calculated from the 1930 and 1940 censuses. We find no eﬀect of the transfer
on these measures regardless of the controls or the other estimation corrections we apply.


7.3   Overall maternal welfare

Did the program benefit mothers? To answer this, we collected two measures of her long run
well-being: longevity of the mother and her household income in 1940. In Figure 5 we compare
the distributions of longevity (5a) and 1940 household income (5b) of the mother by acceptance
status. In both cases, we cannot reject that the distributions are identical (p-values reported in
the figure). We follow this with regression analysis (Table 8). There do not appear to be any
large or significant eﬀects of welfare receipt on long run maternal well-being. Once full controls are
included, there appears to be a small positive but insignificant eﬀect of welfare receipt on maternal
longevity (column 1), and a small negative but insignificant eﬀect on income (column 2). Again these
conclusions are not aﬀected by our various corrections. For longevity, we cannot rule out relatively
large positive increases of about half a year (Oster) or more (Newey CI) in life expectancy. While
maternal physical well-being was perhaps improved by the transfers, the transfer did not improve
economic well-being. Our estimates suggest that in 1940 accepted mothers were poorer than rejected
mothers, and this diﬀerence is similar to what it was at the time of application (see last column
of Appendix Table 2). All mothers who applied for welfare were poor and remained so by 1940,
regardless of welfare receipt, earning roughly half of a typical household’s income.


7.4   Was the program worth it? Marginal value of public funds computations.

We find that cash transfers resulted in marriage delays of about a year and decreases in geographic
mobility. But they otherwise had no statistically significant negative impacts on behavior and no
positive eﬀects on outcomes. We compute the marginal value of public funds (MVPF) using the
methodology of Hendren and Sprung-Keyser [2019]. The computations are in Table 9. Considering
only the benefits to mothers, the MVPF of the program once we include the dollar value of behavioral
responses is 0.84, below one.
   However, a more realistic and comprehensive calculation would also consider whether the trans-
fers benefitted children. Using Aizer et al.’s (2016) findings for children’s longevity and income, we
find that the MVPF of the program is greater than 5 even with maternal behavioral responses. We
also compute the smallest increases in income or longevity of the children that would be needed
for the MVPF to be larger than one. If the children’s income over the lifetime increases by only


                                                 26
0.75% then the MVPF exceeds one. Alternatively if their longevity increases by 0.3 years of life the
MVPF would also exceed one. Thus relatively small benefits for children allows the program to pay
for itself, in part because behavioral responses from the mother are relatively minor.32


7.5    Limitations.

While the data are unique in that they allow us to follow the short and long run trajectories for the
mothers, they are limited as we are missing outcomes data for a non-trivial number of the mothers.
We address this by calculating bounds of the eﬀects which address both missing outcomes data and
potential omitted variable bias. While these approaches have limitations, we note that missing data
is an equally important issue for contemporary studies of welfare receipt, given the documented
high rates of attrition of this population in survey data and high rates of non-formal employment
among adult recipients.
    The Mothers’ Pension program was in practice a small program that served fewer than 1/3 of
the eligible families in the places where it existed (Eli et al., 2020) which is similar to the rate
of participation in the modern welfare program. Thus while the eﬀects we estimate are likely to
reflect “partial equilibrium” eﬀects and cannot speak to a situation where a much larger share of the
population has access to the program, this analysis is useful for understanding eﬀects in the current
US welfare program.
    Finally, we did not investigate whether the existence of the program aﬀected behaviors ex-ante.
For example, it is possible that fertility increased among women who were not in the program
because the MPP provided a form of insurance. Similarly it is possible that individuals moved to
certain locations to insure access to the program over the long run. Future work should consider
these eﬀects as well. We note here that these eﬀects seem unlikely to occur given that the direct
eﬀects we estimate are modest or non-existent.


8     Conclusion

We study the short and long run incentive eﬀects of the first welfare program in the US. Tracking
16,000 women over their lifetime, we establish that the behavioral responses to the incentives were
small. Women tended to remarry at high rates. Those with transfers were not less likely to marry
over their lifetime and they delayed marriage only in the short term by about a year. Ultimately,
  32
     The table also shows alternative computations. For example in the benefits of the program we count the transfer
as a benefit. If we do not count it, and instead only count the benefits for the children, then we require a 6% increase
in child income or a 1.5 increase in longevity for the MVPF to be greater than one.



                                                          27
they did not have more children, nor were they less likely to work. The only dimension in which
we find a meaningful eﬀect is migration: women were more likely to stay in the county in which
they applied. Thus our findings reject many predictions of a simple search model of welfare and the
marriage and labor markets.
   Our findings suggest that current concerns over the incentive eﬀects of social insurance programs
are overstated — individuals are less responsive to economic incentives than one might anticipate.
Our results suggest that on average, other forces such as age, norms and stigma may be more impor-
tant determinants of marriage and labor force behaviors than the monetary incentives embedded
in these government programs. Incorporating these forces into standard models of behavior and
further assessing their empirical importance is an important area for future research.
   The program did not generate large negative incentive eﬀects as predicted by economic models,
but it did not help mothers escape poverty either. It did help alleviate short term cash needs and
may have improved the longevity of the mothers a bit, though these eﬀects are small and statistically
insignificant. Thus, ultimately the program should be judged mostly by the impact it had on its
intended beneficiaries — the children. We compute that the program would pay for itself if it
generates relatively small benefits in terms of increased health or income of the children.
   These results are relevant for developing countries today where economic conditions are similar
to those that were experienced by the women in our sample. Developing countries face similar issues
of income/poverty measurement, large fertility rates and low levels of female participation in formal
labor markets. Short term evaluations of contemporary conditional and unconditional cash transfers
in developing countries have found limited behavioral responses among adults and improvements
in outcomes among adults and children. Our work can help shed light on what the expected long
term eﬀects of these programs might be, though future work should attempt to confirm our long
term eﬀects in these settings.


References
Ran Abramitzky, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. A nation of immigrants: Assimilation and
  economic outcomes in the age of mass migration. Journal of Political Economy, 122(3):467–506, 2014.
  doi: 10.1086/675805. URL https://doi.org/10.1086/675805.

Ran Abramitzky, Leah Platt Boustan, Katherine Eriksson, James J Feigenbaum, and Santiago Pérez. Au-
  tomated linking of historical data. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019.

Mimi Abramovitz et al. Regulating the lives of women: Social welfare policy from colonial times to the
  present. South End Press, 1996.


                                                   28
Anna Aizer, Shari Eli, Joseph Ferrie, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. The long-run impact of cash transfers to
  poor families. American Economic Review, 106(4):935–71, April 2016. doi: 10.1257/aer.20140529. URL
  http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.20140529.

Douglas Almond and Janet Currie. Killing me softly: The fetal origins hypothesis. Journal of economic
  perspectives, 25(3):153–72, 2011.

Douglas Almond, Janet Currie, and Valentina Duque. Childhood circumstances and adult outcomes: Act ii.
  Working Paper 23017, National Bureau of Economic Research, January 2017. URL http://www.nber.
  org/papers/w23017.

Martha Bailey, Connor Cole, Morgan Henderson, and Catherine Massey. How well do automated link-
  ing methods perform? lessons from us historical data. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, 2017.

Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Jordan Kyle, Benjamin A Olken, and Sudarno Sumarto. Tangible informa-
  tion and citizen empowerment: Identification cards and food subsidy programs in indonesia. Journal of
  Political Economy, 126(2):451–491, 2018.

Marianne Bitler, Jonah Geobach, Hilary Hoynes, and Madeline Zavodny. The impact of welfare reform on
  marriage and divorce. Demography, 41(2):213–36, 2004.

Rebecca Blank. Evaluating welfare reform in the united states. Journal of Economic Literature, 40(4):
  1105–1166, 2002.

Richard Blundell, Luigi Pistaferri, and Itay Saporta-Eksten. Consumption inequality and family labor supply.
  American Economic Review, 106(2):387–435, 2016.

Kenneth Burdett and Kenneth L Judd. Equilibrium price dispersion. Econometrica: Journal of the Econo-
  metric Society, pages 955–969, 1983.

Anne Case, Darren Lubotsky, and Christina Paxson.         Economic status and health in childhood: The
  origins of the gradient. American Economic Review, 92(5):1308–1334, December 2002. doi: 10.1257/
  000282802762024520. URL http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/000282802762024520.

Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. Where is the land of opportunity? the
  geography of intergenerational mobility in the united states. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129
  (4):1553–1623, 2014.

Raj Chetty, Michael Stepner, Sarah Abraham, Shelby Lin, Benjamin Scuderi, Nicholas Turner, Augustin
  Bergeron, and David Cutler. The association between income and life expectancy in the united states,
  2001-2014. Jama, 315(16):1750–1766, 2016.

Pierre-André Chiappori and Bernard Salanié. The econometrics of matching models. Journal of Economic
  Literature, 54(3):832–61, 2016.



                                                    29
David Cutler, Angus Deaton, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. The determinants of mortality. Journal of economic
  perspectives, 20(3):97–120, 2006.

David M Cutler, Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Tom Vogl. Socioeconomic status and health: Dimensions and
  mechanisms. In The Oxford Handbook of Health Economics.

Cheryl Doss. Intrahousehold bargaining and resource allocation in developing countries. The World Bank
  Research Observer, 28(1):52–78, 2013.

Shari Eli and Laura Salisbury. Patronage politics and the development of the welfare state: Confederate
  pensions in the american south. The Journal of Economic History, 76(4):1078–1112, 2016.

Shari Eli, Adriana Lleras-Muney, and James Uguccioni. The emergence of the modern welfare system:
  Evidence from the mothers? pension program. Technical report, Working Paper, 2020.

Claudia Goldin. The quiet revolution that transformed women’s employment, education, and family. Amer-
  ican economic review, 96(2):1–21, 2006.

J Grogger and LA Karoly. Employment, labor supply, and earnings. Welfare reform: Eﬀects of a decade of
  change, pages 134–154, 2005.

Jeﬀ Grogger and Stephen G Bronars. The eﬀect of welfare payments on the marriage and fertility behavior
  of unwed mothers: Results from a twins experiment. Journal of Political Economy, 109(3):529–545, 2001.

André Grow and Jan Van Bavel. Assortative mating and the reversal of gender inequality in education in
  europe: An agent-based model. PloS one, 10(6), 2015.

Joel F Handler and Ellen Jane Hollingsworth. Stigma, privacy, and other attitudes of welfare recipients.
  Stan. L. Rev., 22:1, 1969.

Nathaniel Hendren and Benjamin D Sprung-Keyser. A unified welfare analysis of government policies.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019.

Günter J Hitsch, Ali Hortaçsu, and Dan Ariely. What makes you click??mate preferences in online dating.
  Quantitative marketing and Economics, 8(4):393–427, 2010.

Seema Jayachandran. Social norms as a barrier to women’s employment in developing countries. Working
  Paper 27449, National Bureau of Economic Research, June 2020. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/
  w27449.

Ruth A Kasman. Employed mothers of children in the adc program cook county bureau of public welfare.
  Social Service Review, 19(1):96–110, 1945.

Melissa Schettini Kearney. Is there an eﬀect of incremental welfare benefits on fertility behavior? a look at
  the family cap. Journal of Human Resources, 39(2):295–325, 2004.




                                                     30
Jeﬀrey R Kling, Jeﬀrey B Liebman, and Lawrence F Katz. Experimental analysis of neighborhood eﬀects.
  Econometrica, 75(1):83–119. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-0262.2007.00733.x. URL https://onlinelibrary.
  wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1468-0262.2007.00733.x.

David S Lee. Training, wages, and sample selection: Estimating sharp bounds on treatment eﬀects. The
  Review of Economic Studies, 76(3):1071–1102, 2009.

Wang-Sheng Lee and Terra McKinnish. The marital satisfaction of diﬀerently aged couples. Journal of
  population economics, 31(2):337–362, 2018.

Mark H Leﬀ. Consensus for reform: The mothers’-pension movement in the progressive era. Social Service
  Review, 47(3):397–417, 1973.

Lee A Lillard, Michael J Brien, and Linda J Waite. Premarital cohabitation and subsequent marital.
  Demography, 32(3):437–457, 1995.

Corinne Low. Pricing the biological clock: Reproductive capital on the us marriage market. Manuscript,
  Wharton School of Business, 2014.

Hamish Low, Costas Meghir, Luigi Pistaferri, and Alessandra Voena. Marriage, labor supply and the
  dynamics of the social safety net. Working Paper 24356, National Bureau of Economic Research, February
  2018a. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w24356.

Hamish Low, Costas Meghir, Luigi Pistaferri, and Alessandra Voena. Marriage, labor supply and the
  dynamics of the social safety net. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018b.

Shelly Lundberg, Robert A Pollak, and Jenna Stearns. Family inequality: Diverging patterns in marriage,
  cohabitation, and childbearing. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(2):79–102, 2016.

Barbara Machtinger. The us children’s bureau and mothers’ pensions administration, 1912–1930. Social
  Service Review, 73(1):105–118, 1999.

J. J. McCall. Economics of information and job search. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(1):113–126,
  1970. ISSN 00335533, 15314650. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/1879403.

Hayward MD and BK Gorman. The long arm of childhood: the influence of early life social conditions on
  men’s mortality. Demography, 41(1):87–107, 2004.

Gwendolyn Mink. The wages of motherhood: Inequality in the welfare state, 1917-1942. Cornell University
  Press, 1996.

Robert Moﬃtt. Incentive eﬀects of the u.s. welfare system: A review. Journal of Economic Literature, 30
  (1):1–61, 1992. ISSN 00220515. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/2727878.

Robert Moﬃtt et al. An economic model of welfare stigma. American economic review, 73(5):1023–1035,
  1983.



                                                   31
Whitney K Newey. Two-step series estimation of sample selection models. The Econometrics Journal, 12:
  S217–S229, 2009.

Dorothy E Roberts. The value of black mothers’ work. Conn. L. Rev., 26:871, 1993.

Mark R Rosenzweig and Junsen Zhang. Do population control policies induce more human capital in-
  vestment? twins, birth weight and china’s ?one-child? policy. The Review of Economic Studies, 76(3):
  1149–1174, 2009.

Theda Skocpol. Protecting soldiers and mothers. Harvard University Press, 1995.

Deborah E Ward. The white welfare state: The racialization of US welfare policy. University of Michigan
  Press, 2009.

Jeﬀrey E Zabel. An analysis of attrition in the panel study of income dynamics and the survey of income
  and program participation with an application to a model of labor market behavior. Journal of Human
  Resources, pages 479–506, 1998.




Appendix

Basic Model

In order to make the appendix self-contained, we set up the model as we did in the main text.
   A woman is either single or married. While single, she receives a flow benefit of b and, with
probability      , she finds a potential partner with quality q (the flow utility she would get from
marriage) and decides whether to marry him or stay single. For simplicity, we say that marriage
                                                                           ⇥ ⇤
lasts forever. The quality of a partner q is distributed F (q) with support q, q̄ and q̄ > b. She
discounts the future at rate .
   The value of being single is
                                      Z                                                 !
                                           q̄
                       Vs = b +                 max {Vm (q), Vs } dF (q) + (1     )Vs       .
                                          q=q

The value of being married to a partner with quality q is

                                                                          q
                                     Vm (q) = q + Vm (q) =                    .
                                                                      1

Since the value of marriage is strictly increasing in q, the agent will follow a cut-oﬀ rule. There is a
cutoﬀ quality, q ⇤ , such that she will accept all prospects with q > q ⇤ . The cutoﬀ rule is implicitly
defined as
                                                   Vm (q ⇤ ) = Vs .

                                                         32
    Considering that, and rearranging the definition of Vs , we can write
                                            Z q̄
                          V s = b + Vs +           max {Vm (q) Vs , 0} dF (q),
                                                           q=q
                                                       Z    q̄
                             V s = b + Vs +                             Vm (q)         Vs dF (q),
                                                           q=q ⇤
                                                             Z     q̄
                             V s = b + Vs +                                   1       F (q) dq,
                                                1                q=q ⇤
                                                Z q̄
                    (1      )Vs = b +                        1           F (q) dq,
                                        1        q=q ⇤

where the third line followed from integration by parts. From the definition of q ⇤ , we have obtained
an implicit equation for q ⇤ (which contains no other endogenous variables)
                                                Z q̄
                                  ⇤
                                 q =b+                 1 F (q) dq.                                               (1)
                                          1      q=q ⇤
                                                                 Z       q̄
                                        ⇤
                                0=      q +b+                                     1    F (q) dq.
                                                   1                    q=q ⇤
We can see that this function is continuous and positive at q ⇤ = b and negative at q ⇤ = q̄, so there
exists a solution. Also, the function is strictly decreasing so its solution is unique.
    Intuitively, this equation says that the value of the minimum acceptable marriage, q ⇤ should be
equal to the benefit, b, plus the option value of holding out for a good match. Given a reservation
quality, q ⇤ , the probability of marriage is    (1         F (q ⇤ )) and the average match quality is E[q|q > q ⇤ ].
The duration until remarriage is given by D = 1/ (1                               F (q ⇤ )).
    Before proving Proposition 1, we establish the following useful result.

Lemma. The reservation quality, q ⇤ , is increasing in benefits, b. Moreover, the reservation quality
is also increasing in the probability of finding prospects, , and the distribution of quality F (q) (in
the senses of first-order stochastic dominance).

Proof. This result can be seen on equation 1. An increase in b, , or the distribution F increases
the right-hand side of the equation which corresponds to the value of waiting. In order to preserve
the equality, the cutoﬀ must be higher. Waiting is more attractive when the benefits are higher, the
oﬀers appear more often, or the oﬀers are stochastically better. Then, the woman will only find it
worthwhile to settle for a higher cutoﬀ quality.

    Now, we are ready to prove Proposition 1.

Proposition 8. @D/@b > 0and @ E[q|q > q ⇤ ]/@b > 0: An increase in benefits, b, increases the
number of periods the woman stays single and the average quality of the marriage.

                                                             33
Proof. From our previous lemma, an increase in benefits will increase the cutoﬀ quality. Since the
probability of marriage is decreasing in the cutoﬀ quality, the increase in benefits decreases the
probability of marriage and increases the expected number of periods the woman stays single. The
average quality of the marriage increases because the woman now rejects relatively lower quality
proposals.

   In order to test the second prediction of Proposition 1, we would need to observe the quality of
the marriage. what we observe are several traits that matter for the quality. We assume that there
exists a quality function, q : X ! [q, q̄], that maps a vector of characteristics into a single quality
index. For exposition, and without loss of generality, we assume that the function q is increasing in
each trait.

Proposition 9. Without further assumptions about the joint distribution of X and the production
function q(X), the sign of @ E[xi |q > q ⇤ ]/@b is ambiguous for all i. However the sign of @ E[xi |q >
q ⇤ , x i ]/@b is positive for all xi so long as all relevant X are observed.

   It might seem natural to expect that higher benefits would result in higher (better) traits in the
accepted marriages. This is not necessarily true and it could be that every trait becomes worse.

Example 1. Consider a quality function q(x1 , x2 ) = x1 x2 . The joint distribution of the traits is
uniformly distributed over three mass points (1, 10); (10, 1); (4, 4). Suppose that, initially, the cutoﬀ
is q ⇤ = 10. The average of each trait conditional on a match is equal to 5. Consider a small increase
in the cutoﬀ (10 < q ⇤  16). The new average of each trait is 4.

   As the example shows, each trait could be, on average, lower with a higher cutoﬀ quality. Still,
we can predict an increase in a particular trait when conditioning for all the other relevant traits. In
order to see this, notice that for a given value of the other traits, a higher cutoﬀ will only eliminate
matches where the trait we are interested in was low.


Extensions

Age

We show that the predictions of the model still hold when we incorporate aging considerations.
In order to maintain the simple recursive structure of the model, we model aging as a random
independent process that moves the agent from a young state to an old state. In the young state,
a woman receives a proposal with probability          Y.   In the old state, she receives a proposal with
probability   O   <   Y.   There is a probability ⇡ of transitioning from young to old and, naturally, no

                                                     34
probability of the reverse transition. The transition, or lack of, is realized at the end of each period
after the oﬀer has been accepted or rejected.
   The old single woman’s problem is the same as the original problem. Let us define Vs,O and qO
                                                                                               ⇤

as the value of being single and the cutoﬀ quality when old.
   The young woman’s problem is slightly diﬀerent. The opportunity cost of accepting a proposal
is given by V := (1     ⇡)Vs,Y + ⇡Vs,O , where Vs,Y is the value of being single when young.
                                      Z                                          !
                                             q̄
                   Vs,Y = b +        Y            max {Vm (q), V } dF (q) + (1                                  Y )V   .
                                         q=q

The cutoﬀ rule is defined by Vm (qY⇤ ) = qY⇤ /(1                         ) = V . Then, ⇡(Vs,Y                   Vs,O ) =    ⇡
                                                                                                                           1 ⇡ (V   Vs,O ) =
     ⇤    ⇤
 ⇡ q  q
1 ⇡ 1
     Y    O
              .
                                                              Z    q̄
                         Vs,Y = b + V +               Y                      max {Vm (q)               V, 0} dF (q),
                                                               q=q
                                                              Z q̄
                         Vs,Y = b + V +               Y                      Vm (q)               V   dF (q),
                                                                  q=qY⇤
                                                                  Z q̄
                                                          Y
                         Vs,Y = b + V +                                          1       F (q) dq,
                                                  1                 q=qY⇤
                                                                                         Z   q̄
                                                                                     Y
                   (1      )V = b + ⇡(Vs,O                Vs,Y ) +                                    1   F (q) dq,
                                                                             1            q=q ⇤
                                                                                         Z q̄ Y
                                         ⇡    qY⇤              ⇤
                                                              qO                 Y
                           qY⇤ = b                                      +                             1   F (q) dq,
                                     1       ⇡ 1                             1            q=qY⇤

This equation takes into account the probability of transitioning into old age. It is easy to see that
the cutoﬀ quality will not be the same if             Y   >             O.


Proposition 10. If the arrival rate          falls with age then @ E[q|q > q ⇤ ]/@b > 0 and @D/@b > 0.

Proof. First, for the old woman, the analysis of the basic model applies and the result follows
immediately. Second, for the young woman, we can apply the same kind of analysis. Higher
benefits increase the value of waiting both directly and indirectly. The direct eﬀect comes from
enjoying the benefits while single and young and the indirect eﬀect comes from the benefits while
old (which shows up through the cutoﬀ quality of old). Thus, all cutoﬀ qualities increase which
implies higher expected qualities conditional on a match and a higher duration of single-hood.


Stigma

Getting the benefits could also bring about negative eﬀects if there is stigma associated with par-
ticipating in the program. In the model, we can think of this issue in two ways. First, being in the


                                                                    35
program lowers the probability of receiving an oﬀer. Second, the distribution of oﬀers gets worse.
   In either case, the presence of the stigma makes the predictions of the model ambiguous.

Proposition 11. If b lowers the rate of arrival of prospects       or worsens the distribution F (q) in
the sense of first-order stochastic dominance (in addition to increasing the per period utility) then
the sign of@ E[q|q > q ⇤ ]/@b and @D/@b becomes ambiguous.

Proof. Lemma 1 established that the cutoﬀ quality moved in the same direction as the benefits,
the change in the probability of proposals, , and the distribution, F (q). With a stigma eﬀect, the
program increases b but lowers     or F . The original eﬀect increases the cutoﬀ but the stigma eﬀect
lowers it. It is unclear which one we should expect to dominate.


Work

The initial predictions are maintained when we introduce a labor decision in the model. In this
extension, a woman has a probability      E   of receiving an employment opportunity. A job oﬀer is
characterized by its wage w which is distributed G(w) with support [w.w̄] and w̄ > b. We assume
that marriage lasts forever and that an employed woman loses her job with probability each period.
We also assume that an employed woman can receive marriage oﬀers at rate                m,e   and with quality
distributed F̂ (q).
   In this extension, there exist three possible states: single and unemployed, single and employed,
and married. The value of being single and unemployed is
              Z                                Z
Vs,u = b + m max{Vm,u (q), Vs,u }dF (q) + e       max{Vs,e (w), Vs,u }dG(w) + (1                  m     e )Vs,u .
                  q                                   w

The value of being married to a partner with quality q is

                                 Vm,u (q) = q + Vm,u (q) = q/(1        ).

The value of being employed at wage w is
                        Z q̄
    Vs,e (w) = w + m,e       max{Vs,e (w), Vm,u (q)}dF̂ (q) +       Vs,u + (1           m,e     )Vs,e (w).
                           q=q

Letw⇤ be the cutoﬀ wage and q ⇤ be the cutoﬀ quality for the single, unemployed woman. Then, by
definition of cutoﬀ wage and quality

                      (1     )Vs,u = (1       )Vs,e (w⇤ ) = (1   )Vm,u (q ⇤ ) = q ⇤ .




                                                    36
Evaluating the expression above at w⇤ , we get
                               Z q̄                                                                                          Z         q̄
               ⇤     ⇤     m,e                                                                                         m,e
              q =w +                  [q q ⇤ ]dF̂ (q) = w⇤ +                                                                                 [1      F̂ (q)]dq.               (2)
                         1      q=q ⇤                        1                                                                    q=q ⇤

For each wage w, there will be a cutoﬀ marriage quality, q(w), such that all proposals with quality
q > q(w) will be taken. The cutoﬀ marriage quality is implicitly defined by

                                                                                                             q(w)
                                                      Vs,e (w) = Vm,u (q(w)) =                                    .
                                                                                                             1

Then, we can write,

                                                                      Z    q̄
         [1         (1        )]Vs,e (w) = w +                  m,e                 max{0, Vm,u (q)                           Vs,e (w)}dF̂ (q) +                   Vs,u .
                                                                          q=q
                                                                                          Z    q̄
                                                                                    m,e
                         [1       (1         )]Vs,e (w) = w +                                                    [1     F̂ (q)]dq +                   Vs,u .
                                                                            1                 q=q(w)
                                                                                              Z     q̄
                                                                                      m,e
              [1         (1       )][Vs,e (w)             Vs,u ] = w +                                             [1        F̂ (q)]dq               (1        )Vs,u .
                                                                                1                 q=q(w)
                                                                                                             Z    q̄
                                                                                               m,e
                    [1        (1         )][Vs,e (w)            Vs,u ] = w +                                                 [1             F̂ (q)]dq     q⇤.
                                                                                          1                      q=q(w)
                                                                                                                        Z    q̄
                                                                                                                 m,e
                    [1        (1         )][Vs,e (w)            Vs,u ] = w                q⇤ +                                              [1      F̂ (q)]dq.
                                                                                                         1                  q=q(w)
                                                                                                                            Z     q̄
                                                 1                                                       m,e
                   q(w) = q ⇤ +                                 (w        qñ⇤ ) +                                                            [1      F̂ (q)]dq.              (3)
                                        1            (1     )                             1              (1             )       q=q(w)

     We can directly establish the existence and uniqueness of the solution of q(w⇤ ) (the cutoﬀ
marriage quality at the reservation wage) by evaluating this expression at w = w⇤ . The cutoﬀ
marriage quality accounts for the current wage, the search value, and the possibility of the job
being lost.
   Now, the value of being single and unemployed is given as before.
                      Z q̄                                       Z w̄
(1   )Vs,u = b + M           max {Vm (q) Vs,u , 0} dF (q) + E                                                                                      max {Vs,e (w)         Vs,u , 0} dG(w),
                                   q=q                                                                                             w=w
                                  Z q̄                                                                   Z       w̄
(1     )Vs,u = b +            M                  Vm (q)      Vs,u dF (q) +                          E                        Vs,e (w)               Vs,u dG(w),
                                   q=q ⇤                                                                     w=w⇤
                                   Z q̄                                                                       Z w̄
                              M                                                               E
(1     )Vs,u = b +                                1       F (q) dq +                                                              1          G(w) dq(w),
                          1         q=q      ⇤                                  1         (1                 )    w=w⇤
                                   Z q̄                                                                          Z w̄
                              M                                                               E
(1     )Vs,u = b +                                1       F (q) dq +                                                              1          G(w) dq(w),
                          1            q=q   ⇤                                  1         (1                 )     w=w⇤




                                                                                    37
                             Z    q̄                                                   Z   w̄
             ⇤           M                                               E
            q =b+                        1       F (q) dq +                                       1   G(w) dq(w).          (4)
                     1           q=q ⇤                             1    (1         )       w=w⇤
Then, we can solve for all cutoﬀs in the following way. We first solve for the cutoﬀs at the single,
unemployed state. Those cutoﬀs are w⇤ and q ⇤ . Equation (2) is increasing in w⇤ while equation
(4) is decreasing in w⇤ . This means that if a solution exists, it is unique. We can also solve for the
cutoﬀ marriage quality at a job with wage w using equation (3). Clearly, q(w⇤ ) = q ⇤ and q(w) is a
strictly increasing function.
   We can now establish the comparative statics with respect to the benefits.

Proposition 12. An increase in benefits b increases the number of periods the woman stays single
and the average quality of the marriage. An increase in benefits b also increases the number of
periods the woman stays unemployed and the average wages of the women that become employed.

Proof. As before, all we need to do is establish that the increase in benefits increases the cutoﬀ
qualities and wages. For the single and unemployed cutoﬀs, notice that equation (4) is the only one
aﬀected by the change in benefits and that this equation is decreasing in w⇤ . Therefore, q ⇤ and w⇤
must increase.
   For the single and employed cutoﬀs, the higher benefits have an indirect eﬀect through the single
and unemployed cutoﬀ which we already established was increasing. Intuitively, higher benefits make
it better to wait before marrying even when employed because if the woman were to lose the job,
she would enjoy those benefits.


Fertility

An extra dimension that we can consider is fertility. A woman’s incentives to have more children
are aﬀected by the program. We model this dimension as a binary decision that a woman makes
in each period. If a woman decides to have children, she gets one next period with probability
⇡c . In the model, we limit the number of extra children a woman can have to one. We do this by
considering a small state space. That is, a woman can be single with n children, single with n+1
children, or married with n and n+1 children. A decision to have children while married does not
aﬀect the analysis and is thus omitted.
   Let us compare the decision of having children when enrolled in the program and when not.
The value of being single with n children is
                                                 Z                                                                 !
                                                      q̄       n               o
               i
             Vs,n = bin + an +               i
                                             n
                                                                          i
                                                           max Vm (q), V̂s,n       dF̃n (q) + (1        i     i
                                                                                                        n )V̂s,n       ,
                                                     q=q




                                                                   38
where the i superscript is either 0 or 1, indicating if the woman is participating in the program.
   i is the optimal continuation (next period) value of a single woman who has n children in this
V̂s,n
period. V̂s,n
           i = max{V i , ⇡ V i
                    s,n c s,n+1 + (1
                                                        i }.
                                                  ⇡c )Vs,n
   Also, an is the utility flow of having n children. Finally, bin is the transfers that a woman who has
n children receives. Some conditions change when a woman enrolls in the program. For instance, if a
woman is enrolled in the program, she will receive a transfer b1n > b0n = 0. If b1n+1 > b1n , the program
provides extra incentives to have children (becauseb0n+1 = b0n ). At the same time, if                i
                                                                                                      n+1   <       i
                                                                                                                    n

and   1
      n+1
             1
             n   <   0
                     n+1
                                 0
                                 n   (the eﬀect of an extra child on the arrival of prospects is more negative
when participating in the program), there are fewer incentives to have children. When combined
with the eﬀect of the higher transfers, the overall eﬀect of the program on fertility is ambiguous.

Proposition 13. If b is an increasing function of the number of children then fertility will increase
when b increases. But if more children while single lower the rate of arrival of prospects in the labor
and marriage market, then the predictions about fertility become ambiguous.


Mobility

Now, we introduce the possibility of moving to a new location. Locations are indexed by j and have
diﬀerent characteristics ( j ). We consider the case where the transfer is lost upon moving to a new
location. Opportunities to move to a new location arrive randomly with probability µ. We assume
that a married woman does not receive moving opportunities.
                     Z                                         Z                                            !
                          q̄
      Vs = b +                 max {Vm (q), Vs } dF (q) + µ            max {Vs,j , Vs } dH(j) + (1   µ)Vs       .
                         q=q                                       j

The value of being married to a partner with quality q is

                                                                               q
                                           Vm (q) = q + Vm (q) =                   .
                                                                           1

We take the value of being single in the new location, Vs,j , as exogenous. While we could make it
endogenous, the only relevant assumption is that for each specific new location, the value of being
single there is not aﬀected by b.
   The decision to migrate is governed by max{Vs,j , Vs }. Define the set of locations the agent would
move to as J ⇤ := {j|Vs,j            Vs }. The probability of moving to a new location is given by µH(J ⇤ ).
The expected quality of new locations a woman moves to is given by E[Vs,j |j 2 J ⇤ ].

Proposition 14. If b increases, then mobility falls, and those who do migrate, move to better
locations.


                                                          39
Proof. By applying standard dynamic programming arguments, we can show that Vs is a strictly
increasing function of $b$. [First, the Bellman operator satisfies Blackwell’s suﬃcient conditions
for a contraction so there is a fixed point and it is unique. Second, the operator preserves the
property of being an increasing function of b, and the operator maps weakly increasing functions
of b to strictly increasing functions of b.] Since Vs is a strictly increasing function of b and each
Vs,j is constant on b, the set J ⇤ is decreasing in b (i.e., when b increases, the set gets smaller as
some locations are now excluded). Thus, the probability of moving is lower. Finally, the expected
quality of a new location a woman moves to is higher when b is higher. That is because the expected
quality when b is lower is a weighted average of the locations that remain when b is higher and the
locations that were excluded. By construction, the latter has a lower value than any of the former
which proves the result.




                                                 40
Figure 1: Distribution of predicted income by accepted, predicted Income using IOWA census
           Sample: women with non missing predicted income. Income<1 set to =1.




         Note: Data comes from administrative data collected by the authors. See text for
         details. Sample includes 5332 individuals for whom we could compute predicted
         income using the Iowa census. The predicted income was computed by running a
         regression of family income on covariates (widow, mother age at application,
         number of kids at each age (0-18), age of the youngest and oldest kid, number of
         kids over 14, mother is foreign, black, education and occupation score. We include
         interactions of the covariates with the variable widow, and some of the covariates
         are included in a dummy format.) in the Iowa Census and then using the estimated
         betas to predict income for all mothers in the MP sample. In the MP sample we
         use the 1910 census occupation scores and 1040 census education.
                        Figure 2: Welfare Receipt and Duration until Remarriage
                     (among women who were not married at the time of application)
                    2a. Histograms of duration until the first remarriage (in years) by welfare receipt




                      2b. survival curves over 40 years: probability of remaining single by welfare receipt




                 2c. Effect of obtaining cash transfer on probability of remarriage by year, as a function of
                 baseline probability of remarriage




Notes: Panel a. The figure plots the duration until the first remarriage by accepted. We cannot reject that the distributions are
equal. Sample includes only women that remarried. Panel b: The figure plots the survival curves by accepted for the duration until
the first remarriage. Panel c: The figure plots the estimated coefficients of "accepted" divided by the baseline probability of
remarriage among rejected applications. And 95% confident intervals. Coefficients come from regressions where we regress a
dummy indicating that the mother remarried within x years on accepted status and all predetermined characteristics. Standard
Errors are clustered at the county level. See information in Table 3.
                                         Figure 3: Women with transfers did not marry better man in all dimensions




Notes: All figures are estimated densities. The number of observations varies because we do not always observe a given outcome. We use the maximum number of
observations available for each figure.
    Figure 4: Fertility, work and income of MP mothers


a. Distribution of number of children born after the MP application by accepted




  b. Distribution of 1930 occupation-based income of the mother by accepted




 Note: Panel a plots the distribution of kids born after application by accepted. The
 sample includes all women. Panel b plots the distribution of 1930 occupation-based
 income by accepted. We cannot reject that both distributions are equal. The sample
 includes all women with non-missing occupation score.
c. Distribution of the 1940 occupation-based income of the mother by accepted




            d. Distribution of 1940 mother income by accepted




Note: Panel c figure plots the distribution of 1940 occupation based income by
accepted. We cannot reject that both distributions are equal. The sample includes
all women with non-missing occupation score. Panel d figure plots the
distribution of 1940 mother income by accepted. We cannot reject that both
distributions are equal. The sample includes all women with non-missing and non-
zero income.
Figure 5: Effect of cash transfer on maternal long term well being

             a. Distribution of longevity of the mother by accepted




          b. Distribution of 1940 household income of the mother by accepted
          Sample: Women with non-missing and non-zero household income




      Note: Panel a The figure plots the distribution of the longevity of the mother by
      accepted. We cannot reject that both distributions are equal. The sample includes
      all women with non-missing longevity. Panel b figure plots the distribution of
      1940 household income by accepted. We cannot reject that both distributions are
      equal. The sample includes all women with non-missing and non-zero household
      income.
                              Table 1: Summary statistics for MP applicants
                                                                                      Unmarried MP
                                                          All MP applicants        applicants at time of
                                                                                        application¹
Variable                                                 Obs    Mean Std. Dev.     Obs     Mean Std. Dev.
Found remarriage information                            16228   0.84   0.37       13383    0.84      0.36
   Share accepted                                       16228   0.90   0.30       13383    0.90      0.30
Dependent variables
  Remarrriage rates
   Mom ever remarried                                   13638    0.47     0.50    11286    0.48     0.50
              % remarried within 1 years²               11509    0.02     0.15     9423    0.03     0.16
              % remarried within 2 years                11509    0.08     0.28     9423    0.09     0.29
              % remarried within 3 years                11509    0.14     0.34     9423    0.15     0.35
              % remarried within 5 years                11509    0.21     0.41     9423    0.22     0.41
  Among moms that remarried
   Duration to remarriage in years                      4255      6.71    7.73    3572      6.36    7.55
   Year of first remarriage                             4255    1927.1    9.60    3572    1926.7    9.37
   Mom age at remarriage                                4240     38.89    9.98    3558     38.77    9.80
     Post-MP husband
         age at remarriage - FS                         4179     43.31    12.63   3507     43.27    12.53
         longevity - FS                                 6384     71.30    12.02   5435     71.28    12.04
         died before 1940 - FS                          4850      0.18     0.38   4123      0.19     0.39
         died before 1930 - FS                          4850      0.07     0.25   4123      0.07     0.26
         died before 1920 - FS                          4850      0.02     0.14   4123      0.02     0.14
         wage income - 1940                             3301    693.60   770.05   2815    674.77   759.27
         highest schooling grade - 1940                 3460      7.59     2.75   2955      7.56     2.72
         occupational earnings score - latest census³   3932     40.49    29.56   3328     39.68    29.62
         occupation income score - latest census³       4206     20.24    10.79   3556     20.09    10.83
         was a farmer - latest census³                  5264      0.11     0.31   4457      0.12     0.32
         lives in owned housing unit - 1920             2843      0.56     0.50   2418      0.57     0.49
         foreign born - FS                              5522      0.16     0.37   4673      0.16     0.36
         foreign status is missing in FS                6384      0.14     0.34   5435      0.14     0.35
         number of children at time of marriage - FS    4255      0.56     1.11   3572      0.57     1.10
     Quality of match
     Age gap - FS                                       5771     4.22     8.68    4874     4.32     8.71
     Education gap - 1940                               2978    -0.23     2.88    2545    -0.23     2.83
  Other Maternal outcomes
   Mom's longevity                                      12989   74.29     15.04   10749    74.32    14.84
   Mom died before 1940                                 13064    0.17      0.38   10810     0.18     0.38
   Mom's income in 1940                                  8226   130.3     306.9    6697   125.40   305.68
   Mom's occupation score 1930                          11178    4.73      8.60    9174     4.72     8.65
   Mom's occupation score 1940                           9358    4.66      8.81    7635     4.48     8.67
   Mom in the labor force in 1930                       11170    0.37      0.48    9166     0.37     0.48
   Mom in the labor force in 1940                        9351    0.26      0.44    7630     0.25     0.43
   Mom worked in 1930                                   11178    0.34      0.47    9174     0.33     0.47
   Mom worked in 1940                                    9358    0.24      0.42    7635     0.23     0.42
   Mom was married in 1940                               9330    0.45      0.50    7615     0.42     0.49
   Mom's household income in 1940                        9070   956.0    1050.3    7398   955.59   1053.2
   Mom's number of own kids living together in 1940      9358    1.74      1.59    7635     1.71     1.57
   Number of kids born after MP application             16228    0.27      0.83   13383     0.26     0.82
                            Table 1 continued: Summary statistics for MP applicants

                                                               All MP applicants             Unmarried MP applicants
                                                                                             at the time of application
Variable                                             Obs      Mean Std. Dev.                  Obs      Mean Std. Dev.
 Characteristics at time of application observed in the application
   Year of application                             16228 1921.6        5.31     13383 1921.45                        5.27
   Number of children                              16228       2.61    1.52     13383    2.61                        1.53
   Age of the youngest                             16228       6.09    3.99     13383    6.20                        4.04
   Age of the oldest                               16228      10.38    4.00     13383   10.51                        3.97
   Share widowed (in MP application)               16228       0.53    0.50     13383    0.64                        0.48
   Share married (present or absent husband),
   divorced and single in MP application           16228       0.21    0.40     13383    0.04                        0.19
   Share missing marital status in MP application  16228       0.26    0.44     13383    0.32                        0.46
   Time to MP application since husband death       7244       1.67    2.80      7067    1.66                        2.74
 Characteristics at time of application observed with family tree data and census data
   Number of kids died pre-MP application          16228       0.23    0.62     13383    0.23                        0.63
   Number of live kids 14+ at MP application       16228       1.51    2.27     13383    1.59                        2.33
   Mom's year of birth (all)                       15351 1884.4        10.0     12656 1883.80                        9.97
   Mom's schooling                                  9222       7.75    2.68      7521    7.74                        2.67
   Mother age at application                       15313      37.21    8.67     12629   37.64                        8.71
   Mother is foreign born                          14968       0.17    0.37     12337    0.17                        0.37
   Mother foreign status is missing                16228       0.08    0.27     13383    0.08                        0.27
   Mother is black (all census)                    14824       0.02    0.13     12205    0.02                        0.14
   Mother number of siblings                       16228       4.37    4.23     13383    4.45                        4.27
   Age at death of pre-husband - FS                 9938      49.70   16.33      8463   47.42                       15.17
   Age at death of pre husband missing - FS        16228       0.39    0.49     13383    0.37                        0.48
   Pre-MP husband is foreign - FS                  12766       0.18    0.38     10550    0.18                        0.39
   Pre-MP husband foreign status is missing - FS 16228         0.21    0.41     13383    0.21                        0.41
   Mom in the labor force in 1910                   7648       0.12    0.33      6507    0.12                        0.33
   Mom's total number of children - FS             16228       4.50    2.81     13383    4.56                        2.82
   Predicted Income                                 5225     808.60 633.62       4360  757.84                      649.84
 County of application characteristics⁴
   Sex ratio (Male/Female)                         16228       1.15    0.18     13383    1.15                        0.17
   Share of females who are in the labor force     16228       0.20    0.06     13383    0.20                        0.05
   Share of white married mothers in labor force   16228       0.05    0.02     13383    0.05                        0.02
   Share black                                     16228       0.01    0.02     13383    0.01                        0.02
   Share rural                                     16228       0.54    0.26     13383    0.56                        0.25
Notes: ¹Unmarried MP applicants include widowed, divirced and never married women. ² People who remarried and have
missing dates are dropped. The duration measure starts at 0.5 (the variable is duration + 0.5, so we assume that marriages
occur uniformly within a year). We also assume that if women married the same year they applied for the pension (and the
exact data of marriage is missing) that the marriage took place after the MP application. ³ Defined from pre marriage data:
uses 1940 if available, then 1930, then 1920, then 1910. Never uses a measure that is observed post-MP marriage. ⁴
measured in year of application. Yearly measures are constructed through linear interpolation using census data from 1910,
1920 and 1930. All measures use the universe of people who are between 18 and 55 years old. Sample restriction: we drop
mothers that applied after 1930 or records for mothers that applied multiple times so mothers only appear once in the data
and individuals who we discovered in the family tree were not the mother (a handfull of grandmothers, sisters and step-
mothers).
                               Table 2: Welfare mothers are not less likely to remarry
                                   Sample: mothers that were not married at MP application ¹
Data source:                                 FamilySearch                                    Census
                                                Ever                                       Married in             Married in
Dependent variable                                               Married in 1920²
                                             remarried = 1                                  1930, all              1940, all
 Mean of Y for rejected                          0.47           0.39                          0.41                   0.43
Panel A: No controls
 Accepted                                  0.009              -0.069                          -0.022                 -0.009
   Robust standard errors               (0.016)           (0.025)***                         (0.018)                (0.021)
   Clustered at county                  [0.026]           [0.021]***                         [0.021]                [0.026]
   Clustered at county*year             {0.019}           {0.026}***                         {0.021}                {0.022}
 Bounds for missing data (Lee 2009) [ -0.02;0.04]        [ -0.16;0.08]                    [ -0.12;0.04]          [ -0.15;0.09]
 R-squared                                 0.000               0.002                           0.000                  0.000
Panel B: Full controls
 Accepted                                 -0.014              -0.099                          -0.012                -0.006
   Robust standard errors               (0.016)           (0.026)***                         (0.018)               (0.020)
   Clustered at county                  [0.020]           [0.022]***                         [0.019]               [0.020]
   Clustered at county*year             {0.016}           {0.027}***                         {0.018}               {0.020}
 R-squared                                 0.228               0.189                           0.199                 0.219
 Observations                             11286                3522                            9155                  7615
Panel C: Checks
 1- Correction for OVB (Oster 2017) [ -0.02;-0.01]      [ -0.11;-0.09]                    [ -0.02;-0.01]        [ -0.01;-0.01]
 2- Semi-parametric sample selection correction (Newey, 2009)
 Accepted                                 -0.014              -0.100                          -0.013                -0.005
   95% Confidence interval            [-0.05;0.02]       [-0.14;-0.06]                     [-0.05;0.03]          [-0.05;0.03]
    F-Stat                                 72.37               13.05                           24.20                 62.77
    P-Value                                0.000               0.000                           0.000                 0.000
 3- Drop if quality of match low
  Accepted                               -0.027            -0.097***                          -0.021                 0.000
   Clustered at county                   (0.028)             (0.025)                          (0.022)               (0.025)
 Observations                              5463                1538                            4495                   3752
Notes: Panel B controls for county and year-of-application fixed effects and individual, county and state controls. Individual
controls: Kids: MP age of the youngest and oldest, MP dummies for number, FS number older than 14, FS number that died before
MP, FS number with dates missing. Mother: last name lenght, dummies for divorced, widowed and missing marital status, age at
application, missing age, number of siblings, foreign, missing nativity, first husband's longevity, first husband's longevity is
missing. County controls: for ages 18-55 : sex ratio (M/F), shares of white married mothers in the labor force, black and rural.
County controls match linear interpolated information from the 1910, 1920 and 1930 census with the year of MP application. State
controls: manufacturing wages, education/labor laws (age must enter school, work permit age, and continuation school law in
place), state expenditures in logs (education, charity, and social programs), state laws concerning MP transfers (work required,
reapplication required, maximum amount for the first child and for each additional child). Bounds: All bounds report coefficients
(not standard deviations). We follow Lee (2009) to construct bounds for missing data. We use Oster (2017) to construct ommited
variable bias (OVB) bounds. We assume that the R-max is 1.3 times greater than the R-squared from panel B. We assume delta = (-1,
1) for lower and upper bounds. Sample Selection Correction : We follow the two-step estimation suggested by Newey (2009) to
correct for sample selection. First, we regress the dummy indicating whether the outcome is mising on RA fixed effects (73
dummies) and all other controls. We report the F-statistic and P-value of the test of relevance of these dummies. Second, we
estimate a linear regression of the outcome on controls and on a fourth degree polynomial of predicted values from the first stage.
We jointly bootstrap the two stages and report the 95% bias corrected confidence interval clustered at the county level, from 200
repetitions. Quality of match: Regressions that drop low quality matches (quality measure below its median) include all controls
and cluster the standard errors at the county level. The quality of match between census, family search and administrative data is
constructed as the weighted sum of variables that access the similarity between first name, last name, full name, age and place of
birth in each dataset. ¹Sample includes mothers whose marital status at the time of application is missing. ²Post MP application
sample. See Table 1 for sample restrictions.
                                                Table 3: Women with cash transfers wait a little bit longer to marry
                                                    Sample: Women who were not married at time of application.
                                                                                  Remarried       Remarried     Remarried                            Remarried          Remarried
Dependent variable Y:                                    Duration¹ Log duration¹ within 1          within 2      within 3                             within 5          within 10
                                                                                     year             years        years                               years              years
                                                                                                 OLS specification. Women that never married are coded as zero, women who
Notes:                                                         OLS              OLS
                                                                                                     married but have missing remarriage dates are dropped from sample
  Mean of Y for rejected                           5.47         1.23           0.04           0.11                                      0.16              0.22               0.30
Panel A: No controls
  Accepted                                        0.971        0.174         -0.017         -0.021                                   -0.013            -0.004               0.011
    Robust standard errors                    (0.327)*** (0.061)***       (0.007)**       (0.011)*                                  (0.013)           (0.015)             (0.016)
    Clustered at county                        [0.389]** [0.055]*** [0.006]***            [0.012]*                                  [0.016]           [0.026]             [0.029]
    Clustered at county*year                  {0.356}*** {0.064}*** {0.006}***            {0.011}*                                  {0.013}           {0.016}             {0.018}
  Bounds for missing data (Lee 2009)         [ -0.17;1.26] [ 0.08;0.27] [ -0.03;-0.02] [ -0.03;-0.02]                            [ -0.02;-0.01] [    -0.01;-0.00]       [ 0.00;0.02]
  R-squared                                       0.001        0.003          0.001          0.000                                    0.000             0.000               0.000
Panel B: Full controls
  Accepted                                        1.275        0.238         -0.024         -0.035                                    -0.033            -0.032             -0.019
    Robust standard errors                    (0.412)*** (0.065)*** (0.007)*** (0.012)***                                           (0.014)**         (0.015)**           (0.016)
    Clustered at county                       [0.444]*** [0.061]*** [0.007]*** [0.009]***                                          [0.011]***          [0.018]*           [0.017]
    Clustered at county*year                  {0.372}*** {0.068}*** {0.007}*** {0.012}***                                           {0.013}**         {0.015}**           {0.015}
  R-squared                                       0.338        0.115          0.039          0.091                                     0.121             0.170              0.228
  Observations                                    3572         3572           9423           9423                                      9423              9423               9423
Panel C: Checks
  1- Correction for OVB (Oster 2017)          [ 1.17;1.39] [ 0.22;0.26] [ -0.03;-0.02] [ -0.04;-0.03]                            [ -0.04;-0.03] [ -0.04;-0.02] [ -0.03;-0.01]
2- Semi-parametric sample selection correction (Newey, 2009)
  Accepted                                        1.305        0.243         -0.024         -0.035                                   -0.033        -0.032                  -0.019
    95% Confidence interval                   [0.42;2.19] [0.12;0.36] [-0.04;-0.01] [-0.05;-0.02]                                 [-0.05;-0.01] [-0.07;0.00]            [-0.05;0.02]
     F-Stat                                       32.81        32.81          28.01          28.01                                    28.01         28.01                   28.01
     P-Value                                      0.000        0.000          0.000          0.000                                    0.000         0.000                   0.000
  3- Drop if quality of match low
   Accepted                                     0.979**     0.213***      -0.045***      -0.061***                                   -0.045*            -0.029             -0.005
    Clustered at county                          (0.424)      (0.067)       (0.013)        (0.021)                                   (0.023)            (0.030)            (0.025)
  Observations                                    3334         3334           4495           4495                                     4495               4495               4495
Note: Refer to Table 2 for a description of the controls, restrictions and checks. ¹The duration measure starts at 0.5 (the variable is duration + 0.5, so we assume that marriages occur
uniformly within a year). We also assume that if women married the same year they applied for the pension (and the exact data of marriage is missing) that the marriage took place
after the MP application. ² Low quality of match is defined as observations with remarriage dates that do not include day, month and year of marriage.
                                        Table 4: Does welfare increase quality of Post-MP husband?
                                          Sample women who were unmarried at the time of application
Data source:                            Family Search                  Censuses                                        Summary index using…
                                                                                                       P-
                                                                                                                           Equal weights
                                   Post-MP    Age gap                       Post-MP                  value
                                                                                        Education               Equal        (no age,    Satisfaction
Outcome:                           Husband (shifted by       Occ Score²     Husband                  (H0:
                                                                                          gap³                 weights ⁴    education     weights ⁵
                                   Longevity 2.5 years)¹                    Education               all = 0)
                                                                                                                               gap)
                                       (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)       (7)            (8)           (9)
Panel A: No Controls
Mean of outcome for rejected         70.130       6.661           21.220      7.798       1.821                -0.0470        -0.0465         0.361
Accepted                              1.313       0.091          -1.245*      -0.254      0.122      0.146      0.050          0.045         -0.001
                                     (0.845)     (0.248)         (0.642)     (0.202)     (0.151)               (0.043)        (0.050)       (0.018)
Observations                          4,104       4,874           3,556        2,955      2,545                 4,894          4,606          2,540
Panel B: control for predetermined variables
Accepted                             1.821**      0.275           -0.828      -0.226      -0.064     0.095     0.095**        0.087*         -0.006
                                     (0.903)     (0.289)         (0.574)     (0.228)     (0.185)               (0.046)        (0.044)       (0.021)
Observations                          4,104       4,874            3,556       2,955       2,545                4,894          4,606          2,540
Panel C: control for pre-determined variables and other inputs
Mean of outcome for rejected          73.99       6.345           20.18       7.946       1.818
Accepted                              1.368       0.247         -0.425        -0.334      0.031      0.719
                                     (1.309)     (0.599)       (0.749)       (0.279)     (0.239)
Observations                          1,887       1,887          1,887         1,887      1,887
Panel D: control for pre-determined variables and mom's age at marriage
Mean of outcome for rejected          71.08       6.826          20.28        7.905       1.924                0.0214         0.0184          0.360
Accepted                              0.906       0.133          -1.293**     -0.362      -0.044     0.115     0.103*         0.103*         -0.013
                                     (0.960)     (0.346)          (0.624)    (0.221)     (0.198)               (0.058)        (0.056)       (0.022)
Observations                          3,116       3,499            2,424       2,218       1,893                3,505          3,333          1,889
                       Table 4 continued: Does welfare increase quality of Post-MP husband?
                              Sample women who were unmarried at the time of application
Data source:                                                        Family Search                                             Censuses
                                                                            Age gap
                                                                Post-MP                                                  Post-MP
                                                                            (shifted
Outcome:                                                        Husband                               Occ Score²         Husband            Education gap³
                                                                             by 2.5
                                                                Longevity                                                Education
                                                                             years)¹
                                                                   (1)         (2)                         (3)                (4)                   (5)
Panel E: Checks (for panel C)
1- Correction for OVB (Oster 2017)                             [ 1.32;1.43][ 0.15;0.36] [ -0.45;-0.39][ -0.34;-0.33]                         [ -0.00;0.06]
2- Semi-parametric sample selection correction (Newey, 2009)
Accepted                                        1.368        0.247       -0.425       -0.334                                                      0.031
95% Confidence interval                     [-1.22;3.96] [-0.94;1.43] [-1.91;1.06] [-0.89;0.22]                                               [-0.44;0.50]
 F-Stat                                            .            .            .            .                                                          .
 P-Value                                           .            .            .            .                                                          .
Observations                                    1,887        1,887        1,887        1,887                                                      1,887

3- Drop if quality of match low
   Accepted                                                        1.397             0.433               0.099             -0.364                -0.010
Clustered at county                                               (1.464)           (0.713)             (0.973)            (0.308)               (0.239)
Observations                                                        1305              1305                1305              1305                  1305

Note: Standard errors are clustered at the county level. Please refer to Table 2 for a full description of the controls, restrictions and checks. Panel C includes
the other inputs (Post-MP Husband longevity, age gap, Post-MP Husband latest occupational score, Post-MP Husband 1940 education and education gap) as
controls (except if the input is the regression dependent variable). In column 6, we present the P-value of the test with null hypothesis that the estimates from
columns 1 to 5 are jointly equal to zero. ¹ Age gap is defined as the absolute value of the husband' s age minus the mother's age minus 2.5. ² Defined from pre
marriage data: uses 1940 if available, then 1930, then 1920, then 1910. Never uses a measure that is observed post-MP marriage. ³ Education gap is defined as
the absolute value of the difference in highest grade between the mother and the husband. ⁴ Equal Weights regressions give the same weight to each of the
quality measures. Values are standardized to zero mean and variance equals one. ⁵ Satisfaction weights include husband's occupational score, education and
longevity. We use the utility function and the parameters defined and calibrated in Grow and Van Bavel (2015) to construct the dependent variable. The
equation below presents the utility function. The first term of the equation is the similarity of education, the second term is the earnings prospect and, the last
term is the age gap. We follow the same categorization of variables as in the original paper, except for education, where we divide it in 4 quintile categories
instead of the four categories in the paper (no schooling, primary, secundary and terciary). !i = a i+25 To take into accoun that female agents prefer partners
who are about 2.5 years older. The parameters are: Smax=4; Ymax=5; Amax=800; ws=0.385; wy=1.201; wa=10.833
                                                       Table 5: Do the cash transfers affect Fertility?
                                     Results for all mothers and mothers that were unmarried at the time of application
Sample:                                                          All mothers                              Mothers that were not married at time of
Data source                                       Family Search                   Census                  Family Search                  Census
                                                                             Number of own                                          Number of own
                                              Post MP      Children                                    Post MP      Children
Outcome                                                                   children in household                                  children in household
                                              kids born    ever born                                  kids born     ever born
                                                                            1930          1940                                     1930          1940
 Mean of Y for rejected                          0.25         4.13           2.38          1.54          0.22          4.16         2.39          1.57
Panel A: No controls
 Accepted                               0.022                   0.414         0.417         0.212              0.038          0.446          0.382         0.151
   Robust standard errors             (0.021)                (0.074)*** (0.061)*** (0.059)***                (0.022)*      (0.081)***     (0.067)*** (0.065)**
   Clustered at county                [0.025]                [0.086]*** [0.131]*** [0.103]**                 [0.025]       [0.093]***     [0.123]***      [0.103]
   Clustered at county*year           {0.022}               {0.079}*** {0.078}*** {0.075}***                 {0.024}      {0.082}***      {0.082}*** {0.080}*
 Bounds for missing data (Lee 2009) [ 0.02;0.25]            [ 0.41;4.13] [ -0.12;0.79] [ -0.37;0.61]       [ 0.04;0.22]   [ 0.45;4.16]   [ -0.16;0.76] [ -0.44;0.55]
 R-squared                              0.000                   0.002         0.004         0.001              0.000          0.002          0.003         0.001

Panel B: Full controls
 Accepted                                       -0.023          0.037           -0.069            -0.036      -0.009         0.061          -0.067        -0.056
   Robust standard errors                      (0.021)         (0.035)         (0.051)           (0.055)     (0.022)       (0.037)*        (0.056)       (0.060)
   Clustered at county                         [0.018]         [0.032]         [0.051]           [0.049]     [0.021]       [0.034]*        [0.059]       [0.051]
   Clustered at county*year                    {0.020}         {0.033}         {0.052}           {0.060}     {0.021}       {0.036}*        {0.056}       {0.067}
 R-squared                                       0.160          0.799            0.412             0.279       0.162         0.805           0.407         0.274
 Observations                                   16228           16228           11178              9358       13383         13383            9174          7635

Panel C: Checks
 1- Correction for OVB (Oster 2017)[ -0.04;-0.01] [ -0.08;0.14] [ -0.25;0.10] [ -0.13;0.05]                [ -0.03;0.01] [ -0.05;0.17] [ -0.24;0.09] [ -0.13;0.01]
 2- Semi-parametric sample
 selection correction (Newey,
 Accepted                               -0.023         0.037         -0.063        -0.012                     -0.009        0.061       -0.063       -0.037
   95% Confidence interval          [-0.06;0.01] [-0.03;0.10] [-0.16;0.04] [-0.11;0.08]                    [-0.05;0.03] [-0.01;0.13] [-0.18;0.05] [-0.14;0.07]
    F-Stat                                  .              .          25.57       116.82                       75.57        75.57        26.33        80.59
    P-Value                                 .              .          0.000         0.000                      0.000        0.000        0.000        0.000
 3- Drop if quality of match low
  Accepted                             -0.014          0.004        -0.049        -0.061                       0.008         0.015         -0.043        -0.053
   Clustered at county                 (0.028)        (0.040)       (0.071)       (0.066)                     (0.031)       (0.044)        (0.077)       (0.076)
 Observations                            7577           7577          5589          4679                        6266          6266          4501          3759
Note: please refer to Table 2 for a full description of the controls, restrictions and checks.
                                                  Table 6: Do the cash transfers affect Labor supply and wages?
                                                              Sample includes all women in application
                                                                                                              Occupation Score |                                  Earned Income |
Outcome:                                         Labor force participation               Work
                                                                                                            occupation not missing                                   income>0
Census year                                        1930           1940            1930         1940           1930         1940                                        1940
 Mean of Y for rejected                             0.33           0.21            0.29         0.19          15.85        15.79                                      479.08
Panel A: No controls
 Accepted                                          0.046         0.050                    0.045         0.054                   -0.677            0.154                38.030
   Robust standard errors                       (0.016)*** (0.015)***                  (0.015)*** (0.015)***                   (0.610)           (0.729)              (32.968)
   Clustered at county                          [0.013]***     [0.020]**               [0.012]*** [0.018]***                   [0.578]           [0.597]              [37.463]
   Clustered at county*year                     {0.016}*** {0.016}***                  {0.015}*** {0.016}***                   {0.666}           {0.745}              {30.602}
 Bounds for missing data (Lee 2009)            [ -0.05;0.10] [ -0.12;0.11]            [ -0.06;0.10] [ -0.12;0.11]           [ -4.17;2.20] [     -5.27;5.26]       [ -203.18;247.58]
 R-squared                                         0.001         0.001                    0.001         0.001                    0.000            0.000                 0.000
Panel B: Full controls
 Accepted                                          0.012             0.027               0.014              0.032               -0.487            -0.349                 5.434
   Robust standard errors                         (0.017)           (0.017)             (0.016)          (0.016)**             (0.642)           (0.795)               (37.659)
   Clustered at county                            [0.016]           [0.017]             [0.014]          [0.016]**             [0.522]           [0.614]               [28.688]
   Clustered at county*year                       {0.016}           {0.017}             {0.016}           {0.016}*             {0.679}           {0.822}               {35.857}
 R-squared                                         0.072             0.067               0.059              0.061                0.097             0.108                 0.160
 Observations                                      11170              9351               11178              9358                 3472              2737                  2083
Panel C: Checks
 1- Correction for OVB (Oster 2017)            [ -0.00;0.02] [ 0.02;0.04]             [ 0.00;0.02]      [ 0.02;0.04]        [ -0.55;-0.41] [ -0.55;-0.18]           [ -8.04;16.94]
 2- Semi-parametric sample selection          correction (Newey, 2009)
 Accepted                                          0.011        0.025                    0.013             0.030                -0.457           -0.358                 7.543
   95% Confidence interval                     [-0.02;0.04] [-0.01;0.06]              [-0.02;0.04]      [-0.00;0.06]         [-1.50;0.58]     [-1.58;0.86]          [-49.45;64.53]
    F-Stat                                         25.31        116.23                   25.57             116.82                25.30            52.17                 74.65
    P-Value                                        0.000        0.000                    0.000             0.000                   0              0.000                 0.000
 3- Drop if quality of match low
  Accepted                                         0.019             0.011                0.026             0.020              -0.084             0.395                 28.263
   Clustered at county                            (0.035)           (0.021)              (0.027)           (0.022)             (0.948)           (1.256)               (38.861)
 Observations                                      5589              4679                 5589              4679                2035              1547                   1237
Note: please refer to Table 2 for a full description of the controls, restrictions and checks. Refer to Table 5 for a description of the quality measure.
Note from IPUMS: Census practice on collecting occupational data (in OCC) for persons not currently in the labor force changed over time. In the earliest samples, no time referent was
specified for when the person was gainfully employed. In 1900, past occupation was specifically requested for persons unable to secure any work during the preceding year, but not
for persons who had permanently retired. Similarly, for the 1910-1930 surveys, occupation was to be reported for persons temporarily unemployed, but not for those permanently
retired. This changed markedly in 1940 and 1950. In those years, OCC was reserved for those in the labor force (working, with a job, or looking for work) in the week prior to the
census. For 1940 and 1950, past occupation was separately collected via different questions and variables (UOCC and ROCC) for formerly-employed persons not currently in the labor
force.
                     Table 7: Do the cash transfers affect geographic mobility?
                                  Sample: all mothers in application
Outcome:                                                           All mothers

                                        1930 live in     1930 live in   1940 live in   1940 live in
Sample:
                                         MP county         MP state      MP county       MP state

 Mean of Y for rejected                        0.65             0.85        0.59           0.83
Panel A: No controls
 Accepted                                    0.080            0.037         0.078           0.031
   Robust standard errors                 (0.016)***      (0.012)***     (0.018)***      (0.014)**
   Clustered at county                    [0.027]***       [0.016]**     [0.028]***       [0.020]
   Clustered at county*year               {0.019}***     {0.013}***     {0.021}***       {0.015}**
 Bounds for missing data(Lee 2009)       [ 0.04;0.19]    [ 0.02;0.15]   [ 0.00;0.23]   [ -0.00;0.17]
 R-squared                                   0.002            0.001         0.002           0.001
Panel B: Full controls
 Accepted                                    0.048            0.021         0.063         0.020
   Robust standard errors                 (0.017)***        (0.013)*     (0.019)***      (0.015)
   Clustered at county                     [0.024]**        [0.013]      [0.018]***      [0.018]
   Clustered at county*year                {0.019}**        {0.013}      {0.020}***      {0.016}
 R-squared                                   0.176            0.099         0.114         0.090
 Observations                                11178            11178         9358           9358
Panel C: Checks
 1- Correction for OVB (Oster 2017)      [ 0.04;0.06]    [ 0.02;0.03]   [ 0.06;0.07]   [ 0.02;0.02]
 2- Semi-parametric sample selection correction (Newey, 2009)
 Accepted                                    0.049            0.021         0.063          0.020
   95% Confidence interval                [0.00;0.10]    [-0.00;0.05]    [0.03;0.10]   [-0.02;0.05]
    F-Stat                                   25.57            25.57        116.82         116.82
    P-Value                                  0.000            0.000         0.000          0.000
 3- Drop if quality of match low
  Accepted                                 0.069***           0.017        0.053*          0.029
   Clustered at county                      (0.026)          (0.017)       (0.028)        (0.024)
 Observations                                 5589             5589         4679            4679
                                       Table 7 Cont: Do the cash transfers affect geographic mobility?
Outcome:                                                                        All mothers who moved
                                            1930 live in    1940 live in
                                                                              1930 live in   1940 live in               1930 live in       1940 live in
                                                more            more
Sample:                                                                        higher sex     higher sex               higher female      higher female
                                              educated        educated
                                                                             ratio county ² ratio county ²              LFP county ²       LFP county ²
                                               county ¹        county ¹
 Mean of Y for rejected                          0.5             0.51              0.5           0.54                        0.67               0.63
Panel A: No controls
 Accepted                                    0.032           0.024                      0.019             -0.047             -0.025            0.011
   Robust standard errors                   -0.029           -0.03                     -0.037              -0.03             -0.035           -0.029
   Clustered at county                     [0.048]         [0.044]                    [0.053]            [0.050]            [0.039]          [0.034]
   Clustered at county*year                {0.034}         {0.037}                    {0.041}           {0.032}            {0.036}           {0.031}
 Bounds for missing data(Lee 2009)      [ -0.03;0.09]    [ 0.02;0.03]               [ 0.00;0.03]     [ -0.05;-0.04]     [ -0.05;-0.02]     [ 0.00;0.02]
 R-squared                                     0               0                          0                0.001                0                0
Panel B: Full controls
 Accepted                                    0.028           0.021                      0.038            -0.004             -0.018             0.026
   Robust standard errors                   -0.026          -0.026                     -0.036            -0.029             -0.035            -0.027
   Clustered at county                     [0.024]         [0.024]                    [0.031]           [0.032]            [0.034]           [0.026]
   Clustered at county*year                {0.027}         {0.026}                    {0.036}           {0.028}            {0.032}           {0.027}
 R-squared                                   0.399           0.405                      0.333             0.289              0.328             0.275
 Observations                                3123            3177                       2009              3136               2009              3136
Panel C: Checks
 1- Correction for OVB (Oster 2017)      [ 0.03;0.03]    [ 0.02;0.02]               [ 0.03;0.05]      [ -0.02;0.01]     [ -0.02;-0.02]     [ 0.02;0.03]
 2- Semi-parametric sample selection correction (Newey, 2009)
 Accepted                                    0.028           0.022                      0.037            -0.003             -0.019             0.025
   95% Confidence interval               [-0.02;0.08]    [-0.03;0.07]               [-0.02;0.10]      [-0.07;0.06]       [-0.09;0.05]      [-0.03;0.08]
    F-Stat                                   22.13           29.86                      27.58             27.52              27.58             27.52
    P-Value                                    0               0                          0                 0                  0                 0
 3- Drop if quality of match low
  Accepted                                  -0.023          -0.016                      0.08              0.049             -0.039             -0.035
   Clustered at county                      -0.042          -0.042                     -0.062            -0.041             -0.061             -0.051
 Observations                                1249            1362                       775               1352               775                1352
Note: Sample: all mothers in application. R efer to Table 3 for a full description of the controls, restrictions and checks. ¹ Counties are ranked by the
average schooling in the population between 18 and 55 years old in the 1940 census. ² Counties are ranked by the sex ratio (white married mother labor
force participation) at the year of application (interpolated between 1910, 1920 and 1930 censuses). A Low quality match is a match with quality below the
median. The quality measure uses the standardized jarowinkle for the 1930 and 1940 census matches respectively.
                        Table 8: Does welfare benefit mothers in the long run?
                                    Sample all women in application
Data source                                               Family search                         1940 census
                                                                                             Household income
Outcome                                                          Mom longevity
                                                                                                  in 1940
 Mean of Y for rejected                                                73.43                       979.57
Panel A: No controls
 Accepted                                                               0.950                        -9.027
   Robust standard errors                                            (0.456)**                     (42.631)
   Clustered at county                                               [0.404]**                     [57.634]
   Clustered at county*year                                          {0.464}**                     {44.757}
 Bounds for missing data, no controls (Lee 2009)                   [ -0.53;3.26]              [ -414.44;208.69]
 R-squared                                                              0.000                         0.000

Panel B: Full controls
 Accepted                                                             0.247                         -58.241
   Robust standard errors                                            (0.494)                       (44.585)
   Clustered at county                                               [0.567]                       [31.877]*
   Clustered at county*year                                          {0.490}                       {43.470}
 R-squared                                                            0.028                          0.080
 Observations                                                         12989                          9358

Panel C: Checks
 1- Correction for OVB (Oster 2017)                     [ -0.02;0.49]                          [ -76.55;-41.74]
 2- Semi-parametric sample selection correction (Newey, 2009)
 Accepted                                                    0.254                                  -59.762
   95% Confidence interval                               [-0.86;1.37]                           [-122.81;3.29]
    F-Stat                                                   46.25                                   116.82
    P-Value                                                  0.000                                    0.000
 3- Drop if quality of match low
  Accepted                                                   0.215                                 -107.325
   Clustered at county                                      (0.742)                                 (72.547)
 Observations                                                 8007                                    4679
Note: please refer to Table 2 for a full description of the controls, restrictions and checks. The quality measure
uses the standardized jarowinkle for longevity in column 1, and the standarized jarowinkle for the 1940 census
match in column 2.
                                               Table 9: Marginal Value of Public Funds
                                                  All values expressed in 2019 dollars
                                                                      Mothers                      Including Children Spillovers
                                                                                              income and
                                                                                                                transfer not counted as a
                                                                                          longevity benefits on
                                                                                                                          benefit
                                                                                                  kids
Panel A: computations based on the results of this paper and of Aizer et al. (2016)
Dollar value of maternal behavioral response (marriage delay     3,660.68                        3,660.68                 3,660.68
and mobility decrease)
Dollar value of spillover for kids (mortality + income)              0                           61,481                   61,481
Dollar value of increased income taxes from kids (10% tax rate)      0                            5,225                    5,225
Dollar value of increased income taxes from mom (10% tax rate)    507.59                         507.59                   507.59
Total transfer                                                    20,715                         20,715                   20,715
Total benefit or WTP (transfer + spillovers - cost of behavioral  17,054                         78,535                   57,820
responses)
WTP excluding cost of behavioral responses                        20,715                         82,196                   61,481
Total cost (transfer - taxes from increased earnings)             20,207                         14,982                   14,982
MVPF without behavioral responses from mother                      1.00                           5.49                     4.10
MVPF including behavioral responses                                0.84                           5.24                     3.86

Panel B: Minimum gains for children needed for an MVPF of 1
Minimum change in kids' life expectancy¹ in years (for a MVPF=1)                                     0.34                    1.45
Minimum percentatge change in kids' income² (for a MVPF=1)                                          0.75%                   5.67%
This table computes the Marginal Value of Public Funds (MVPF) using the methodology of Hendren and Sprung-Keyser (2019). We
correct for discounting using a 3% rate, and we do not consider the implications of life extensions on Medicare and SSA pensions. We
ignore the effects of the pension on marriage rates, type of husband, and years of schooling of the children. These are treated as
intermediate outcomes whose ultimate value is reflected in increases in income and longevity.
The dollar value of maternal behavioral response includes the discounted effects on marriage delay and mobility decrease. The value of
spillover for kids includes the discounted effects on mortality from age 10 to 85 and discounted income effects for the children's average
working period, 45 years. We assume a 10% tax rate that is discounted for mothers and children average working periods (27 and 45
years, respectively). The total transfer takes into account that mothers are in the program, on average, for 3 years. ¹Assumes no change
in kids income. ²Assumes there is no change in kids longevity and takes into account the increase in income taxes from kids.
Appendix Figure 1: Census Figures
Appendix Figure 1 continued: Labor Force participation 1940 census
Appendix Figure 2: Duration and Husband Quality
Appendix Figure 3: Cash transfers do not change the degree of assortative mating in education, longevity and age at marriage
                  Appendix Figure 4: Share of MP applicants remarrying by age




Note: the figure plots the fraction remarrying by age. The 5th percentile of the age at remarriage is 24 and the
95th is 52.
Appendix table 1: The status of poor women with children in 1910


                                                              White Women with    Unmarried white
Women ages 15-55 in the 1% 1910 IPUMS census data.
                                                                   children      women with children


Number of children ever had                                         3.873              4.279

Number of children in household                                     2.832              2.392

Is working                                                          0.081              0.411

Married                                                             0.918

Married and working                                                 0.047

House is a farm                                                     0.305              0.204

Woman is the head of the household                                  0.067               0.68

Woman is head and male non-relatives are living at home             0.011              0.112
Woman is living with adult relatives                                0.051               0.28
N                                                                  118,411             9,705
Note: Author's computation using data from the 1910 census.
Appendix Table 2: Accepted moms are slightly worse off at time of application
                           MP admin data                              Newly collected data
                                               Number      Number
                               Number of        of kids     of live   Mom age       Mom        Mom
                                                                                                         Mom is
Outcome:                         kids on         died      kids 14+       at       number     foreign
                                                                                                          black
                               application¹   before MP     at MP     application of siblings   born
                                              application application
Panel A: All Moms (no controls)
Mean of outcome for rejected    2.200            0.198       1.631        37.824      4.14     0.155      0.017
 Accepted                         0.454           0.031      -0.132     -0.683    0.251          0.014     0.002
  OLS (unadjusted se)          (0.040)***       (0.016)*   (0.060)** (0.238)*** (0.111)**        -0.01    -0.004
  Robust standard errors       [0.037]***      [0.015]**   [0.064]** [0.253]*** [0.113]**      [0.010]   [0.004]
  Clustered at county          {0.071}***       {0.018}*    {0.075}* {0.309}** {0.191}         {0.019}   {0.005}
  Clustered at county*year     (0.052)***      (0.015)**    (0.071)* (0.290)** (0.135)*         -0.012    -0.004
 Observations                  16228         16228           16228        15313      16228     14968     14824
 R-squared                      0.008         0.000          0.000        0.001      0.000     0.000     0.000
Panel B: All Moms (County and Year of Application FE)
Mean of outcome for rejected   2.2000         0.198          1.631        37.824      4.14     0.155      0.017

 Accepted                         0.421           0.023       -0.193       -0.712      0.105    0.006      0.004
  OLS (unadjusted se)          (0.042)***        -0.017    (0.063)***   (0.253)***    -0.115    -0.01     -0.004
  Robust standard errors       [0.038]***       [0.016]    [0.067]***   [0.267]***   [0.117]   [0.010]   [0.004]
  Clustered at county          {0.058}***       {0.016}    {0.072}***   {0.272}***   {0.130}   {0.009}   {0.004}
  Clustered at county*year     (0.045)***        -0.016    (0.069)***   (0.274)***    -0.114    -0.01     -0.005
 Observations                16228               16228       16228        15313      16228     14968     14824
 R-squared                   0.083               0.052       0.041        0.033      0.094     0.125     0.058
Panel C: Unmarried Moms (No Controls)
Mean of outcome for rejected 2.182               0.196       1.727        38.372      4.22     0.159      0.018

 Accepted                         0.471          0.043        -0.147    -0.81     0.253          0.009     0.001
  OLS (unadjusted se)          (0.044)***      (0.018)**   (0.068)** (0.263)*** (0.124)**       -0.011    -0.004
  Robust standard errors       [0.040]***      [0.017]**   [0.072]** [0.281]*** [0.127]**      [0.011]   [0.004]
  Clustered at county          {0.067}***      {0.020}**     {0.094} {0.334}** {0.212}         {0.020}   {0.005}
  Clustered at county*year     (0.053)***      (0.017)**    (0.078)* (0.324)** (0.146)*         -0.013    -0.005
 Observations                13383          13383      13383              12629      13383     12337     12205
 R-squared                   0.008          0.000       0.000             0.001      0.000     0.000     0.000
Panel D: Unmarried Moms (County and Year of Application FE)
Mean of outcome for rejected 2.182          0.196       1.727             38.372      4.22     0.159      0.018
 Accepted                         0.441          0.034        -0.224     -0.779        0.049     0.007     0.003
  OLS (unadjusted se)          (0.046)***      (0.019)*    (0.071)*** (0.278)***      -0.127    -0.012    -0.004
  Robust standard errors       [0.042]***      [0.018]*    [0.076]*** [0.296]***     [0.131]   [0.012]   [0.005]
  Clustered at county          {0.057}***      {0.019}*     {0.097}** {0.318}**      {0.139}   {0.009}   {0.005}
  Clustered at county*year     (0.047)***      (0.017)*    (0.080)*** (0.311)**       -0.133    -0.011    -0.005
 Observations                     13383          13383       13383        12629      13383     12337     12205
 R-squared                        0.092          0.058       0.047        0.044      0.101     0.130     0.063
Appendix Table 2 cont: Accepted moms are slightly worse off at time of application
                                                        Newly collected data                                                     Predicted
                                                                                                                                   Income
                                                                 Occupationa Mom      Years from  Longevity
                                     In labor                                                                                    (based on
Outcome:                                       Work 1910           l score  education  Pre-MP     of Pre-MP
                                    force 1910                                                                                      Iowa
                                                                    1910²     1940 husband death³ husband
                                                                                                                                  census
Panel A: All Moms (no controls)
Mean of outcome for rejected    0.14                 0.151           2.407         7.654           2.214            51.418         824.642
  Accepted                           -0.021     -0.032     -0.579                   0.099        -0.593            -1.877          -64.731
   OLS (unadjusted se)              (0.012)* (0.011)*** (0.214)***                 -0.102      (0.119)***        (0.582)***       (34.086)*
   Robust standard errors            [0.013] [0.012]*** [0.236]**                 [0.099]      [0.134]***        [0.609]***       [33.450]*
   Clustered at county              {0.012}* {0.011}*** {0.336}*                  {0.089}      {0.148}***        {0.742}**        {48.850}
   Clustered at county*year          -0.013   (0.013)**  (0.259)**                 -0.108      (0.147)***        (0.674)***       (36.836)*
  Observations                         7648          8953            8953          9222            7244             9938               5332
  R-squared                            0.000         0.001           0.001         0.000           0.003            0.001              0.001
Mean of outcome for rejected   0.14       0.151        2.407                       7.654           2.214            51.418         824.642
Panel B: All Moms (County and Year of Application FE)
  Accepted                    -0.007     -0.013       -0.286                        0.018         -0.38            -1.759          -50.700
   OLS (unadjusted se)        -0.013     -0.012       -0.228                       -0.107      (0.127)***        (0.608)***        -34.287
   Robust standard errors    [0.014]    [0.013]      [0.252]                      [0.106]      [0.140]***        [0.637]***       [33.650]
   Clustered at county       {0.011}    {0.010}     {0.312}                       {0.102}      {0.119}***        {0.591}***      {29.663}*
   Clustered at county*year   -0.013     -0.013       -0.251                        -0.11      (0.132)***        (0.672)***        -32.908
  Observations               7648                    8953            8953          9222            7244             9938               5332
  R-squared                  0.033                   0.039           0.032         0.064           0.067            0.076              0.152
Panel C: Unmarried Moms (No Controls)
Mean of outcome for rejected 0.141                   0.153           2.515         7.712           2.222            49.083         768.819
  Accepted                           -0.023     -0.033     -0.648                   0.027        -0.611            -1.820          -67.727
   OLS (unadjusted se)              (0.013)* (0.013)*** (0.241)***                 -0.112      (0.118)***        (0.587)***       (38.929)*
   Robust standard errors            [0.014]  [0.014]**  [0.268]**                [0.109]      [0.135]***        [0.629]***       [38.478]*
   Clustered at county              {0.013}* {0.011}*** {0.326}**                 {0.111}      {0.146}***        {0.885}**        {62.972}
   Clustered at county*year          -0.015   (0.014)**  (0.294)**                 -0.114      (0.149)***        (0.704)***        -44.261
  Observations               6507      7515         7515                           7521            7067             8463               4453
  R-squared                  0.000     0.001        0.001                          0.000           0.004            0.001              0.001
Panel D: Unmarried Moms (County and Year of Application FE)
Mean of outcome for rejected 0.141     0.153        2.515                          7.712           2.222            49.083         768.819
  Accepted                            -0.006          -0.01          -0.309        -0.051        -0.395             -1.672         -52.257
   OLS (unadjusted se)                -0.014         -0.013          -0.257        -0.119      (0.125)***        (0.614)***        -38.093
   Robust standard errors            [0.015]        [0.014]         [0.283]       [0.115]      [0.141]***         [0.656]**       [37.794]
   Clustered at county               {0.011}        {0.010}         {0.282}       {0.112}      {0.121}***        {0.717}**        {37.969}
   Clustered at county*year           -0.015         -0.013          -0.265        -0.119      (0.134)***         (0.699)**        -38.244
  Observations                         6507          7515            7515          7521            7067             8463               4453
  R-squared                            0.039         0.044           0.037         0.063           0.071            0.076              0.207
Note: Controls include county and year of application fixed effects. The sample drops mothers that applied after 1930, and
applications made by a person who is not the mother, keeps only the observations of the firts successful attemp (It keeps the
application with more children listed if multiple succesful applications in the same year. Keep the smallest fsid if applied
successfully more than once the same year, with the same number of children.). The predicted income is obtained using the 1915
Iowa census to estimate the coefficients to predict income for all recipients. The regression includes only the covariates observed
in both our data and the Iowa census. It includes widow status, mother's age, number of kids, number of kids at each age, age of
youngest and oldest kid at application, number of kids over 14 years old at application, an indicator if the mother is foreign-born,
and indicator of being black, schooling and occupation score.¹Only includes kids with elegible age. ²Occupational score inputs
zeros for mothers out of the labor force. ³Death to MP application if >0.
Appendix Table 3A: Does accepted status predict missing data for marriage outcomes?
                                                              Data for women known to have remarried
                                           Remarriage              Missing Family Search variables
                                           information                                        Post-MP
                                                           Duration until
                                              missing                          Age gap        Husband
Outcome:                                                     remarriage
                                                                                              Longevity
Panel A: All Moms (No controls)
Mean of outcome for rejected                   0.205            0.355           0.121           0.298

Accepted                                       -0.051          -0.024          -0.028          -0.060
 OLS (unadjusted se)                        (0.010)***        (0.020)        (0.013)**      (0.018)***
 Robust standard errors                     [0.011]***        [0.021]        [0.014]**      [0.020]***
 Clustered at county                        {0.009}***        {0.024}        {0.013}**      {0.018}***
 Clustered at county*year                   (0.010)***        (0.022)         (0.016)*      (0.021)***

Observations                                  16228            6384            6384            6384
R-squared                                     0.002            0.000           0.001           0.002
Panel B: All Moms (All Controls)
Mean of outcome for rejected                   0.205           0.355           0.121           0.298

Accepted                                       -0.009          -0.022          -0.020          -0.040
 OLS (unadjusted se)                          (0.009)         (0.020)         (0.013)        (0.020)**
 Robust standard errors                       [0.010]         [0.021]         [0.015]         [0.021]*
 Clustered at county                          {0.011}         {0.022}         {0.014}        {0.019}**
 Clustered at county*year                     (0.010)         (0.022)         (0.016)         (0.021)*

Observations                                  16228            6384            6384            6384
R-squared                                     0.294            0.205           0.114           0.085
Panel C: Unmarried Moms (No Controls)
Mean of outcome for rejected                   0.203           0.370           0.127           0.300

Accepted                                       -0.051          -0.030          -0.026          -0.060
 OLS (unadjusted se)                        (0.011)***        (0.022)        (0.014)*       (0.020)***
 Robust standard errors                     [0.012]***        [0.023]        [0.016]*       [0.021]***
 Clustered at county                        {0.009}***        {0.027}        {0.013}*       {0.020}***
 Clustered at county*year                   (0.012)***        (0.022)         (0.017)       (0.022)***

Observations                                  13383            5435            5435            5435
R-squared                                     0.002            0.000           0.001           0.002
Panel D: Unmarried Moms (All Controls)
Mean of outcome for rejected                   0.203           0.370           0.127           0.300

Accepted                                       -0.009         -0.039           -0.019          -0.045
 OLS (unadjusted se)                          (0.010)        (0.022)*         (0.015)        (0.021)**
 Robust standard errors                       [0.010]        [0.023]*         [0.016]        [0.023]**
 Clustered at county                          {0.013}        {0.021}*         {0.015}        {0.021}**
 Clustered at county*year                     (0.012)        (0.023)*         (0.016)        (0.022)**

Observations                                   13383           5435            5435            5435
R-squared                                      0.307           0.216           0.125           0.096
Appendix Table 3B: Does accepted status predict missing data for marriage outcomes?
                                                  Data for women known to have remarried
                                                       Missing Post-MP census variables
                                                                  Occupational
                                    Education      Education                       Farmer       Income
                                                                      score
Outcome:                              (1940)       gap (1940)                     (earliest)     (1940)
                                                                    (earliest)
Panel A: All Moms (No controls)
Mean of outcome for rejected           0.513          0.599          0.325          0.199        0.539

Accepted                                -0.061         -0.073         -0.015        -0.026        -0.062
 OLS (unadjusted se)                 (0.021)***     (0.021)***       (0.020)       (0.016)     (0.022)***
 Robust standard errors              [0.022]***     [0.021]***       [0.020]       [0.017]     [0.021]***
 Clustered at county                 {0.023}***     {0.020}***       {0.026}      {0.014}*      {0.025}**
 Clustered at county*year            (0.023)***     (0.021)***       (0.025)       (0.018)     (0.023)***

Observations                             6384          6384           6384          6384         6384
R-squared                                0.001         0.002          0.000         0.000        0.001
Panel B: All Moms (All Controls)
Mean of outcome for rejected            0.513          0.599          0.325         0.199        0.539

Accepted                                -0.024         -0.030         -0.001        -0.014       -0.030
 OLS (unadjusted se)                   (0.023)        (0.023)        (0.021)       (0.017)      (0.023)
 Robust standard errors                [0.022]        [0.022]        [0.021]       [0.018]      [0.023]
 Clustered at county                   {0.020}       {0.015}*        {0.021}       {0.016}      {0.023}
 Clustered at county*year              (0.021)        (0.020)        (0.024)       (0.018)      (0.022)

Observations                             6384          6384           6384          6384         6384
R-squared                                0.102         0.102          0.079         0.079        0.098
Panel C: Unmarried Moms (No Controls)
Mean of outcome for rejected       0.511               0.606          0.330         0.203        0.535

Accepted                                -0.060         -0.081         -0.013        -0.026       -0.059
 OLS (unadjusted se)                  (0.023)**     (0.023)***       (0.022)       (0.018)     (0.024)**
 Robust standard errors               [0.024]**     [0.023]***       [0.022]       [0.019]     [0.023]**
 Clustered at county                 {0.023}***     {0.018}***       {0.028}       {0.017}     {0.024}**
 Clustered at county*year             (0.024)**     (0.022)***       (0.026)       (0.019)     (0.024)**

Observations                             5435          5435           5435          5435         5435
R-squared                                0.001         0.002          0.000         0.000        0.001
Panel D: Unmarried Moms (All Controls)
Mean of outcome for rejected       0.511               0.606          0.330         0.203        0.535

Accepted                                -0.027          -0.038        -0.005        -0.015       -0.029
 OLS (unadjusted se)                   (0.025)         (0.025)       (0.023)       (0.019)      (0.025)
 Robust standard errors                [0.024]         [0.024]       [0.023]       [0.020]      [0.025]
 Clustered at county                   {0.019}       {0.017}**       {0.022}       {0.019}      {0.022}
 Clustered at county*year              (0.022)        (0.022)*       (0.023)       (0.019)      (0.022)

Observations                             5435          5435           5435          5435         5435
R-squared                                0.117         0.115          0.087         0.088        0.108
Appendix Table 4A: Does accepted predict missing data for MP mom's labor force outcomes?
                                         Labor force participation                Working                  Occupational Score             Mother's Income
Outcome:
                                      1920         1930          1940        1930        1940         1920       1930         1940            1940

Panel A: All Moms (No controls)
Mean of outcome for rejected          0.441       0.396        0.521        0.298        0.187        0.896        0.831        0.886          0.579

Accepted                               -0.003     -0.093       -0.108        0.042        0.053       -0.002       -0.050       -0.061        -0.096
 OLS (unadjusted se)                  (0.013)   (0.012)***   (0.013)***   (0.016)***   (0.016)***    (0.008)     (0.011)***   (0.010)***    (0.013)***
 Robust standard errors               [0.013]   [0.013]***   [0.013]***   [0.015]***   [0.015]***    [0.008]     [0.010]***   [0.009]***    [0.013]***
 Clustered at county                  {0.026}   {0.022}***   {0.022}***   {0.013}***   {0.018}***    {0.010}     {0.012}***   {0.016}***    {0.024}***
 Clustered at county*year             (0.017)   (0.016)***   (0.016)***   (0.016)***   (0.016)***    (0.010)     (0.010)***   (0.010)***    (0.017)***

Observations                          16228       16228        16228        11178        9358         16228        16228        16228         16228
R-squared                             0.000       0.004        0.004        0.001        0.001        0.000        0.001        0.002         0.003

Panel B: All Moms (All Controls)
Mean of outcome for rejected          0.441       0.396        0.521        0.298        0.187        0.896        0.831        0.886          0.579

Accepted                              -0.027       -0.034      -0.032       0.014         0.031       -0.035       -0.012       -0.022        -0.041
 OLS (unadjusted se)                (0.012)**   (0.012)***   (0.013)**     (0.017)      (0.017)*    (0.008)***    (0.011)     (0.010)**     (0.013)***
 Robust standard errors             [0.013]**   [0.013]***   [0.013]**     [0.016]      [0.016]*    [0.009]***    [0.011]     [0.009]**     [0.013]***
 Clustered at county                {0.012}**    {0.013}**   {0.013}**     {0.015}     {0.016}**    {0.008}***    {0.010}     {0.009}**     {0.014}***
 Clustered at county*year           (0.013)**   (0.013)***   (0.013)**     (0.016)      (0.016)*    (0.009)***    (0.011)     (0.009)**     (0.013)***

Observations                          16228       16228        16228        11178        9358         16228        16228        16228         16228
R-squared                             0.287       0.215        0.157        0.057        0.062        0.103        0.071        0.075         0.129
Appendix Table 4B: Does accepted predict missing data for MP mom's labor force outcomes?
                                  Labor force participation                Working                        Occupational Score             Mom's Income
Outcome:
                               1920         1930          1940        1930         1940              1920       1930         1940           1940
Panel C: Unmarried Moms (No Controls)
Mean of outcome for rejected   0.426        0.401         0.529       0.303        0.190             0.891        0.830        0.888          0.584

Accepted                          0.008       -0.096       -0.110          0.034       0.044         0.000       -0.046       -0.056         -0.093
 OLS (unadjusted se)             (0.014)    (0.013)***   (0.014)***      (0.018)*    (0.018)**      (0.009)    (0.012)***   (0.011)***     (0.014)***
 Robust standard errors          [0.014]    [0.014]***   [0.014]***      [0.017]*   [0.017]***      [0.009]    [0.011]***   [0.009]***     [0.014]***
 Clustered at county             {0.026}    {0.021}***   {0.022}***     {0.013}**    {0.017}**      {0.011}    {0.012}***   {0.013}***     {0.022}***
 Clustered at county*year        (0.018)    (0.017)***   (0.018)***      (0.017)*    (0.018)**      (0.010)    (0.012)***   (0.011)***     (0.018)***

Observations                      13383        13383        13383         9174         7635          13383        13383        13383          13383
R-squared                         0.000        0.004        0.004         0.000        0.001         0.000        0.001        0.002          0.003

Panel D: Unmarried Moms (All Controls)
Mean of outcome for rejected 0.426             0.401        0.529         0.303        0.190         0.891        0.830        0.888          0.584

Accepted                          -0.018       -0.035      -0.041         0.007        0.027        -0.035        -0.007       -0.021        -0.047
 OLS (unadjusted se)             (0.013)    (0.013)***   (0.014)***      (0.019)      (0.019)     (0.009)***     (0.012)      (0.011)*     (0.015)***
 Robust standard errors          [0.014]     [0.014]**   [0.014]***      [0.018]      [0.018]     [0.010]***     [0.012]     [0.010]**     [0.015]***
 Clustered at county             {0.013}     {0.014}**   {0.014}***      {0.017}     {0.014}*     {0.010}***     {0.010}     {0.008}**     {0.015}***
 Clustered at county*year        (0.014)     (0.015)**   (0.014)***      (0.018)      (0.019)     (0.010)***     (0.012)     (0.010)**     (0.014)***

Observations                        13383        13383        13383           9174         7635          13383        13383        13383        13383
R-squared                           0.299        0.218        0.159           0.061        0.067         0.105        0.075        0.077        0.128
Note: Refer to Table 2 for a description of the controls and checks.The sample drops mothers that applied after 1930, and applications made by a
person who is not the mother, keeps only the observations of the firts successful attemp (It keeps the application with more children listed if
multiple succesful applications in the same year. Keep the smallest fsid if applied successfully more than once the same year, with the same number
of children.). Panel D drops mother with missing marital status.
Appendix Table 5: Does accepted predict missing data for mobility and well-being outcomes?
                                  County of residence missing          Long Run mother outcomes missing
                                                                                       Died     Family
Outcome:                        1920         1930         1940         Longevity      before    income
                                                                                       1940      (1940)
Panel A: All Moms (No controls)
Mean of outcome for rejected    0.435        0.396        0.520           0.244        0.237      0.520

Accepted                          -0.005        -0.094       -0.108       -0.049       -0.046       -0.108
 OLS (unadjusted se)             (0.013)     (0.012)***   (0.013)***   (0.011)***   (0.010)***   (0.013)***
 Robust standard errors          [0.013]     [0.013]***   [0.013]***   [0.011]***   [0.011]***   [0.013]***
 Clustered at county             {0.027}     {0.022}***   {0.022}***   {0.016}***   {0.016}***   {0.022}***
 Clustered at county*year        (0.017)     (0.016)***   (0.016)***   (0.013)***   (0.013)***   (0.016)***

Observations                      16228         16228        16228       16228        16228        16228
R-squared                         0.000         0.004        0.004       0.001        0.001        0.004
Panel B: All Moms (All Controls)
Mean of outcome for rejected    0.435           0.396         0.520      0.244        0.237        0.520

Accepted                          -0.028        -0.034       -0.032      -0.006       -0.003       -0.032
 OLS (unadjusted se)            (0.012)**    (0.012)***    (0.013)**    (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.013)**
 Robust standard errors         [0.013]**    [0.013]***    [0.013]**    [0.010]      [0.010]     [0.013]**
 Clustered at county            {0.012}**     {0.013}**    {0.013}**    {0.013}      {0.014}     {0.013}**
 Clustered at county*year       (0.013)**    (0.013)***    (0.013)**    (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.013)**

Observations                      16228         16228        16228       16228        16228        16228
R-squared                         0.287         0.216        0.157       0.352        0.324        0.157
Panel C: Unmarried Moms (No Controls)
Mean of outcome for rejected 0.420              0.401         0.529      0.242        0.235        0.529

Accepted                          0.007         -0.096       -0.110       -0.051       -0.047       -0.110
 OLS (unadjusted se)             (0.014)     (0.013)***   (0.014)***   (0.012)***   (0.011)***   (0.014)***
 Robust standard errors          [0.014]     [0.014]***   [0.014]***   [0.012]***   [0.012]***   [0.014]***
 Clustered at county             {0.026}     {0.021}***   {0.022}***   {0.016}***   {0.016}***   {0.022}***
 Clustered at county*year        (0.018)     (0.017)***   (0.018)***   (0.014)***   (0.014)***   (0.018)***

Observations                      13383         13383        13383       13383        13383        13383
R-squared                         0.000         0.004        0.004       0.001        0.001        0.004
Panel D: Unmarried Moms (All Controls)
Mean of outcome for rejected 0.420              0.401         0.529      0.242        0.235        0.529

Accepted                          -0.018        -0.035     -0.041        -0.006       -0.003        -0.041
 OLS (unadjusted se)             (0.013)     (0.013)*** (0.014)***      (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.014)***
 Robust standard errors          [0.014]      [0.014]** [0.014]***      [0.011]      [0.011]     [0.014]***
 Clustered at county             {0.013}      {0.014}** {0.014}***      {0.014}      {0.016}     {0.014}***
 Clustered at county*year        (0.014)      (0.015)** (0.014)***      (0.012)      (0.012)     (0.014)***

Observations                        13383         13383        13383     13383        13383        13383
R-squared                           0.299         0.219        0.159     0.361        0.332        0.159
Note: Refer to Table 2 for a description of the controls and checks.
                   Appendix Table 6: Does welfare increase quality of Post-MP husband? Results for additional quality measures
                                           Sample women who were unmarried at the time of application
                                                      Post-MP       Post-MP        Post-MP         1939
                                       Post-MP                                                              Husband's                         Mom's           Mom and Husband
                                                     Husband's      Husband        Husband       earnings                       Mom's
            Outcome:                  husband is                                                              age at                           age at           live together
                                                       kids at         is a          1940        occupation                    Education
                                        foreign                                                              marriage                         marriage
                                                      marriage       farmer*        income          score                                                      1930           1940
                                           (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)           (9)           (10)
Panel A: No Controls
Mean of outcome for rejected             0.683          0.607          0.106         751.3          43.17         44.670         7.801         38.240          0.827          0.920
Accepted                                 0.043          -0.042         0.011         -83.318       -3.833*         0.770         -0.059         0.582        -0.051**       -0.036*
                                        (0.028)        (0.066)        (0.016)       (73.331)       (2.079)        (0.846)       (0.149)        (0.544)        (0.023)       (0.019)
Observations                             4,266           3,572         4,457          2,815         3,328          2,637          3,759         3,558          2,987         2,612

Panel B: control for predetermined variables
Accepted                          0.000       -0.029                   0.014         -65.456        -3.002        1.140*         -0.021       0.995***       -0.041**         -0.012
                                 (0.027)     (0.069)                  (0.017)       (80.028)       (2.102)        (0.627)       (0.141)        (0.346)        (0.019)        (0.024)
Observations                      4,266        3,572                   4,457          2,815          3,328         2,637          3,759         3,558          2,987           2,612

Panel C: control for pre-determined variables and other inputs
Mean of outcome for rejected      0.446       0.698       0.142                      804.6          41.84          40.92         8.169          36.69          0.788          0.919
Accepted                                 -0.008         0.032          -0.010       -87.459         0.566        2.452**         -0.108       1.761***         -0.031         -0.028
                                        (0.049)        (0.098)        (0.027)      (109.735)       (0.804)       (0.944)        (0.172)        (0.548)        (0.031)        (0.031)
Observations                              1,887         1,363           1,887        1,755          1,755          998            1,887         1,363           1,431          1,887

Panel D: control for pre-determined variables and mom's age at marriage
Mean of outcome for rejected      0.673       0.607      0.107      758.6                           41.54          44.67         7.902          38.24          0.817          0.912
Accepted                                 -0.003         -0.029         0.004        -90.378         -2.877        1.140*         -0.095       0.995***         -0.024         -0.020
                                        (0.028)        (0.069)        (0.020)      (109.387)       (2.893)        (0.627)       (0.178)        (0.346)        (0.024)        (0.033)
Observations                              3,177          3,572         3,276         2,108           2,215         2,637          2,512         3,558           2,250          1,948
Note: Standard errors are clustered at the county level. Please refer to Table 2 for a full description of the controls, restrictions and checks. Panel C includes the other inputs
(Post-MP Husband longevity, age gap, Post-MP Husband latest occupational score, Post-MP Husband 1940 education and education gap) as controls. *Defined from pre
marriage data: uses 1910 if available, then 1920, then 1930, then 1940. Never uses a measure that is observed post-MP marriage.
Appendix Table 7: Determinants of remarriage and time to remarriage
Dependent variable:                                     Remarried=1                        Duration to remarriage
Sample:                                           All     Accepted Rejected               All     Accepted Rejected
  Mean of dependent variable                     0.482       0.482        0.474          6.357       6.442       5.471
  Accepted                                      -0.014                                1.275***
                                               (0.020)                                 (0.444)
  MP age of youngest sibling                  -0.005** -0.005**          -0.004         -0.047      -0.080       0.101
                                               (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.005)        (0.059)     (0.061)     (0.195)
  MP age of oldest sibling                       0.003      0.004*       -0.009         -0.010       0.014      -0.087
                                               (0.002)     (0.003)      (0.006)        (0.059)     (0.063)     (0.201)
  # of kids in the application (7+ omitted):    0.080*      0.086*        0.059         -1.713      -1.473      -0.038
      1                                        (0.045)     (0.047)      (0.151)        (1.258)     (1.308)     (3.995)
                                                 0.065       0.063        0.129        -1.864*      -1.671      -0.006
      2                                        (0.040)     (0.041)      (0.137)        (1.101)     (1.157)     (3.450)
                                                 0.029       0.030        0.062         -1.328      -1.169       2.174
      3                                        (0.040)     (0.041)      (0.153)        (1.226)     (1.242)     (3.486)
                                                 0.003       0.004        0.017         -0.827      -0.729       2.857
      4                                        (0.039)     (0.041)      (0.131)        (1.094)     (1.133)     (3.695)
                                                -0.028      -0.030        0.038         -0.782      -0.777       0.475
      5                                        (0.037)     (0.039)      (0.134)        (1.243)     (1.311)     (4.122)
                                                -0.030      -0.037        0.129         -0.807      -0.774       1.812
      6                                        (0.045)     (0.047)      (0.150)        (1.078)     (1.164)     (4.379)
  Length of mother's last name                   0.000       0.001       -0.010         -0.064      -0.067      -0.107
                                               (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.009)        (0.066)     (0.072)     (0.223)
  Divorced mother (MP)                        0.372*** 0.382***          -0.003         -0.401      -0.246      -2.360
                                               (0.023)     (0.026)      (0.130)        (0.789)     (0.884)     (2.946)
  Widow mother (MP)                           0.418*** 0.432***           0.020         -0.950      -1.027      -1.863
                                               (0.023)     (0.023)      (0.131)        (0.746)     (0.802)     (2.573)
  MP Marital status is missing                0.316*** 0.329***
                                               (0.032)     (0.036)
  Mother's age at application                -0.028*** -0.029*** -0.022***             0.048**     0.060**      -0.043
                                               (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.002)        (0.022)     (0.024)     (0.076)
  Missing mother's age at application          -0.155*     -0.136* -0.309**          62.227*** 66.624*** -8.601**
                                               (0.080)     (0.081)      (0.136)        (6.606)     (7.482)     (3.784)
  Number of siblings of the mother            0.009*** 0.009***           0.006         -0.013      -0.018       0.078
                                               (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.004)        (0.028)     (0.030)     (0.123)
  Mother is foreign born (FS)                  -0.018*     -0.021*       -0.014          0.105       0.144       0.143
                                               (0.011)     (0.013)      (0.044)        (0.387)     (0.415)     (0.925)
  Mother's foreign status is missing          -0.055**     -0.051*       -0.098         -1.701      -1.161       2.964
                                               (0.023)     (0.026)      (0.068)        (1.462)     (2.111)     (3.180)
  Pre-MP husband's longevity                  0.003*** 0.003***           0.000          0.014       0.013      -0.024
                                               (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.012)     (0.014)     (0.033)
  Pre-MP husband's longevity is missing       0.047*** 0.049***           0.047         -0.132      -0.233      -0.604
                                               (0.011)     (0.012)      (0.028)        (0.182)     (0.188)     (1.161)
  Number of kids older than 14 (FS)           0.015*** 0.015***           0.008       -0.165** -0.187**          0.110
                                               (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.007)        (0.071)     (0.077)     (0.343)
  Number of kids that died before application (FS)
                                                 0.003       0.003        0.020         -0.042       0.027    -1.097**
                                               (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.021)        (0.146)     (0.149)     (0.521)
  Number with missing dates of birth/death (FS)-0.005        0.005    -0.093***          0.455       0.301     2.519*
                                               (0.014)     (0.014)      (0.035)        (0.299)     (0.318)     (1.354)
  Observations                                  11,286      10,237        1,049          3,572       3,259        313
Note: OLS regressions. Standard errors clustered at the county level. The specifications also include year of
application FE. State and county covariates not shown.
Appendix Table 8a: Heterogeneity in results - controls
 Sample                                     All                                                       Among remarried women only
                                                                                              Utility    Post-MP      Post-MP    Post-MP     Age gap
                                        Ever     # kids post       Years to      Equal                                                                   Education
           Outcome (Y):                                                                      weighted    Husband      Husband    Husband   (shifted by
                                      remarried?     MP           remarriage    weights ⁴                                                                  gap³
                                                                                               index     Longevity Occ Score² Education    2.5 years)¹
A.All moms
   Accepted                               -0.013         -0.023       1.296       0.945        -0.005      1.752      -0.327     -0.115      0.390         -0.039
     Clustered at county level           (0.018)        (0.018)    (0.398)***   (0.429)**     (0.018)     (0.899)*   (0.461)    (0.219)     (0.235)*      (0.174)
     R-squared                            0.212          0.160        0.315       0.058        0.076       0.052      0.089      0.119       0.044         0.068
     Mean of outcome for rejected           0.468          0.246        5.719     23.123         0.360      70.242     21.095      7.709       6.557         1.950
     Observations                         13638          16228         4255        5792         2973        4830       4206       3460        5771          2978
B. all unmarried moms
   Accepted                               -0.014         -0.009       1.275       0.921        -0.006      1.821      -0.828     -0.226      0.275         -0.064
     Clustered at county level           (0.020)        (0.021)    (0.444)***   (0.448)**     (0.021)    (0.903)**   (0.574)    (0.228)     (0.289)       (0.185)
     R-squared                            0.228          0.162        0.338       0.068        0.085       0.056      0.095      0.122       0.049         0.081
     Mean of outcome for rejected           0.474          0.224        5.471     23.153         0.361     70.129      21.220      7.798      6.661          1.821
     Observations                         11286          13383         3572        4894         2540        4104       3556       2955       4874           2545
C. (unmarried moms?) drop if marital status missing at application
   Accepted                               -0.048         -0.032       1.112        1.366       -0.018      2.577      -0.542     -0.393      0.323         -0.258
     Clustered at county level          (0.020)**       (0.030)      (0.573)*   (0.467)***    (0.023)    (1.011)**   (0.677)    (0.297)     (0.313)       (0.199)
     R-squared                            0.241          0.174        0.331        0.076       0.094       0.066      0.095      0.117       0.053         0.108
     Mean of outcome for rejected           0.529          0.252        5.232      22.960        0.368     69.428      21.162      7.915      6.559          1.885
     Observations                          7925           9171         2620         3524        1794        2965       2549       2094       3511           1797
D. states that only admit widows
   Accepted                               -0.006         0.000        1.467        1.571       0.003       1.587      0.272      -0.457      0.529         -0.212
     Clustered at county level           (0.026)        (0.030)     (0.696)**   (0.494)***    (0.023)     (1.908)    (0.837)    (0.330)    (0.235)**      (0.196)
     R-squared                            0.206          0.156        0.319        0.060       0.094       0.060      0.101      0.106       0.050         0.101
     Mean of outcome for rejected           0.491          0.222        5.471      23.028       0.371      69.582     20.867       8.193       6.335        2.229
     Observations                          4128           4906         1395        1795         920        1507       1199        1053        1790          921
E. states that admit more than just widows (all other states?)
   Accepted                               -0.013         -0.025       1.096       0.644        -0.010      1.547      -0.612     0.056       0.333         0.037
     Clustered at county level           (0.020)        (0.022)     (0.430)**    (0.529)      (0.025)     (0.892)*   (0.606)    (0.210)     (0.314)       (0.236)
     R-squared                            0.220          0.165        0.333       0.070        0.089       0.063      0.097      0.147       0.054         0.076
     Mean of outcome for rejected           0.458          0.257        5.858     23.170         0.355      70.555     21.180     7.515       6.665         1.833
     Observations                          9510          11322         2860       3997          2053        3323       3007      2407        3981          2057
   P-value of test that D=E               0.869          0.804        0.767       0.191        0.642       0.741      0.295      0.253       0.758         0.616
F. states that regulated/required work
   Accepted                               -0.006         -0.012       1.244       0.852        -0.002      1.641      -0.347     0.082       0.488         -0.095
     Clustered at county level           (0.023)        (0.024)     (0.468)**    (0.582)      (0.028)     (1.021)    (0.715)    (0.253)     (0.358)       (0.272)
     R-squared                            0.212          0.149        0.316       0.068        0.092       0.060      0.086      0.144       0.049         0.086
     Mean of outcome for rejected           0.444          0.229        6.130     23.011         0.364     70.188      21.763     7.530       6.421          1.918
     Observations                          6657           8015         2046       2804          1432       2351        2144      1691        2795           1435
G. states that required women to stay home (all other states?)
   Accepted                               -0.017         -0.030       1.265       1.127        -0.010      1.559      -0.083     -0.245      0.333         -0.034
     Clustered at county level           (0.025)        (0.029)     (0.604)**   (0.556)**     (0.019)     (1.492)    (0.599)    (0.327)     (0.296)       (0.214)
     R-squared                            0.219          0.180        0.343       0.068        0.098       0.070      0.112      0.124       0.058         0.095
     Mean of outcome for rejected           0.501          0.270        5.270     23.252         0.355     70.304      20.231      7.951      6.714          1.990
     Observations                          6981           8213         2209        2988         1541       2479        2062       1769       2976           1543
   P-value of test that F=G               0.651          0.511        0.997       0.526        0.919       0.916      0.722      0.445       0.883         0.700
Appendix Table 8b: Heterogeneity in results - controls
                                        Ever        # kids post MP    Years to     Equal weights ⁴      Utility       Post-MP     Post-MP      Post-MP       Age gap        Education gap³
          Outcome (Y):               remarried?                      remarriage                       weighted       Husband     Husband      Husband     (shifted by 2.5
                                                                                                     quality index   Longevity   Occ Score²   Education        years)¹
H. counties with high share males (sex ratio above median)
    Accepted                               0.001          -0.002         1.642         1.183            0.014          2.154       -0.347      -0.292         0.259             0.012
      Clustered at county level          (0.020)         (0.022)      (0.475)***     (0.477)**         (0.026)       (1.224)*     (0.642)     (0.320)        (0.276)           (0.226)
      R-squared                            0.225           0.181         0.282         0.075            0.100          0.063       0.109       0.147          0.059             0.089
      Mean of outcome for rejected          0.472           0.228          5.751       23.154             0.351        69.876      21.106        7.965          6.549             2.083
      Observations                         6778            8095           2228          2995             1544          2511         2089        1787           2983              1547
I. counties with low share males (sex ratio below median)
    Accepted                              -0.022          -0.050         1.042         0.505            -0.021        1.051        -0.242      0.034          0.543             -0.253
      Clustered at county level          (0.027)         (0.029)*      (0.544)*       (0.598)          (0.027)       (1.016)      (0.747)     (0.252)        (0.382)           (0.238)
      R-squared                            0.208           0.144         0.377         0.068            0.115         0.073        0.100       0.126          0.065             0.084
      Mean of outcome for rejected          0.464           0.268          5.679       23.086             0.369       70.675       21.085        7.459          6.568             1.814
      Observations                         6860            8133           2027          2797             1429          2319         2117        1673           2788              1431
    P-value of test that H=I               0.746           0.104         0.636         0.415            0.296         0.691        0.961       0.411          0.786             0.443
J. counties with high female labor force participation (LFP above median)
    Accepted                              -0.020          -0.021         0.994         0.678            0.019          2.338       0.201       -0.401         0.346             -0.127
      Clustered at county level          (0.028)         (0.020)        (0.873)       (0.694)          (0.022)       (1.384)*     (0.721)     (0.265)        (0.321)           (0.228)
      R-squared                            0.203           0.130         0.359         0.060            0.099          0.064       0.105       0.142          0.055             0.115
      Mean of outcome for rejected          0.442           0.200          6.076       23.224             0.357        69.557      21.795        8.105          6.583             2.000
      Observations                         6766            8108           1980          2741             1426          2245         1940        1633           2733              1427
K. counties with low female labor force participation (LFP below median)
    Accepted                              -0.005          -0.026         1.468         1.305            -0.021        1.373        -0.466      0.141          0.429             0.101
      Clustered at county level          (0.015)         (0.030)      (0.435)***     (0.618)**         (0.026)       (1.210)      (0.715)     (0.282)        (0.333)           (0.236)
      R-squared                            0.232           0.188         0.288         0.094            0.113         0.084        0.114       0.154          0.065             0.122
      Mean of outcome for rejected          0.493           0.290          5.413       23.037             0.362       70.839       20.544        7.372          6.535             1.908
      Observations                         6872            8120           2275          3051             1547          2585         2266        1827           3038              1551
    P-value of test that J=K               0.601           0.741         0.573         0.585            0.231         0.634        0.593       0.186          0.453             0.763
L. moms above median age
    Accepted                              -0.010          -0.007         2.470         0.876            -0.010        3.022       -2.963       -0.237          1.166            -0.292
      Clustered at county level          (0.021)         (0.010)      (0.659)***      (0.919)          (0.043)       (2.199)     (1.567)*     (0.395)        (0.656)*          (0.318)
      R-squared                            0.096           0.060         0.181         0.143            0.274         0.130        0.189       0.243           0.137            0.298
      Mean of outcome for rejected          0.282           0.032          5.083       24.781            0.387        70.583       23.587       7.354           6.146            2.200
      Observations                         6407            7214           1091          1594             606           1267        1113         753            1590              607
M. moms below median age
    Accepted                              -0.016          -0.032         0.924         1.160            0.001         1.346        0.803       -0.132         0.101             0.075
      Clustered at county level          (0.021)         (0.036)       (0.531)*      (0.567)**         (0.022)       (0.916)      (0.742)     (0.243)        (0.381)           (0.195)
      R-squared                            0.150           0.157         0.370         0.059            0.096         0.064        0.107       0.124          0.057             0.078
      Mean of outcome for rejected          0.644           0.420          5.932       22.491             0.353       70.113       20.122        7.812          6.714             1.883
      Observations                         7231            9014           3164          4198             2367          3563         3093        2707           4181              2371
    P-value of test that L=M               0.699           0.559         0.187         0.521            0.164         0.413        0.041       0.773          0.163             0.208
N. moms above median age of youngest
    Accepted                               0.002          -0.002         0.684         1.637            0.001          2.590       -0.832      -0.213          0.795            0.200
      Clustered at county level          (0.020)         (0.013)        (0.568)      (0.675)**         (0.027)       (1.222)**    (0.932)     (0.367)        (0.470)*          (0.309)
      R-squared                            0.177           0.096         0.347         0.116            0.222          0.117       0.178       0.212           0.126            0.232
      Mean of outcome for rejected          0.348           0.078          5.857       23.737            0.381         70.597      22.240       7.630           6.425            1.800
      Observations                         5672            6886           1296          1804             802            1470        1283        965            1797              803
O. moms below median age if youngest
    Accepted                              -0.029          -0.037         1.377         0.659            -0.003        1.557        0.033       -0.139         0.151             -0.152
      Clustered at county level          (0.023)         (0.033)      (0.512)***      (0.629)          (0.023)       (1.076)      (0.754)     (0.285)        (0.328)           (0.219)
      R-squared                            0.213           0.169         0.344         0.073            0.104         0.072        0.104       0.135          0.055             0.078
      Mean of outcome for rejected          0.594           0.422          5.638       22.781             0.351       70.055       20.551        7.746          6.631             2.012
      Observations                         7966            9342           2959          3988             2171          3360         2923        2495           3974              2175
    P-value of test that N=O               0.279           0.744         0.438         0.688            0.548         0.748        0.998       0.998          0.307             0.402
Appendix Table 8c: Heterogeneity in results - controls (All Sample)
                                                                Occupation Score | occupation                     Lives in same         Lives in more
        Outcome (Y):               Labor force participation                                         Earned                                                            Household
                                                                         not missing                                 county            educated county
                                                                                                    Income |                                               Longevity    income
                                applied                          applied
                                             1930        1940                1930       1940       income>0      1930       1940       1930      1940                    1940
                               pre 1920                         pre 1920
A.All moms
   Accepted                       0.067      0.012       0.027     0.713      -0.487     -0.349      5.434       0.048      0.063      0.028     0.021       0.247      -58.241
     Clustered at county level (0.025)*** (0.016)       (0.017)  (0.714)     (0.522)    (0.614)    (28.688)    (0.024)** (0.018)***   (0.024)   (0.024)     (0.567)    (31.877)*
     R-squared                    0.083      0.072       0.067     0.159       0.097      0.108      0.160       0.176      0.114      0.399     0.405       0.028       0.080
     Mean outcome for rejected      0.356      0.327       0.209   14.500      15.852     15.786    479.083       0.648       0.589     0.497     0.508      73.432     979.570
     Observations                  4127      11170        9351     1313        3472       2737       2083        11178       9358      3123      3177        12989       9358
B. all unmarried moms
   Accepted                       0.058      0.005       0.021     0.865      -0.805     -0.133      1.527       0.053      0.071      0.025     0.022       0.397       -80.179
     Clustered at county level (0.027)** (0.017)        (0.014)  (0.741)     (0.581)    (0.756)    (50.856)    (0.025)** (0.023)***   (0.026)   (0.029)     (0.657)    (38.347)**
     R-squared                    0.090      0.075       0.071     0.186       0.109      0.131      0.175       0.173      0.116      0.413     0.418       0.030        0.083
     Mean outcome for rejected      0.367      0.332       0.211   14.568      16.308     15.284    490.283        0.646      0.585     0.509     0.525      73.467     1013.223
     Observations                  3523       9166        7630     1136        2833       2185       1644         9174       7635      2581      2608        10749        7635
C. (unmarried moms?) drop if marital status missing at application
   Accepted                       0.054      0.020       0.021     0.986      -0.846     -0.871     -1.899       0.076      0.087      0.030      0.064      -0.268      -10.464
     Clustered at county level   (0.036)    (0.021)     (0.015)  (0.963)     (0.820)    (0.925)    (72.490)    (0.031)** (0.025)***   (0.033)   (0.033)*    (0.791)     (45.632)
     R-squared                    0.087      0.085       0.083     0.171       0.120      0.144      0.197       0.198      0.131      0.416      0.432      0.031        0.079
     Mean outcome for rejected      0.366      0.339       0.211   13.603      16.613     15.625    442.130        0.644      0.576     0.500      0.509      73.786     923.520
     Observations                  2448       6399        5255      792        2023       1558       1156         6405       5256      1757       1762        7484        5256
D. states that only admit widows
   Accepted                       0.075      -0.024      0.039    -0.013      -1.483     -0.732     26.339       0.076      0.074      0.045     0.025       -0.179     -51.370
     Clustered at county level   (0.047)    (0.038)     (0.030)  (1.357)    (0.610)**   (0.590)    (51.596)    (0.031)** (0.027)***   (0.034)   (0.049)     (0.978)    (41.588)
     R-squared                    0.085      0.069       0.086     0.224       0.128      0.138      0.179       0.223      0.183      0.394     0.358       0.033       0.066
     Mean outcome for rejected      0.350      0.403       0.228   13.610      16.687     16.056    536.762        0.618      0.557     0.364     0.386       73.897   1021.553
     Observations                  1030       3496        2960      327        1223        940        760         3497       2962       928       986         3841       2962
E. states that admit more than just widows (all other states?)
   Accepted                       0.060      0.030       0.023     0.756      -0.060     -0.373     -20.359      0.041     0.062       0.019     0.015       0.430       -58.852
     Clustered at county level (0.028)** (0.015)** (0.018)       (1.019)     (0.709)    (0.840)    (26.588)     (0.030) (0.022)***    (0.032)   (0.026)     (0.696)     (41.529)
     R-squared                    0.091      0.072       0.060     0.168       0.096      0.110      0.185       0.160     0.091       0.416     0.445       0.031        0.092
     Mean outcome for rejected      0.358      0.295       0.201   14.884      15.368     15.672    452.462       0.660      0.602      0.561     0.565      73.242      961.779
     Observations                  3097       7674        6391      986        2249       1797       1323        7681       6396       2195      2191        9148         6396
   P-value of test that D=E       0.574      0.153       0.772     0.817       0.223      0.943      0.324       0.538     0.743       0.712     0.757       0.634        0.625
F. states that regulated/required work
   Accepted                       0.058      0.034       0.014     0.604      0.147      0.159      -22.365      0.053      0.049      0.009     -0.019      0.526      -61.801
     Clustered at county level   (0.030)* (0.016)** (0.020)      (1.172)     (0.821)    (0.869)    (26.738)     (0.035)   (0.024)**   (0.035)   (0.028)     (0.803)    (44.188)
     R-squared                    0.071      0.070       0.065     0.170      0.111      0.110       0.183       0.148      0.076      0.423      0.455      0.032       0.071
     Mean outcome for rejected      0.372      0.291       0.209   15.128     15.338     15.355     477.397       0.664       0.640     0.557      0.590     72.855    1008.257
     Observations                  2500       5377        4501      834       1537       1265         947        5380        4506      1509       1458       6569        4506
G. states that required women to stay home (all other states?)
   Accepted                       0.077      -0.018      0.042     0.471      -1.381     -0.874     16.405       0.048     0.092       0.058     0.057       -0.163      -32.908
     Clustered at county level (0.033)** (0.028)        (0.025)* (0.832)    (0.546)**   (0.764)    (48.235)     (0.031) (0.023)***    (0.035)   (0.040)     (0.774)     (41.579)
     R-squared                    0.117      0.075       0.077     0.207       0.118      0.135      0.186       0.209     0.154       0.395     0.386       0.032        0.097
     Mean outcome for rejected      0.330      0.381       0.210   13.420      16.422     16.400    481.133       0.624      0.517      0.419     0.422       74.317     939.373
     Observations                  1627       5793        4850      479        1935       1472       1136        5798       4852       1614      1719         6420        4852
   P-value of test that F=G       0.535      0.101       0.403     0.560       0.131      0.424      0.617       0.990     0.128       0.503     0.155       0.454        0.523
Appendix Table 8d: Heterogeneity in results - controls (All Sample)
                                                                               Occupation Score | occupation not        Earned                                  Lives in more educated               Household
          Outcome (Y):                     Labor force participation                                                                  Lives in same county
                                                                                            missing                    Income |                                          county          Longevity    income
                                        pre 1920       1930          1940      pre 1920      1930          1940        income>0           1930        1940        1930          1940                    1940
H. counties with high share males (sex ratio above median)
    Accepted                              0.059       -0.022         0.012          1.907        -0.504       -0.588         7.448        0.040       0.038         0.030      0.020       0.245       -44.491
       Clustered at county level        (0.036)      (0.025)       (0.022)       (0.788)**      (0.651)      (0.755)      (45.198)      (0.024)*     (0.023)      (0.031)     (0.040)     (0.753)     (49.184)
       R-squared                          0.091        0.068         0.065          0.223         0.139        0.152         0.192        0.196       0.142         0.421      0.394       0.034        0.083
       Mean outcome for rejected           0.348        0.342         0.215         13.342        15.778       16.031      557.079          0.611       0.585        0.516       0.541     73.907     1055.150
       Observations                       1942         5460          4727            576          1688         1286           986          5462        4730         1706        1778        6462         4730
I. counties with low share males (sex ratio below median)
    Accepted                              0.078        0.052         0.046          0.512        -0.686       -0.064        16.414        0.060       0.096         0.060      0.035       0.423       -46.787
       Clustered at county level       (0.034)** (0.013)*** (0.022)**             (1.433)       (0.860)      (1.005)      (40.038)       (0.042)   (0.034)***     (0.037)     (0.029)     (0.936)     (39.696)
       R-squared                          0.089        0.089         0.083          0.175         0.109        0.120         0.179        0.161       0.093         0.381      0.426       0.034        0.089
       Mean outcome for rejected           0.365        0.312         0.202         15.841        15.937       15.512      408.886          0.686       0.594        0.473       0.469     72.888      890.679
       Observations                       2185         5710          4624            737          1784         1451          1097          5716        4628         1417        1399        6527         4628
    P-value of test that H=I              0.841        0.006         0.092          0.222         0.803        0.656         0.928        0.696       0.178         0.516      0.628       0.844        0.872
J. counties with high female labor force participation (LFP above median)
    Accepted                              0.067        0.001         0.051          0.886        -1.408       -0.435        20.168        0.072       0.039         0.030      0.072       0.082       -40.826
       Clustered at county level        (0.034)*     (0.022)      (0.021)**       (1.226)      (0.730)*      (0.755)      (37.556)      (0.039)*     (0.030)      (0.041)    (0.029)**    (0.867)     (42.838)
       R-squared                          0.097        0.079         0.077          0.191         0.115        0.120         0.158        0.153       0.104         0.378      0.357       0.031        0.079
       Mean outcome for rejected           0.383        0.346         0.206         15.569        17.720       16.494      509.048          0.678       0.652        0.384       0.392     73.072     1073.101
       Observations                       1504         5708          4796            476          1892         1544          1218          5713        4798         1253        1366        6292         4798
K. counties with low female labor force participation (LFP below median)
    Accepted                              0.076        0.024         0.007          0.960         0.678       -0.064       -56.764        0.036       0.091         0.032      -0.001      0.372      -72.742
       Clustered at county level        (0.039)*     (0.021)       (0.021)        (1.262)       (0.821)      (1.042)      (48.125)       (0.026)   (0.028)***     (0.034)     (0.035)     (0.700)    (43.639)*
       R-squared                          0.093        0.074         0.064          0.182         0.124        0.162         0.205        0.181       0.120         0.422       0.453      0.040       0.081
       Mean outcome for rejected           0.328        0.311         0.212         13.297        14.065       15.243      452.915          0.620       0.537        0.582       0.579     73.751     902.924
       Observations                       2623         5462          4555            837          1580         1193           865          5465        4560         1870        1811        6697        4560
    P-value of test that J=K              0.895        0.417         0.040          0.761         0.039        0.720         0.250        0.587       0.245         0.694       0.309      0.955       0.371
L. moms above median age
    Accepted                              0.056        0.008         0.022          1.260         1.085        0.406       -61.413        0.014       0.033        -0.001      -0.017      0.113      -120.033
       Clustered at county level        (0.044)      (0.027)       (0.020)        (1.219)       (0.844)      (1.315)      (66.576)       (0.032)     (0.033)      (0.037)     (0.054)     (0.563)     (78.797)
       R-squared                          0.120        0.100         0.119          0.226         0.124        0.229         0.338        0.196       0.132         0.490       0.446      0.047        0.106
       Mean outcome for rejected           0.356        0.306         0.160         13.797        13.517       14.298      445.395          0.716       0.649        0.520       0.589     74.100      956.395
       Observations                       1855         5098          3970            615          1562          992           715          5101        3972         1203        1186        6259        3972
M. moms below median age
    Accepted                              0.065        0.021         0.035          1.144        -1.418       -0.514        26.870        0.074       0.078         0.044      0.034       0.355        2.880
       Clustered at county level       (0.030)**     (0.020)       (0.026)        (1.343)       (0.897)      (0.875)      (48.863)     (0.025)*** (0.018)***      (0.031)     (0.027)     (0.909)     (45.509)
       R-squared                          0.122        0.091         0.071          0.251         0.153        0.124         0.176        0.177       0.125         0.393      0.429       0.038        0.106
       Mean outcome for rejected           0.355        0.346         0.244         15.224        17.720       16.464      492.558          0.589       0.546        0.484       0.463     72.767      996.110
       Observations                       2272         6072          5381            698          1910         1745          1368          6077        5386         1920        1991        6730        5386
    P-value of test that L=M              0.808        0.687         0.520          0.938         0.105        0.590         0.508        0.123       0.400         0.893      0.322       0.924        0.437
N. moms above median age of youngest
    Accepted                              0.087        0.014         0.014         -0.278         0.680       -0.202        44.491        0.012       0.018         0.034      -0.015      0.195       -66.807
       Clustered at county level        (0.054)      (0.018)       (0.025)        (0.814)       (0.574)      (1.240)      (42.940)       (0.028)     (0.031)      (0.041)     (0.043)     (0.807)     (73.805)
       R-squared                          0.124        0.114         0.126          0.258         0.136        0.253         0.299        0.201       0.139         0.477       0.467      0.048        0.097
       Mean outcome for rejected           0.363        0.333         0.209         15.158        14.854       14.728      439.678          0.691       0.637        0.482       0.504     73.545      962.932
       Observations                       1601         4522          3487            559          1471         1010           782          4525        3490         1177        1146        5468         3490
O. moms below median age if youngest
    Accepted                              0.040        0.012         0.031          1.882        -0.914       -0.994        -0.779        0.081       0.097         0.028      0.038       0.455       -45.624
       Clustered at county level        (0.024)*     (0.022)       (0.024)        (1.305)       (0.940)      (0.899)      (48.143)     (0.029)*** (0.022)***      (0.044)     (0.034)     (0.689)     (56.965)
       R-squared                          0.107        0.075         0.069          0.246         0.143        0.136         0.185        0.182       0.132         0.411      0.415       0.040        0.103
       Mean outcome for rejected           0.348        0.322         0.209         13.667        16.779       16.634      510.500          0.609       0.550        0.508       0.510     73.311      992.780
       Observations                       2526         6648          5864            754          2001         1727          1301          6653        5868         1946        2031        7521         5868
    P-value of test that N=O              0.340        0.509         0.752          0.246         0.042        0.545         0.990        0.011       0.014         0.691      0.745       0.870        0.873
    ⁴ Seemingly unrelated regressions give equal weights to each of the five standardized quality measures. Values are standardized to zero mean and variance equals one.
