                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        RISK AVERSION, OFFSETTING COMMUNITY EFFECTS, AND COVID-19:
                EVIDENCE FROM AN INDOOR POLITICAL RALLY

                                           Dhaval M. Dave
                                          Andrew I. Friedson
                                          Kyutaro Matsuzawa
                                           Drew McNichols
                                           Connor Redpath
                                            Joseph J. Sabia

                                         Working Paper 27522
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w27522


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        July 2020




Dr. Sabia acknowledges support from the Center for Health Economics & Policy Studies
(CHEPS) at San Diego State University, including grant support received from the Troesh Family
Foundation and the Charles Koch Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Dhaval M. Dave, Andrew I. Friedson, Kyutaro Matsuzawa, Drew McNichols, Connor Redpath,
and Joseph J. Sabia. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Risk Aversion, Offsetting Community Effects, and COVID-19: Evidence from an Indoor Political
Rally
Dhaval M. Dave, Andrew I. Friedson, Kyutaro Matsuzawa, Drew McNichols, Connor Redpath,
and Joseph J. Sabia
NBER Working Paper No. 27522
July 2020, Revised August 2020
JEL No. H75,I1

                                              ABSTRACT

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) deems large indoor gatherings without social
distancing the “highest risk” activity for COVID-19 contagion. On June 20, 2020, President Donald
J. Trump held his first mass campaign rally following the US coronavirus outbreak at the indoor Bank
of Oklahoma (BOK) arena. In the weeks following the event, numerous high-profile national news
outlets reported that the Trump rally was “more than likely” the cause of a coronavirus surge in Tulsa
county based on time series data. This study is the first to rigorously explore the impacts of this event
on social distancing and COVID-19 spread. First, using data from SafeGraph Inc, we show that while
non-resident visits to census block groups hosting the Trump event grew by approximately 25 percent,
there was no decline in net stay-at-home behavior in Tulsa county, reflecting important offsetting behavioral
effects. Then, using data on COVID-19 cases and deaths from the CDC and a synthetic control design,
we find little evidence that COVID-19 grew more rapidly in Tulsa County, its border counties, or in
the state of Oklahoma than each’s estimated counterfactual during the five-week post-treatment period
we observe. Difference-in-differences estimates further provide no evidence that COVID-19 rates
grew faster in counties that drew relatively larger shares of residents to the event. We conclude that
offsetting risk-related behavioral responses to the rally — including voluntary closures of restaurants
and bars in downtown Tulsa, increases in stay-at-home behavior, displacement of usual activities of
weekend inflows, and smaller-than-expected crowd attendance — may be important mechanisms.
Dhaval M. Dave                                        Drew McNichols
Bentley University                                    Center for Health Economics
Department of Economics                               & Policy Studies (CHEPS)
175 Forest Street, AAC 195                            University of San Diego-California
Waltham, MA 02452-4705                                9500 Gilman Drive #0508
and IZA                                               La Jolla, CA 92093-0043
and also NBER                                         dmcnichols@ucsd.edu
ddave@bentley.edu
                                                      Connor Redpath
Andrew I. Friedson                                    Center for Health Economics
Department of Economics                               & Policy Studies (CHEPS)
University of Colorado Denver                         University of California, San Diego
Lawrence Street Center 460T                           credpath@ucsd.edu
Campus Box 181
P.O. Box 173364                                       Joseph J. Sabia
Denver, CO 80217-3364                                 San Diego State University
andrew.friedson@ucdenver.edu                          Department of Economics
                                                      Center for Health Economics
Kyutaro Matsuzawa                                     & Policy Studies
Center for Health Economics and Policy Studies 5500 Campanile Drive
San Diego State University                            San Diego, CA 92182
San Diego, CA                                         and IZA & ESSPRI
qmatsuzawa@gmail.com                                  jsabia@sdsu.edu
                                               1. Introduction


        “Coronavirus surge in Tulsa ‘more than likely’ linked to Trump rally”
                                                           -   New York Times headline, July 10, 20201



         “Large in-person gatherings where it is difficult for individuals to remain spaced at least

6 feet apart and attendees travel from outside the local area” are the “highest risk” category of

event or gathering for the spread of COVID-19, according to current Centers for Disease Control

and Prevention (CDC) guidelines (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2020a). Indoor

gatherings are viewed as problematic as indoor temperature, airflow and humidity are conductive

to the spread of COVID-19 (Allen and Marr, 2020; Contini and Costabile, 2020; Mittal et al.,

2020; Setti et al., 2020). Between March 15, 2020 and June 1, 2020, nearly all states and the

District of Columbia banned large indoor gatherings such as sporting events and theatre

performances (Dave et al., 2020b; Mervosh et al., 2020).2

        Despite the high-risk categorization of indoor gatherings, some states have rolled back

bans on indoor events. For example, as of June 22, 2020 most counties in Nebraska were

allowed to hold indoor events as long as attendance did not exceed the maximum of 50 percent

of building capacity or 10,000 individuals (Treisman 2020). However, there is very little

evidence on the effect of large indoor events on population-level spread of COVID-19,



1
  For other similar headlines from around this date, see, for example, articles at Forbes
(https://www.forbes.com/sites/tommybeer/2020/07/08/trump-rally-more-than-likely-led-to-coronavirus-spike-in-
tulsa-health-official-says/#6495ca4924e0), the Washington Post
(https://www.washingtonpost.com/nation/2020/07/09/trump-tulsa-rally-coronavirus/), and CNN
(https://www.cnn.com/2020/07/08/us/tulsa-covid-trump-rally-contact-tracers-trnd/index.html).
2
  Many large indoor events were cancelled earlier than this. For example, on Thursday March 11, the National
Basketball Association (NBA) cancelled a game between the Utah Jazz and Oklahoma City Thunder after a single
player tested positive for COVID-19. The game had been scheduled to be played indoors at the Oklahoma City
Chesapeake Energy Arena. Later that evening, the NBA suspended the remainder of the 2020 basketball season
(Aschburner 2020).

                                                      1
especially during the time when state and local policymakers are determining whether to ease

social distancing policies.3

         To attempt to investigate the risk posed by indoor events, we study President Donald J.

Trump’s re-election campaign rally, held on June 20, 2020 at the Bank of Oklahoma (BOK)

Center and nearby convention center in Tulsa, Oklahoma. While estimates leading up to the

rally estimated that attendance would reach up to 100,000 — well over the capacity of the venue,

forcing overflow to the nearby convention center (Murphy 2020a; Murphy and Lauer 2020) —

attendance figures reported by Fire Marshalls ranged from 6,000 to 7,000 and attendance

numbers reported by the re-election campaign reached 12,000 (Murphy and Lauer 2020; Wise

2020). Though the turnout of the event was disappointing politically, the crowd size that did

materialize is comparable to that seen at many sporting events — including those held by the

Women’s National Basketball Association, the National Basketball Association (NBA), and the

National Hockey League (NHL) — as well as numerous megachurch services.

         However, in some ways, this indoor event was quite different from usual sporting events

or church-related gatherings, making the rally a potentially poor bellwether for gauging the

dangers of indoor events and reopening policies. The rally was accompanied by numerous

media reports suggesting there could be violent clashes between the president’s supporters and

opponents (Baker and Haberman 2020; Bierman 2020; Cohen 2020; Karni 2020; Murphy 2020b;

Singh 2020). The National Guard was deployed to maintain order (Murphy 2020c) and

numerous businesses and roads closed (Holloway 2020; Fox23News Staff 2020) in anticipation

of the event. Thus, the event was coupled with both a local shutdown of many gathering places,


3
 There are studies demonstrating spread of COVID-19 at indoor events utilizing contact tracing, however it is
difficult to discern what the counterfactual level of transmission would have been (Nishiura et al. 2020; James et al.
2020). Work by Dave et al. (2020d) studies the Black Lives Matter protests (large outdoor events) and estimates a
population level effect which includes avoidance behavior by non-attendees.

                                                          2
including restaurants and bars, as well signals to deter non-attendees from visiting the area near

the event. These factors may have plausibly generated avoidance behavior in the non-attending

population, which could have important offsetting effects on population level growth of COVID-

19 cases, a point discussed recently in the context of Black Lives Matter protests (Dave et al.

(2020d).4

        In the days and weeks following the campaign event, numerous high-profile media

reports anecdotally linked the Trump rally to a surge in new COVID-19 cases in Tulsa, drawing

on notable attendees or Oklahomans who had tested positive or drawing on post-rally infection

trends in the city.5 This study is the first to rigorously explore the impact of President Trump’s

2020 presidential campaign kickoff rally on social distancing and COVID-19 related outcomes.

To begin, we utilize anonymized smartphone data from SafeGraph Inc. to examine the impact of

the Tulsa rally on travel into the census block groups (CBGs) where the Tulsa rally took place.

We document that the Tulsa event increased total cell phone “pings” in the treatment CBGs by

22.4 percent and the number of non-resident cell phone pings by 25.7 percent. However, using

synthetic control methods, we find that net stay-at-home behavior in Tulsa county, which drew

over half of rally attendees (according to cell phone data), did not change, consistent with

avoidance behavior of other residents. Such individuals may have chosen to increase stay-at-

home behavior to avoid congestion at the rally, owing to road and business closures, or in

response to predictions of violent clashes between protesters and rally attendees which

precipitated the National Guard being called out on June 19 and 20.



4
  Attendees of the rally were also drawn from a part of the political distribution that have been found to be less
responsive to public health policies aimed at mitigation, which could exacerbate the spread of COVID-19 (Painter
and Qiu 2020).
5
  See for instance: Associated Press News (2020); Itkowitz (2020); Murphy (2020e); Jones and Ries (2020); Astor
and Weiland (2020); Carlisle (2020); Oprysko (2020).

                                                         3
       Then, turning to data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), we

explore whether the Trump rally ignited COVID-19 growth, examining (i) Tulsa county, (ii)

Tulsa county and its border counties, and (iii) the state of Oklahoma. Synthetic control estimates

provide no evidence that the Tulsa rally precipitated COVID-19 case or mortality growth in any

of these jurisdictions during the five weeks following the event. Moreover, a dose-response

difference-in-differences approach, which utilizes SafeGraph data on higher “donor” counties to

the rally, find no evidence that COVID-19 cases or mortality grew more quickly in counties that

sent more attendees into the rally census block group and who returned home.

       These findings have important implications for policymakers considering reopening

policies. At first pass, our findings appear to imply that indoor events may not be as dangerous

to public health as previously thought, particularly if crowd size is relatively modest, the event is

accompanied by substantial publicity surrounding the importance of mitigating behaviors (i.e.

mask-wearing), and if indoor attendees have their temperature taken upon entry, as they were at

the Trump rally (Murphy 2020d). However, the findings also speak to the importance of

offsetting community effects in response to large gatherings. To the extent that the Tulsa event

displaced mobility that otherwise would have taken place, such as by reducing gatherings of non-

household members at restaurants and bars downtown, such compensatory avoidance behavior

may have played a vital dampening role in community spread. Because not all future indoor

events are likely to generate such avoidance behavior, reopening policies should not dismiss the

possibility of disease spread under different circumstances.



                                            2. Background

2.1 COVID-19 and Health Policy Response



                                                  4
       Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the virus that causes

COVID-19, primarily transmits from one person to another via droplets expelled from an

infected individual — from speaking, breathing, coughing, or sneezing— that are absorbed into

the nose, mouth, or eyes of an uninfected individual (Centers for Disease Control and

Prevention, 2020b; Fineberg, 2020). To reduce transmission, a variety of public health

recommendations and mandates have been issued by the government, including (i)

recommendations for frequent handwashing (Centers for Disease Control, 2020b), (ii) mandating

mask wearing in public (Angell and Newsom, 2020; Cuomo, 2020), and (iii) policies requiring

social distancing, such as shelter-in-place orders, non-essential business closures, school

shutdowns, mandates for non-household members to remain six feet apart, and limits on the

number of individuals that may gather in a group (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,

2020b; Angell and Newsom, 2020; Cuomo, 2020; Mervosh et al. 2020). Social distancing among

the general population may be particularly important to the extent that infectious individuals are

asymptomatic (Bai et al., 2020; Pan et al., 2020; Rothe et al., 2020). There is a growing body of

evidence to suggest that public policies mandating social distancing and mask wearing played an

important role in fighting the spread of COVID-19 (Courtemanche et al. 2020a, 2020b; Dave et

al. 2020a, 2020b, 2020c; Friedson et al. 2020, Sears et al. 2020; Lyu and Wehby 2020).

       One of the most common policies designed to enforce social distancing is the prohibition

of large indoor gatherings, particularly at indoor arenas. By June 1, 2020, nearly all states and

the District of Columbia had banned large indoor gatherings such as sporting events and theatre

performances (Dave et al. 2020b; Mervosh et al. 2020). Indoor gatherings are viewed as sites

with a high potential for that spread of COVID-19 due to airflows, temperatures, and humidity

levels that are helpful for virus transmission (Allen and Marr 2020; Contini and Costabile 2020;



                                                 5
Mittal et al. 2020; Setti et al. 2020). There have also been high profile reports of larger

outbreaks in indoor facilities that maintained operations during state COVID-19 shutdowns, such

as prisons and meatpacking plants (Mosk et al. 2020; Schlosser 2020; Williams et al. 2020).



2.2 President Trump’s 2020 Campaign Kickoff Rally

        On June 10, 2020, the president’s re-election campaign organization, Donald J. Trump

for President, Inc., announced that the president would hold an indoor campaign rally on June 19

at the Bank of Oklahoma (BOK) Center in Tulsa, Oklahoma. The BOK Center has a capacity of

approximately 19,000 individuals, and the campaign announced that overflow seating was

permissible in the nearby outdoor Tulsa Convention Center (Bierman 2020; Singh 2020; Karni

2020). This event was the first large indoor arena event permitted in the United States since the

start of the coronavirus outbreak in March 2020 (Bierman 2020; Singh 2020; Karni 2020).

        On June 13, President Trump announced that the campaign rally was postponed one day,

to June 20, to avoid coinciding with Juneteenth celebrations of the realized emancipation of

enslaved peoples in the United States in 1865.6 The date change was also related to concerns

regarding potential conflicts between the president’s supporters and critics (Baker and Haberman

2020; Cohen 2020).

        Despite the change of date, event organizers expected to fill both the BOK Center and the

nearby Convention Center, with a total estimated attendance of up to 100,000 (Murphy, 2020a;

Murphy and Lauer 2020). Attendees began lining up for the event the night prior and gathered

throughout the day (Christopher 2020; Hinton 2020; Sgana 2020). At 3:00 PM local time on June


6
 A Juneteenth rally took place in the Greenwood District of the city and included Reverend Al Sharpton as a keynote
speaker. The gatherings also attracted a large crowd, numbering in the thousands, were outdoors on the streets and
sidewalks, and Rev. Sharpton delivered his address in an open field on the campus of Oklahoma State University-
Tulsa.

                                                        6
20, 2020, the BOK Center opened its doors to attendees. Each attendee had his or her

temperature checked and only those with normal temperatures were permitted to enter. While

mask-wearing was encouraged by public health officials (Centers for Disease Control 2020b), it

was not required, and video footage of the event suggests that social distancing (i.e. six-foot

distancing requirements among non-household members) did not occur inside or outside the

event center and only a small fraction of attendees wore masks (Christopher 2020; Wise 2020).

        The rally itself ran from about 7:00 PM to 10:30 PM and attendance did not reach the

BOK Center’s capacity. Attendance estimates range from approximately 6,000 to 7,000,

according the Fire Marshalls, to over 12,000, from the president’s election campaign (Murphy

and Lauer 2020a; Wise 2020).7

        While it was not immediately clear why attendance fell so far below expectations,

speculation from the Trump campaign and the national news media suggested that potential

attendees’ concerns over COVID-19 or, perhaps, fears over violent confrontations with

protesters may have induced some Trump supporters to remain at home (Murphy 2020).8

Indeed, substantial news coverage leading up to the event included alarming information about

infection risk of attendance and potential violent confrontations between passionate admirers and

critics of the president (Baker and Haberman, 2020; Bierman, 2020; Cohen, 2020; Karni, 2020;

Murphy, 2020; Singh, 2020). The presence of National Guard and local police around the BOK

Center during the day prior to and the day of the rally may have reinforced concerns over

possible confrontations (Murphy 2020).




7
 It is unclear whether protesters directly prevented anyone from entering the BOK Center (Murphy 2020a).
8
 The New York Times reported one possibility of inflated expectations related to an elaborate prank by teenagers
part of “TikTok Teens” and “K-Pop Stans” (Lorenz and Frenkel 2020).

                                                         7
2.3 Comparability to Other Indoor Events

       Though the attendance numbers for the campaign rally were well below the pre-event

estimates, the re-election rally’s actual size makes it representative of many types of events that

could occur once indoor event bans are lifted. For example, many sporting events and concerts

also occur in arenas such as the BOK Center in Tulsa, and one may reasonably expect attendance

of events at such large venues to fall short of capacity during the COVID-19 pandemic. Prior to

its cancellation, the 2019-2020 NBA season had an average attendance of 17,750 people per

game (ESPN 2020). The Women’s National Basketball Association had an average attendance

number of 6,535 during the 2019 season (Broughton 2019). Study of the rally and its aftermath

could yield meaningful insights for the public health implications of several of possible classes

of indoor events, including those that fall below maximum capacity of the venue either due to

demand or due to policy design.

        Conditional on transmission probabilities and the number of infected in attendance, the

expected number of new cases from this campaign rally may be quite similar to that of a sporting

event or concert. Professional sports leagues considering holding matches open to the public are

also considering requiring match attendees to wear face masks and possibly socially distance.

Therefore, all else equal, the transmission probability for an individual attending this campaign

rally would be larger than for a typical sporting event or concert to the extent that masks were

not worn at the rally (Christopher 2020; Wise 2020). The rally is thus a plausible upper bound on

expected new infections from a similar event, conditional on other factors such as overall

attendance, and the number of infected in attendance.

       Those who did not attend the event may still have found their likelihood of infection

increased as a result. If the event at BOK Center infected many individuals who would not have



                                                 8
otherwise been infected, then anyone who came into close contact with an attendee had an

increased chance of infection. Attendees of the rally are a selected sample, drawn from a part of

the population distribution that is on average older and less responsive to public health policies

aimed at mitigation, factors which could exacerbate the spread of COVID-19 (Barrios and

Hochberg 2020; Painter and Qiu 2020). While it is possible that event attendees, or those who

would have otherwise come in contact with them, may take measures to reduce the risk of

infections, such as self-quarantining, stringently avoiding others, or wearing a mask, because

most rally attendees did not wear masks or practice social distancing in the venue (Christopher,

2020; Wise, 2020), it does not seem likely they would voluntarily take-on precautionary

measures in other circumstances.

       Finally, it is important to note the Tulsa campaign rally differs from other indoor events

in regards to potential avoidance behavior on the part of non-attendees. Several businesses, city

buildings, and roads and streets in downtown Tulsa were closed in anticipation of the influx of

people attending the event (Holloway 2020; Fox23News Staff 2020). Due to concerns over

potential clashes and violence, as a precautionary measure, some businesses in the downtown

area and just outside the vicinity were boarded up (Hutchins 2020; Morgan 2020). Soldiers from

the Oklahoma Army National Guard were activated to help provide security in the event of such

clashes. These considerations may have increased stay-at-home behaviors among residents who

were not planning on attending the campaign rally, and displaced inflows of non-residents who

otherwise would be coming into the downtown area in the absence of the campaign event and

anticipated disruptions. Such avoidance behaviors could mitigate community spread of COVID-

19 from attendees and non-attendees alike, and would not likely be present at otherwise

comparable indoor events.



                                                 9
2.4 Other Activities Near Rally Site

         As noted above, the Bank of Oklahoma Center hosted the rally and the convention center

was prepared to host an overflow crowd, including those who wished to attend the events while

social distancing away from the arena. The areas where these events took place include two

census block groups (CBGs), which encompass downtown Tulsa, and with it a variety of

businesses and government services. In this downtown area were many restaurants, several

hotels (including DoubleTree by Hilton, Hyatt Regency, and Holiday Inn), and a number of

churches (i.e., the First Presbyterian Church of Tulsa, the First Baptist Church of Tulsa, and the

Episcopal Diocese of Oklahoma). In addition, the site of the Trump rally included the Brady

Arts District, which contains the Oklahoma Jazz Hall of Fame, the Woody Guthrie Center, and

the nearby Tulsa Performing Arts Center.9

         There are a variety of government services also provided in the CBGs where the Trump

rally took place. These include the Sheriff’s office, the county jail, the Tulsa County

Courthouse, United States Postal Service, and the Tulsa County Library. Finally, there is the

large Oklahoma State University Medical Center.10 The downtown areas attract considerable

inflows of non-residents on weekends, and below we argue that such inflows would have been

expected in the absence of the Trump event.

         In anticipation of the Trump rally, a number of businesses and county offices closed, and

the city of Tulsa announced closures of a number of roadways in the area. The Tulsa Police

Department announced their cooperation with the Secret Service “to provide maximum security



9
 The well-known business district, Greenwood is also located nearby.
10
  At the time of this writing, visitors to this hospital are restricted to those requiring end-of-life care, labor and
delivery, pre- or post-operative care.

                                                            10
for Trump as the country is in a state of unrest” and “to expect significant restrictions to roads in

the downtown Tulsa area…through Saturday [June 20]” (Fox23News Staff 2020). Over 40 local

businesses, including many restaurants and bars, announced voluntary closures on the day of the

rally, and government officials decided to close several public buildings and their associated

services, including the Tulsa County Library and Tulsa County Courthouse (Fox23News Staff

2020). Together, these voluntary and government-issued closures, coupled with media reports of

severe congestion, potential for violent clashes, and possibility of COVID-19 “super spread”

(King and Rodriguez 2020) raise the possibility of substantial community avoidance behavior in

response to the rally.



                                                      3. Data

3.1 Anonymized Smartphone Data

           Measures of social distancing are constructed using data available from SafeGraph Inc.11

This firm provides census-block-group-level data from 45 million anonymized smartphone

devices. These data are useful for measuring stay-at-home behavior and travel away from home,

and have been used by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to study social distancing

behavior during the time of the COVID-19 epidemic in the United States. In addition,

researchers analyzing social distancing policies in the United States have also used these data to

study the impact of mitigation policies and large outdoor social gatherings on social distancing

behaviors (Andersen et al. 2020; Dave et al. 2020a,b,c,d; Friedson et al. 2020; Abouk and

Heydari 2020; Lasry et al. 2020). The time period of analysis for social distancing ranges from




11
     These data are available at: https://www.safegraph.com/covid-19-data-consortium

                                                         11
June 5, 2020 to June 27, 2020, a period including two weeks leading up to the Tulsa rally and 7

days following the event.

         In the Safe Graph data, a person’s “home” is defined as the 153-by-153-meter area

receiving the largest number of GPS “pings” from 6PM to 7AM. We can measure “movement”

in the SafeGraph data when we observe a smartphone appearing outside of its home. We use

these data in two key ways. First, we measure the number of non-resident visitors in a given

census block group. Non-Resident Ping Rate measures the number of non-resident pings per

1,000 square meters of size of a census block group (CBG).12 Our particular interest is to

measure the non-resident ping rate in the census block groups where the Trump rally took place,

that is, the CBG where the Bank of Oklahoma (BOK) Center and the Convention Center are

located.

         Between Saturday, June 13 and Saturday, June 20, the date of the Trump event, the rate

of non-resident pings at the CBG which housed the BOK increased by 22.4 percent, reflecting a

substantial increase in the number of non-residents in this key treatment CBG.13 Appendix

Figure 1 shows trends in non-resident pings in the treatment CBGs and “control” CBGs in the

state of Oklahoma. The intra-week cyclicality in mobility patterns is notable for non-resident

inflows into the treated CBGs. Generally, non-resident pings are highest from Monday through

Friday, and decline considerably on Saturdays and Sundays, consistent with these CBGs

comprising the central downtown business district. However, during the weekend of the Tulsa

campaign event, inflows of non-resident pings were substantially lower on that Friday (relative

to prior Fridays), reflecting displacement from early business closures and road closures (some



12
   Alternately, normalizing by the population of the CBG, as a proxy for its size and economic activity, yields
virtually identical results in relative terms.
13
   For the CBG housing the Convention Center, the increase was more than twofold.

                                                          12
of which had commenced Thursday evening),14 and expectedly peaked on Saturday, the day of

the event.

        In addition, we measure Total Ping Rate, the total number of pings per 1,000 square

meters. The total number of pings recorded in the BOK Arena CBG increased by 20.6 percent

over the period between June 13 and June 20. Coupled with our findings for non-resident pings,

this does suggest some degree of displacement of residents in a key treatment CBG in response

to the rally.15 This could reflect one dimension of avoidance behavior by local residents.

        Importantly, we are able to measure the home counties of those non-residents (those who

did not record a “home residence” in the CBG) who appeared in the treatment CBGs.16 The

national map in panel (a) of Figure 1 documents the counties that drew the most residents into

the rally.17 As shown, the rally was largely an Oklahoma event and, more precisely, a Tulsa

county event. About half (43 percent) of the total of non-resident pings in the Trump rally CBGs

were recorded from individuals whose homes were recorded in Tulsa county. Another 38

percent of the pings came from other counties in the state of Oklahoma outside of Tulsa county.

Finally, 18 percent of pings came from outside of the state of Oklahoma, largely in the border

counties of Texas (including Clay and Grayson counties), Missouri (including McDonald and

Newton counties), and Arkansas (including Benton and Washington counties). Panels (b) and




14
   See Fox23News Staff (2020).
15
   For both treatment CBGs combined, the percent increase in non-resident pings was 52.6 percent, while the total
number of pings rose by 46.7 percent, again reflective of displacement.
16
   We are unable to precisely detect whether residents of the treatment CBG attended the rally.
17
   We define a High Inflow as a county (Tulsa county) that contributed more than 9.5 percent of visitors to the
treatment CBGs on June 20, Moderate-High Inflow as a county contributing 2.9 to 9.4 percent of visitors, Moderate-
Low Inflow as a county contributing 1 to 2.8 percent of visitors, and Low Inflow as a county contributing 0.1 to 1
percent of visitors.

                                                       13
(c) of Figure 1 further isolate the state of Oklahoma and Oklahoma along with its border states to

highlight jurisdictions that drew the most residents to the rally.18

        Second, we use four measures of net social distancing behavior at the county-level.

These include Median Hours at Home, which measures the median number of hours respondents

spend at their home (mean for Oklahoma = 11.5 and mean for Tulsa County = 11.7), Mean

Hours at Home, which captures the mean of the same measure (mean for Oklahoma = 11.3 and

mean for Tulsa County = 11.5), Percent of Time at Home, which measures the percent of total

time that the phone was turned on that was pinged at home (mean for Oklahoma = 78.8 percent

and mean for Tulsa County = 81.6 percent), and Percent at Home-Full Time, which measures the

mean percent of individuals who spent the full day at home (mean for Oklahoma = 24.3 percent

and mean for Tulsa County = 26.7 percent).



3.2 COVID-19 Cases and Deaths

        We measure county-level COVID-19 cases and deaths using state- and county-level data

provided by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and made available via the

Kaiser Family Foundation and the New York Times.19 Our COVID-19 case analysis is conducted

over the period from June 6, 2020 through July 24, 2020. During this period, the mean COVID-

19 case rate per 100,000 population in the state of Oklahoma was 382.6 and the death rate was

10.0. For Tulsa county, the mean case (mortality) rate was 554.2 (10.9) per 100,000 population.

Finally, an examination of Tulsa county and its border counties (Creek, Okmulgee, Osage,




18
   For comparison, Appendix Figures 2A and 2B show jurisdictions with pings in treatment CBGs for June 6 and
June 13, each of which are Saturdays.
19
   These data are available at: https://github.com/nytimes/covid-19-data

                                                      14
Pawnee, Rogers, Wagoner, and Washington counties) revealed a mean COVID-19 case

(mortality) rate of 478.6 (14.5) per 100,000 population.

          In Appendix Figure 3A, we show trends in COVID-19 cases in the state of Oklahoma, in

Tulsa county, and in Tulsa county and its surrounding border counties (“Tulsa county Cluster”).

We document that though Tulsa county starts off at a similar rate of COVID-19 cases as the state

of Oklahoma, the rate of COVID-19 growth is faster in Tulsa county. By July 24, there were

nearly 400 more COVID-19 cases per 100,000 in Tulsa county as compared to the state of

Oklahoma. In Appendix Figure 3B, we examine COVID-19-related mortality. We find that the

death rate is low in Tulsa county as compared to its surrounding border counties. Similar to

cases, we document that Tulsa county has a similar rate of COVID-19 death growth as the state

of Oklahoma at the start, but then experiences faster growth over the latter part of the sample

period.



                                       4. Empirical Approach

4.1 Non-Resident Travel

          We begin by estimating the effect of the Trump rally on non-resident and total pings in

the CBGs where Trump rally events were organized (the BOK Center and the adjacent

Convention Center). We pool a panel of 2,965 CBGs in the state of Oklahoma across 22 days

and estimate a difference-in-differences model of the following form:



Non-Resident Ping Rategct = β0 + β1Trumpgt + β2Tempct + β3Precipct + β4BLMct + αg + τt + εgct (1)




                                                  15
Here Non-Resident Ping Rategct is the non-resident GPS ping rate in census block group g in

county c on day t, Trumpgt is the interaction of an indicator for June 20th and whether the CBG is

one of the two in which primary Trump rally events took place, Tempct is a measure of the

average temperature (in degrees Celsius) in county c on day t, Precipct is a dichotomous variable

capturing whether measurable precipitation fell that day,20 and BLMct is a county-level indicator

for whether a Black Lives Matter (BLM) protest took place in a metropolitan area with a

municipal population greater than 100,000.21 Finally, αg is a time-invariant census block group

effect and τt is a CBG-invariant day effect that captures intra-day cyclicality in travel behavior in

addition to secular trends. All regressions are weighted by the census block group population.

           Following Buchmueller et al. (2011) and Cunningham and Shah (2018), statistical

inference is conducted by re-estimating 𝛽1 from equation (1) 𝐺 − 2 times for each untreated

census block group. We then compare the main estimate to the distribution of placebo estimates

by ranking them. If the estimate of the true treatment effect is in the top 5 percent of all

(treatment plus placebo) estimates, then we judge it statistically distinguishable from zero at the

5 percent level.

           Our estimate of β1 will be unbiased only if the common trends assumption is satisfied.

We take a number of tacks to ensure that will be true. First, our analysis takes place entirely

within Oklahoma, where major policy changes regarding reopening were conducted at the state-

level and hence are captured by the common day fixed effect. Second, we explore the robustness

of our findings to including county-specific linear time trends, to capture unmeasured time

shocks that could be correlated with social distancing and the Trump event. Finally, we also




20
     Weather data are available at: https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov.
21
     These data are described in Dave et al. (2020d).

                                                          16
utilize event study analyses, which capture social distancing trends in the weeks leading up to the

Trump event.



4.2 COVID-19 Cases and Mortality

       The previous analyses on the scale of non-resident travel, in conjunction with the inflow

patterns across counties that contributed the largest numbers of rally attendees, highlight areas of

focus for studying potential effects on COVID-19 cases as attendees travel back home. In order

to evaluate the impact of the Trump rally on COVID-19 cases and mortality, we first turn to a

synthetic control approach (Abadie et al. 2010). This approach has been used by several recent

studies exploring how COVID-19 mitigation policies have affected coronavirus spread (Friedson

et al 2020; Dave et al. 2020c). Motivated by findings in Figure 1, we begin by examining three

treatment jurisdictions: (i) Tulsa county, the county that included the rally, (ii) Tulsa county and

its surrounding border counties (“Tulsa cluster”), and (iii) the state of Oklahoma.

       We use several approaches to generate our synthetic treatment units to ensure that our

estimates are not influenced by researcher-driven matching characteristics. First, in all cases, we

exclude border states from the donor pool given that some border counties of these states

contributed travelers to the Trump rally (see Figure 1). In addition, for our Tulsa county-based

analysis, we (i) exclude other counties within the state of Oklahoma as potential donors, (ii)

exclude donor counties that contributed positive number of cell phone pings in the treatment

CBGs on June 20, and (iii) focus on donor counties (and their border counties) with urbanization

that approximates Tulsa county. Specifically, we restrict the donor pool to counties with

urbanicity rates between 93 percent and 98 percent, a band that narrowly envelopes Tulsa

county’s urbanicity of 95.2 percent, or counties with population-weighted density similar to



                                                 17
Tulsa county.22 Population-weighted density captures the density where the average person

lives; based on this measure, Tulsa has a weighted population density of 3,250 per square mile,

and we restrict the donor pool to a band of +/- 1,000 enveloping Tulsa.23 Given the vital role of

social interactions and crowding in contributing to community spread of the coronavirus,

drawing on a donor pool of urbanized, densely populated counties similar to Tulsa improves the

quality of synthetic counterfactual.24

         Second, to ensure that the synthetic control was similar to the treatment jurisdiction on

pre-rally COVID-19 cases and mortality, we match on (i) cumulative COVID-19 cases on each

day for the two weeks prior to the rally (June 5, 2020 to July 18, 2020, allowing June 19, a travel

day for some arriving in Tulsa, to have different COVID-19 case levels), or (ii) cumulative

COVID-19 cases on six pre-rally days (June 6, June 8, June 10, June 14, June 16 and June 18)

when we choose to match on other observable characteristics of jurisdictions that may influence

COVID-19 case or mortality growth.

         We focus on several observable traits that have been found to influence COVID-19 case

growth in the selection of our synthetic control, including median hours spent at home during the

pre-rally period (11.6 hours in Oklahoma and 11.4 hours in Tulsa County), COVID-19 testing

rate per 100,000 population (6841.6 per 100,000 in the state of Oklahoma), state reopening

policies (number of days that the state has permitted reopening of restaurants/bars, retail,




22
   Urbanicity rates are the proportion of individuals living in an urban area instead of a rural area, calculated using
2010 Census data available from https://www.census.gov/data/datasets/2010/dec/stateside-pums.html. The state of
Oklahoma has an urbanicity rate of 66.2 percent.
23
   We compute the weighted population density for each county by combining population density at the census block
group level weighted by the population of each CBG. See: https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/metro-
micro/data/tools/metro-micro-help/variables.html.
24
   Widening this constraint to include donor counties with urbanicity rates greater than 90 percent does not
materially alter our results.

                                                          18
personal care services and gyms and entertainment)25, and whether the state issued a mask-

wearing mandate.

         We estimate the unobserved counterfactual COVID-19 case or mortality rate for Tulsa

county, the Tulsa cluster (Tulsa County and its border counties), or the state of Oklahoma on pre-

treatment day 𝑡 by ∑𝑗 𝑤𝑗 ∗ 𝐶𝑂𝑉𝐼𝐷𝑗𝑡 , where 𝑤𝑗 is the weight assigned to donor jurisdiction 𝑗. The

estimated weights 𝑤𝑗 are chosen to minimize the absolute difference between 𝐶𝑂𝑉𝐼𝐷𝑖=𝑇𝑢𝑙𝑠𝑎,𝑡 and

∑𝑗 𝑤𝑗 ∗ 𝐶𝑂𝑉𝐼𝐷𝑗𝑡 and for all pre-treatment days. Then, the per-day treatment effect αt is estimated

as 𝛼𝑡 = 𝐶𝑂𝑉𝐼𝐷𝑖=𝑇𝑢𝑙𝑠𝑎,𝑡 − ∑𝑗 𝑤𝑗 ∗ 𝐶𝑂𝑉𝐼𝐷𝑗𝑡 for t ∈ [June 2026, July 24]. The average treatment

effect is then the average over the post-treatment window.

         In addition to the above COVID-19 analysis, we also use the above synthetic control

methods for examining net stay-at-home behavior in Tulsa county and the Tulsa cluster using the

four stay-at-home measures described above. This analysis is motivated by recent work showing

that increased social mobility to attend an event may be countered by behavior of non-attendees

who may choose to avoid congestion or due to fear of violence from political clashes (Dave et al.

2020d).

         The above analyses focused on Tulsa county and its surrounding areas since the

campaign rally was largely a greater Tulsa event, with the Tulsa cluster supplying the majority

(57.2 percent) of attendees. Nevertheless, rally-goers from other parts of the state (notably

counties comprising Oklahoma City), and to a smaller extent from other states, were also

observed in the treated CBGs on the day of the campaign event. We therefore also broaden our

focus to outside the greater Tulsa area, in order to assess whether there were any discernible


25
   Hence, if the state rolls back its reopening or suspends it for any or all of these sectors, this will be reflected in the
separate duration measure of days for each sector that the state has remained reopened over the sample period.
26
   In our main specification, we also include June 19 as a posttreatment day given travel to the event that day. Using
June 20 as the first post-treatment day yields a qualitatively similar pattern of results.

                                                             19
changes in COVID-19 cases or mortality in these other areas that contributed attendees at the

rally. Specifically, we explore a dose-response difference-in-differences model by taking

advantage of the variation in non-resident pings to the treatment CBGs, as shown in Figure 1.

That is, we pool a panel of counties and days from Oklahoma and its bordering states (Arkansas,

Colorado, Kansas, Missouri, New Mexico, and Texas) and estimate the following specification:



log (COVID-19)cst = β0 + Inflowc*PostRallyt*β1 + Xst*β2 + Zct*β3 + αc + τt + αc*t + μcst                      (2)



where Inflowc is a vector measuring inflows of home counties that contributed to non-resident

pings in the treatment CBGs on the day of the Trump rally, June 20, (High Inflow, Moderate-

High Inflow, Moderate-Low Inflow, Low Inflow) as measured by SafeGraph using data on

smartphone home locations and destinations (see Figure 1 and footnote 16). For COVID-19

confirmed cases, we utilize a log transformation, while for deaths, we utilize an inverse

hyperbolic sine transformation. The latter approximates the natural log, is interpreted in a

similar manner, but has the advantage of retaining areas with zero death counts (Bellemare and

Wichman 2020).27

         In alternate specifications, we also define relative inflow measures that account for the

population of the county that contributed residents to the treatment CBG, in order to capture

heterogeneity arising from differential risk of exposure from potential population mixing.28 For


27
   Approximately 44 percent of county-day observations had zero death counts, mainly representing rural counties.
Our estimates are not sensitive to utilizing a log transformation, and dropping these county-days with zero deaths, or
utilizing a log transformation after adding one to the death count in all counties.
28
   Based on the relative share measure, we define high inflow as a county that contributed more than 10 percent of
its observed residents (as measured by resident pings) to the treatment CBGs on June 20, moderate-high inflow as a
county contributing 6 to 10 percent of its observed residents, moderate- low inflow as a county contributing 1 to 6
percent of its residents, and low inflow as a county contributing 0.1 to 1 percent of its residents. See Appendix
Figure 4 for a map of counties in Oklahoma that drew the most residents to the rally, based on the relative share of
the home county population.

                                                         20
instance, 100 returning residents from the rally to their home county would have different

implications for community spread if the home county has a relatively smaller population (than if

the home county was more populated). On the one hand, this implies a larger share of the

county’s population being potentially treated by attending the rally; on the other hand,

interactions between the returning attendees and non-attendees may be more limited if the home

county is relatively sparsely populated, ceteris paribus.

       Turning back to equation (2), PostRallyt measures post-Trump rally windows capturing

the incubation period (up to 5 days following the rally), the aftermath of the incubation period

(6-14 days), 15-29 days, and 30-34 days after the rally. This post-treatment window (up to 34

days after treatment) captures a period well after the median incubation period for COVID-19

(5.1 days) and exceeds the time after which 97 percent of infected individuals would have

exhibited symptoms (Li et al. 2020). In addition, 𝑿𝒔𝒕 is a vector of state characteristics including

separate indicators of state reopening policies for each of the following sectors including

restaurants/bars, retail, personal care services, and gyms and entertainment activity, the presence

of a state shelter-in-place order (SIPO), the COVID-19 testing rate per 100,000 population, and

whether the state had issued a mask-wearing mandate; and Zct is a vector for the average

temperature in the county, whether measurable precipitation fell in the county, and the onset of

Black Lives Matter protests in major urban centers in the county (Dave et al. 2020d). In

addition, we include a set of county fixed effects, 𝛼𝑐 , day fixed effects, 𝜏𝑡 , and a county-specific

linear time trend (𝛼𝑐 *t). This last control may account for differential growth trends of COVID-




                                                  21
19 across states and counties.29 To evaluate the common trends assumption, we conduct event-

study analyses for counties that contributed large shares of residents to the Trump rally CBGs.30



                                                    5. Results

         Our difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the indoor political rally on non-

resident travel are reported in Table 1; the corresponding event-study analysis is shown in Figure

2. Our main findings on COVID-19 are shown in Figures 3-7 and Tables 2-5.



5.1 Non-Resident Travel and Social Distancing

         We first assess the effects of the Tulsa rally on the scope of non-resident travel behavior

into the census block groups containing the planned venues, based on equation (1). Estimated

effects of the rally on the non-resident ping rate (Panel I) and the total ping rate (Panel II) in the

treatment CBGs are shown in Table 1. Column (1) includes day and CBG fixed effects, column

(2) adds controls for temperature and weather, column (3) adds controls for the onset of Black

Lives Matter protests in large cities in the county (see Dave et al. 2020d), and column (4) adds

controls for county-specific linear time trends. While our preferred estimates are from the

saturated models that include predictors of social distancing and trend controls, it is reassuring

that the estimates are robust across all of these specifications.


29
   One concern with the inclusion of a control for a county-specific linear time trend is that its inclusion may bias
estimated treatment effects downward in the presence of dynamic impacts (Goodman-Bacon 2018; Dave et al.
2020a). We experiment with alternate specifications, including difference-in-differences models that (i) excluded a
county-specific time trend or (ii) included a treatment county-specific linear pre-treatment trend. Event study
analyses of these specifications provided no evidence that the Tulsa rally increased COVID-19 cases in counties that
drew larger numbers of residents to the June 20 events. Moreover, an examination of pre-treatment trends across
each of our specifications suggested that models including county-specific linear time trends produced findings most
consistent with the common trends assumption.
30
   Statistical inference is conducted via permutation-based placebo tests in which the estimate of β1 from equation
(2) is compared to the distribution of β1 generated from randomly assigning treatment to counties that did not
contribute inflows to the Tulsa event.

                                                         22
       Estimates in Panel I indicate that the Trump campaign event resulted in a significant

increase in non-residents traveling into the treated CBGs, reflecting an increase of 0.10

additional non-resident pings (per 1,000 meters squared). While actual turnout at the rally was

far lower than anticipated, the influx on Saturday still amounts to a 25.7 percent increase over

inflows into the area that would normally occur on average prior to the rally. Panel II presents

commensurate estimates based on total pings (resident and non-resident) observed in the CBGs.

As evident from the means, virtually all (92 percent) of the total pings observed in the treated

CBGs are from non-residents; this reflects the fact that the CBGs containing the BOK Center and

the Convention Center comprise the central business districts of Tulsa and are primarily non-

residential. Hence, it is not surprising that we find highly similar estimates of the rally-induced

inflows in Panel II, reflecting an increase in the total ping rate of 0.09 or 22.4 percent relative to

the pre-treatment mean. This is virtually identical to the unadjusted difference in inflows

between the Saturday of the rally (June 20) and the previous Saturday (June 13) (see Appendix

Figure 1).

       Figure 2 visually presents the event study analyses for non-resident and total pings

observed in the treated CBGs. They underscore the dynamics in travel behavior surrounding the

campaign rally. First, inflows into the treated and non-treated CBGs trend quite similarly prior

to the event. Second, there is a substantial and significant spike in pings, reflecting an influx of

non-residents into the area, on the day of the rally, relative to the control groups. Third,

immediately following the event, the treated CBGs experience a commensurate and equally rapid

decrease in non-resident pings, consistent with rally-goers returning home, with inflows

thereafter reverting to baseline.




                                                  23
        While the estimates in Table 1 reveal an increase in inflows into the treated CBGs of 22

to 26 percent, it is important to note that this is a net increase above and over what would have

occurred on a typical Saturday in the absence of the rally. As noted earlier, individuals who

otherwise would have visited downtown Tulsa on the weekend may have reduced their travel

behavior due to business and road closures, anticipated crowding, and/or safety concerns arising

from potential clashes between protesters and rally attendees. Thus, not only did the Trump

campaign rally lead to an increase in the level of inflows but would also be expected to shift the

composition of visitors into the treated CBGs, as rally attendees displace typical Saturday

visitors and their activities.

        Such displacement and avoidance behaviors are somewhat more evident in Appendix

Figures 5 and 6, when we turn to stay-at-home measures of social distancing. Here we present

trends in the extensive and intensive measures of staying at home (Panels a through d) for the

larger Tulsa county cluster (Appendix Figure 5) and for just Tulsa county (Appendix Figure 6)

along with their respective synthetically-generated counterfactuals. The synthetic controls,

constructed through matches on outcomes in all pre-treatment periods, track Tulsa lock-step in

all periods prior to the rally. For both the broader Tulsa cluster and just Tulsa county, there is a

short-term increase in the percent of residents staying at home full-time (Panel a), on the day of

the rally and the preceding Friday, relative to the control group. These effects are statistically

significant (two-tailed permutation-based p-value = 0.029). Given that the greater Tulsa area is

responsible for the majority of visitors into the treated CBGs for the Trump rally, the increase in

the percent of residents staying at home full-time reflects counteracting compensatory behavior

on the part of residents who chose not to the attend the rally or leave their homes. That this is

consistent with a rally-induced displacement is supported by the short-term duration of the



                                                 24
increase in stay-at-home behaviors over that Friday and Saturday, and a rapid return to their

baseline trends thereafter. Turning to the intensive measures of time spent at home (Panels c

through d), we find no significant or substantial change. Given that attendees from Tulsa and

surrounding counties are known to have travelled to the treatment CBGs, thereby reducing their

time spent at home, a null effect at this margin also implies countering increase in the time spent

at home among other non-traveling sub-populations.31



5.2 COVID-19 Results

         In light of the evidence from Table 1 and the mobility patterns documented in Figure 1, it

is clear that, while attendance at the Trump campaign event fell short of expectations, the event

nevertheless did attract a significant inflow of visitors into the treated CBGs. Moreover, the

visitors primarily hailed from instate (81.6 percent) and mainly from Tulsa county (43.4 percent)

and the broader Tulsa cluster (57.2 percent). In assessing the impact of the large indoor

gathering on COVID-19 case rates, as attendees returned home, we therefore aim our spotlight

on these areas that contributed the largest shares of visitors to the rally.

         Figure 3 presents a synthetic control counterfactual evolution of realized COVID-19

cases (Panels a and c) and deaths (Panels b and d) for Tulsa county. Given that Tulsa county is

highly urbanized, and the central role played by social interactions and crowding in community

spread, we constrain the donor pool to counties that a priori approximate Tulsa in their degree of

urbanization as proxied by urbanicity and weighted population density.32 We draw on this donor



31
   It is more difficult to detect changes in time spent at home at the intensive margin, and thus separate out increases
driven by the avoidance behavior of non-attendees from decreases due to attendees traveling to the venue CBGs
with these measures of stay-at-home behaviors. Appendix Table 1 presents the point estimates for the synthetic
control results on stay-at-home behaviors.
32
   Given differential risk of exposure, population mixing, and other unobservable dynamics in infection spread, it
would not be appropriate to include sparsely populated, rural and less urban counties as part of the potential donors.

                                                           25
pool of similar counties, and construct the counterfactual in Panels (a) and (b) by matching on

predictors of confirmed infections including social distancing (median hours spent at home) and

COVID-19 testing rates and matching on the outcome at six points in time (June 6, 8, 10, 14, 16,

and 18) during the pre-treatment period. Panels (c) and (d) further match on states’ reopening

policies and policies mandating public use of face masks.33

         These analyses underscore two points. First, despite not forcing matches on the outcome

across all pre-treatment days, synthetic Tulsa county trends virtually identically to actual Tulsa

county with respect to confirmed cases and deaths prior to the campaign event. Second, there is

little indication that the rally had any meaningful effects on confirmed infection rates or

mortality rates in Tulsa county relative to the control set, within 35 days of the event. These

results provide little support for any sustained or persistent increase in COVID-19 infections, as

measured by confirmed cases or deaths in Tulsa county following the campaign event.

         Figures 4 and 5 widen the spatial unit of analysis to incorporate the cluster of surrounding

counties (Tulsa county and its neighboring counties) and the entire state, respectively. These

continue to show no signs of any discernible increase in COVID-19 cases or deaths in Tulsa

cluster and the state of Oklahoma, relative to their synthetic controls.34

         The corresponding point estimates and their permutation-based inferential statistics for

our main analyses are reported in Table 2 for confirmed cases. In columns (1) and (2), we match

on observable predictors of COVID-19 infection spread in conjunction with cumulative COVID-

19 cases for a subset of the pre-treatment period (six of the 14 pre-rally days), and in column (3)



33
   Appendix Table 2 shows the principal counties (or states, in the case of Oklahoma) that received positive weights
from our donor pool in our various matching strategies.
34
   Confirmed cases in the state of Oklahoma are somewhat lower than their respective estimated counterfactuals,
though the difference is not statistically significant (Figure 5, Panels a and c). COVID-related mortality rate
remained virtually identical between actual and synthetic Oklahoma over the entire 7+ weeks of the analysis period
enveloping the rally (Figure 5, Panels b and d).

                                                         26
we match directly on cumulative COVID-19 cases over the entire pre-treatment period. Table 3

reports parallel estimates for COVID-related mortality rates. Estimates in Tables 2 and 3

indicate no consistent or systematic patterns reflective of an increase in COVID-19 cases or

deaths following the Tulsa rally, and none of the estimates are statistically distinguishable from

zero. It is validating that these results are robust across alternate donor pools, matching

algorithms, and variation in the donors and weights used to form the counterfactual set.35

         Appendix Table 3 presents alternate analyses, following Courtemanche et al. (2020a, b)

and Dave et al. (2020c), based on a three-day moving average of growth rate in cases, which is

defined as the difference in the natural log of cumulative COVID-19 cases between day t and day

t-1. While growth in cumulative cases tends to be noisier, this measure captures dynamics in

new confirmed cases from day to day (that is the rate of change or the derivative of cumulative

cases over time) and may magnify effects that might otherwise be masked by looking at changes

in total confirmed cases. The synthetic control estimates of the effects of the Trump campaign

rally on the growth in cases continue to confirm our prior results, and do not indicate any

substantial or significant shift.36



5.3 Dose-Response Results




35
   Our main analyses (Figures 3-5 and Tables 2-3) had constrained the donor pool to include jurisdictions with a
similar level of urbanization to Tulsa county and to Oklahoma, based on proximity to the treated area’s urbanicity
rate or weighted population density. Appendix Table 4 presents estimates where we restrict the donor pool
alternately based on urbanicity rates alone or weighted population density alone. The results are largely similar.
We also generated synthetic control estimates based on the natural log of the outcome (COVID-19 confirmed cases
and deaths) in order to assess sensitivity to functional form. Relative changes, that is changes in the log of
confirmed cases or deaths, may provide a better counterfactual tracking for Tulsa for infections that are growing at a
non-linear exponential rate. These results also do not show any consistent, persistent, or significant increase within
five weeks following the campaign event.
36
   Our synthetic approach matches on COVID-19 case growth on each pretreatment day until June 19, and June 19 is
included as part of the three-day moving average.

                                                         27
       While the Trump campaign rally was largely a Tulsa event drawing almost half of its

attending audience from within the county, it did also pull some – though notably a smaller share

– of its attendees from more distant parts, including Oklahoma City (more than 100 miles from

Tulsa) and from bordering states (see Figure 1). Next, we therefore assess whether the Tulsa

event led to any increase in COVID-19 cases across any of the counties that contributed

attendees, nearby or far, from within the state or from its neighbors. We exploit variation in non-

resident pings into the treated CBGs to assess whether there are any changes in confirmed cases

across counties that contributed fewer as compared to more visitors to the rally, and if so,

whether effects are larger for home counties that supplied more attendees.

       Table 4 reports these county-level dose-response difference-in-differences estimates of

the association between pings in the rally CBGs and COVID-19 case counts, based on equation

(2). We group counties whose resident cell phones were detected in the treated CBGs on the day

of the rally into four categories (Low Inflow; Moderate-Low Inflow, Moderate-High Inflow, High

Inflow) that monotonically capture the absolute share of visitors in the treated CBG from the

source county. For instance, for the High Inflow county (Tulsa county), more than 9.5 percent of

observed visitors in the venue CBGs came from this county, compared to the Low Inflow

counties, where less than one percent of visitors traveled from any of these counties. These

estimates are reported in the first two columns, which alternately exclude and include extended

controls. Counties with low inflows saw slight decreases in infections following the rally (6.8

percent 15-29 days after and 7.0 percent 30 or more days after) in the saturated model (column

2). Point estimates for counties with high inflows indicate a 1.6 percent increase within 15-29




                                                 28
days, and an 8.3 percent decrease 30 or more days after.37 None of these estimates are

statistically significant or show any consistent patterns reflective of any substantial increase in

confirmed cases following the campaign event. That is, we do not find stronger positive effects

on cases in counties that drew relatively more attendees to the treated CBGs, especially at the

end of three weeks following the event.

        Arguably, it is not just the number of visitors returning back to their home county, but

also the resident population of the home county, that together may impact the dynamics of

population mixing and community transmission. In columns (3) and (4), we report dose-

response estimates based on an alternate relative measure of inflow, which considers the share of

residents traveling to the rally CBGs relative to the population of the home county, as measured

by home resident pings in the Safegraph data. If there are any increases in COVID-19 cases,

they would be expected for counties with the most residents pinging in the rally CBGs.

Regardless of how we define the inflows, we do not find this to be the case, and estimates

continue to suggest no significant changes across the high inflow counties or across any of the

other county groupings from which residents visited the treatment CBGs on the day of the rally.

        Table 5 reports the corollary county-level dose-response difference-in-differences

estimates for mortality. As we do not find any significant effects on COVID-19 cases, we would

not expect any effects on mortality. Nevertheless, assessing effects on deaths permits an

additional validation check; death counts represent an alternate objective measure of COVID-19

infections that bypasses any issues with the measurement of confirmed case counts potentially

conflating selection into testing. As with cases, estimates in Table 5 indicate no significant or



37
  For convenience of presentation, we present estimates for four lag windows: 0-5 days, 6-14 days, 15-29 days, and
30 or more days. The event study analyses (Figures 6 and 7) present the results for disaggregated post-treatment
effects.

                                                        29
systematic increase in deaths across counties that experience the highest inflows of rally

attendees. Thus, the weight of the evidence from these analyses suggests that the event has not

had any discernible consistent effect on COVID-19 cases or deaths over a post-rally period of

five weeks.

         Figures 6 and 7 visually present the event study analyses for the sets of counties

alternating from low to high inflows, for cases and deaths respectively. Differential trends in

confirmed cases and deaths are fairly flat across each of the treated groups and the controls prior

to the rally, and there is little evidence of a significant, substantial or persistent increase in cases

for any of these treated groups following the rally.38

         One concern regarding our finding on the lack of any strong effects for COVID-19 cases

is that the post-rally sample period might not be sufficiently protracted to detect an increase in

transmission rates. While we acknowledge this possibility, we also note that our sample includes

35 days of data in the post-treatment period, 34 days following the day of the campaign event.

This combined with the median incubation period for COVID-19 being 5.1 days, with 75 percent

of all infected individuals experiencing symptoms within 6.7 days and 97.5 percent within 11.5

days (Li et al. 2020), suggests that our post-event window is long enough to be able capture any

substantial increase in confirmed cases — as well as deaths — if there are any meaningful

changes. Moreover, prior work has uncovered strong effects of shelter-in-place orders on

confirmed cases within ten days following the adoption of the policy (Friedson et al. 2020; Dave

et al. 2020 a, b; c; Courtemanche et al. 2020a, b), and other work in economics has detected




38
  A weakly positive (though statistically insignificant) differential trend in the case rate for Tulsa county (relative to
the control counties) prior to campaign event is evident (Figure 6 Panel d). The event study however shows little
indication of a break in this trend or any sustained increase in cases following the event.

                                                            30
secondary spread of COVID-19 from travel due to spring break at a 2-week time horizon

(Mangrum and Niekamp 2020).

                                          6. Conclusions

       The Trump Campaign’s Tulsa rally on June 20, 2020 was the largest indoor event in the

United States since March 2020. In the weeks following the event, numerous high-profile news

outlets, including the Washington Post, Time, CBS News, and CNN linked the Tulsa rally to a

spike in COVID-19 case growth. Commenting on Tulsa’s COVID-19 case growth in the weeks

following June 20, Tulsa Health Department Executive Director Bruce Dart suggested “we just

connect the dots” (Astor and Weiland 2020). However, no study has rigorously examined the

impact of the Trump rally on COVID-19.

       This study is the first to empirically examine the link between this event and changes in

confirmed COVID-19 case rates and mortality rates, drawing focus on areas that drew the most

attendees to the census block groups containing the rally venues and to which the attendees

traveled back home following the event. During the five weeks of our post-treatment period, we

do not find any significant or substantial changes in the trajectory of COVID-19 cases in Tulsa

county, which was home to the Trump rally, or from counties that drew attendees to the event.

While the data do not allow us to pinpoint all of the mechanisms underlying our findings, we

hypothesize several possible explanations.

       First, the results are consistent with avoidance behaviors among those who did not attend

to the rally. Given the business and road closures along with the anticipation of large crowds and

potential for violence, visitors into the venue CBGs likely displaced typical travellers into the

area. These visitors who were displaced would likely have engaged in a number of ‘risky’

COVID-related behaviors in the treatment CBGs, including bar, restaurant, and entertainment-


                                                 31
related activities. Moreover, deployment of the National Guard, which stood ready to assist with

crowd control and security, along with police and Secret Service efforts, likely deterred many

individuals from the area. In other words, individuals who otherwise typically would have

travelled into the downtown area on the weekend may have chosen to stay home that weekend or

travel elsewhere, and their activities were displaced. There is some indication of a net increase in

stay-at-home behaviors coinciding with the rally, as many non-attendees opted not to travel to

the area or leave their homes. Dave et al. (2020d) find similar effects, specifically a net increase

in stay-at-home behaviors, in communities following the onset of Black Lives Matter protests.

Such avoidance behaviors on the part of other segments of the population can change the level

and composition of population mixing, and may also serve to isolate individuals of varying risk

profiles.

         Second, mitigating factors specific to the rally may also have played a role. These

included temperature checks prior to entry, a crowd size that filled the arena to only about a third

of its capacity, and self-protection behaviors (face masks, social distancing) among some of the

attendees. Countering these are other considerations; for instance, individuals attending the

Trump campaign rally are a selected sample, on average older and less likely to engage in risk

mitigation efforts (Barrios and Hochberg 2020). If these individuals are also less likely to get

tested, then they may not be reflected in the official case numbers. 39 However, given that

turnout was far lower than anticipated, possibly in response to concerns over COVID-19 risk,

individuals who are more risk-averse, or perceived themselves to be at a higher risk of exposure

or complications may have opted to bypass the event. Thus, the risk of infection among attendees

may not be representative of the population risk.


39
  We also note that it is possible that due to the selected nature of the rally attendees, the activities forgone to attend
the rally may have had a similar infection risk.

                                                            32
          While our findings suggest that the first large indoor gathering in the United States since

the COVID-19 shutdowns was not associated with a significant rise in confirmed cases, the

complexities of the potential mechanisms at play may not imply that all indoor gatherings of a

similar scale are necessarily low-risk. Our work highlights the fact that large gatherings such as

political rallies or Black Lives Matter protests (Dave et al. 2020d), which have the potential for

large offsetting community effects through avoidance behaviors, may not generalize to all indoor

events.




                                                   33
                                         7. References

Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. 2010. “Synthetic Control Methods for
     Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control
     Program.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 105 (490): 493–505.

Abouk, R., Heydari, B., 2020. The Immediate Effect of COVID-19 Policies on Social Distancing
    Behavior in the United States (SSRN Scholarly Paper No. ID 3571421). Social Science
    Research Network, Rochester, NY. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3571421

Allen, J.G., Marr, L.C., 2020. Recognizing and controlling airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-
      2 in indoor environments. Indoor Air 30, 557–558. https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12697

Andersen, M., Maclean, J.C., Pesko, M.F., Simon, K.I., 2020. Effect of a Federal Paid Sick
     Leave Mandate on Working and Staying at Home: Evidence from Cellular Device Data
     (Working Paper No. 27138), Working Paper Series. National Bureau of Economic
     Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27138

Angell, S.Y., Newsom, G., 2020. California Department of Public Health.

Aschburner, Steve. 2020. Coronavirus pandemic causes NBA to suspend season after player tests
     positive. NBA.com

Associated Press News. 2020. Reporter at Trump’s Tulsa rally tests positive for COVID-19. June
     26, 2020. https://apnews.com/3b4f69c49231eff5ec7dabfce02e55aa

Astor, M., and Weiland, N. Coronavirus Surge in Tulsa ‘More Than Likely’ Linked to Trump
      Rally. July 10, 2020. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/08/us/politics/coronavirus-tulsa-
      trump-rally.html

Bai, Y., Yao, L., Wei, T., Tian, F., Jin, D.-Y., Chen, L., Wang, M., 2020. Presumed
      Asymptomatic Carrier Transmission of COVID-19. JAMA 323, 1406–1407.
      https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.2565

Baker, P., Haberman, M., 2020. Trump Moves Tulsa Rally Date ‘Out of Respect’ for Juneteenth.
     The New York Times.

Barrios, J.M. and Hochberg, Y. (2020). “Risk Perception Through the Lens of Politics in the
      Time of the COVID-19 Pandemic.” NBER Working Paper No. 27008.

Bellemare, M.F. and Wichman, C.J., 2020. Elasticities and the inverse hyperbolic sine
     transformation. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 82(1), pp.50-61.

Bierman, N., 2020. Trump says he will resume campaign rallies June 19 in Tulsa. Los Angeles
     Times.

Broughton, D. 2019. WNBA Turnstile Tracker: Attendance Down At End Of Regular Season.
     Sports Business Daily.

                                               34
      https://www.sportsbusinessdaily.com/Daily/Issues/2019/09/10/Research-and-
      Ratings/WNBA-Turnstile-Tracker.aspx
Botosaru, Irene., & Bruno Ferman 2019. “On the Role of Covariates in the Synthetic Control
     Method.” The Econometrics Journal 22(2): 117-130.

Buchmueller, T. C., DiNardo, J., & Valletta, R. G. 2011. The effect of an employer health
    insurance mandate on health insurance coverage and the demand for labor: Evidence from
    hawaii. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(4), 25-51.

Carlisle, M. 2020. Three Weeks After Trump's Tulsa Rally, Oklahoma Reports Record High
      COVID-19 Numbers. July 11, 2020. https://time.com/5865890/oklahoma-covid-19-trump-
      tulsa-rally/

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2020a. Considerations for Events and Gatherings.
     https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/community/large-events/considerations-for-
     events-gatherings.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020b. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) –
     Prevention & Treatment [WWW Document]. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
     URL https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/prevention.html
     (accessed 6.25.20).

Christopher, T., 2020. Viral Videos Show Teeming Throngs of Maskless Trump Fans Lining Up
      for Tulsa Rally. Mediaite.

Cohen, L., 2020. Trump moves campaign rally scheduled for Juneteenth after facing backlash.
     CBS News.

Contini, D., Costabile, F., 2020. Does Air Pollution Influence COVID-19 Outbreaks?
     Atmosphere 11, 377. https://doi.org/10.3390/atmos11040377

Courtemanche, C., Garuccio, J., Le, A., Pinkston, J., Yelowitz, A., 2020a. Did Social-Distancing
     Measures in Kentucky Help to Flatten the COVID-19 Curve? 24.

Courtemanche, C., Garuccio, J., Le, A., Pinkston, J., Yelowitz, A., 2020b. Strong Social
     Distancing Measures In The United States Reduced The COVID-19 Growth Rate. Health
     Affairs 10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00608. https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00608

Cunningham, S. and Shah, M., (2018). “Decriminalizing Indoor Prostitution: Implications for
      Sexual Violence and Public Health.” The Review of Economic Studies, 85(3), pp.1683-
      1715.
Cuomo, A., 2020. No. 202.17: Continuing Temporary Suspension and Modification of Laws
    Relating to the Disaster Emergency.

Dave, D.M., Friedson, A.I., Matsuzawa, K., McNichols, D., Sabia, J.J., 2020a. Did the
     Wisconsin Supreme Court Restart a COVID-19 Epidemic? Evidence from a Natural

                                               35
     Experiment (Working Paper No. 27322). National Bureau of Economic Research.
     https://doi.org/10.3386/w27322

Dave, D.M., Friedson, A.I., Matsuzawa, K., Sabia, J.J., 2020b. When Do Shelter-in-Place Orders
     Fight COVID-19 Best? Policy Heterogeneity Across States and Adoption Time (Working
     Paper No. 27091). National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27091

Dave, D.M., Friedson, A.I., Matsuzawa, K., Sabia, J.J., Safford, S., 2020c. Were Urban Cowboys
     Enough to Control COVID-19? Local Shelter-in-Place Orders and Coronavirus Case
     Growth (Working Paper No. 27229). National Bureau of Economic Research.
     https://doi.org/10.3386/w27229

Dave, D.M., Friedson, A.I., Matsuzawa, K., Sabia, J.J., Safford, S., 2020d. Black Lives Matter
     Protests, Social Distancing, and COVID-19 (Working Paper No. 27408), Working Paper
     Series. National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27408

ESPN. 2020. NBA Attendance Report 2020. http://www.espn.com/nba/attendance

Fineberg, H.V., 2020. Rapid Expert Consultation on the Possibility of Bioaerosol Spread of
     SARS-CoV-2 for the COVID-19 Pandemic. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,
     Medicine.

Fox23News Staff., 2020. What to Know: Closures Expected for Trump Rally in Tusla. June 18,
     2020. https://www.kjrh.com/news/local-news/closing-some-tulsa-businesses-closing-
     ahead-of-rallies-this-weekend

Friedson, A.I., McNichols, D., Sabia, J.J., Dave, D., 2020. Did California’s Shelter-in-Place
      Order Work? Early Coronavirus-Related Public Health Effects (Working Paper No.
      26992). National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w26992

Goodman-Bacon, A., 2018. Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment timing
    (Working Paper No. w25018). National Bureau of Economic Research.
    https://doi.org/10.3386/w25018

Gupta, S., Nguyen, T.D., Rojas, F.L., Raman, S., Lee, B., Bento, A., Simon, K.I., Wing, C.,
     2020. Tracking Public and Private Responses to the COVID-19 Epidemic: Evidence from
     State and Local Government Actions (Working Paper No. 27027). National Bureau of
     Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27027

Hinton, C., 2020. Early bird Trump supporters want to be among first at rally. Oklahoman.com.

Holloway, J., 2020. Downtown Tulsa Roads Closing in Preparation for Weekend Trump Rally.
     June 18, 2020. https://www.news9.com/story/5eeb43856aba30686324820d/downtown-
     tulsa-roads-closing-in-preparation-for-weekend-trump-rally-

Hutchins, E., KTUL Staff, 2020. Tulsa businesses continue to board up ahead of large crowds at
     Trump rally, protests. June 18, 2020. https://ktul.com/news/local/tulsa-businesses-
     continue-to-board-up-ahead-of-large-crowds-at-trump-rally-protests

                                                36
Itkowitz, C. 2020. Herman Cain, who attended Trump’s Tulsa rally, hospitalized with covid-19.
     July 2, 2020. https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/herman-cain-who-attended-trumps-
     tulsa-rally-hospitalized-with-covid-19/2020/07/02/55daf86e-bc92-11ea-80b9-
     40ece9a701dc_story.html

James, A., Eagle, L., Phillips, C., Hedges, D.S., Bodenhamer, C., Brown, R., Wheeler, J.G. and
     Kirking, H., 2020. High COVID-19 attack rate among attendees at events at a church—
     Arkansas, MMWR. Morbidity and mortality weekly report ; v. 69, early release, May 19,
     2020

Jones, K. and Ries, B. 2020. Tulsa sees Covid-19 surge in the wake of Trump's June rally. July 9,
      2020. https://www.cnn.com/2020/07/08/us/tulsa-covid-trump-rally-contact-tracers-
      trnd/index.html

Karni, A., 2020. Trump Will Return to Campaign Trail With Rally in Tulsa. The New York
     Times.

Lasry, A., Kidder, D., Hast, M., Poovey, J., Sunshine, G., Winglee, K., Zviedrite, N., Ahmed, F.,
     Ethier, K.A., CDC Public Health Law Program, New York City Department of Health and
     Mental Hygiene, Louisiana Department of Health, Public Health – Seattle & King County,
     San Francisco COVID-19 Response Team, Alameda County Public Health Department,
     San Mateo County Health Department, Marin County Division of Public Health, CDC
     Public Health Law Program, Clodfelter, C., Howard-Williams, M., Hulkower, R., Jeong,
     G., Landsman, L., McCord, R., Moreland, A., Shelburne, J., Louisiana Department of
     Health, Billioux, A., Hand, J., Kanter, J., Smith, A., Sokol, T., Public Health – Seattle &
     King County, Duchin, J.S., Fagalde, M.S., Pogosjans, S., Alameda County Public Health
     Department, Brown, R., Huang, S., Moss, N., Pan, E., Shemsu, M., Yette, E., San Mateo
     County Health Department, Bock, C., Curtis-Robles, R., Lockett, C., Morrow, S.,
     Sallenave, C., Marin County Division of Public Health, Santora, L., Willis, M., 2020.
     Timing of Community Mitigation and Changes in Reported COVID-19 and Community
     Mobility ― Four U.S. Metropolitan Areas, February 26–April 1, 2020. MMWR Morb.
     Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 69, 451–457. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6915e2

Lorenz, T., Browning, K. and Frenkel, S. 2020. TikTok Teens and K-Pop Stans Say They Sank
     Trump Rally. New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/21/style/tiktok-trump-
     rally-tulsa.html

Lyu, W. and Wehby, G.L., 2020. Community Use Of Face Masks And COVID-19: Evidence
     From A Natural Experiment Of State Mandates In The US: Study examines impact on
     COVID-19 growth rates associated with state government mandates requiring face mask
     use in public. Health Affairs, pp.10-1377.

Mervosh, S., Lu, D., Swales, V., 2020. See Which States and Cities Have Told Residents to Stay
    at Home. The New York Times.

Mittal, R., Ni, R., Seo, J.-H., 2020. The flow physics of COVID-19. Journal of Fluid Mechanics
      894. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.330


                                               37
Morgan, R., 2020. QuikTrip closing some downtown-area stores temporarily ahead of Trump
    rally out of concern for employees, June 17, 2020.
    https://www.tulsaworld.com/business/quiktrip-closing-some-downtown-area-stores-
    temporarily-ahead-of-trump-rally-out-of-concern-for/article_ed0077ec-5dc6-5557-8129-
    9f4665fa6458.html#1

Mosk, M., Rubin, O., Ebbs, S., Barr, L., 2020. Like ‘stationary cruise ships’: Prisons, factories
    emerging as deadly coronavirus transit hubs. ABC News.

Murphy, S. 2020a. Oklahoma governor seeks larger event for Trump’s Tulsa rally. The Seattle
    Times.

Murphy, S., 2020b. Many fear Trump’s visit to Tulsa could spark violence. AP NEWS.

Murphy, S., 2020c. Trump supporters, protesters face off outside Oklahoma rally. Boston
    Herald.

Murphy, S. 2020d. Temperature checks, metal barriers, Trump gear: Crowd readies for Tulsa
    rally. https://wjla.com/news/nation-world/temperature-barriers-trump-gear-tulsa-rally

Murphy, S. 2020e. Tulsa Health Official Says Trump Rally 'Likely Contributed' to Surge in
    COVID-19 Cases. July 8, 2020. https://time.com/5864434/tulsa-trump-rally-coronavirus-
    surge/

Murphy, S., Lauer, C., 2020. Tulsa arena hosts thousands for Trump rally amid virus fears. AP
    NEWS.

Nishiura, H., Oshitani, H., Kobayashi, T., Saito, T., Sunagawa, T., Matsui, T., Wakita, T.,
     COVID, M. and Suzuki, M., 2020. Closed environments facilitate secondary transmission
     of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). medRxiv.

Oprysko, C. 2020. Oklahoma governor tests positive for coronavirus after hosting Trump rally.
     July 15, 2020. https://www.politico.com/news/2020/07/15/oklahoma-governor-positive-
     for-coronavirus-363951

Painter, M., & Qiu, T. 2020. Political beliefs affect compliance with covid-19 social distancing
      orders. (SSRN Scholarly Paper No. ID 3569098.). Social Science Research Network,
      Rochester, NY. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3569098

Pan, X., Chen, D., Xia, Y., Wu, X., Li, T., Ou, X., Zhou, L., Liu, J., 2020. Asymptomatic cases
     in a family cluster with SARS-CoV-2 infection. Lancet Infect Dis 20, 410–411.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30114-6

Rothe, C., Schunk, M., Sothmann, P., Bretzel, G., Froeschl, G., Wallrauch, C., Zimmer, T.,
     Thiel, V., Janke, C., Guggemos, W., Seilmaier, M., Drosten, C., Vollmar, P., Zwirglmaier,
     K., Zange, S., Wölfel, R., Hoelscher, M., 2020. Transmission of 2019-nCoV Infection
     from an Asymptomatic Contact in Germany. New England Journal of Medicine 382, 970–
     971. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMc2001468

                                                38
Schlosser, E., 2020. America’s Slaughterhouses Aren’t Just Killing Animals. The Atlantic.

Sears, James and Villas-Boas, J. Miguel and Villas-Boas, Vasco and Villas-Boas, Sofia, Are We
      #Staying Home to Flatten the Curve? (May 25, 2020). Department of Agricultural and
      Resource Economics. CUDARE Working Papers. Available at SSRN:
      https://ssrn.com/abstract=3569791.

Setti, L., Passarini, F., De Gennaro, G., Barbieri, P., Perrone, M.G., Borelli, M., Palmisani, J., Di
       Gilio, A., Piscitelli, P., Miani, A., 2020. Airborne Transmission Route of COVID-19: Why
       2 Meters/6 Feet of Inter-Personal Distance Could Not Be Enough. International Journal of
       Environmental Research and Public Health 17, 2932.
       https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17082932

Sgana, N., 2020. Trump supporters camp out in line overnight for his rally in Tulsa.

Singh, M., 2020. Donald Trump to hold rally in Oklahoma, first since coronavirus pandemic
     began. The Guardian.

Treisman, R. 2020. Midwest: Coronavirus-Related Restrictions By State. NPR.
     https://www.npr.org/2020/06/11/847413697/midwest-coronavirus-related-restrictions-by-
     state

Williams, T., Seline, L., Griesbach, R., 2020. Coronavirus Cases Rise Sharply in Prisons Even as
      They Plateau Nationwide. The New York Times.

Wise, J., 2020. Tulsa Fire Department says Trump rally attendance was about 6,200. TheHill.

World Health Organization, 2020. Q&A: Influenza and COVID-19 - similarities and differences
     [WWW Document]. URL https://www.who.int/news-room/q-a-detail/q-a-similarities-and-
     differences-covid-19-and-influenza (accessed 6.24.20)




                                                 39
           Figure 1. Distribution of Home Counties for Absolute Inflows to
              Treatment Census Block Groups (CBGs) on June 20, 2020

       Panel (a): Distribution of Home Counties of Those Who Traveled to Trump Event CBGs




    Panel (b): Distribution of Home Counties of Oklahomans Who Traveled to Trump Event CBGs




Panel (c): Distribution of Home Counties of Oklahomans and Border State Residents Who Traveled
                                     to Trump Event CBGs




                                             40
Figure 2. Event-Study Analyses of Effect of Tulsa Rally on Non-Resident Ping Rate in Affected Census Block Groups
         Panel (a): Non-Resident Ping Rate                                                               Panel (b): Total Ping Rate




 Note: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares estimate. All estimates include county and day fixed effects as well as county linear time trend.
 State policy controls include COVID-19 testing, an indicator for whether a state reopened restaurant or bars, an indicator for whether a state reopened
 retail services beyond curbside pickup, an indicator for whether a state reopened personal or pet care services, an indicator for whether a state reopened
 entertainment business, an indicator for whether a state reopened gyms or parks, and an indicator for whether a state paused reopening. County weather
 controls include average temperature and an indicator for whether any measurable precipitation fell.




                                                                         41
            Figure 3. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Tulsa Rally on COVID-19 Cases and Deaths in Tulsa County

Panel (a): Cases per 100,000 - Matching on Six days of Pre-Treatment COVID-19           Panel (b): Deaths per 100,000 – Matching on Six days of Pre-Treatment
 Case Rates, Pre-Treatment Stay-at-Home Behavior, Mask Wearing Policy, and            COVID-19 Death Rates, Pre-Treatment Stay-at-Home Behavior, Mask Wearing
                          COVID-19 Reopening Policy                                                    Policy, and COVID-19 Reopening Policy




Panel (c): Cases per 100,000 - Matching on Six days of Pre-Treatment COVID-            Panel (d): Deaths per 100,000 – Matching on Six days of Pre-Treatment COVID-
 19 Case Rates, Pre-Treatment Stay-at-Home Behavior, COVID-19 Testing Rate,             19 Death Rate, Pre-Treatment Stay-at-Home Behavior, COVID-19 Testing Rate,
            COVID-19 Reopening Policy, and Mask Wearing Policy                                     COVID-19 Reopening Policy, and Mask Wearing Policy




Note: The donor pool is comprised of primary counties (and their border counties) with urbanicity of ± 2.5 Tulsa County’s urbanicity rate (95.2%) or weighted
population density of ± 1,000 Tulsa County’s density (3,250) and exclude counties in
                                                                                  42Oklahoma and in Oklahoma's border states, as well as counties where a home
resident was detected (via smartphone using SafeGraph data) in the treatment CBGs on June 20, 2020.
        Figure 4. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Tulsa Rally on COVID-19 Cases and Deaths in Tulsa County Cluster

Panel (a): Cases per 100,000 - Matching on Six days of Pre-Treatment COVID-19          Panel (b): Deaths per 100,000 – Matching on Six days of Pre-Treatment COVID-
 Case Rates, Pre-Treatment Stay-at-Home Behavior, Mask Wearing Policy, and              19 Death Rates, Pre-Treatment Stay-at-Home Behavior, Mask Wearing Policy,
                          COVID-19 Reopening Policy                                                           and COVID-19 Reopening Policy




  Panel (c): Cases per 100,000 – Matching on Six days of Pre-Treatment COVID-           Panel (d): Deaths per 100,000 – Matching on Six days of Pre-Treatment COVID-
  19 Case Rates, Pre-Treatment Stay-at-Home Behavior, COVID-19 Testing Rate,             19 Death Rates, Pre-Treatment Stay-at-Home Behavior, COVID-19 Testing Rate,
             COVID-19 Reopening Policy, and Mask Wearing Policy                                     COVID-19 Reopening Policy, and Mask Wearing Policy




                                                                                 43 with urbanicity of ± 2.5 Tulsa County’s urbanicity rate (95.2%) or weighted
    Note: The donor pool is comprised of primary counties (and their border counties)
    population density of ± 1,000 Tulsa County’s density (3,250) and exclude counties in Oklahoma and in Oklahoma's border states, as well as counties where a home
    resident was detected (via smartphone using SafeGraph data) in the treatment CBGs on June 20, 2020.
           Figure 5. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Tulsa Rally on COVID-19 Cases and Death in State of Oklahoma


 Panel (a): Cases per 100,000 – Matching on Six days of Pre-Treatment COVID-19           Panel (b): Deaths per 100,000 – Matching on Six days of Pre-Treatment
  Case Rates, Pre-Treatment Stay-at-Home Behavior, Mask Wearing Policy, and            COVID-19 Death Rates, Pre-Treatment Stay-at-Home Behavior, Mask Wearing
                           COVID-19 Reopening Policy                                                    Policy, and COVID-19 Reopening Policy




Panel (c): Cases per 100,000 – Matching on Six days of Pre-Treatment COVID-                Panel (d): Deaths per 100,000 – Matching on Six days of Pre-Treatment
19 Case Rates, Pre-Treatment Stay-at-Home Behavior, COVID-19 Testing Rate,              Log(COVID-19 Case Rates), Pre-Treatment Stay-at-Home Behavior, COVID-19
           COVID-19 Reopening Policy, and Mask Wearing Policy                               Testing Rate, COVID-19 Reopening Policy, and Mask Wearing Policy




                                                                                  44
    Note: The donor pool is comprised of states with urbanicity of ± 15 Oklahoma’s urbanicity rate (65%) or with weighted population density ±750 Oklahoma’s
    Population Density (2,150) and exclude counties in Oklahoma and in Oklahoma's border states.
Figure 6. Event-Study Analyses of Effect of Tulsa Rally on COVID-19 Cases Per 100,000 Population in Oklahoma and Border
                                              States, by Dose (Absolute Inflow)
                  Panel (a): Counties with Low Inflow                                              Panel (b): Counties with Moderate-Low Inflow




            Panel (c): Counties with Moderate-High Inflow                                         Panel (d): Highest Inflow County (Tulsa County)




                                                                              45 include county and day fixed effects as well as county specific linear
   Note: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares estimate. All estimates
   time trend. State policy controls include COVID-19 testing, an indicator for whether a state reopened restaurant or bars, an indicator for whether a state
   reopened retail services beyond curbside pickup, an indicator for whether a state reopened personal or pet care services, an indicator for whether a state
   reopened entertainment business, an indicator for whether a state reopened gyms or parks, and an indicator for whether a state paused reopening. County
   weather controls include average temperature and an indicator for whether any measurable precipitation fell.
Figure 7. Event-Study Analyses of Effect of Tulsa Rally on COVID-19 Deaths Per 100,000 Population in Oklahoma and
                                      Border States, by Dose (Absolute Inflow)
               Panel (a): Counties with Low Inflow                                              Panel (b): Counties with Moderate-Low Inflow




         Panel (c): Counties with Moderate-High Inflow                                         Panel (d): Highest Inflow County (Tulsa County)




                                                                           46 include county and day fixed effects as well as county specific linear
Note: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares estimate. All estimates
time trend. State policy controls include COVID-19 testing, an indicator for whether a state reopened restaurant or bars, an indicator for whether a state
reopened retail services beyond curbside pickup, an indicator for whether a state reopened personal or pet care services, an indicator for whether a state
reopened entertainment business, an indicator for whether a state reopened gyms or parks, and an indicator for whether a state paused reopening. County
weather controls include average temperature and an indicator for whether any measurable precipitation fell.
       Table 1. Difference-in-Differences Estimates of the Effect of Tulsa Rally on Pings per 1,000
                          Meters Squared in Treatment Census Block Groups
                                                        (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)

                                                                           Panel I: Non-Resident Pings
Trump Rally                                          0.097**               0.097**          0.098**                    0.097**
P-Value                                               [.017]                [.017]           [.017]                     [.017]

N                                                     68148                 68148                  68148                68148
Mean of DV                                            0.377                 0.377                  0.377                0.377

                                                                               Panel II: Total Pings
Trump Rally                                          0.092**               0.091**            0.091**                  0.092**
P-Value                                               [.018]                [.018]             [.018]                   [.018]

N                                                     68148                 68148                  68148                68148
Mean of DV                                            0.410                 0.410                  0.410                0.410

Day & Census Block Group FE?                            Yes                   Yes                  Yes                    Yes
COVID-19 Policy & Weather Controls?                     No                    Yes                  Yes                    Yes
BLM Protest Controls                                    No                    No                   Yes                    Yes
County Linear Time Trend                                No                    No                   No                     Yes
       * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1%

       Note: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares estimate. All estimates include county and day fixed effects
       as well as county specific linear time trend. State policy controls include COVID-19 testing, an indicator for whether
       a state reopened restaurant or bars, an indicator for whether a state reopened retail services beyond curbside pickup,
       an indicator for whether a state reopened personal or pet care services, an indicator for whether a state reopened
       entertainment business, an indicator for whether a state reopened gyms or parks, and an indicator for whether a state
       paused reopening. County weather controls include average temperature and an indicator for whether any
       measurable precipitation fell. BLM Controls include whether a county had a city with at least 100,000 population
       with a protest. Permutation based p-value is reported inside the bracket.




                                                                 47
          Table 2. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Tulsa Rally on COVID-19 Cases
                                                       (1)            (2)          (3)

                                                                        Panel I: Tulsa County
      Trump Rally                                               -20.290       -20.747         -36.902
      P-Value                                                   [0.580]       [0.541]         [0.502]

      Pre-Treatment Mean of DV a                                230.099           230.099         230.099

                                                                     Panel II: Tulsa County Cluster
      Trump Rally                                                -2.017         -13.288        -14.833
      P-Value                                                   [0.888]         [0.766]        [0.829]

      Pre-Treatment Mean of DV a                                227.892           227.892         227.892

                                                                      Panel III: State of Oklahoma
      Trump Rally                                               -106.378         -106.41        -104.474
      P-Value                                                    [0.174]         [0.174]         [0.304]

      Pre-Treatment Mean of DV a                                203.002           203.002         203.002

      Observable used to construct the weights
      Number of pre-treatment days                                 6                  6             14
      Matching on Median Hours at Home                            Yes                Yes            No
      Matching on Reopening Policy?                               Yes                Yes            No
      Matching on Mask Wearing Policy?                            Yes                Yes            No
      Matching COVID-testing?                                     No                 Yes            No
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Notes: Estimate is generated using synthetic control methods. Matching was conducted using the pre-treatment
COVID-19 case rate and variables listed under each column. The permutation-based p-values are included in
brackets below each point estimate (Abadie et al. 2010).

a
    Pre-treatment mean of the Dependent Variable (DV) is calculated using the treated unit.




                                                           48
        Table 3. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Tulsa Rally on COVID-19 Deaths
                                                      (1)            (2)          (3)

                                                                        Panel I: Tulsa County
      Trump Rally                                                -0.024         0.079          -1.344
      P-Value                                                   [0.896]       [0.877]         [0.537]

      Pre-Treatment Mean of DV a                                 9.542              9.542         9.542

                                                                    Panel II: Tulsa County Cluster
      Trump Rally                                                0.016          -0.100         -1.089
      P-Value                                                   [0.937]        [0.937]        [0.330]

      Pre-Treatment Mean of DV a                                13.210             13.210         13.210

                                                                     Panel III: State of Oklahoma
      Trump Rally                                                0.041           0.059          0.171
      P-Value                                                   [0.913]         [0.913]        [0.565]

      Pre-Treatment Mean of DV a                                 9.044              9.044         9.044

      Observable used to construct the weights
      Number of pre-treatment days                                 6                  6             14
      Matching on Median Hours at Home                            Yes                Yes            No
      Matching on Reopening Policy?                               Yes                Yes            No
      Matching on Mask Wearing Policy?                            Yes                Yes            No
      Matching COVID-testing?                                     No                 Yes            No
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Notes: Estimate is generated using synthetic control methods. Matching was conducted using the pre-treatment
COVID-19 case rate and variables listed under each column. The permutation-based p-values are included in
brackets below each point estimate (Abadie et al. 2010).

a
    Pre-treatment mean of the Dependent Variable (DV) is calculated using the treated unit.




                                                           49
       Table 4. Dose-Response Difference-in-Differences Estimates of the Effect of Tulsa Rally on
                                         Log (COVID-19 Cases)
                                                 Absolute Inflow                 Relative Inflow
                                               (1)              (2)            (3)              (4)
Counties with Low Inflow
  June 20-June 25 (0-5 Days After Rally)     -0.017           -0.018         -0.022           -0.024
                                P-Value     [0.510]          [0.538]        [0.712]          [0.375]
  June 26-July 4 (6-14 Days After Rally)     -0.059           -0.062         -0.063           -0.067
                                P-Value     [0.529]          [0.577]        [0.817]          [0.452]
 June 5-July 19 (15-29 Days After Rally)     -0.032           -0.034         -0.022           -0.027
                                P-Value     [0.519]          [0.644]        [0.250]          [0.529]
  July 20 onward (30+ Days After Rally)      -0.035           -0.036         -0.020           -0.025
                                P-Value     [0.577]          [0.904]        [0.337]          [0.615]
Counties with Moderate- Low Inflow
  June 20-June 25 (0-5 Days After Rally)     -0.011           -0.015         -0.001           -0.001
                                P-Value     [0.288]          [0.317]        [0.654]          [0.596]
  June 26-July 4 (6-14 Days After Rally)     -0.035           -0.043         -0.036           -0.039
                                P-Value     [0.365]          [0.365]        [0.779]          [0.731]
 June 5-July 19 (15-29 Days After Rally)     -0.075           -0.078         -0.045           -0.043
                                P-Value     [0.481]          [0.558]        [0.760]          [0.779]
  July 20 onward (30+ Days After Rally)      -0.101           -0.101         -0.068           -0.064
                                P-Value     [0.519]          [0.817]        [0.375]          [0.865]
Counties with Moderate- High Inflow
  June 20-June 25 (0-5 Days After Rally)     -0.024           -0.018         -0.003            0.001
                                P-Value     [0.385]          [0.394]        [0.663]          [0.702]
  June 26-July 4 (6-14 Days After Rally)     -0.036           -0.039         -0.056           -0.054
                                P-Value     [0.250]          [0.221]        [0.192]          [0.298]
 June 5-July 19 (15-29 Days After Rally)     -0.067           -0.059         -0.053           -0.042
                                P-Value     [0.404]          [0.375]        [0.769]          [0.385]
  July 20 onward (30+ Days After Rally)      -0.064           -0.048          0.005            0.028
                                P-Value     [0.587]          [0.923]        [0.346]          [0.385]
Highest Inflow County (Tulsa County)
  June 20-June 25 (0-5 Days After Rally)     -0.006            0.001        -0.0002           -0.002
                                P-Value     [0.144]          [0.173]        [0.644]          [0.250]
  June 26-July 4 (6-14 Days After Rally)     -0.029           -0.030          0.011            0.007
                                P-Value     [0.260]          [0.212]        [0.202]          [0.308]
 June 5-July 19 (15-29 Days After Rally)     -0.047           -0.038         -0.047           -0.046
                                P-Value     [0.413]          [0.365]        [0.779]          [0.375]
  July 20 onward (30+ Days After Rally)      -0.057           -0.038         -0.064           -0.059
                                P-Value     [0.596]          [0.913]        [0.356]          [0.375]
N                                            34709          34709            34709           34709
Observable Controls?                          No             Yes              No              Yes
                                                  50
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Note: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares estimate. All estimates include county and day fixed effects
as well as county specific linear time trend. State policy controls include log COVID-19 testing, an indicator for
whether a state reopened restaurant or bars, an indicator for whether a state reopened retail services beyond curbside
pickup, an indicator for whether a state reopened personal or pet care services, an indicator for whether a state
reopened entertainment business, an indicator for whether a state reopened gyms, and an indicator for whether a
state paused reopening. County weather controls include average temperature and an indicator for whether any
measurable precipitation fell. BLM Protest control include an indicator for whether a county had a city with 100,000
or more population with a Black Lives Matter protest. Permutation based p-value are included inside the bracket
below each point estimate (Buchmueller et al. 2011; Cunningham and Shah 2018).




                                                          51
       Table 5. Dose-Response Difference-in-Differences Estimates of the Effect of Tulsa Rally on
                             Inverse Hyperbolic Sine of COVID-19 Deaths
                                                Absolute Inflow                  Relative Inflow
                                              (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)
Counties with Low Inflow
  June 20-July 4 (0-14 Days After Rally)    -0.017           -0.018          -0.022           -0.024
                                P-Value    [0.740]          [0.760]         [0.712]          [0.837]
 June 26-July 10 (6-20 Days After Rally)    -0.059           -0.062          -0.063           -0.067
                                P-Value    [0.817]          [0.846]         [0.817]          [0.865]
June 11-July 19 (21-29 Days After Rally)    -0.032           -0.034          -0.022           -0.025
                                P-Value    [0.202]          [0.240]         [0.250]          [0.212]
  July 20 onward (30+ Days After Rally)     -0.035           -0.036          -0.027           -0.032
                                P-Value    [0.240]          [0.317]         [0.337]          [0.231]
Counties with Moderate- Low Inflow
  June 20-July 4 (0-14 Days After Rally)    -0.011           -0.015          -0.001           -0.001
                                P-Value    [0.712]          [0.740]         [0.654]          [0.731]
 June 26-July 10 (6-20 Days After Rally)    -0.035           -0.043          -0.036           -0.039
                                P-Value    [0.788]          [0.760]         [0.779]          [0.846]
June 11-July 19 (21-29 Days After Rally)    -0.075           -0.078          -0.045           -0.043
                                P-Value    [0.808]          [0.673]         [0.760]          [0.346]
  July 20 onward (30+ Days After Rally)     -0.101           -0.101          -0.068           -0.064
                                P-Value    [0.279]          [0.596]         [0.375]          [0.317]
Counties with Moderate- High Inflow
  June 20-July 4 (0-14 Days After Rally)    -0.024           -0.018          -0.003            0.001
                                P-Value    [0.779]          [0.779]         [0.663]          [0.740]
 June 26-July 10 (6-20 Days After Rally)    -0.029           -0.039          -0.056           -0.054
                                P-Value    [0.769]          [0.721]         [0.192]          [0.317]
June 11-July 19 (21-29 Days After Rally)    -0.047           -0.059          -0.053           -0.042
                                P-Value    [0.212]          [0.346]         [0.769]          [0.404]
  July 20 onward (30+ Days After Rally)     -0.057           -0.048           0.005            0.028
                                P-Value    [0.260]          [0.346]         [0.346]          [0.308]
Highest Inflow County (Tulsa County)
  June 20-July 4 (0-14 Days After Rally)    -0.006            0.001           0.001           -0.002
                                P-Value    [0.702]          [0.692]         [0.644]          [0.721]
 June 26-July 10 (6-20 Days After Rally)    -0.029           -0.030           0.011            0.007
                                P-Value    [0.779]          [0.731]         [0.202]          [0.308]
June 11-July 19 (21-29 Days After Rally)    -0.047           -0.038          -0.047           -0.046
                                P-Value    [0.221]          [0.337]         [0.779]          [0.394]
  July 20 onward (30+ Days After Rally)     -0.057           -0.038          -0.064           -0.059
                                P-Value    [0.269]          [0.356]         [0.356]          [0.298]
N                                            36873          36873            36873           36873
Observable Controls?                          No             Yes              No              Yes
                                                  52
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Note: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares estimate. All estimates include county and day fixed effects
as well as county specific linear time trend. State policy controls include log COVID-19 testing, an indicator for
whether a state reopened restaurant or bars, an indicator for whether a state reopened retail services beyond curbside
pickup, an indicator for whether a state reopened personal or pet care services, an indicator for whether a state
reopened entertainment business, an indicator for whether a state reopened gyms, and an indicator for whether a
state paused reopening. County weather controls include average temperature and an indicator for whether any
measurable precipitation fell. BLM Protest control include an indicator for whether a county had a city with 100,000
or more population with a Black Lives Matter protest. Permutation based p-value are included inside the bracket
below each point estimate (Buchmueller et al. 2011; Cunningham and Shah 2018).




                                                          53
Appendix Figure 1: Trends in Non-Resident Absolute Pings in the Treatment CBGs and
                                 “Control” CBGs




                                     54
Appendix Figure 2A. Distribution of Home Counties for Absolute Inflows to
            Treatment Census Block Groups on June 6, 2020

                    Panel (a): Home Counties Across U.S.




                 Panel (b): Home Counties Across Oklahoma




         Panel (c): Home Counties Across Oklahoma and Border States




                                     55
Appendix Figure 2B. Distribution of Home Counties for Absolute Inflows to
           Treatment Census Block Groups on June 13, 2020
                    Panel (a): Home Counties Across U.S.




                 Panel (b): Home Counties Across Oklahoma




         Panel (c): Home Counties Across Oklahoma and Border States




                                     56
Appendix Figure 3A: Trends in COVID-19 Cases in Oklahoma, Tulsa County and Tulsa
                                 County Cluster




                                       57
Appendix Figure 3B: Trends in COVID-19 Deaths in Oklahoma, Tulsa County and Tulsa
                                 County Cluster




                                       58
Appendix Figure 4. Distribution of Home Counties for Relative Inflows to Treatment
                      Census Block Groups on June 20, 2020




                                        59
      Appendix Figure 5. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effects of Tulsa Rally on Stay-at-Home Behavior in Tulsa County Cluster

                      Panel (a): % Staying at Home Full Time                                                   Panel (b): Median % Time at Home




     Note: Synthetic Tulsa is comprised of Jefferson, AL (.347), Burleigh, ND (.227),    Note: Synthetic Tulsa is comprised of Chatham, GA (.34), Jefferson, AL (.128), Cascade,
     Coles, IL (.142), Cabell, WV (.137), Dorchester, SC (.105), & Colonial Heights,     MT (.113), Lafayette, LA (.086), Cabell, WV (.075), Coconino, AZ (.072), Silver Bow,
     VA (.035).                                                                          MT (.066), Winona, MN (.063), and Albany, NY (.032).


                           Panel (c): Median Hours at Home                                                           Panel (d): Mean Hours at Home




      Note: Synthetic Tulsa is comprised of Jefferson, AL (.373), Cabell, WV (.202),      Note: Synthetic Tulsa is comprised of Dorchesterm SC (.209), Jefferson, AL (.197), Cabell,
      Monongalia, WV (.094). Linn, IA (.085), Pinal, AZ (.081), Dorchester, SC (.078),    WV (.196), Pinal, AZ (.159), Linn IA (.082), Carson NV (.080), & Anchorage, AK (.071).
      Carcon, NV (.039), & Outaagamie, WI (.036).

Note: The donor counties are comprised of counties with urbanicity rate of ± 2.5 60
                                                                                 Tulsa County’s urbanicity rate (95.2%) or weighted population density of ± 1,000 Tulsa
County’s density (3,250) and exclude counties in Oklahoma and in Oklahoma's border states, as well as counties where a home resident was detected (via smartphone using
SafeGraph data) in the treatment CBGs on June 20, 2020. Matching was based on six pre-treatment social distancing behaviors, COVID-19 testing rate, COVID-19 reopening
policies, and mask wearing policies
          Appendix Figure 6. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effects of Tulsa Rally on Stay-at-Home Behavior in Tulsa County

                      Panel (a): % Staying at Home Full Time                                                      Panel (b): Median % Time at Home




     Note: Synthetic Tulsa is comprised of Silver Bow, MT (.253), Indiana, PA (.161),          Note: Synthetic Tulsa is comprised of Chatham, GA (.329), Jefferson AL (.169),
     Wayne, NE (.142), Jefferson, AL (.128), Lafayette, LA (.108), Colonial Heights,           Cascade, MT (.159), Anchorage, AK (.14), Silver Bow, MT (.081), Coconino, AZ
     VA (.087), Sweetwater, WY (.073), & Monongalia, WV (.049).                                (.076), & Athens, OH (.037).

                          Panel (c): Median Hours at Home                                                          Panel (d): Mean Hours at Home




 Note: Synthetic Tulsa is comprised of Dorchester, SC (.436), Silver Bow, MT (.126), Pima,     Note: Synthetic Tulsa is comprised of Dorchester, SC (.374), Anchorage,
 AZ (.090), Linn, IA (.089), Lafayette, LA (.086), Anchorage, AK (.069), Johnson, IA (.067),   AK (.149), Jefferson, AL (.135), Pinal, AZ (.081), Silver Bow, AZ (.043),
 & Pinal, AZ (.033)
                                                                                               & Pottawattamie, IA (.038).
                                                                                          61
Note: The donor counties are comprised of counties with urbanicity rate of ± 2.5 Tulsa County’s urbanicity rate (95.2%) or weighted population density of ± 1,000 Tulsa
County’s density (3,250) and exclude counties in Oklahoma and in Oklahoma's border states, as well as counties where a home resident was detected (via smartphone using
SafeGraph data) in the treatment CBGs on June 20, 2020. Matching was based on six pre-treatment social distancing behaviors, COVID-19 testing rate, COVID-19 reopening
policies, and mask wearing policies
     Appendix Table 1. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Tulsa Rally on Stay-at-Home
                                           Behavior
                            % Staying at     Median % Time       Median Hours       Mean Hours
                           Home Full Time        at Home         Spent at Home     Spent at Home
                                 (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)

                                                     Panel I: Tulsa County and Border Counties
Trump Rally                              0.884                 0.586             -0.049                      -0.054
P-Value                                 [0.390]               [0.117]           [0.415]                     [0.454]


                                                                   Panel II: Tulsa County
Trump Rally                              1.135                     0.795              0.054                  -0.003
P-Value                                 [0.152]                   [0.270]            [0.727]                [0.537]
   * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

   Notes: Estimate is generated using synthetic control methods. The donor counties are comprised of counties with
   urbanicity rate of ± 2.5 Tulsa County’s urbanicity rate (95.2%) or weighted population density of ± 1,000 Tulsa
   County’s density (3,250) and exclude counties in Oklahoma and in Oklahoma's border states, as well as counties
   where a home resident was detected (via smartphone using SafeGraph data) in the treatment CBGs on June 20,
   2020. All estimates match on six pre-treatment social distancing behaviors, COVID-19 testing rate, COVID-19
   reopening policies, and mask wearing policies




                                                             62
                                                Appendix Table 2. Donor Pool that Received Positive Weights in Table 2
                                                                          COVID-19 Cases                                                             COVID-19 Deaths
                                                      (1)                   (2)                         (3)                         (4)                   (5)                        (6)

                                                                                                              Panel I: Tulsa County
                                                                                               La Crosse, WI (.394)
                                             La Crosse, WI (.430)                                                                                                            Madera, CA (.413)
                                                                     La Crosse, WI (.356)        Weber, UT (.157)           La Crosse, WI (.428)
                                               Clark, OH (.150)                                                                                     La Crosse, WI (.421)     Osceola, FL (.183)
                                                                     Jefferson, AL (.231)         Tulare, CA (.12)              Linn, IA (.172)
                                             Lafayette, LA (.143)                                                                                    Jefferson, AL (.214)   Lafayette, LA (.076)
                                                                       Clark, OH (.140)          Alachua, FL (.107)          Jefferson, AL (.166)
                                             Jefferson, AL (.122)                                                                                       Linn, IA (.150)     Olmsted, MN (.075)
                                                                     Dorchester, SC (.133)      Lafayette, LA (.102)           Story, IA (.125)
                                             Dorchester, SC (.116)                                                                                  Tippecanoe, IN (.148)   Schuykill, PA (.055)
                                                                     Lafayette, LA (.074)      Charleston, SC (.056)          Wayne, NE (.045)
                                              Pottawattamie, IA                                                                                        Blair, PA (.052)     Manatee, FL (.035)
                                                                       Story, IA (.064)           Story, IA (.031)          Outagamie, WI (.043)
                                                      (.029)                                                                                                                 St. John, LA (.016)
                                                                                              Pottawattamie, IA (.019)

                                                                                                         Panel II: Tulsa County Cluster
                                                                                             Northumberland, PA (.325)                                                       Madera, CA (.500)
                                                                     Jefferson, AL (.275)                                                            Cabell, WV (.288)
                                             La Crosse, WI (.361)                               La Crosse, WI (.308)         Wayne, NE (.412)                                Canyon, ID (.225)
                                                                     La Crosse, WI (.207)                                                              Linn, IA (.274)
                                               Vanderburgh, IN                                 Charleston, SC (.132)           Linn, IA (.234)                              Colonial Height, VA
                                                                         Ada, ID (.13)                                                               Clarke, GA (.161)
                                                      (.208)                                    Lafayette, LA (.065)         Clarke, GA (.166)                                     (.086)
                                                                       Clark, OH (.115)                                                             Muscogee, GA (.133)
                                               Clark, OH (.181)                                Muscogee, GA (.051)         Muscogee, GA (.103)                              Eau Claire, WI (.062)
                                                                        Linn, IA (.103)                                                               Clark, OH (.099)
                                             Jefferson, AL (.136)                             Santa Barbara, CA (.050)     Poquoson, VA (.040)                               Manatee, FL (.036)
                                                                     Lafayette, LA (.097)                                                           Jefferson, AL (.023)
                                             Lafayette, LA (.093)                                Tulare, CA (.033)          Jefferson, AL (.036)                             Kenton, KY (.034)
                                                                      Cabell, WV (.073)                                                              Wayne, NE (.023)
                                                                                                 Weber, UT (.032)                                                            Orange, NY (.019)

                                                                                                          Panel III: State of Oklahoma
                                                                                                                                                                                 WY (.362)
                                                                                                                                MT (.511)                MT (.442)
                                                                                                                                                                                 AK (.279)
                                                  ID (.610)               ID (.606)                  ID (.602)                  ID (.257)                ID (.364)
                                                                                                                                                                                 MT (.159)
                                                  SC (.222)               SC (.224)                  SC (.222)                  MI (.098)                MI (.094)
                                                                                                                                                                                 ND (.098)
                                                  MT (.168)               MT (.17)                   MT (.175)                  WY (.085)                WY (.057)
                                                                                                                                                                                 MI (.062)
                                                                                                                                AL (.049)                AL (.043)
                                                                                                                                                                                 IA (.041)

Observables used to construct the weights
Number of pre-treatment days                          6                       6                         14                           6                       6                       14
Matching on pre-treat Median Hours at Home           Yes                     Yes                        No                          Yes                     Yes                      No
Matching on Reopening Policy?                        Yes                     Yes                        No                          Yes                     Yes                      No
Matching on Mask Wearing Policy?                     Yes                     Yes                        No                          Yes                     Yes                      No
Matching COVID-testing?                              No                      Yes                        No                          No                      Yes                      No



                                                                                              63
      Appendix Table 3. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Tulsa Rally on Three-day
                      Moving Average of COVID-19 Case Growth Rate
                                       Tulsa County        Tulsa County        Oklahoma
                                                               Cluster
                                              (1)                (2)               (3)
    Trump Rally                             -0.002             0.001             -0.010
    P-Value                                [0.663]            [0.810]           [0.522]

    Pre-Treatment Mean of DV a                          0.028                   0.029              0.018
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Notes: Estimate is generated using synthetic control methods. The donor pool is comprised of counties with
urbanicity rates of ± 2.5% of Tulsa County urbanicity rate (95.2%) or weighted population density of ±1,000 people
per sq. mi. of Tulsa County weighted population density (3,250) and exclude counties in Oklahoma and in
Oklahoma's border states, as well as counties where a home resident was detected (via smartphone using SafeGraph
data) in the treatment CBGs on June 20, 2020. All synthetic control estimates match on all days of pre-treatment
COVID-19 growth rate.

a
    Pre-treatment mean of the Dependent Variable (DV) is calculated using the treated unit.




                                                           64
       Appendix Table 4. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Tulsa Rally on COVID-19 Case
                            and Death Rate Using Different Donor Pools
                                         Cases per 100,000                   Deaths per 100,000
                                        (1)              (2)                 (3)              (4)

                                                                          Panel I: Tulsa County
Trump Rally                                       -57.201              -104.822             0.330               -0.541
P-Value                                           [0.411]               [0.240]            [0.667]             [0.760]

Pre-Treatment Mean of DV a                       230.099                230.099                    9.542        9.542

                                                                          Panel II: Tulsa Cluster
Trump Rally                                       29.159               -115.975               0.143             -1.114
P-Value                                           [0.494]               [0.100]              [0.944]           [0.400]

Pre-Treatment Mean of DV a                       227.892                227.892                    13.210      13.210

                                                                      Panel III: State of Oklahoma
Trump Rally                                       -73.154             -111.668               0.318              0.187
P-Value                                           [0.364]              [0.174]              [0.409]            [0.434]

Pre-Treatment Mean of DV a                       203.002                203.002                    9.044        9.044
Weight Population Density Cut
                                                    Yes                    No                       Yes          No
for Donor Pool
Urbanicity Cut for Donor Pool                       No                    Yes                       No           Yes
 * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Note: Estimate is generated using synthetic control method. Matching was based on six days of pre-treatment COVID-19
case rates, pre-treatment stay-at-home behavior, COVID-19 testing rate, COVID-19 reopening policy, and mask wearing
policy. Donor pool is restricted to counties/states with similar weight population or urbanicity as Tulsa/Oklahoma.




                                                                 65
