                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    MUTUAL FUND PERFORMANCE AND FLOWS DURING THE COVID-19 CRISIS

                                            Lubos Pastor
                                           M. Blair Vorsatz

                                        Working Paper 27551
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27551


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2020




We are grateful to Ali Hortacsu, Jeff Pontiff, Luke Taylor, Alexander Wagner, and Yao Zeng for
helpful comments, and to the University of Chicago Booth School of Business for research
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27551.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Lubos Pastor and M. Blair Vorsatz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Mutual Fund Performance and Flows During the COVID-19 Crisis
Lubos Pastor and M. Blair Vorsatz
NBER Working Paper No. 27551
July 2020, Revised August 2020
JEL No. G01,G11,G12,G14,G23

                                          ABSTRACT

We present a comprehensive analysis of the performance and flows of U.S. actively-managed
equity mutual funds during the COVID-19 crisis of 2020. We find that most active funds
underperform passive benchmarks during the crisis, contradicting a popular hypothesis. Funds
with high sustainability ratings perform well, as do funds with high star ratings. Fund out ows
surpass pre-crisis trends, but not dramatically. Investors favor funds that apply exclusion criteria
and funds with high sustainability ratings, especially environmental ones. Our finding that
investors remain focused on sustainability during this major crisis suggests they view
sustainability as a necessity rather than a luxury good.


Lubos Pastor
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and CEPR
and the National Bank of Slovakia
and NBER
lubos.pastor@chicagobooth.edu

M. Blair Vorsatz
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
mvorsatz@chicagobooth.edu
1. Introduction

Active equity mutual funds are well known to have underperformed passive benchmarks, net
of fees.1 Despite its long-lasting underperformance, the active management industry remains
large, managing tens of trillions of dollars. The existence of a large underperforming industry
appears puzzling because an alternative—passive funds—is easily available to investors.

       One popular hypothesis is that investors are willing to tolerate this underperformance
because active funds outperform in periods that are particularly important to investors. This
hypothesis is first formulated by Moskowitz (2000) who asks whether mutual funds provide
a hedge against recessions. Glode (2011) formalizes this hypothesis by building a model in
which a fund manager generates active returns that depend on the state of the economy. In
equilibrium, the manager chooses to work harder in periods when investors’ marginal utility
of consumption is higher because investors are willing to pay for this insurance. If active
funds deliver high returns in periods when investors need them the most then these funds’
unconditional performance understates the funds’ true abilities.

       We test this hypothesis by analyzing the performance of active mutual funds during the
COVID-19 crisis of 2020. This crisis is particularly suitable for the task at hand for two
reasons. First, it has led to an unprecedented output contraction and the fastest increase in
unemployment on record. Investors surely want to hedge against such a severe crisis. Second,
active managers have an opportunity to perform well during this crisis because the crisis has
created unusually large price dislocations in financial markets. In the equity market, the S&P
500 index experienced its steepest descent in living memory, losing 34% of its value in the five-
week period between February 19 and March 23, 2020 before bouncing back by over 30% by
the end of April. The sharp response of equity markets to COVID-19 is analyzed in a growing
number of studies.2 In the bond market, liquidity evaporated in March 2020, not only for
corporate bonds (e.g., Kargar et al., 2020, and O’Hara and Zhou, 2020) but also for the
usually-liquid Treasuries (e.g., Schrimpf, Shin, and Sushko, 2020). Until liquidity improved
following the interventions from the Federal Reserve, its temporary shortage created massive
market disruptions. For example, in the corporate bond market, bonds traded at large
discounts to credit default swaps, and ETFs traded at large discounts to net asset values
(Haddad, Moreira, and Muir, 2020). In addition, the Treasury market witnessed significant
   1
     See Jensen (1968), Elton, Gruber, Das, and Hlavka (1993), Malkiel (1995), Gruber (1996), Carhart
(1997), Wermers (2000), Pástor and Stambaugh (2002), and Fama and French (2010), and others.
   2
     For evidence at the aggregate stock market level, see, for example, Alfaro et al. (2020), Baker et al.
(2020), and Gormsen and Koijen (2020). For cross-sectional evidence, see Bretscher, Hsu, and Tamoni
(2020), Ding et al. (2020), Fahlenbrach, Rageth, and Stulz (2020), Gerding, Martin, and Nagler (2020),
Glossner et al. (2020), Pagano, Wagner, and Zechner (2020), Ramelli and Wagner (2020), and others.


                                                    1
mispricing between bonds and bond futures (Schrimpf, Shin, and Sushko, 2020). These price
dislocations are due to a combination of factors including record-high volatility and traders
working from home. Under the hypothesis that active funds outperform during recessions,
they should find it particularly easy to outperform when markets are rife with mispricing.

  Contrary to this hypothesis, we find that active funds underperform their passive bench-
marks during the COVID-19 crisis. We define the crisis period as the ten-week period
between February 20 and April 30, 2020. We choose February 20 as the starting date be-
cause the stock market peaked on February 19 before its rapid descent. We choose April
30 as the ending date because it is a month-end by which the market largely rebounded,
and also because it puts the market bottom on March 23 roughly in the middle of the crisis
period. The ten-week crisis period is thus roughly evenly split between the crash and the
recovery. Our evidence is based on daily returns of U.S. active equity mutual funds.

   The underperformance of active funds is particularly strong when measured relative to
the S&P 500 benchmark. We find that 74.2% of active funds—about three quarters—
underperform the S&P 500 during the COVID-19 crisis. The average fund underperformance
is −5.6% (t = −5.37) during the ten-week period, or −29.1% on an annualized basis.

   While the S&P 500 is the most popular benchmark among U.S. equity funds, it is not
appropriate for all funds given its large-cap focus. We consider three types of benchmarks
that are tailored to each fund’s investment style: Morningstar-designated FTSE/Russell
benchmarks, fund-designated prospectus benchmarks, and factor-model benchmarks. We
find that active funds also underperform these fund-specific benchmarks, although by nar-
rower margins. For example, 57.6% of funds underperform their FTSE/Russell benchmarks
and 54.2% of funds underperform their prospectus benchmarks. The average fund under-
performance relative to the FTSE/Russell benchmark is −2.1% (t = −3.90) during the crisis
period, or −11% on an annualized basis. Relative to the prospectus benchmark, the average
underperformance is −1.5% (t = −2.49) during the crisis, or −7.7% annualized.

   Besides benchmark-adjusted fund returns, we also examine factor-adjusted returns by
computing fund alphas relative to five different factor models. All five alphas are significantly
negative on average during the crisis period, ranging from −7.6% annualized (t = −3.25) for
the six-factor model that includes the five factors of Fama and French (2015) plus momentum,
to −29.1% annualized (t = −7.02) for the CAPM. The fraction of funds with negative alphas
ranges from 60.4% for the four-factor Carhart (1997) model to a stunning 80.2% for the
CAPM. Active fund performance during the crisis is substantially worse than before the
crisis. In short, active funds perform poorly during the COVID-19 crisis.


                                               2
      Prior tests of the same hypothesis arrive at a different conclusion. Moskowitz (2000)
shows that active funds’ returns from 1975 to 1994 are higher during recessions by 6% per
year, on average. Kosowski (2011) analyzes the period from 1962 to 2005 and finds that
mutual fund alphas in recessions exceed those in expansions by 3% to 5% per year, on
average. Glode (2011) reports that funds with poor unconditional performance generate
countercyclical risk-adjusted returns in 1980 through 2005. Kacperczyk, van Nieuwerburgh,
and Veldkamp (2016) find that fund alphas are 1.6% to 4.6% per year higher in recessions
over the 1980–2005 period. Unlike our study, all of these studies examine periods in which
recessions are substantially milder than the COVID-19 crisis.

      While active funds as a whole underperform, their performance during the COVID-19
crisis exhibits substantial heterogeneity. One of the strongest predictors of performance is
the sustainability rating from Morningstar. Morningstar assigns between one and five sus-
tainability “globes” to each fund, with more globes denoting higher sustainability. We find
that funds with more globes as of January 31, 2020 have higher benchmark-adjusted returns
between February 20 and April 30, 2020. Remarkably, the relation is monotonic across the
globe categories: five-globe funds outperform four-globe funds, which in turn outperform
three-globe funds, etc. High-globe funds (those with four or five globes) significantly out-
perform the remaining funds within the same investment style by 14.2% per year (t = 4.85)
in terms of FTSE/Russell benchmark-adjusted returns. This result is driven largely by en-
vironmental sustainability. Sustainability ratings predict fund returns regardless of whether
we control for funds’ industry exposure.

      Our findings linking fund performance to sustainability resemble those of Nofsinger and
Varma (2014) who find that socially responsible mutual funds tend to outperform during
market crises. Their sample of 240 U.S. domestic equity mutual funds covers the period
of 2000 through 2011, which includes two recessions (2001 and 2007–2009). We examine
only one recession (2020) but many more funds. Another related study, Albuquerque et al.
(2020), finds that U.S. firms with high environmental and social ratings earn comparatively
high stock returns in the first quarter of 2020. Ding et al. (2020) report a similar finding
based on corporate social responsibility ratings of firms in 56 countries.3 Our fund-level
evidence complements their stock-level evidence in highlighting the role of sustainability
during the COVID-19 crisis. The model of Pástor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2020) implies
that “green” assets (those with high sustainability ratings) have lower expected returns than
“brown” assets (those with low sustainability ratings), but green assets can nonetheless
outperform brown assets in periods during which investors’ tastes are shifting toward green
  3
    These findings echo those based on the 2008–2009 recession. Lins, Servaes, and Tamayo (2017) show
that U.S. firms with higher environmental and social ratings perform better during that recession.


                                                 3
assets or customers’ tastes are shifting toward green products. Such a shift in tastes appears
to have started before the COVID-19 crisis and, judging by our evidence as well as that of
Albuquerque et al. (2020) and Ding et al. (2020), it continued through the crisis.

   Besides sustainability ratings, another strong predictor of fund performance during the
COVID-19 crisis is the fund’s star rating from Morningstar. Star ratings assigned as of
January 31, 2020 predict performance between February 20 and April 30, 2020 positively
and significantly. Similar to Morningstar globes, the relation is monotonic: five-star funds
outperform four-star funds, which outperform three-star funds, etc. One additional star
is associated with an increase in performance of 5.78% per year (t = 2.84) in terms of
FTSE/Russell benchmark-adjusted returns. That is, a five-star fund outperforms a one-
star fund of the same style by about 23% per year, on average.

    Finally, we find that growth funds outperform value funds. This finding is at most partly
driven by the strong performance of the growth style during the crisis because we measure
fund performance net of the fund’s style. In other words, growth funds beat value funds on a
style-adjusted basis. This result is strong when the style adjustment is performed through a
factor model but it is insignificant when the adjustment is based on the style benchmark. The
mixed nature of this evidence suggests roles for both active management and the superior
performance of the growth style in explaining the different performance of growth and value
funds during the crisis. Growth funds beat value funds not only during the crisis but also
in the four months preceding the crisis. However, neither the sustainability ratings nor the
star ratings predict fund performance in the pre-crisis period.

   In addition to fund performance, we analyze capital flows in and out of active mutual
funds. During the COVID-19 crisis, active funds experience steady outflows of about 1.3%
of assets under management. These outflows are rapid during the market crash and they
continue, albeit at a slower pace, during the market rebound after March 23, 2020. The
outflows are faster than their long-term trend, but the difference is not dramatic.

   Fund flows vary substantially across funds. Similar to performance, crisis-period flows
are predictable by funds’ pre-crisis sustainability ratings. Flows are near-monotonic across
the five globe categories, with five-globe funds having the largest net flows and one-globe
funds having the lowest flows between February 20 and April 30, 2020. In particular, one-
globe funds suffer outflows of 2.6% of assets under management over the ten-week period,
whereas five-globe funds’ net flows are roughly zero. This difference, which is statistically
significant, is driven especially by environmental concerns. Furthermore, funds that apply
exclusion criteria in their investment process receive net inflows during the crisis, whereas


                                              4
funds that do not apply exclusions experience outflows. It is well known that mutual fund
investors have come to favor sustainability-oriented funds in the 2010s (e.g., Bialkowski and
Starks, 2016, and Hartzmark and Sussman, 2019). We find that this pre-crisis trend toward
sustainability continues during the COVID-19 crisis.

   A popular perspective in traditional neoclassical economics is that sustainability issues,
such as environmental quality, are “luxury goods” that are likely to be of concern only
to those whose more basic needs for food, housing, and survival are adequately met (e.g.,
Baumol and Oates, 1979).4 This perspective predicts that interest in sustainability should
subside during a major economic and health crisis. In contrast, we find that investors retain
their commitment to sustainability during the COVID-19 crisis. This finding suggests that
investors have come to view sustainability as a necessity rather than a luxury good.

   We also conduct additional tests whose results are less conclusive. For example, we find
no significant difference between active and passive funds in terms of their sustainability-
performance or sustainability-flow relations. We find that institutional funds perform better
than retail funds during the crisis based on benchmark-adjusted performance, but the op-
posite is true based on alphas, and the institutional-retail performance gap is insignificant
within investment styles. Institutional funds have larger outflows than retail funds during
the crisis, but only after we apply a battery of controls. There is no significant difference
between institutional and retail flows with respect to sustainability.

   The performance hypothesis rejected by our evidence—that active funds outperform in
recessions—is not the only possible explanation for why active management remains popu-
lar despite its poor track record. Gruber (1996) suggests that some investors suboptimally
rely on active management because they are influenced by advertising, brokers, institutional
arrangements, or tax considerations. Pástor and Stambaugh (2012) argue that a large active
management industry can be rationalized if investors believe that active managers face de-
creasing returns to scale. In their model, rational investors respond to past underperformance
of active funds by withdrawing money, which improves those funds’ future performance to
the point where investors are indifferent between investing actively or passively.

   Our focus on crisis-period fund performance is also related to the literature on time-
varying fund manager skill. An important early contribution is Ferson and Schadt (1996).
More recently, Kacperczyk, van Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp (2016) develop a model of
   4
     An example of this common view is the controversial “Summers memo” from 1991, in which the World
Bank’s Chief Economist suggests that the Bank should be encouraging more migration of dirty industries
to the least-developed countries. One of the reasons given in the memo is that “the demand for a clean
environment for aesthetic and health reasons is likely to have very high income elasticity.”



                                                  5
optimal attention allocation over the business cycle. In their model, fund managers allocate
more attention to idiosyncratic shocks in expansions and to aggregate shocks in recessions.
Similarly, Kacperczyk, van Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp (2014) find that fund managers
exhibit better stock picking in expansions and better market timing in recessions. We do not
attempt to separate stock selection from market timing during the COVID-19 crisis because
such an exercise would require time series of fund holdings, which are widely available only
on a quarterly basis. Data availability also limits our ability to test the hypothesis that the
profit opportunities created by COVID-19 lead active funds to trade more, improving their
future performance (Pástor, Stambaugh, and Taylor, 2017). Whether funds increase their
turnover in 2020, and whether this turnover causes better future fund performance, remains
to be seen because the turnover data from the SEC are only annual.

   While we examine the performance and flows of equity mutual funds, Falato, Goldstein,
and Hortacsu (2020) analyze the flows of corporate bond funds during the COVID-19 crisis.
They find that those funds suffer outflows much larger than the outflows from equity funds
that we document here. They also argue that outflows from bond funds contribute to fire
sales, especially by funds holding illiquid bonds. We look for fire sales by focusing on the
flows of small-cap equity funds, which hold relatively illiquid stocks. Our evidence points in
the direction of fire sales, but it is weak statistically. Ma, Xiao, and Zeng (2020) also analyze
fixed-income mutual funds, focusing on their response to redemptions in March 2020.

   The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe our data. In Section 3, we
analyze fund performance and its determinants. In Section 4, we discuss fund flows and their
determinants. Section 5 concludes. Additional empirical results and database construction
details are located in the Appendix, which is available on the authors’ websites.



2. Data

We use daily data from Morningstar Direct covering the period from January 1, 2017 to
April 30, 2020. Our original sample covers 4,292 U.S. actively managed equity mutual
funds, although we primarily focus on the 3,626 funds with at least one non-missing net
return between February 20 and April 30, 2020. The latter sample represents $4.9 trillion of
total net assets (TNA) as of January 31, 2020.

   Our fund universe is constructed largely following Pástor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2015),
with two main differences. First, we also include international and sector equity funds domi-
ciled in the U.S. Second, we do not require funds to appear in both CRSP and Morningstar;


                                               6
we use only Morningstar data. As in Pástor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2015), we use the
Morningstar FundID variable to aggregate share classes to the fund level.5

       We use keywords in the Morningstar Category variable and the prospectus benchmark
to exclude bond funds, money market funds, real estate funds, target retirement funds, and
other non-equity funds. We also exclude funds identified by Morningstar as passive index
funds and funds whose name contains the word “index.” In our baseline results, we also use
a fund size filter to include only funds with at least $15 million of TNA on January 31, 2020.
Excluding the smallest funds is advocated by Elton, Gruber, and Blake (2001), among many
others. The size filter is particularly relevant for fund flows because modest dollar flows can
translate into extreme percentage flows for the smallest funds. This subsample covers 2,764
funds and $4.891 trillion of TNA.

    Throughout our analysis, we use funds’ returns net of the expense ratio because our goal
is to measure the return delivered to clients after fees. Despite being fresh (we downloaded
data through April 30, 2020 in May 2020), the data appear to be free of salient errors. For
example, none of our sample’s 2,692,799 fund-level daily net return observations are below
-90% and only one is larger than 100%. We adjust fund returns for daily benchmark returns,
also obtained from Morningstar, and for daily factor returns, which we obtain from Ken
French’s data library along with the risk-free rate.

       We rely on three main Morningstar categorization variables throughout our analysis: the
Morningstar Category, the Morningstar Institutional Category, and the Global Category. In
our full sample of 3,626 funds, there are 39 Global Categories, 52 Morningstar Categories,
and 93 Morningstar Institutional Categories. Each of these variables classifies a fund based
on its investment style, sector, and geographical orientation. The Global Categories are
the coarsest classification system and are used by Morningstar as groupings within which
sustainability can be ranked. These categories include U.S. equity investment styles such
as small-cap, mid-cap, and large-cap growth, value, and blend, U.S. equity sectors such as
energy, healthcare, and technology, as well as international categories such as Asia equity and
Latin America equity (for the full list of the 39 Global Categories, see the Appendix). We
use the Global Categories for style fixed effects. The Morningstar Category variable is built
on the 3-by-3 style box of size tilts (large-cap vs. small-cap) and growth vs. value style tilts.
   5
     Many funds have multiple share classes, which are tied to the same pool of assets but have different
fee structures. Since different share classes of the same fund have the same Morningstar FundID value, we
can use the FundID variable to aggregate the share classes up to the fund level. Specifically, we compute a
fund’s TNA by summing TNA across the fund’s share classes, setting the fund-level variable to missing if
TNA are missing for any of the share classes on that date. The fund’s net returns, net expense ratio, and
turnover ratio are averaged (lag-asset-weighted) across all share classes with non-missing values.



                                                    7
We use this variable to follow Pástor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2015) in their classification
of funds into equity and non-equity categories. Morningstar uses these groupings to rank
performance in terms of star ratings. Last, the Morningstar Institutional Category variable
is built on an extended version of the 3-by-3 style box with size tilts including micro-cap and
giant and style tilts including deep value and high growth. We use this finest classification
system for clustering our standard errors. While this is conservative relative to the more
standard treatment of clustering at the fund level, we believe this appropriately accounts
for how the health crisis shock may generate residual correlation among funds with similar
strategies. For further details on our data construction, see the Appendix.



3. Fund Performance

Figure 1 provides a preliminary look at the performance of active funds during the COVID-
19 crisis, along with the performance of the most popular passive benchmark: the S&P 500
index. We normalize the levels of both the S&P 500 and each fund’s net asset value to 100
as of February 19, 2020. For each day t after February 19, we compute the price indices for
each fund as well as the S&P 500 by compounding the corresponding daily returns:

                           Ft = 100(1 + r1F )(1 + r2F )...(1 + rtF )                       (1)
                           Bt = 100(1 + r1B )(1 + r2B )...(1 + rtB ) ,                     (2)

where Ft is the fund price index, Bt is the price index for the passive benchmark, rtF is the
fund’s net return on day t, and rtB is the benchmark return. Figure 1 plots both Bt and the
average value of Ft across all funds. The figure also plots a 95% confidence interval around
average Ft . Standard errors are clustered on the Morningstar Institutional Category, both
here and in all subsequent figures reporting confidence intervals.

   Computing Ft in equation (1) requires all of the fund’s daily returns starting February
20 through day t. Any gap in the fund’s return series, however short, would necessitate the
fund’s deletion from the average calculation. To avoid deleting too many funds, we replace
any missing returns by the average return across all funds with the same FTSE/Russell
benchmark on the same day, thus preserving the average level of performance across funds.
We only replace missing returns for which there exists a non-missing return later in the
fund’s history by April 30. That is, we do not replace any missing returns at the end of a
fund’s history because funds that stop reporting returns to Morningstar may no longer be
alive. Altogether, we replace 19,124 missing returns, which account for 13.9% of our sample.



                                               8
We apply this “patch” not only in Figure 1 but also in Figures 2 through 8.6 We do not
replace missing returns in Tables 1 through 6 because the analysis behind those tables does
not require funds to have continuous return series.

       Figure 1 shows that the S&P 500 loses 34% of its value between February 19 and March
23, before gaining 30% by April 30, 2020. The average active fund performs similarly, but it
significantly underperforms the S&P 500 during the crisis. The April 30 price index levels
are 86.01 for the S&P 500 but only 82.45 for the average active fund.

    Given its focus on large-cap stocks, the S&P 500 is not the most appropriate benchmark
for every fund. Several large-cap technology stocks performed well during the crisis, making
the S&P 500 hard to beat. We thus compare each fund’s returns also to the returns of
two benchmarks tailored to the fund’s investment style: the prospectus benchmark and
the FTSE/Russell benchmark. The prospectus benchmark is chosen by the fund itself (with
some potential for strategic choice, as discussed by Sensoy, 2009), whereas the FTSE/Russell
benchmark is assigned to each fund by Morningstar based on the fund’s holdings.

       Figure 2 compares fund performance to the FTSE/Russell benchmark (Panel A), the
prospectus benchmark (Panel B), and the S&P 500 (Panel C). Unlike Figure 1, which plots
index levels, Figure 2 plots the cumulative performance of the average active fund relative
to the benchmark. Specifically, at each date t after February 19, 2020, the figure plots the
average value of log(Ft ) − log(Bt ), where Ft and Bt are defined in equations (1) and (2).

   Figure 2 shows that active funds significantly underperform their benchmarks, on average.
As of April 30, 2020, the average underperformance over the ten-week period is 1.53% relative
to the FTSE/Russell benchmark, 0.94% relative to the prospectus benchmark, and 4.77%
relative to the S&P 500. This underperformance is highly statistically significant in Panel C,
and marginally significant in Panels A and B. Moreover, Figure 2 underestimates the actual
underperformance due to a mild survivorship bias because average Ft can only be computed
across funds that have survived through time t. During the ten-week period, 22 funds drop
out of our sample, so their returns are excluded from the plot as of April 30.

       Table 1 reports average benchmark-adjusted fund performance in a way that is immune
to the survivorship bias. For each fund, live or dead, we take all of the fund’s available daily
returns in the given time period and subtract the same days’ returns on the corresponding
benchmark. We report annualized averages of those benchmark-adjusted returns in the first
three columns of Panel A of Table 1. The average fund underperforms its FTSE/Russell
   6
    All figures look virtually identical if we replace missing returns not by average fund returns but rather
by the returns of the fund’s FTSE/Russell benchmark on the same day.


                                                     9
benchmark during the crisis by 11.02% per year, with a t-statistic of −3.90. Average under-
performance relative to the prospectus benchmark is 7.70% per year (t = −2.49). The average
fund underperforms the S&P 500 by a whopping 29.12% per year (t = −5.37). In addition to
these equal-weighted averages, Table 1 reports the average performance weighted by funds’
TNA in Panel B. For all three benchmarks, the average crisis-period underperformance in
Panel B is even more negative than in Panel A. For example, the value-weighted average
underperformance relative to the FTSE/Russell benchmark is 24.30% per year (t = −3.03),
more than double the equal-weighted average.

  The remaining columns of Panels A and B of Table 1 report average fund alphas from five
multifactor models: the capital asset pricing model (CAPM), the three-factor model of Fama
and French (1993), the four-factor model of Carhart (1997), the five-factor model of Fama
and French (2015), and a six-factor model that includes those five factors plus momentum.
For a fund’s alpha to be included in the average, the fund must have at least 15 non-missing
net returns for the time period of interest. All five alphas are significantly negative during
the crisis period. The equal-weighted average alphas in Panel A range from −7.62% per year
(t = −3.25) for the six-factor model to −29.11% per year (t = −7.02) for the CAPM, and the
value-weighted average alphas in Panel B are only slightly less negative.

       Table 1 reports average performance not only during the full ten-week crisis period but
also during both subperiods, the first of which captures the market crash and the second
the recovery. Funds clearly underperform during the crash subperiod. Their average crash-
period performance ranges from −7.91% (t = −1.54) to −80.94% (t = −8.33) per year across
the 16 relevant values (eight columns times two panels in the table). Among these 16
negative values, 12 are statistically significant. Performance during the recovery subperiod
is mixed, with underperformance based on the ∆’s (i.e., relative to passive benchmarks) but
outperformance based on the α’s (i.e., relative to factor models).

   In the pre-crisis period (October 1, 2019 to January 31, 2020), the average performance
ranges from −5.18% (t = −3.85) to 2.24% (t = 1.11) per year across the 16 relevant values,
12 of which are significantly negative. Importantly, for each of the 16 metrics, the average
pre-crisis performance is better than the average crisis-period performance, with the differ-
ence ranging from 2.5% to 33.8% per year. For example, while the equal-weighted average
underperformance relative to the S&P 500 is −2.91% per year (t = −1.66) before the crisis,
this underperformance is ten times larger, −29.12% (t = −5.37), during the crisis. Fund
performance is clearly worse during the crisis than before the crisis.7
   7
    This is a difference-in-difference type of comparison, where one difference is between the fund and its
benchmark and the other difference is between the crisis period and the pre-crisis period.



                                                    10
       Panel C of Table 1 shows that 57.6% of funds underperform their FTSE/Russell bench-
marks during the crisis. Additionally, 54.2% of funds underperform prospectus benchmarks
and 74.2% of funds—almost three quarters—underperform the S&P 500. More than 80%
of funds have negative CAPM alphas during the crisis period. The fraction of funds with
negative alphas ranges from 60.4% to 80.2% across the five models. Regardless of how we
look at the data, we see active funds underperforming during the crisis.

       Institutional investors are often viewed as more sophisticated than retail investors. To see
whether this feature translates into better performance, we divide funds into three groups—
institutional, retail, and neither—by using Morningstar’s share-class-level institutional indi-
cator. For each fund, we sum the January 31, 2020 TNA across all of the fund’s institutional
share classes, and we do the same for retail share classes. We label a fund “institutional”
if the institutional fraction of its TNA exceeds two-thirds. A fund is “retail” if the retail
fraction of its TNA exceeds two-thirds. The rest of the funds are neither.

       When we reconstruct Table 1 for institutional and retail funds separately, we find that
their relative performance during the crisis depends on the performance measure: institu-
tional funds perform better based on ∆’s whereas retail funds do better based on alphas.
Institutional funds roughly match their FTSE/Russell and prospectus benchmarks (i.e., their
∆’s are indistinguishable from zero), whereas retail funds underperform their benchmarks by
a wide margin. The alphas, on the other hand, are higher (i.e., less negative) for retail funds.
The same message emerges from a cross-sectional regression of fund performance on the in-
stitutional indicator. The institutional-retail performance differential becomes insignificant,
for both ∆’s and alphas, when we add style fixed effects in the same way as we do later in
Table 2. In short, the evidence is inconclusive. The details are in the Appendix.


3.1. Sustainability

We find that funds with higher sustainability ratings perform better during the crisis. For
each fund, Morningstar evaluates how well the fund’s holdings perform on ESG issues relative
to the fund’s peer group (i.e., Morningstar Global Category). Morningstar uses company-
level ESG scores from Sustainalytics to determine each fund’s asset-weighted average un-
managed ESG risk exposure. Then, within each peer group, these scores are fitted to an
approximate normal distribution to award 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 sustainability globes to each fund.8
Funds with 5 globes are the most sustainable and funds with 1 globe are the least sustainable.
   8
   Within each peer group, the top 10% of funds receive 5 globes, the next 22.5% receive 4 globes, the next
35% receive 3 globes, the next 22.5% receive 2 globes, and the bottom 10% receive 1 globe.



                                                    11
We find that funds with more globes perform better during the crisis.

       Figure 3 shows the distributions of cumulative returns during the crisis across funds with
different sustainability ratings, which are assigned as of January 2020. We collect funds in
two groups: funds with 4 or 5 globes (“high sustainability”) and funds with 1 or 2 globes
(“low sustainability”). Panel A shows the distributions of cumulative total fund returns,
whereas Panel B shows cumulative benchmark-adjusted returns, which are adjusted using
FTSE/Russell benchmarks. Specifically, Panel A shows log(Ft ), where Ft is in equation (1)
and t corresponds to April 30, 2020, while Panel B shows log(Ft ) − log(Bt ), where Bt is in
equation (2) for the fund’s FTSE/Russell benchmark. Both panels clearly show that more
sustainable funds perform better in the crisis.

       Figure 4 presents the sustainability result from a perspective similar to Figure 2, plotting
cumulative fund performance relative to the benchmark, or log(Ft ) − log(Bt ). We consider
the same three benchmarks as before: FTSE/Russell (Panels A and B), prospectus (Panels
C and D), and the S&P 500 (Panels E and F). In the left panels (A, C, and E), we plot the
average cumulative performance differences for each of the five globe groups. In the right
panels (B, D, and F), we report 95% confidence intervals for high-sustainability funds (4 or
5 globes) and low-sustainability funds (1 or 2 globes).

   Remarkably, Figure 4 shows a monotonic relation between benchmark-adjusted fund per-
formance and sustainability globes: five-globe funds outperform four-globe funds, which out-
perform three-globe funds, which in turn outperform two-globe funds, which beat one-globe
funds. This monotonicity is present for all three benchmarks. The performance difference
between high-sustainability funds and low-sustainability funds is marginally statistically sig-
nificant. The significance is stronger in the subsequent regression analysis in Table 2.

    Given the important role of sustainability in determining fund performance, we inves-
tigate which dimensions of sustainability—E, S, or G—matter the most during the crisis.
After sorting funds by their individual E, S, and G scores from Morningstar, we separate
funds into two groups, “greener” (top 30%) and “browner” (bottom 30%), for each of the
three scores. We do the same for the composite historical sustainability score, based on
which Morningstar assigns globes to each fund.9 We perform the greener-versus-browner
comparisons in Figure 5, whose four panels are analogous to Panel B of Figure 4, except
that sustainability globes are replaced by the four metrics described above. In all four panels,
we benchmark funds against FTSE/Russell.
   9
   A fund’s individual E, S, and G scores do not simply add up to the fund’s historical sustainability score.
There does not appear to be a simple direct mapping between the two sets of scores.



                                                     12
   Figure 5 shows that funds with high sustainability scores outperform those with low
scores. This result from Panel A is not surprising, given the prior results from Figure 4.
More interesting, funds with high environmental (E) scores outperform those with low E
scores (Panel B), whereas funds with high social (S) scores underperform those with low
S scores (Panel C). According to Panel D, funds’ governance (G) scores have no effect on
performance. To make the figure easy to read, we do not show confidence intervals, but we
do show them in the Appendix. Only the pattern in Panel B is statistically significant.


3.1.1. Regression Analysis


Figures 3 through 5 demonstrate that more sustainable funds perform better during the
crisis. We further examine this result by conducting regression analysis, with two benefits.
First, regressions allow us to see whether the result survives the inclusion of many control
variables. Second, we remove the slight survivorship bias discussed earlier.

   Table 2 analyzes the determinants of crisis-period fund performance in cross-sectional
regressions with large numbers of controls. Panel A focuses on benchmark-adjusted perfor-
mance, using FTSE/Russell benchmarks. Panel B considers factor-adjusted performance,
using the four-factor Carhart (1997) model. The right-hand-side variables include indicators
for sustainability, exclusions, and the growth investment style, as well as the Morningstar
star rating. Fund and industry controls are described below. All regressions include style
fixed effects, where style is measured at the level of the Morningstar Global Category. As a
result, the relevant comparisons are across funds within the same investment style.

   Table 2 confirms that funds with higher sustainability ratings perform better during the
crisis. As before, we define high-sustainability funds as those with 4 or 5 globes. Column
1 of the table includes no controls other than style fixed effects. In column 1 of Panel
A, the slope on the high-sustainability indicator is 14.21 (t = 4.85), indicating that high-
sustainability funds outperform the remaining funds within the same style by 14.21% per
year during the crisis. The high-sustainability indicator is also highly significant in column
1 of Panel B (t = 4.25), where fund returns are factor-adjusted rather than benchmark-
adjusted. Sustainability thus remains a significant determinant of performance even after
style fixed effects are included. This is not surprising, given our prior results, because both
sustainability ratings and fund returns are style-adjusted, though in slightly different ways—
sustainability ratings by Morningstar, with respect to the Morningstar Global Category, and
returns by us, with respect to the fund’s FTSE/Russell benchmark.

   More interesting, sustainability remains significantly associated with fund performance

                                              13
after the inclusion of fund and industry controls. Fund controls include the log of fund age,
the log of the fund’s TNA, fund turnover, expense ratio, cash position, the Morningstar
medal rating, and market beta (in Panel B only, as there is no beta estimation in Panel
A). Industry controls are the fund’s net investment position, as a percentage of TNA, in
industries such as energy, healthcare, and technology (for the full list of the 11 industries,
see the Appendix). As controls are added, the slope on the high-sustainability indicator
decreases, but it remains both statistically and economically significant even when all controls
are included: 9.76 (t = 2.60) in Panel A and 3.47 (t = 3.15) in Panel B. To summarize, we
find that funds with high sustainability ratings perform better during the crisis.

   In reaching this conclusion, we control for funds’ industry exposure in two ways. In
addition to the industry controls described in the previous paragraph, we include fixed effects
for Global Categories, which include not only investment styles such as large-cap value but
also U.S. equity sectors such as technology, energy, and healthcare. We report the estimated
coefficients on both the industry controls and the fixed effects in the Appendix. None of
those coefficients are reliably positive or negative across all specifications.

   A subset of funds employ exclusions in their investment process. These funds exclude
from their portfolios stocks of firms such as tobacco producers or gun manufacturers whose
business they deem unacceptable. Exclusions represent one possible approach to sustain-
ability, one that discards the opportunities to engage with the firm as well as to benefit from
the potential mispricing of the firm’s stock. 107 of our funds employ exclusions, representing
3.9% of our TNA-screened sample.

   Table 2 shows that funds that employ exclusions outperform same-style funds that do
not employ exclusions by 8.61% per year (t = 3.26) in terms of benchmark-adjusted returns.
However, this result weakens, and eventually loses significance, after adding enough control
variables. The result does not obtain on a factor-adjusted basis; if anything, it goes the
other way (Panel B). The exclusion aspect of sustainability therefore does not have a robust
association with fund performance during the crisis.


3.1.2. The Sustainability-Performance Relation


Do sustainable funds outperform thanks to their managers’ superior active management
skills, or simply due to the superior performance of sustainable stocks? To answer this
question, we bring passive index funds into the analysis. We classify a fund as passive if
Morningstar designates it as such or if its name includes the word “index.” After applying
our TNA and missing-return screens, we have 266 passive funds in our sample. We augment

                                               14
the right-hand-side variables in Table 2 by adding an index-fund indicator as well as its
interactions with the sustainability variables (globes and exclusions). As we show in the
Appendix, the estimated coefficients on the interaction terms tend to be negative, indicating
a weaker sustainability-performance relation for passive funds, but none of those coefficients
is statistically significant. The sustainability-performance relation thus appears to be present
not only for active funds but also for mutual funds more generally.10

       One potential source of the sustainability-performance relation is that firm-level sus-
tainability initiatives may be related to firm quality. If firms with stronger fundamentals
disproportionately engage in sustainability activities, these firms could outperform during
the crisis due to their fundamentals rather than sustainability. More sustainable funds could
then outperform because they hold stocks of higher-quality firms. We explore this hypothesis
in two ways. First, we proxy for the quality of a fund’s holdings by the fund-level return
on assets (ROA). Morningstar computes each fund’s ROA as an approximate median of the
firm-level ROAs of the fund’s holdings. When we add a control for ROA to the regres-
sions in Table 2, we find that ROA is insignificant whereas the sustainability coefficients
are barely affected by its inclusion. Second, we replace the four-factor alpha in Panel B of
Table 2 with the alphas from the five- and six-factor models that include the profitability
factor. The fund’s loading on this factor may pick up quality to some extent. The results
are very similar to those in Panel B of Table 2. Either way, controlling for firm quality as
proxied by profitability does not alter the significance of the sustainability-performance re-
lation. Whether the relation survives other proxies for firm quality, such as customer loyalty
(Albuquerque et al., 2020), can be examined in future work.


3.2. Star Ratings

Besides sustainability, the most important determinant of active fund performance during the
crisis is the fund’s star rating as of January 31, 2020. To calculate star ratings, Morningstar
computes each fund’s risk-adjusted performance over the prior three, five, and ten years
relative to the fund’s peer group. Averaging across the three periods, Morningstar awards
1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 stars to each fund, with 5 stars going to the best-performing funds.11 We find
  10
     Anecdotal evidence of a sustainability-performance relation among passive funds is obtained by compar-
ing the returns of the S&P 500 index to those of the S&P 500 ESG index. The latter index is composed of
310 companies in the S&P 500 that meet certain sustainability criteria. During the crisis period, the S&P
500 ESG outperforms the S&P 500 by 0.72%, or 3.74% annualized. This passive-return difference is smaller
than the differences reported earlier in Table 2 for active funds.
  11
     As with the sustainability globes, within each peer group, the top 10% of funds receive 5 stars, the
next 22.5% receive 4 stars, the next 35% receive 3 stars, the next 22.5% receive 2 stars, and the bottom
10% receive 1 star. A fund must have at least three years of performance to be considered for a rating,


                                                    15
that funds with higher star ratings perform better during the crisis.

   Figure 6 shows the distributions of cumulative returns during the crisis across funds with
different star ratings, similar to Figure 3. We collect funds in two groups: funds with 4
or 5 stars (“high”) and funds with 1 or 2 stars (“low”). Panel A shows the distributions
of cumulative total fund returns whereas Panel B shows cumulative returns adjusted for
FTSE/Russell benchmark returns. Both panels clearly show that funds with more stars
perform better during the crisis.

   Figure 7 shows the same result from a different perspective. Similar to the layouts from
Figures 2 and 4, Figure 7 plots cumulative benchmark-adjusted fund performance for groups
of funds with different star ratings. The relation between benchmark-adjusted performance
and star ratings is monotonic across the five star groups, with five-star funds performing the
best and one-star funds performing the worst. This striking monotonicity is observed for all
three benchmarks. The figure also shows that five-star funds outperform one-star funds by
a significant margin for all three benchmarks.

   Table 2 confirms the important role of the star rating in our regression setting with con-
trols and style fixed effects. The star rating significantly predicts both benchmark-adjusted
and factor-adjusted returns, with t-statistics ranging from 2.42 to 3.50 in Panel A and from
2.79 to 5.92 in Panel B. This is a surprising result—it is not clear a priori why Morningstar
star ratings, which are computed before the crisis from historical risk-adjusted returns, should
have such strong predictive power for fund performance during the crisis. The result is sig-
nificant not only statistically but also economically. For example, the slope coefficient of 5.78
in column 3 of Panel A indicates that one extra star is associated with a higher crisis-period
benchmark-adjusted return of 5.78% per year. Therefore, a five-star fund outperforms a
one-star fund of the same style by four times that amount, 23.1% per year, on average.


3.3. Value versus Growth

Sustainability and stars are the most robust predictors of active fund performance during
the crisis. Next in line, though less robust, is the value/growth investment style. We find
that growth funds tend to outperform value funds. Importantly, we are not saying that the
growth style outperforms the value style during the crisis—that is well known (e.g., HML’s
crisis-period return is −18%). What we are saying is that growth funds deliver higher returns
than value funds on a style-adjusted basis.
and depending on its age, a combination of three-year, five-year, and ten-year performance measures are
averaged to construct the fund’s raw performance score.


                                                  16
       To decide which funds follow the value and growth investment styles, we use the equity
style box variable from Morningstar. We define value funds as funds classified as large-cap
value, mid-cap value, or small-cap value. We define growth funds as funds classified as
large-cap growth, mid-cap growth, or small-cap growth.

   Figure 8 shows that growth funds outperform value funds, on average, for all three
benchmarks. The outperformance is statistically significant when measured against the S&P
500 and prospectus benchmarks, but not against the FTSE/Russell benchmarks.

    Table 2 finds the same outperformance in our regression setting with controls and style
fixed effects. In Panel B, where fund performance is factor-adjusted, the indicator variable
for the growth tilt is always positive and significant, with t-statistics exceeding 3.7. For
example, using the estimate from column 4, growth funds outperform non-growth funds by
10.62% per year (t = 5.58) during the crisis. In Panel A, the estimated slopes on the growth
indicator are similar in magnitude to those in Panel B but their statistical significance is
weaker, with t-statistics ranging from 0.75 to 2.35 across the four specifications.

       Table 3 is the counterpart of Table 2 estimated over the pre-crisis period. The growth
indicator enters with a positive sign in all eight specifications, just like in Table 2, but it is
significant only in half of them. More important, neither the sustainability globe indicator
nor the star rating predicts fund performance in the pre-crisis period.12 The predictive
power of these variables thus appears to be specific to the crisis period. The same message
is conveyed by the Appendix figures that extend our time-series plots to the period from
October 2019 to April 2020. These plots show the predictive power of globes and stars
kicking in around the beginning of the crisis in February 2020. The plots also show fund
performance deteriorating sharply after February 2020, consistent with Table 1.


3.4. Robustness

Our main results are robust to a variety of methodological modifications. As noted earlier,
our sample is restricted to active equity funds with at least $15 million in TNA as of January
31, 2020. However, we show in the Appendix that the results from Table 1 are extremely
similar even if we do not impose this size screen.

       Another screen that is commonly imposed on mutual fund samples is an age screen.
  12
     These comparisons between Tables 2 and 3 are difference-in-difference-in-difference comparisons: one
difference is between the fund and its benchmark, another difference is between funds with different numbers
of globes (or stars), and the final difference is between the crisis and pre-crisis periods.



                                                    17
Researchers often exclude young funds because of a concern about the incubation bias (Evans,
2010). This bias can appear if researchers analyze historical fund data with a delay that
would allow the bias to creep in. The bias is not a concern in our study because there is
no such delay—we constructed our fund sample in May 2020, shortly after the end of our
sample period. Nonetheless, we show in the Appendix that our main results are extremely
similar also when we exclude funds less than two years old from the sample.

   Our tables report evidence based on simple returns. Our plots of cumulative performance
are based on log (i.e., continuously compounded) returns because those returns cumulate over
time in a tractable manner. This distinction is immaterial—our main table results are very
similar if we replace simple returns by log returns, as we show in the Appendix.

   To remove the effects of investment style, we include style fixed effects in our regressions.
Nonetheless, we show in the Appendix that the regression results from Table 2 are similar
if style fixed effects are excluded. The Appendix also reports subperiod results for Table 2
and its variations, dividing the full crisis period into the crash period (February 20 to March
23, 2020) and the recovery period (March 24 to April 30, 2020).

   Recall that Figure 3 shows the distributions of crisis-period returns across two groups of
funds, those with high sustainability ratings (4 or 5 globes) and low sustainability ratings
(1 or 2 globes). In the Appendix, we present analogous plots showing three distributions
corresponding to funds with 1, 3, and 5 globes, and also five distributions, one for each
possible number of globes. Those plots are more cluttered but they convey the same message
as Figure 3—that more sustainable funds perform better in the crisis.

   Similarly, Figure 6 shows the distributions of returns across funds with high star ratings
(4 or 5 stars) and low star ratings (1 or 2 stars). In the Appendix, we present analogous
plots showing three distributions corresponding to funds with 1, 3, and 5 stars, and also
five distributions, one for each possible number of stars. Again, those plots convey the same
message as Figure 6: funds with more stars perform better during the crisis.



4. Fund Flows

Our key measure for assessing fund flows is the cumulative net fund flow percentage. Daily
net fund flows, in dollars, are computed following Barber, Huang, and Odean (2016) as

                          F Di,t = T N Ai,t − (1 + Ri,t )T N Ai,t−1 ,                       (3)



                                                18
where T N Ai,t is the total net assets of fund i on date t and Ri,t is the net return of fund
i on date t. To convert the dollar values of net fund flows into a cumulative percentage,
the values of F Di,t are accumulated across the time period of interest and divided by the
TNA of fund i on the day before the period of interest begins. Given the sensitivity of the
cumulative net flow percentage to missing values, we restrict consideration to funds with
entirely non-missing daily net fund flows.13

       Figure 9 shows the time series of cumulative net fund flows into active equity mutual
funds, both in dollar terms and in percentage terms. Panel A shows that active funds
experience outflows during the COVID-19 crisis of about 43 billion dollars, or 1.3% of assets
under management. The pace of outflows is fairly rapid during the market crash between
February 20 and March 23, 2020. Outflows continue, at a slower pace, during the market
recovery. Panel B shows that between January 2017 and April 2020, active funds experience
outflows of about 5% per year as a fraction of their initial assets. These steady outflows
reflect the well-known ongoing trend toward passive investment management. Year 2020
does not stand out relative to prior years. Crisis-period outflows are somewhat faster than
pre-crisis outflows, but they largely extend their long-term trend.

       Table 4 adds more detail. Column 1 of Panel A shows that aggregate net outflows in the
pre-crisis period, −1.43%, exceed the outflows during the crisis period, −1.32%. However,
the crisis period is only ten weeks long whereas the pre-crisis period is 17.5 weeks long
(October 1, 2019 to January 31, 2020). On a per-week basis, crisis-period outflows are larger
than pre-crisis-period outflows (0.132% vs. 0.082% per week). In fact, both crash-period
outflows, −0.91%, and recovery-period outflows, −0.60%, exceed pre-crisis-period outflows
on a per-week basis (they are 0.182% and 0.120% per week, respectively). However, this
ordering disappears when we focus on equal-weighted average flows in Panel B rather than
on aggregate flows. Overall, our reading of Table 4 is similar to that of Figure 9: crisis-
period outflows are substantial but not dramatic compared to their long-term trends. This
evidence for equity mutual funds is in sharp contrast to that for corporate bond mutual
funds. According to Falato, Goldstein, and Hortacsu (2020), the average corporate bond
fund experienced cumulative outflows of about 9% of assets between February and March
2020—much larger than the outflows we document for equity funds.
  13
    In our baseline fund size filtered sample, we retain 2,082 funds (75.3%) over the full February 20 to April
30, 2020 time period, 2,137 funds (77.3%) over the February 20 to March 23, 2020 time period, and 2,219
funds (80.3%) over the March 24 to April 30, 2020 time period.




                                                      19
4.1. Sustainability

We find that funds with higher sustainability ratings (i.e., more Morningstar globes) receive
larger net flows during the crisis. Figure 10 plots cumulative net fund flows across funds with
different globe ratings over the February 20 to April 30, 2020 time period. Panel A plots
aggregate cumulative flows for each globe category, which we compute as total cumulative
net flows into that category divided by that category’s total net assets on February 19, 2020.
The panel shows a near-monotonic relation between those ratings and net fund flows, with
five-globe funds having the largest flows (0.14%, per Table 4) and one-globe funds the lowest
flows (−2.74%). Panel B focuses on the five-globe and one-globe categories. It plots average
fund-level cumulative flows across all funds in the given category, scaled as a percent of the
fund’s February 19, 2020 TNA, along with the 95% confidence intervals. The panel shows
that five-globe funds receive significantly larger net flows than one-globe funds. In short,
investors favor sustainable funds when moving their money during the crisis.

   Figure 11 shows a similar pattern based on a different measure of sustainability: an
indicator of whether the fund employs exclusions in its investment process. Funds that do
not employ exclusions, which account for the vast majority of funds, experience net outflows
during the crisis. However, funds that do employ exclusions experience net inflows, and the
difference between the two groups is statistically significant.

   Figure 12 unpacks sustainability into its E, S, and G dimensions. As before, we separate
funds into high-E, low-E, high-S, low-S, high-G and low-G, where the high (low) group
always denotes the top (bottom) 30% of funds. Figure 12 shows that cumulative aggregate
net flows during the crisis are larger for high-E funds than for low-E funds. Low-E funds
experience substantial outflows of 2.7% of assets, whereas the outflows from high-E funds
are only 0.3%. Net flows are also larger for high-G funds than for low-G funds: low-G funds
have outflows of 2.0% whereas high-G funds’ outflows are only 1.0%. High-S funds actually
experience larger outflows than low-S funds, but the difference between the two categories’
total flows is relatively small, only 0.7%, and the average outflow is in fact slightly larger for
the low-S category. The effect of sustainability on fund flows thus seems driven by E and, to
a lesser extent, G. Investors seem to have retained their focus on environmental issues even
during the health crisis of 2020.

   Table 5 reports results from cross-sectional regressions of crisis-period net fund flows on
the sustainability variables as well as style fixed effects and a large number of fund and
industry controls. These controls include past fund performance, as we explain later in
Section 4.2. The sustainability variables remain significant even with all of these controls.


                                               20
The exclusions variable is the most robust, with t-statistics ranging from 2.50 to 4.02 across
the seven different specifications. The indicator for high-E (i.e., green) funds is also generally
significant, with t-statistics ranging from 1.89 to 3.09. The five-globe indicator is significant
when included on its own as well as in several other specifications, but it loses significance
when the exclusions indicator is included. Overall, these results indicate that investors favor
sustainable funds while reallocating money during the pandemic of 2020.14

       To see whether this preference for sustainability is unique to active funds, we once again
bring passive funds into the analysis. We augment the right-hand-side variables in Table 5
by adding an index-fund indicator as well as its interactions with the sustainability variables
(globes, exclusions, E, S, and G). As we show in the Appendix, the estimated coefficients on
the interaction terms are essentially zero, indicating no significant difference between active
and passive funds in the strength of the sustainability-flow relation. Investors seem to favor
sustainable funds regardless of whether they are active or passive.15

       Investors’ preference for sustainable funds is not specific to the COVID-19 crisis. One
way to see this is presented in Table 6, which is the counterpart of Table 5 estimated over
the pre-crisis period. The results in Tables 5 and 6 are quite similar. The slope coefficient on
the five-globe indicator enters even more strongly in Table 6, with uniform significance and
magnitudes roughly double those reported in Table 5. The slope coefficient on the exclusion
indicator enters more strongly in Table 5, but it is always positive and often significant also
in Table 6. The environmental indicator is similarly significant in both tables.

       We also consider the difference between the net flows of the five-globe and one-globe
funds. When computed based on aggregate flows, this difference is slightly larger during the
crisis than before the crisis (2.88% vs. 2.43%, respectively; see Panel A of Table 4). Based on
average flows, however, the same difference is larger during the pre-crisis period (2.93% vs.
6.55%; see Panel B of Table 4). Similar conclusions apply to the flow difference between the
funds with and without investment exclusions—when computed based on aggregate flows,
this difference is larger during the crisis, but based on average flows, it is larger before the
crisis. A similar message is conveyed by the long-term plots of fund flow patterns in the
Appendix, which reveal no structural breaks around the beginning of the crisis. Investors
thus prefer sustainable funds both before and during the COVID-19 crisis. Based on some
metrics, this preference is stronger during the crisis, but based on others, it is stronger
  14
     As we did for fund performance, we also consider specifications without style fixed effects. The results
are quite similar to those reported in Table 5, as we show in the Appendix. The Appendix also reports
subperiod (crash and recovery) results for Table 5, as well as for its version with no style fixed effects.
  15
     Related evidence is reported by Ferriani and Natoli (2020) who analyze flows into global equity large-cap
funds, active and passive combined, and find that investors favor funds with low ESG risk scores.



                                                     21
before the crisis. What matters for our conclusions is that investors retain their preference
for sustainability even in the face of a large economic and health crisis.


4.2. Other Determinants of Fund Flows

Figure 13 plots cumulative net fund flows for funds with different star ratings as of January
31, 2020. Panel A shows a monotonic flow-star relation, with higher-star funds receiving
higher net flows. Panel B shows that the differences in average cumulative net flows are
statistically significant: five-star funds receive significantly larger average net flows than
three-star funds, whose average flows are significantly larger than those of one-star funds.
The positive flow-star relation is highly significant also after controlling for style fixed effects
and the other controls (see Table 5). This relation is not surprising, however, because
Morningstar constructs its star ratings based on historical fund returns, which are well
known to have predictive power for fund flows.

   Given their design, star ratings essentially perform the role of catch-all controls for past
fund returns in Table 5. We also consider other controls for past fund performance, but we
find them to be less powerful. In the Appendix, we add eight different past-performance
controls—the eight measures from Table 1—to the regressions in Table 5. While all eight
measures enter positively, only two of them are statistically significant (the ∆’s relative to
the prospectus and FTSE/Russell benchmarks), and even they are far less significant than
the star rating. Most important, the addition of the eight controls has very little effect on
the sustainability-related coefficients in Table 5.

   The crisis-period inflows into sustainable funds could in principle be caused by the supe-
rior performance of those funds during the crisis. To examine this conjecture, we construct
the analog of Table 5 for recovery-period flows (i.e., flows in the second half of the crisis) and
add controls for crash-period performance (i.e., performance in the first half of the crisis).
We find that the sustainability-related coefficients remain positive and significant even after
controlling for crash-period performance. The details are in the Appendix.

   Figure 14 shows that growth funds receive significantly larger net flows than value funds.
This relation holds largely at the style level because it vanishes when we run regressions that
include style fixed effects. We include the growth indicator variable among the fund-level
controls in Table 5 but we suppress it because it is never statistically significant.

   We examine the differences in flows between institutional and retail funds, which we define
in Section 3. We add an institutional-fund indicator to the regressions in Table 5, both by

                                                22
itself and interacted with the sustainability indicators. We find that institutional funds
have more outflows than retail funds during the crisis, but only in the presence of controls,
especially the star rating. However, we find no significant difference between institutional
and retail flows with respect to sustainability. See the Appendix for details.16


4.3. Flow-Induced Fire Sales

It is well known that funds facing large outflows are sometimes forced to sell their holdings
at a discount. For example, Edelen (1999) finds that liquidity-motivated trading caused by
mutual fund flows has a negative impact on fund performance. Coval and Stafford (2007)
find that stock sales by funds experiencing large outflows depress those stocks’ prices. There-
fore, the capital outflows observed during the COVID-19 crisis (Figure 9) could potentially
contribute to the poor performance of mutual funds documented in Section 3.

       Falato, Goldstein, and Hortacsu (2020) show that the vulnerability to fire sales helps
explain outflows from corporate bond funds during the COVID-19 crisis. For example, when
they split funds based on the levels of liquidity of their holdings, they find that funds holding
less liquid bonds suffer more severe outflows. We conduct a similar exercise for equity funds:
as small-cap stocks are well known to be rather illiquid, we test whether small-cap funds suffer
more severe outflows than other funds. We do so without running any new regressions—
we simply examine Table 5’s estimated fixed effects on the two most relevant Morningstar
Global Categories: U.S. equity small-cap and global equity mid/small-cap. These fixed
effects are suppressed in Table 5 but we show in the Appendix that 81% of them (21 out
of 26 coefficients) are negative. Almost all of them are statistically insignificant, though,
indicating that the evidence of larger outflows from small-cap funds is weak at best.

       We also look for fire sales by regressing a fund’s daily performance on the fund’s cumu-
lative net flow over three days: the same day and the two preceding days. If outflows today
trigger fire sales today or in the following two days (future sales could result, for example,
from the fund replenishing its cash position), fund performance should be depressed on those
days, producing a positive regression slope. The estimated slope is indeed positive, but it is
significant across all specifications only when we measure fund performance relative to the
S&P 500. If we use FTSE/Russell or prospectus benchmarks instead, the slope’s significance
vanishes after enough controls are added to the regression. In an additional test, we interact
flows with a small-cap indicator. The estimated slope on the interaction term is typically
  16
    Glossner et al. (2020) analyze changes in the holdings of institutional investors during Q1 2020. They
observe no portfolio shifts toward stocks of firms with high environmental and social scores.



                                                   23
positive, hinting at a stronger performance-flow relation for small-cap funds, but it is never
statistically significant. All these results are in the Appendix.

   To summarize, our evidence points in the direction of fire sales, but it is not statistically
reliable. It makes sense for the evidence of fire sales to be weaker in equity markets than
in corporate bond markets, for two reasons. First, equities are generally more liquid than
corporate bonds. Second, as noted earlier, capital outflows from equity funds during the
COVID-19 crisis are not nearly as large as those from corporate bond funds.



5. Conclusions

We analyze the performance and flows of U.S. active equity mutual funds during the COVID-
19 crisis. We find that most active funds underperform passive benchmarks, contradicting the
hypothesis that active funds outperform in recessions. This underperformance is particularly
large when measured against the S&P 500 index, but it is observed also relative to style
benchmarks. Funds with higher sustainability ratings and higher star ratings perform better.
When reallocating capital, investors favor funds with high sustainability ratings and funds
that apply exclusion criteria. That investors retain their focus on sustainability during a
major crisis indicates that they view sustainability as a necessity, not a luxury.

   While this paper appears to be the first to analyze the performance and flows of equity
mutual funds during the COVID-19 crisis, it leaves plenty of room for future research. For
example, the performance of fixed income funds deserves a careful investigation. So do the
sources of active equity funds’ underperformance during the crisis. It would also be useful
to extend our work to deepen our understanding of the dependence of investors’ demand for
sustainability on economic conditions.




                                              24
                                                 Table 1
                                            Fund Performance

This table describes active equity mutual funds’ performance against both benchmarks and factor models.
Panel A reports equal-weighted averages across funds of estimated deltas and alphas, all reported in annual-
ized percentage terms. The deltas are average differences between the fund’s net returns and its benchmark
returns. The benchmarks are the FTSE/Russell benchmark, the prospectus benchmark, and the S&P 500.
The alphas are estimated intercepts from the regressions of excess net fund returns on factor returns de-
scribed in the text. Panel B reports the value-weighted averages of estimated deltas and alphas, weighted
by each fund’s TNA. Panel C reports the fraction of funds that underperform (i.e., have a negative delta or
alpha). The time periods are: crisis (February 20 to April 30, 2020); crash (February 20 to March 23, 2020);
recovery (March 24 to April 30, 2020); and pre-crisis (October 1, 2019 to January 31, 2020). Standard errors
are clustered on the Morningstar Institutional Category. t-statistics are in brackets.


                     (1)           (2)        (3)            (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)          (8)
                   F T SE/Rus
                  ∆Bench         ∆PBench
                                    rosp
                                            ∆S&P 500
                                             Bench      αCAP M        αF F 3    αCar4     αF F 5    αF F 5+M om

                                   Panel A. Average Fund Performance (%)

         Crisis     -11.02         -7.70     -29.12         -29.11    -11.30     -7.84     -9.90       -7.62
                    [-3.90]       [-2.49]    [-5.37]        [-7.02]   [-5.16]   [-3.22]   [-4.51]     [-3.25]

         Crash       -7.91         -8.19     -64.31         -80.94    -37.75    -38.98    -49.84      -51.11
                    [-1.54]       [-1.33]    [-4.77]        [-8.33]   [-4.25]   [-3.90]   [-5.91]     [-5.77]

      Recovery      -12.68         -7.55      -5.81          8.47     17.49     20.76     18.75       22.83
                    [-3.94]       [-2.13]    [-1.14]        [1.46]    [2.83]    [4.12]    [3.00]      [4.42]

     Pre-Crisis      -2.38         -1.43      -2.91          -5.18     -3.16     -3.05     -2.72       -2.67
                    [-3.45]       [-2.37]    [-1.66]        [-3.85]   [-4.17]   [-3.50]   [-3.16]     [-2.84]

                           Panel B. Value-Weighted Average Fund Performance (%)

         Crisis     -24.30        -22.42     -33.00         -20.46     -8.33     -7.05     -6.97       -6.04
                    [-3.03]       [-2.96]    [-4.41]        [-3.23]   [-2.96]   [-2.27]   [-2.42]     [-1.79]

         Crash      -16.45        -11.06     -67.81         -58.43    -33.22    -33.62    -41.46      -42.51
                    [-1.49]       [-1.19]    [-5.31]        [-4.19]   [-3.60]   [-3.61]   [-4.04]     [-4.18]

      Recovery      -22.87        -19.47     -11.02          2.51      9.17     11.31     10.53       13.67
                    [-2.41]       [-2.03]    [-1.50]        [0.74]    [2.55]    [3.25]    [2.86]      [3.92]

     Pre-Crisis      0.23          2.24       0.75           -4.98     -3.82     -3.77     -3.56       -3.54
                    [0.11]        [1.11]     [0.19]         [-2.89]   [-7.69]   [-6.95]   [-5.38]     [-5.36]

                                Panel C. Fraction of Funds Underperforming (%)

         Crisis     57.59         54.17      74.24          80.15     69.66     60.35     67.80       60.43
         Crash      51.62         48.57      63.48          83.79     78.57     80.01     80.65       81.41
      Recovery      55.73         55.64      55.77          53.09     39.53     34.79     40.08       34.28
     Pre-Crisis     64.13         60.55      67.14          71.18     73.50     71.94     70.05       69.63




                                                       25
                                          Table 2
                     Determinants of Fund Performance During the Crisis
The table reports slope coefficients estimated from regressions of fund performance in February 20 to April 30,
2020 on fund characteristics and controls. In Panel A, the dependent variable is FTSE/Russell-benchmark-
adjusted performance; in Panel B, it is the Carhart four-factor alpha. Both performance measures are
estimated using simple returns and expressed in annualized percentage terms. Global category fixed effects
are based on the Morningstar Global Category variable. Fund-level controls include the log of the fund’s age
in days, the log of the fund’s January 31, 2020 TNA, turnover ratio as of January 2020, net expense ratio as
of January 2020, net cash position (as a percent of TNA) as of January 2020, Morningstar medal rating as
of January 2020, and, in Panel B only, market beta estimated from the October 1, 2019 to January 31, 2020
period. Industry controls include the fund’s net position as a percent of TNA in basic materials, communi-
cation services, consumer cyclical, consumer defensive, energy, financial services, healthcare, industrials, real
estate, technology, and utilities. Standard errors are clustered on the Morningstar Institutional Category.
t-statistics are in brackets.

                                         (1)       (2)         (3)      (4)      (5)       (6)       (7)

                                                  Panel A. Benchmark-Adjusted Performance

      I(4 or 5 Sustainability Globes)   14.21                                   11.51      8.61      9.76
                                        [4.85]                                  [3.22]    [2.26]    [2.60]

      I(Employs Exclusions)                        8.61                          5.47      2.03      2.79
                                                  [3.26]                        [2.44]    [1.05]    [1.24]

      Star Rating                                              5.78              5.12      7.00      6.49
                                                              [2.84]            [2.42]    [3.50]    [3.41]

      I(Growth Tilt)                                                   12.43     7.24      9.39      5.15
                                                                       [2.35]   [1.16]    [1.70]    [0.75]

      Global Category FE                 Yes       Yes         Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes
      Fund-Level Controls                No        No          No       No        No       Yes       Yes
      Industry Controls                  No        No          No       No        No       No        Yes
      Observations                      2,494     2,561       2,286    2,561    2,251     1,632     1,604
      Adjusted R2                       0.06      0.05        0.06     0.06      0.06     0.12      0.15

                                                     Panel B. Factor-Adjusted Performance

      I(4 or 5 Sustainability Globes)    5.59                                    2.67      3.04      3.47
                                        [4.25]                                  [2.39]    [2.55]    [3.15]

      I(Employs Exclusions)                       −0.89                          −2.61     −3.46     −3.16
                                                 [−0.50]                        [−1.52]   [−2.12]   [−2.19]

      Star Rating                                              3.15              2.51      3.25      3.13
                                                              [3.35]            [2.79]    [5.92]    [5.42]

      I(Growth Tilt)                                                   10.62     7.53      7.51      7.77
                                                                       [5.58]   [4.09]    [3.74]    [4.10]

      Global Category FE                 Yes       Yes         Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes
      Fund-Level Controls                No        No          No       No        No       Yes       Yes
      Industry Controls                  No        No          No       No        No       No        Yes
      Observations                      2,233     2,363       2,104    2,363    2,020     1,522     1,494
      Adjusted R2                       0.10      0.12        0.11     0.12      0.10     0.42      0.46



                                                         26
                                           Table 3
                      Determinants of Fund Performance Before the Crisis
The table reports slope coefficients estimated from regressions of fund performance in October 1, 2019 to
January 31, 2020 on fund characteristics and controls. In Panel A, the dependent variable is FTSE/Russell-
benchmark-adjusted performance; in Panel B, it is the Carhart four-factor alpha. Both performance measures
are estimated using simple returns and expressed in annualized percentage terms. Global category fixed
effects are based on the Morningstar Global Category variable. Fund-level controls include the log of the
fund’s age in days, the log of the fund’s September 30, 2019 TNA, turnover ratio as of September 2019,
net expense ratio as of September 2019, net cash position (as a percent of TNA) as of September 2019,
Morningstar medal rating as of September 2019, and, in Panel B only, market beta estimated from the
June 1 to September 30, 2019 period. Industry controls include the fund’s net position as a percent of
TNA in basic materials, communication services, consumer cyclical, consumer defensive, energy, financial
services, healthcare, industrials, real estate, technology, and utilities. Standard errors are clustered on the
Morningstar Institutional Category. t-statistics are in brackets.


                                         (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)

                                                  Panel A. Benchmark-Adjusted Performance

     I(4 or 5 Sustainability Globes)    −0.51                                 −1.99     −0.97     −2.58
                                       [−0.40]                               [−1.25]   [−0.44]   [−1.29]

     I(Employs Exclusions)                        −2.17                       −0.81     −1.63     −1.59
                                                 [−2.32]                     [−0.73]   [−1.62]   [−1.54]

     Star Rating                                            0.65               0.51      0.90      0.63
                                                           [0.96]             [0.72]    [1.03]    [0.70]

     I(Growth Tilt)                                                  5.69      6.29      6.35      3.90
                                                                    [3.96]    [3.68]    [3.06]    [1.37]

     Global Category FE                  Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
     Fund-Level Controls                 No        No       No       No        No        Yes       Yes
     Industry Controls                   No        No       No       No        No        No        Yes
     Observations                       2,515     2,601    2,313    2,601     2,262     1,614     1,586
     Adjusted R2                        0.06      0.06     0.07     0.07      0.08      0.12      0.16

                                                    Panel B. Factor-Adjusted Performance

     I(4 or 5 Sustainability Globes)    −0.11                                 −0.29     −0.17     −0.36
                                       [−0.32]                               [−0.73]   [−0.41]   [−0.75]

     I(Employs Exclusions)                        −0.79                       −0.38     −1.20     −1.26
                                                 [−1.11]                     [−0.50]   [−1.89]   [−1.97]

     Star Rating                                            0.19               0.14     −0.06     −0.22
                                                           [0.77]             [0.54]   [−0.29]   [−1.12]

     I(Growth Tilt)                                                  0.55      0.67      1.11      0.91
                                                                    [1.44]    [1.24]    [2.12]    [1.63]

     Global Category FE                  Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
     Fund-Level Controls                 No        No       No       No        No        Yes       Yes
     Industry Controls                   No        No       No       No        No        No        Yes
     Observations                       2,227     2,377    2,105    2,377     2,005     1,494     1,466
     Adjusted R2                        0.48      0.46     0.49     0.46      0.50      0.46      0.49


                                                      27
                                                    Table 4
                                                  Fund Flows

This table describes active equity mutual funds’ net flows both in aggregate and for several sustainability-
based subsamples. Panel A reports aggregate net fund flows, that is the sums of net flows over the given
period divided by the sum of TNA at the start of the period, in percentage terms. The table reports flows
for all funds, funds with high (five globes) and low (one globe) sustainability ratings, and funds that do and
do not use exclusion criteria in their investment process. Panel B reports simple averages of net fund flow
percentages across funds. The net flow percentages are constructed by summing the daily net fund flows over
the period and dividing by the fund’s TNA at the start of the period. The flow percentages are winsorized
at the 2.5% and 97.5% levels before estimating the simple average. The time periods are: crisis (February 20
to April 30, 2020); crash (February 20 to March 23, 2020); recovery (March 24 to April 30, 2020); and pre-
crisis (October 1, 2019 to January 31, 2020). Standard errors are clustered on the Morningstar Institutional
Category. t-statistics are in brackets.


                                   (1)           (2)             (3)       (4)        (5)
                                               Sustainability Rating     Investment Exclusions
                                All Funds      5 Globes        1 Globe   Present    Absent

                                            Panel A. Aggregate Net Fund Flows (%)

                       Crisis     -1.32         0.14            -2.74      1.21      -1.40
                       Crash      -0.91         -0.60           -1.12     0.15       -0.94
                    Recovery      -0.60         1.06            -2.57     1.59       -0.66
                   Pre-Crisis     -1.43         0.20            -2.23     -1.75      -1.44

                                            Panel B. Average Net Fund Flows (%)

                       Crisis     -1.25          0.62           -2.31      1.90       -1.42
                                 [-6.29]        [1.06]         [-3.53]    [2.57]     [-6.59]

                       Crash       -1.12         -0.46          -1.81      0.67       -1.21
                                 [-10.17]       [-1.34]        [-5.36]    [2.15]    [-10.65]

                    Recovery      -0.76          0.85           -1.60      1.26       -0.82
                                 [-3.97]        [1.91]         [-3.27]    [1.88]     [-3.86]

                   Pre-Crisis     -2.53          2.49           -4.06      1.06       -2.59
                                 [-7.32]        [1.57]         [-6.77]    [0.62]     [-7.35]




                                                          28
                                                Table 5
                              Determinants of Fund Flows During the Crisis

The table reports slope coefficients estimated from regressions of net fund flows in February 20 to April
30, 2020 on fund characteristics and controls. A fund’s net flow is expressed as a percent of the fund’s
February 19, 2020 TNA. Flows are winsorized at the 2.5% and 97.5% levels. Global category fixed effects
are based on the Morningstar Global Category variable. Fund-level controls include an indicator for a
growth tilt, the log of the fund’s age in days, the log of the fund’s January 31, 2020 TNA, turnover ratio
as of January 2020, net expense ratio as of January 2020, net cash position (as a percent of TNA) as of
January 2020, Morningstar medal rating as of January 2020, and market beta estimated from the October
1, 2019 to January 31, 2020 period. Industry controls include the fund’s net position as a percent of TNA
in basic materials, communication services, consumer cyclical, consumer defensive, energy, financial services,
healthcare, industrials, real estate, technology, and utilities. Standard errors are clustered on the Morningstar
Institutional Category. t-statistics are in brackets.


                              (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)       (10)      (11)      (12)
I(5 Sustainability Globes)    1.76     0.92     1.36     1.44              0.70     1.16     1.22
                             [3.19]   [1.82]   [2.23]   [2.32]            [1.23]   [1.77]   [1.82]

I(Employs Exclusions)                                             2.84     2.61     2.70     2.75               2.69      2.95      3.11
                                                                 [3.37]   [3.09]   [2.50]   [2.53]             [4.02]    [3.46]    [3.43]

I(Greener E)                                                                                          1.67      1.02      1.04      1.91
                                                                                                     [3.09]    [2.08]    [1.89]    [2.72]

I(Greener S)                                                                                          −0.48     −0.43     −0.39     −0.88
                                                                                                     [−0.93]   [−0.83]   [−0.64]   [−1.22]

I(Greener G)                                                                                          0.76      0.63      1.00      1.26
                                                                                                     [1.39]    [1.09]    [1.31]    [1.69]

Star Rating                            1.83     1.78     1.90              1.82     1.76     1.89               1.70      1.38      1.49
                                      [7.49]   [6.04]   [6.00]            [7.51]   [6.04]   [5.96]             [5.77]    [3.91]    [4.01]

Global Category FE            Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Fund-Level Controls           No       No       Yes      Yes      No       No       Yes      Yes      No        No        Yes       Yes
Industry Controls             No       No       No       Yes      No       No       No       Yes      No        No        No        Yes
Observations                 2,082    1,863    1,434    1,390    2,082    1,863    1,434    1,390    1,503     1,348     1,037     1,020
Adjusted R2                  0.02     0.08     0.11     0.11     0.02     0.09     0.11     0.11     0.01      0.08      0.10      0.11




                                                                    29
                                                 Table 6
                               Determinants of Fund Flows Before the Crisis

The table reports slope coefficients estimated from regressions of net fund flows in October 1, 2019 to
January 31, 2020 on fund characteristics and controls. A fund’s net flow is expressed as a percent of the
fund’s September 30, 2019 TNA. Flows are winsorized at the 2.5% and 97.5% levels. Global category fixed
effects are based on the Morningstar Global Category variable. Fund-level controls include an indicator for
a growth tilt, the log of the fund’s age in days, the log of the fund’s September 30, 2019 TNA, turnover
ratio as of September 2019, net expense ratio as of September 2019, net cash position (as a percent of TNA)
as of September 2019, Morningstar medal rating as of September 2019, and market beta estimated from
the June 1 to September 30, 2019 period. Industry controls include the fund’s net position as a percent of
TNA in basic materials, communication services, consumer cyclical, consumer defensive, energy, financial
services, healthcare, industrials, real estate, technology, and utilities. Standard errors are clustered on the
Morningstar Institutional Category. t-statistics are in brackets.


                              (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)       (7)      (8)      (9)       (10)      (11)      (12)
I(5 Sustainability Globes)    3.58     2.13      2.28     2.67              1.92      2.16     2.56
                             [3.45]   [2.52]    [2.26]   [2.37]            [2.22]    [2.15]   [2.26]

I(Employs Exclusions)                                              2.54     2.53      1.90     1.81               2.85      2.23      2.23
                                                                  [2.20]   [2.42]    [1.48]   [1.41]             [2.25]    [1.42]    [1.43]

I(Greener E)                                                                                            2.28      1.42      2.68      3.91
                                                                                                       [2.51]    [1.69]    [2.57]    [3.26]

I(Greener S)                                                                                            −0.48     0.06      0.29      −0.41
                                                                                                       [−0.52]   [0.07]    [0.28]    [−0.39]

I(Greener G)                                                                                            0.38      0.05      −0.69     −0.35
                                                                                                       [0.58]    [0.08]    [−0.93]   [−0.42]

Star Rating                            3.12      2.96     3.08               3.11     2.96     3.08                3.07     2.91      2.86
                                      [13.83]   [8.60]   [9.04]            [13.64]   [8.45]   [8.86]             [12.02]   [7.26]    [7.17]

Global Category FE            Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Fund-Level Controls           No       No        Yes      Yes      No       No        Yes      Yes      No        No        Yes       Yes
Industry Controls             No       No        No       Yes      No       No        No       Yes      No        No        No        Yes
Observations                 2,066    1,832     1,388    1,346    2,066    1,832     1,388    1,346    1,507     1,335     1,005      988
Adjusted R2                  0.02     0.13      0.14     0.15     0.02     0.13      0.14     0.15     0.01      0.13      0.15       0.15




                                                                     30
Figure 1. Average Fund Performance vs. the S&P 500 During the Crisis. This figure plots the
performance of the average active equity mutual fund against the S&P 500 in February 20 through April 30,
2020. Both price indices are initialized at 100 on February 19, 2020 and computed by compounding daily
returns. The fund average is computed by adding the average difference between the fund price index and
the S&P 500 price index to the S&P 500 price index. Standard errors are estimated for this difference and
are clustered on the Morningstar Institutional Category. 95% confidence intervals are plotted in red.




                                                   31
Figure 2. Average Benchmark-Adjusted Fund Performance. This figure plots the cumulative com-
pound performance of the average active equity mutual fund in February 20 through April 30, 2020 relative to
three benchmarks: the Morningstar-designated FTSE/Russell benchmark (Panel A), the prospectus bench-
mark (Panel B), and the S&P 500 (Panel C). Relative performance is measured by log(Ft ) − log(Bt ), where
Ft and Bt are the cumulative compounded daily returns of the average fund and the benchmark, respectively.
Standard errors are estimated for this difference and are clustered on the Morningstar Institutional Category.
95% confidence intervals are plotted in red.




                                                     32
Figure 3. Cumulative Return Densities Across Sustainability Ratings. This figure plots densities
of funds’ cumulative returns from February 20 to April 30, 2020 for two categories of sustainability: high
(four or five Morningstar globes) and low (one or two globes), both assigned as of January 2020. In Panel
A, the cumulative returns are unadjusted, given by log(Ft ) where Ft = (1 + r1F )(1 + r2F ) . . . (1 + rtF ) is
the fund’s cumulative total return. In Panel B, the cumulative returns are benchmark-adjusted, given by
log(Ft ) − log(Bt ), where Bt is the cumulative total return of the fund’s FTSE/Russell benchmark.




                                                      33
Figure 4. Benchmark-Adjusted Fund Performance: Sustainability Ratings. This figure plots the
cumulative compound performance in February 20 through April 30, 2020 for fund categories with different
numbers of Morningstar sustainability globes assigned as of January 2020. “High sustainability” denotes
funds with 4 or 5 globes while “low sustainability” denotes funds with 1 or 2 globes. Performance is measured
relative to the FTSE/Russell benchmark (Panels A and B), the prospectus benchmark (Panels C and D),
and the S&P 500 (Panels E and F). Relative performance is measured by log(Ft ) − log(Bt ), where Ft and
Bt are the cumulative compounded daily returns of the average fund and the benchmark, respectively. 95%
confidence intervals are shown in the right panels. Standard errors are estimated for this difference and are
clustered on the Morningstar Institutional Category.

                                                     34
Figure 5. Benchmark-Adjusted Fund Performance: Sustainability Components. This figure
plots the cumulative compound performance in February 20 through April 30, 2020 for fund categories
with different Morningstar sustainability scores. These scores represent historical portfolio sustainability
scores (Panel A), environmental scores (Panel B), social scores (Panel C), and governance scores (Panel D).
For each of the four scores, the top 30% most sustainable funds are labeled as “greener” and the bottom
30% of funds are labeled “browner.” Performance is measured relative to the FTSE/Russell benchmark by
log(Ft ) − log(Bt ), where Ft and Bt are the cumulative compounded daily returns of the average fund and
the benchmark, respectively.




                                                    35
Figure 6. Cumulative Return Densities Across Star Ratings. This figure plots densities of funds’
cumulative returns from February 20 to April 30, 2020 for two categories of star ratings: high (four or five
Morningstar stars) and low (one or two stars), both assigned as of January 2020. In Panel A, the cumulative
returns are unadjusted, given by log(Ft ) where Ft = (1 + r1F )(1 + r2F ) . . . (1 + rtF ) is the fund’s cumulative
total return. In Panel B, the cumulative returns are benchmark-adjusted, given by log(Ft ) − log(Bt ), where
Bt is the cumulative total return of the fund’s FTSE/Russell benchmark.




                                                        36
Figure 7. Benchmark-Adjusted Fund Performance: Star Ratings. This figure plots the cumulative
compound performance in February 20 through April 30, 2020 for fund categories with different numbers
of Morningstar stars assigned as of January 2020. Performance is measured relative to the FTSE/Russell
benchmark (Panels A and B), the prospectus benchmark (Panels C and D), and the S&P 500 (Panels E and
F). Relative performance is measured by log(Ft ) − log(Bt ), where Ft and Bt are the cumulative compounded
daily returns of the average fund and the benchmark, respectively. 95% confidence intervals are shown in
the right panels. Standard errors are estimated for this difference and are clustered on the Morningstar
Institutional Category.

                                                   37
Figure 8. Benchmark-Adjusted Fund Performance: Growth vs. Value Funds. This figure plots
the cumulative compound performance in February 20 through April 30, 2020 for growth vs value funds,
as determined by the Morningstar equity style box. Performance is measured relative to the FTSE/Russell
benchmark (Panel A), the prospectus benchmark (Panel B), and the S&P 500 (Panel C). Relative perfor-
mance is measured by log(Ft ) − log(Bt ), where Ft and Bt are the cumulative compounded daily returns of
the average fund and the benchmark, respectively. Standard errors are estimated for this difference and are
clustered on the Morningstar Institutional Category. 95% confidence intervals are shown.


                                                    38
Figure 9. Aggregate Net Fund Flows. This figure plots aggregate net flows into active equity mutual
funds during the crisis period (Panel A) and over the past three years (Panel B). Specifically, Panel A plots
total cumulative net fund flows (in both USD billions and as a percent of February 19, 2020 aggregate TNA)
over the February 20 to April 30, 2020 period. Panel B covers the January 4, 2017 to April 30, 2020 period,
and it expresses flows as a percent of January 3, 2017 TNA.



                                                     39
Figure 10. Fund Flows and Sustainability Ratings. This figure plots net fund flows over the February
20 to April 30, 2020 period for categories of funds sorted by Morningstar sustainability ratings. Panel A
plots aggregate cumulative net flows for each of the five globe categories. Flows are aggregated within each
category and accumulated over time, then scaled by the category’s TNA on February 19, 2020. Panel B
plots the average across funds of cumulative net flows as a percent of the fund’s February 19, 2020 TNA,
for the five- and one-globe categories only. Unlike in Panel A, the sample in Panel B is restricted to funds
with at least $15 million of TNA as of January 31, 2020 and the net fund flow percentage is winsorized at
the 2.5% and 97.5% levels. Panel B also plots 95% confidence intervals, with standard errors clustered on
the Morningstar Institutional Category.

                                                    40
Figure 11. Fund Flows and Exclusions. This figure plots net fund flows over the February 20 to April
30, 2020 period for two categories of funds: those that do and do not employ exclusions in their investment
process. Panel A plots aggregate cumulative net flows for both categories. Flows are aggregated within each
category and accumulated over time, then scaled by the category’s TNA on February 19, 2020. Panel B
plots the average across funds of cumulative net flows as a percent of the fund’s February 19, 2020 TNA, for
both categories. Unlike in Panel A, the sample in Panel B is restricted to funds with at least $15 million of
TNA as of January 31, 2020 and the net fund flow percentage is winsorized at the 2.5% and 97.5% levels.
Panel B also plots 95% confidence intervals, with standard errors clustered on the Morningstar Institutional
Category.

                                                     41
Figure 12. Fund Flows and ESG Scores. This figure plots net fund flows over the February 20 to April
30, 2020 period for funds in the top 30% (“high”) and bottom 30% (“low”) of environmental, social, and
governance sustainability scores. The left panels plot aggregate cumulative net flows for the high and low
E, S, and G categories. Flows are aggregated within each category and accumulated over time, then scaled
by the category’s TNA on February 19, 2020. The right panels plot the average across funds of cumulative
net flows as a percent of the fund’s February 19, 2020 TNA, for both the high and low categories. Unlike in
the left panels, the samples in the right panels are restricted to funds with at least $15 million of TNA as of
January 31, 2020 and the net fund flow percentage is winsorized at the 2.5% and 97.5% levels.




                                                      42
Figure 13. Fund Flows and Star Ratings. This figure plots net fund flows over the February 20 to
April 30, 2020 period for categories of funds sorted by Morningstar star ratings. Panel A plots aggregate
cumulative net flows for each of the five star categories. Flows are aggregated within each category and
accumulated over time, then scaled by the category’s TNA on February 19, 2020. Panel B plots the average
across funds of cumulative net flows as a percent of the fund’s February 19, 2020 TNA, for the five-, three-,
and one-star categories only. Unlike in Panel A, the sample in Panel B is restricted to funds with at least
$15 million of TNA as of January 31, 2020 and the net fund flow percentage is winsorized at the 2.5% and
97.5% levels. Panel B also plots 95% confidence intervals, with standard errors clustered on the Morningstar
Institutional Category.

                                                     43
Figure 14. Fund Flows and Growth vs. Value Funds. This figure plots net fund flows over the
February 20 to April 30, 2020 period for growth vs value funds, as determined by the Morningstar equity
style box. Panel A plots aggregate cumulative net flows for both categories. Flows are aggregated within
each category and accumulated over time, then scaled by the category’s TNA on February 19, 2020. Panel
B plots the average across funds of cumulative net flows as a percent of the fund’s February 19, 2020 TNA,
for both categories. Unlike in Panel A, the sample in Panel B is restricted to funds with at least $15 million
of TNA as of January 31, 2020 and the net fund flow percentage is winsorized at the 2.5% and 97.5% levels.
Panel B also plots 95% confidence intervals, with standard errors clustered on the Morningstar Institutional
Category.



                                                     44
                                    REFERENCES

Albuquerque, Rui A., Yrjo Koskinen, Shuai Yang, and Chendi Zhang, 2020, Resiliency of
   environmental and social stocks: An analysis of the exogenous COVID-19 market crash,
   Review of Corporate Finance Studies, forthcoming.

Alfaro, Laura, Anusha Chari, Andrew N. Greenland, and Peter K. Schott, 2020, Aggregate
   and firm-level stock returns during pandemics, in real time, Working paper, Harvard
   University.

Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, Steven J. Davis, Kyle Kost, Marco Sammon, and Tasaneeya
   Viratyosin, 2020, The unprecedented stock market reaction to COVID-19, Review of
   Asset Pricing Studies, forthcoming.

Barber, Brad M., Xing Huang, and Terrance Odean, 2016, Which factors matter to investors?
   Evidence from mutual fund flows, The Review of Financial Studies 29, 2600–2642.

Baumol, William J. and Wallace E. Oates, 1979, Economics, Environmental Policy, and
   Quality of Life, Inglewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Bialkowski, Jedrzej, and Laura T. Starks, 2016, SRI funds: Investor demand, exogenous
   shocks and ESG profiles, Working paper.

Bretscher, Lorenzo, Alex Hsu, and Andrea Tamoni, 2020, The supply channel of uncertainty
   shocks and the cross-section of returns: Evidence from the COVID-19 crisis, Working
   paper, LBS.

Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance
   52, 57–82.

Coval, Joshua, and Erik Stafford, 2007, Asset fire sales (and purchases) in equity markets,
   Journal of Financial Economics 86, 479–512.

Ding, Wenzhi, Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Wensi Xie, 2020, Corporate immunity to the
   COVID-19 pandemic, Working paper, University of Hong Kong.

Edelen, Roger M., 1999, Investor flows and the assessed performance of open-end mutual
   funds, Journal of Financial Economics 53, 439–466.

Elton, Edwin J., Martin Jay Gruber, Sanjiv Das, and Matthew Hlavka, 1993, Efficiency with
   costly information: A reinterpretation of evidence from managed portfolios, Review of
   Financial Studies 6, 1–22.

Elton, Edwin J., Martin Jay Gruber, and Christopher R. Blake, 2001, A first look at the
   accuracy of the CRSP mutual fund database and a comparison of the CRSP and Morn-
   ingstar mutual fund databases, Journal of Finance 56.

Evans, Richard, 2010, Mutual fund incubation, Journal of Finance 65, 1581–1611.

                                            45
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on
   stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2010, Luck versus skill in the cross section of
   mutual fund returns, Journal of Finance 65, 1915–1947.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2015, A five-factor asset pricing model, Journal
   of Financial Economics 116, 1–22.

Fahlenbrach, Rudiger, Kevin Rageth, and René M. Stulz, 2020, How valuable is financial
   flexibility when revenue stops? Evidence from the Covid-19 crisis, Working paper, Swiss
   Finance Institute.

Falato, Antonio, Itay Goldstein, and Ali Hortasu, 2020, Financial fragility in the COVID-19
   crisis: The case of investment funds in corporate bond markets, Working paper, Federal
   Reserve Board.

Ferriani, Fabrizio, and Filippo Natoli, 2020, ESG risks in times of COVID-19, Bank of Italy’s
   Covid-19 note.

Ferson, Wayne E., and Rudi W. Schadt, 1996, Measuring fund strategy and performance in
   changing economic conditions, Journal of Finance 51, 425–461.

Gerding, Felix, Thorsten Martin, and Florian Nagler, 2020, The value of fiscal capacity in
   the face of a rare disaster, Working paper, Bocconi University.

Glode, Vincent, 2011, Why mutual funds “underperform”, Journal of Financial Economics
   99, 546–559.

Glossner, Simon, Pedro Matos, Stefano Ramelli, and Alexander F. Wagner, 2020, Where
   do institutional investors seek shelter when disaster strikes? Evidence from COVID-19,
   Working paper, University of Virginia.

Gormsen, Niels Joachim, and Ralph SJ Koijen, 2020, Coronavirus: Impact on stock prices
   and growth expectations, Working paper, University of Chicago.

Gruber, Martin J., 1996, Another puzzle: The growth in actively managed mutual funds,
   Journal of Finance 51, 783–810.

Haddad, Valentin, Alan Moreira, and Tyler Muir, 2020, When selling becomes viral: Dis-
   ruptions in debt markets in the COVID-19 crisis and the Fed’s response, Working paper,
   UCLA.

Hartzmark, Samuel M., and Abigail B. Sussman, 2019, Do investors value sustainability? A
   natural experiment examining ranking and fund flows, Journal of Finance 74, 2789–2837.

Jensen, Michael C., 1968, The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945–1964, Journal
   of Finance 23, 389–416.


                                             46
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Laura Veldkamp, 2014, Time-varying
   fund manager skill, Journal of Finance 69, 1455–1484.

Kacperczyk, Marcin, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Laura Veldkamp, 2016, A rational theory
   of mutual funds’ attention allocation, Econometrica 84, 571–626.

Kargar, Mahyar, Benjamin T. Lester, David Lindsay, Shuo Liu, and Pierre-Oliver Weill,
   2020, Corporate bond liquidity during the COVID-19 crisis, Working paper, University
   of Illinois.

Kosowski, Robert, 2011, Do mutual funds perform when it matters most to investors? US
   mutual fund performance and risk in recessions and expansions, Quarterly Journal of
   Finance 1, 607–664.

Lins, Karl V., Henri Servaes, and Ane Tamayo, 2017, Social capital, trust, and firm perfor-
   mance: The value of corporate social responsibility during the financial crisis, Journal of
   Finance 72, 1785–1824.

Ma, Yiming, Kairong Xiao, and Yao Zeng, 2020, Mutual fund liquidity transformation and
  reverse flight to liquidity, Working paper, Columbia University.

Malkiel, Burton G., 1995, Returns from investing in equity mutual funds 1971 to 1991,
  Journal of Finance 50, 549–572.

Moskowitz, Tobias J., 2000, Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into
  stock-picking talent, style, transactions costs, and expenses: Discussion, Journal of Fi-
  nance 55, 1695–1703.

Nofsinger, John, and Abhishek Varma, 2014, Socially responsible funds and market crises,
   Journal of Banking and Finance 48, 180–193.

O’Hara, Maureen, and Xing Alex Zhou, 2020, Anatomy of a liquidity crisis: Corporate bonds
   in the COVID-19 crisis, Working paper, Cornell University.

Pagano, Marco, Christian Wagner, and Josef Zechner, 2020, Disaster resilience and asset
   prices, Working paper.

Pástor, Ľuboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2002, Mutual fund performance and seemingly
    unrelated assets, Journal of Financial Economics 63, 315–349.

Pástor, Ľuboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2012, On the size of the active management
    industry, Journal of Political Economy 120, 740–781.

Pástor, Ľuboš, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor, 2015, Scale and skill in active
    management, Journal of Financial Economics 116, 23–45.

Pástor, Ľuboš, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor, 2017, Do funds make more
    when they trade more?, Journal of Finance 72, 1483–1528.


                                             47
Pástor, Ľuboš, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor, 2020, Sustainable investing in
    equilibrium, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Ramelli, Stefano, and Alexander F. Wagner, 2020, Feverish stock price reactions to COVID-
  19, Review of Corporate Finance Studies, forthcoming.

Schrimpf, Andreas, Hyun Song Shin, and Vladyslav Sushko, 2020, Leverage and margin
   spirals in fixed income markets during the COVID-19 crisis, Working paper, BIS.

Sensoy, Berk, 2009, Performance evaluation and self-designated benchmark indexes in the
   mutual fund industry, Journal of Financial Economics 92, 25–39.

Wermers, Russ, 2000, Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into stock-
  picking talent, style, transactions costs, and expenses, Journal of Finance 55, 1655–1695.




                                            48
