Unintended Consequences of Lockdowns: COVID-19 and the Shadow Pandemic
Saravana Ravindran and Manisha Shah
NBER Working Paper No. 27562
July 2020, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. I15,I18,J12,J16,O15

                                         ABSTRACT

Violence against women is a problem worldwide, with economic costs ranging from 1-4% of
global GDP. Using variation in the intensity of government-mandated lock-downs in India, we
show that domestic violence complaints increase 0.47 SD in districts with the strictest lockdown
rules. We find similarly large increases in cybercrime complaints. Interestingly, rape and sexual
assault complaints decrease 0.4 SD during the same period in districts with the strictest
lockdowns, consistent with decreased female mobility in public spaces, public transport, and
workplaces. Attitudes toward domestic violence play an important role in the reporting and
incidence of domestic violence during the lockdown.


Saravana Ravindran
3323 Public Affairs Building, Box 951656
UCLA Luskin Center for Innovation
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
sravindran@ucla.edu

Manisha Shah
Department of Public Policy
University of California, Los Angeles
Luskin School of Public Affairs
3250 Public Affairs Building
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1656
and NBER
manishashah@ucla.edu
              Unintended Consequences of Lockdowns:
               COVID-19 and the Shadow Pandemic∗
                       Saravana Ravindran                       Manisha Shah
                 National University of Singapore              UCLA and NBER


                                         September 2020




                                             Abstract


      Violence against women is a problem worldwide, with economic costs ranging from
      1-4% of global GDP. Using variation in the intensity of government-mandated lock-
      downs in India, we show that domestic violence complaints increase 0.47 SD in dis-
      tricts with the strictest lockdown rules. We find similarly large increases in cybercrime
      complaints. Interestingly, rape and sexual assault complaints decrease 0.4 SD during
      the same period in districts with the strictest lockdowns, consistent with decreased
      female mobility in public spaces, public transport, and workplaces. Attitudes toward
      domestic violence play an important role in the reporting and incidence of domestic
      violence during the lockdown.




   JEL: J12, J16, I15, I18, O15

  ∗ We  thank Natalie Bau, Prashant Bharadwaj, Seema Jayachandran, Aprajit Mahajan and participants
at the NBER Summer Institute 2020 - Development Economics Workshop for helpful comments. Gabriela
Rubio and Michelle Kempis provided excellent research assistance. For questions or comments please
contact Manisha Shah at ManishaShah@ucla.edu and Saravana Ravindran at saravana@nus.edu.sg.




                                                 1
1     Introduction
Globally, one in three women experience intimate partner violence (IPV), and the eco-
nomic costs of this violence range from 1% to 4% of global GDP (Devries et al. (2013);
Garcı́a-Moreno et al. (2015); Ribero and Sánchez (2005)). Studies have shown that vio-
lence against women has negative impacts on female labor market participation, earn-
ings, mental health, child health, and household consumption.1 The estimated costs of
IPV in the U.S. in terms of medical care and declines in productivity exceed USD 5.8 bil-
lion annually (Aizer (2010); Centers for Disease Control (2003)). UN Women has referred
to the rise in violence against women (VAW) during the COVID-19 pandemic and accom-
panying lockdowns as the “Shadow Pandemic” (United Nations Women, 2020). While
concerns of rising VAW have largely been based on media reports or surveys that use a
pre- versus post-lockdown comparison, little is known about the changes in the magni-
tudes and types of VAW during the COVID-19 pandemic and lockdowns.
    We study this issue in a country that has been ranked the world’s most dangerous
country for women: India (Thomson Reuters Foundation, Jun 25, 2018). Using a combi-
nation of temporal and spatial variation in the government-mandated intensity of lock-
downs, we quantify the impacts of lockdown using data from complaints made to the
National Commission for Women (NCW) in India. India is a unique setting for this study
given the variation in the severity of the measures imposed by the national government
in various parts of the country. In addition, the data we use are nationally reported com-
plaints at the district level of various types of violence against women: domestic violence,
cybercrimes, rape, and sexual harassment.
    Our empirical strategy exploits variation in the Indian government’s classification of
districts into red, orange, and green zones where red zone districts had the strictest mobil-
ity restrictions and green the most lenient. Using district-month level data on complaints,
we estimate the impact of lockdowns on VAW. Using a difference-in-differences empirical
strategy, we find evidence of a 0.47 SD (131%) increase in domestic violence complaints in
May 2020 in districts that saw the strictest lockdown measures (red zone districts) relative
to districts that saw the least strict measures (green zone districts). Red zone districts also
experienced a 0.70 SD (184%) increase in cybercrime complaints relative to green zone
districts in May 2020. While there have been media reports that different forms of on-line
1   See for example Aizer (2011); Heise (2011); Eswaran and Malhotra (2011); Sabia et al. (2013); Adams et
    al. (2013); Rawlings and Siddique (2014); World Health Organization (2017);Lewbel and Pendakur (2019),
    etc.



                                                     2
violence are on the rise including stalking, bullying, sexual harassment, and sex trolling
(United Nations Women, 2020), we provide evidence for this through the observed in-
crease in cybercrime complaints. Interestingly, rape and sexual assault complaints fell
significantly by 0.39 SD in red zones in May 2020 and sexual harassment by 0.35 SD in
April 2020 in red zone districts relative to green zone districts, likely due to decreased
mobility in public spaces, public transport, and workplaces. These findings are consis-
tent with research highlighting the magnitude of street harassment women in India face
(see Borker (2018)).
     We verify the findings using two independent sources of data: first, we document that
the lockdown zone categories changed individual’s mobility using Google Community
Mobility Reports and show that mobility was most restricted in red zones. Second, we
verify that the increase in domestic violence-related complaints received by the NCW
during the lockdown period is consistent with an increase in Google search activity for
domestic violence-related terms using Google Trends data during this same period.
     We also show that attitudes toward domestic violence play an important role in the
incidence and reporting of domestic violence during the COVID-19 pandemic and lock-
downs in India. This is an important lesson for policy makers as we might not be able to
decrease violence against women unless we can shift attitudes and social norms around
violence. Using data from the National Family Healthy Survey 4 (2015-2016), we show
that districts in which a greater proportion of husbands report that beating wives is jus-
tified see greater increases in domestic violence complaints received by the NCW in May
2020 in red zone districts relative to green zone districts. On the other hand, districts in
which a greater proportion of wives report that a husband beating his wife is justified see
fewer domestic violence complaints received by the NCW in May 2020 in red zone dis-
tricts relative to green zone districts. This is consistent with a decrease in reporting when
women believe that domestic violence against wives is justified.
     We contribute to a growing literature on the impacts of lockdowns and stay-at-home
policies on violence against women during the COVID-19 pandemic (Peterman et al.,
June 2020b). Boserup et al. (2020) use data from U.S. police departments in four cities
and provide evidence of 10%–27% increases in domestic violence during stay-at-home
order periods in comparison to prior weeks. Mahmud and Riley (2020) use survey data
from rural western Uganda to document an increase in the perceived frequency of in-
timate partner violence against women during the COVID-19 lockdown in the country.
Leslie and Wilson (2020) find evidence of a 10% increase in domestic violence police calls


                                             3
in fifteen U.S. cities after social distancing began relative to the period before, after ac-
counting for trends during the same period in 2019. Bullinger et al. (2020) find that the
stay-at-home order announcement in the city of Chicago increased time spent at home,
leading to a decrease in total calls for police service, but a subsequent increase in do-
mestic violence-related calls for police service. Agüero (2020) uses data on the number
of phone calls to the national helpline for domestic violence across 25 states in Peru and
shows, using Google’s mobility data, an increase in domestic violence calls driven by
states where the lockdown has been more pronounced. Silverio-Murillo and Balmori de
la Miyar (2020) use an event-study design to show that during the lockdown in Mexico
City, intimate partner violence calls requesting psychological services increased.
    Our study is unique in two ways. First, our identification strategy builds on the pre
versus post-lockdown temporal variation used in these studies, but in addition, we ex-
ploit government-mandated spatial variation in the intensity of lockdowns, as districts
were classified into red, orange, and green zones. This provides quasi-random variation
in the lockdown intensity across 577 Indian districts. Second, we consider a broader set
of violence and crimes against women, including cybercrime, harassment, rape, and sex-
ual assault. Though domestic violence and cybercrime complaints increase quite a bit,
we also find that lockdowns decrease complaints related to sexual harassment and rape,
adding to the nascent literature on female mobility and safety in low-income countries
(see for example, Borker (2018); Cheema et al. (2020); Field and Vyborny (2019)). This
is an important finding because if we were to simply estimate the impact of lockdowns
on violence against women, we might find null results due to the increase in domestic
violence and cybercrimes and the decrease in rape and sexual harassment, masking im-
portant heterogeneities. Our results suggest that women face a portfolio of danger, and
some policies can improve certain types of violence outcomes while exacerbating others.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the lockdowns in the
country and the various datasets that we use in the study while section 3 displays some of
the descriptive findings. Section 4 outlines the difference-in-differences empirical strategy
and section 5 presents the key results. We explore the role of attitudes toward domestic
violence in section 6 and conclude in section 7.




                                             4
2     Lockdowns and Data
2.1   Lockdowns: Red, Orange, and Green Zone Classifications
India imposed a nationwide lockdown to contain the spread of COVID-19 in the country
on March 25, 2020. While the initial lockdown was announced for a 21-day period, on
April 14, Indian Prime Minister Modi announced that the nationwide lockdown would
be extended owing to the rising number of cases in the country. When announcing the
extension of the lockdown, Indian media reported that “the Union ministry of health
and family welfare has classified [the] country’s districts in three zones—Red, Orange
and Green—based on the severity of [the COVID-19] outbreak in those areas” (Times
of India, April 16, 2020). The red, orange, and green zone classifications were widely
reported in the Indian media, including in the Business Today (April 13, 2020) and The
Economic Times (April 14, 2020b). On May 1, 2020, India’s Ministry of Home Affairs
officially issued an order that divided all districts into red, orange, and green zones under
“Lockdown 3.0”, a further two-week extension of the nationwide lockdown. However,
since the zonal announcements were made in April, we consider April and May as the
“treatment” months.
    The red, orange and green zone classification was based on factors such as the number
of COVID-19 cases and the doubling rate of COVID-19 cases (India Today, May 1, 2020).
Table C.1 presents summary statistics of various district characteristics by zone color cat-
egories. Red zone districts have a larger population, more cumulative COVID-19 cases,
and more cases per capita as of April 30. Red zone districts also experienced the greatest
number of new cases and new cases per capita in the last two weeks of April. These dis-
tricts had the fastest doubling rate of COVID-19 cases, with cases doubling every 12 days
as of April 30. In contrast, orange and green zone districts were less populous and saw
fewer COVID-19 cases with longer doubling times. Out of 639 districts, 120 districts were
classified into the red zone, 257 into the orange zone, and 262 into the green zone. Figure
B.1 shows a heat map of the spatial variation of the red, orange and green districts.
    Districts in the red zone saw the strictest lockdown measures, with rickshaws, taxis
and cabs, public transport, barber shops, spas, and salons remaining shut. Four wheelers
with a driver and two passengers as well as two wheelers without pillion riders were
allowed. Offices were allowed to open with a third of staff. E-commerce was allowed
for essential services as were all standalone shops, including liquor stores. Orange and
green zone districts saw fewer restrictions. In addition to the activities allowed in red


                                             5
zones, orange zones allowed the operation of taxis and cab aggregators, as well as the
inter-district movement of individuals and vehicles for permitted activities. In addition
to the activities allowed in orange zones, buses were allowed to operate with up to 50%
seating capacity and bus depots with 50% capacity in green zones (Hindustan Times, May
2, 2020a).
2.2     Data
We combine a number of administrative and survey datasets for this study. We use
Google data and National Family Health Survey (NFHS) data from 2015–2016 (see Ap-
pendix A for more details on the Google and NFHS data used). The primary dataset we
employ in this paper is public-access administrative records on district-month level com-
plaints received by the National Commission for Women (NCW) across India over the
period January 2018–May 2020.2
    The NCW is the national level organization and statutory body of the Government of
India with the mandate of protecting and promoting the interests of women. NCW data
is disaggregated by categories of complaints, which we broadly group into (i) domestic
violence, (ii) cybercrime, (iii) harassment, and (iv) rape and sexual assault complaints.
In 2020, complaints of these types made up more than 90% of total complaints received
by the NCW. Other categories include dowry-related complaints, police apathy against
women, as well as trafficking and prostitution of women. NCW public-access adminis-
trative records are seen as a reliable source of data on VAW in the country and have been
used by academics and media outlets to understand trends in VAW during the COVID-19
pandemic (see, for example, Deshpande (April 15, 2020) and The Hindu (May 4, 2020)).
Appendix A provides more details on the categorization of complaints.
    There are several means by which individuals can report complaints to the NCW. Indi-
viduals can register complaints using an online complaints registration portal or email the
NCW.3 In addition, the NCW runs a helpline for individuals to call in to file complaints,
and set up a Whatsapp service in April 2020 to provide an additional mode of commu-
nication to the NCW (The Economic Times, April 10, 2020a). Individuals can also send a
written complaint through mail or by hand. We further address reporting of complaints
in Section 5.1 when we assess the robustness of our findings.
    We obtain district-month level data on the total number of complaints received by the
2   NCW data is available for 577 out of 640 districts since not all districts reported to the NCW over the
    period January 2018–May 2020 (2011 Census district identifiers used).
3   The online portal is available at http://ncwapps.nic.in/onlinecomplaintsv2/frmPubRegistration.aspx.



                                                     6
NCW, in addition to type-month level complaints received. To disaggregate the data to
the district-month-type level, we first calculate the proportion of complaints of each type
from the type-month level data and apply these proportions to the district-month level
data. Our assumption that the month-wise distribution of complaints does not differ by
district within the given month is conservative and may lead us to underestimate the
impacts that we estimate. This is possible if the composition of complaints change in
a given month across districts such that districts facing stricter lockdown measures see
a shift toward domestic violence and cybercrime complaints (which is what happened).
Appendix A provides more details on this assumption and its implications.

3   Descriptive Results
Lockdown. The severity of lockdown measures by zone color categories affects mobility
mostly strictly in April and May 2020 in red zone districts, as expected by the policy. Us-
ing data from the Google Community Mobility Reports, Figures B.2, B.3, and B.4 present
the relationship between mobility and the fraction of a given state’s population in March,
April, and May 2020 in red, orange, and green zone districts, respectively. Mobility is
defined at the state level in the Google Community Mobility Reports as the percentage
change in the number of visitors to places of interest relative to the baseline 5-week period
from January 3–February 6, 2020. The state mean is taken over the percentage change in
the number of visitors (who have opted-in to share their Location History for their Google
Account) to places of interest broadly categorized under “Grocery & Pharmacy”, “Parks”,
“Transit stations”, “Retail & recreation”, and “Workplaces” for each month to create the
Google Mobility Index.
    Several findings in these figures are noteworthy. First, although India officially goes
into national lockdown in late March 2020, mobility only decreases around 20% during
this month, and the decrease is consistent across red, orange, and green zones (as expected
since no zone announcements have been made yet).
    Second, we observe the strongest impacts of the lockdown policy in April and May
2020. The middle and bottom panels of Figure B.2 show that there is a clear decline
in mobility with an increase in the fraction of the state’s population in red zone districts
(and corresponding decrease in the fraction of orange or green zone districts) in April and
May 2020. In May 2020, states with a small fraction of districts in red zones saw mobility
declines of 30% relative to the baseline period, while states for which all districts were
classified as red zone districts in a state saw mobility declines in excess of 70% relative to
the baseline period from January 3–February 6, 2020. The negative correlation between

                                              7
mobility and the fraction of state population in red zone districts is largest in May 2020
(-0.70), followed by April 2020 (-0.65), and March 2020 (-0.61).
    Third, Figure B.4 shows that states with a larger fraction of population in green zone
districts (and hence smaller fraction of orange or red zone districts) saw smaller declines
in mobility relative to the baseline period, consistent with the monotonic decline in the
severity of mobility restrictions. In May 2020, states with no districts in green zones saw
average mobility declines in excess of 70%, while states where all districts were in green
zones saw average mobility declines by only 30% (which is similar to the March levels of
mobility).
    Finally, Figure B.3 shows that there is no clear relationship between an increase in the
fraction of a given state’s population in orange zone districts and mobility in April or
May 2020. This is not surprising as an increase in the fraction of orange zone districts in
a given state could arise due to a decrease in either the fraction of red zone districts or
green zone districts (i.e. a non-montonic change in severity of mobility restrictions).
    Overall, Figures B.2, B.3, and B.4 show that India went into three distinct levels of lock-
down measures following the imposition of lockdowns in the country, with the strictest
measures in April and May 2020 in red zone districts, consistent with the policy. We ex-
ploit the classification of districts and measures by red, orange, and green zones in our
empirical strategy, and show the results by month.
Violence Against Women. Figure 1 presents the mean monthly number of complaints
received by the NCW from October 2019–May 2020 by district lockdown zone color cat-
egories. We observe a large increase in the number of domestic violence complaints re-
ceived by the NCW from red zone districts from April–May 2020. In comparison, orange
and green zone districts show smaller increases in the number of domestic violence com-
plaints. A similar pattern is observed for cybercrime complaints across red, orange, and
green zones.
   Figure 1 shows the number of rape and sexual assault complaints also falls signifi-
cantly in red zone districts in both April and May 2020, while orange and green zone
districts see much smaller declines. The level of rape and sexual assault complaints re-
mains low in May 2020 across all zone color categories. These declines are consistent
with the decrease in commuting via public transit and overall reduced mobility outside
the home.
   The number of harassment complaints fall sharply in April and increase again in May
2020. The sharp fall in April 2020 is consistent with the decrease in complaints arising


                                              8
from harassment at the workplace since women stopped going to work in districts with
strict lockdown measures. The decrease is also consistent with the decrease in commut-
ing via public transit, another significant source of harassment complaints. However,
harassment complaint numbers re-bound in May 2020 to regular levels.
    The large positive deviations in the mean number of domestic violence complaints
in April and May 2020 in Figure 1 align with Google searches for domestic violence-
related terms in these months. Figure 2 presents the relative search interest for the terms
“domestic abuse” and “domestic violence helpline” in India in 2020. We note a significant
increase in search activity for domestic violence-related terms in the weeks after India
imposed the nationwide lockdown on March 25. Domestic violence-related searches may
not reflect actual complaints made to the NCW due to difficulties in reporting owing to (i)
the shutdown of postal and phone-based modes of communication during the lockdown
and (ii) the inability to file a complaint while remaining in close proximity with an abuser
during the lockdown. However, both the NCW and Google Trends datasets highlight an
increase in domestic violence-related searches and complaints made in the months after
the lockdowns in India.

4    Empirical Strategy
We employ a difference-in-differences empirical strategy to study the differential impact
of complaints in districts most affected by the lockdown measures relative to districts least
affected by the measures. Using the quasi-random government classification of districts
into red, orange, and green zones, we exploit the panel structure of the district-month-
year level data and run the following specification for district d in month m of year y:

                             8                      8
    Ydmy = α + γd + λmy + ∑ β i,r θi ∗ RedZoned + ∑ β i,o θi ∗ OrangeZoned + Xdy δ + ε dmy
                            i =1                   i =1
                                                                                           (1)

where Ydmy refers to the number of complaints received by the NCW in district d in month
m of year y, γd are district fixed effects, and λmy are month-year fixed effects. The district
fixed effects capture time-invariant characteristics of districts including level differences
across districts in attitudes toward domestic violence and reporting of violence against
women. Month-year fixed effects flexibly control for country-wide trends in complaints
made to the NCW over time. The combination of fixed effects used allows us to use
variation within a given month and year across districts, in addition to variation within a


                                              9
given district over time. Xdy is district-year level population.
    RedZoned and OrangeZoned are dummy variables equal to 1 for districts in red and
orange zones respectively, and 0 otherwise. θi refer to month dummies corresponding to
the months October 2019 (i = 1) to May 2020 (i = 8). { β i,r } and { β i,o } are the coefficients
of interest. The coefficients { β i,r } capture the impact of districts classified into the red
zone relative to the impact of districts classified into the green zone, in month i relative
to the monthly average from January 2018–September 2019 (the omitted months). Simi-
larly, the set of coefficients { β i,o } capture the impact of districts classified into the orange
zone relative to the impact of districts classified into the green zone, in month i relative to
the monthly average from January 2018–September 2019. The district fixed effects absorb
the time-invariant differences between red (orange) and green zone districts, and the es-
timated coefficients are relative to the average difference between red (orange) and green
zone districts over the months January 2018–September 2019 (the omitted months). We
also present results from a fully flexible specification that only omits May 2018 instead of
the period January 2018–September 2019. All standard errors are clustered by district.
    A key identification assumption for the differences-in-differences strategy is that ab-
sent the lockdowns, complaints in red, orange, and green zone districts should have
evolved similarly over time. Our empirical strategy allows us to assess the validity of this
assumption by studying the differential red-versus-green and orange-versus-green zone
impacts on complaints before the start of the lockdowns from October 2019–February
2020. The differential impacts in these pre-lockdown months should be close to zero if
the parallel trends assumption holds in this setting.

5     Results
Panel A of Table 1 reports the results from estimating equation (1) which combines tem-
poral variation in the lockdowns (across pre- and post-lockdown announcement months)
with spatial variation in the intensity of lockdowns across India (across red, orange, and
green zone districts). Columns (1)–(4) present the coefficient point estimates for the dif-
ferential impact of zone categories on the number of complaints received by the NCW
for domestic violence, cybercrime, harassment, and rape and sexual assault complaints,
respectively.4 The combination of interaction terms, fixed effects, and district-year level
population controls explain 73%–79% of variation in the number of complaints received
4   Table C.3 presents the estimates in SD units, with the dependent variables transformed to z-scores. We
    standardize the number of complaints by subtracting the mean number of complaints (across all districts
    and months) and dividing by the SD of the number of complaints so as to create a z-score.


                                                     10
by the NCW (the adjusted R2 ranges from 0.728 to 0.793). We also report p-values testing
whether the difference between the red and orange zone effects is significantly different
from zero in April and May 2020.
    Consistent with the descriptive evidence in Figure 1, we observe large and statisti-
cally significant increases in the number of domestic violence and cybercrime complaints
in red zone districts relative to green zone districts in May 2020. The increase in the num-
ber of domestic violence complaints by 0.562 on a base of 0.43 complaints across India
represents a 131% (0.47 SD) increase. Red zone districts had a 184% (0.70 SD) increase
in cybercrime complaints relative to green zone districts in May 2020. Orange zone dis-
tricts saw a smaller 31% (0.12 SD) increase in cybercrime complaints relative to green zone
districts.
    Table 1 also displays statistically significant decreases in harassment, rape, and sex-
ual assault complaints in red and orange zone districts relative to green zone districts in
the months during and after the lockdowns. Column (3) of Table 1 shows a significant
decrease in harassment complaints in April 2020 in red and orange zone districts rela-
tive to green zone districts by 0.35 SD. Column (4) also shows significant decreases in the
number of rape and sexual assault complaints in these districts in April and May 2020 by
0.4–0.6 SD.
    In Panel B of Table 1, we re-estimate equation (1) more flexibly, omitting only May
2018 instead of the period January 2018–September 2019. These results are similar in
magnitude and statistical significance to the results presented in Panel A of Table 1.
    Figure 3 presents event study plots of the differential impact of red versus green zone
districts in a given month relative to the monthly mean from January 2018–September
2019, as well as analogous plots for orange versus green zone districts. All standard errors
are clustered by district and 95% confidence intervals are shown. With a few exceptions,5
we see overall that the coefficient point estimates for the months before the lockdown was
imposed are close to zero, suggesting that the parallel trends identification assumption is
likely to hold in this setting.
5.1     Robustness
We re-estimate Table 1 a few additional ways to test the robustness of the main results.
We re-estimate equation (1) using per capita measures of the dependent variables. Despite
5   Harassment complaints are higher in October 2019 in red and orange districts, but not in the five months
    prior to lockdown. Cybercrime complaints in red zone districts are lower than green zone districts in
    January and February 2020.



                                                     11
some dilution of the signal and increase in standard errors, we find qualitatively similar
results in Table C.4. Second, we re-estimate the regressions in Table 1 and include state x
month fixed effects so as to compare impacts across districts within the same state in the
same month. The results in Table C.5 show that our results are robust to the inclusion of
these fixed effects. Third, to address potential concerns relating to the distribution of red,
orange, and green zone districts across India—in particular, the concentration of green
zones in East and Northeast India—we re-estimate the regressions in Table 1 and include
region x month x year fixed effects. We use the division of India into six regions (North-
ern, Northeastern, Central, Eastern, Western, and Southern) by zonal councils. These
fixed effects ensure that we are comparing impacts across districts within the same region
in the same month and year. The results overall are qualitatively robust to the inclusion
of these fixed effects (results available upon request).
    Underreporting of VAW is almost always a potential concern (see, for example, Ells-
berg et al. (2001)). We acknowledge that there may have been potential changes in re-
porting during the lockdowns – in fact, Poblete-Cazenave (2020) finds evidence of a 60%
reduction in reported crimes to the police as a result of the lockdowns in Bihar, India. Im-
portantly, however, such changes are likely to have taken place at the national level and
not differentially by red, orange, or green zones. If anything, it probably became more dif-
ficult for women to report abuse due to interruptions to postal and phone-based modes
of communication during the lockdown. If it were the case that red zone districts saw
larger disruptions to these modes of reporting, we would under-estimate the increases
in domestic violence and cybercrime complaints and over-estimate the decrease in rape
and sexual assault in our analysis. We also note that the differential directions of impacts
for domestic violence and cybercrime complaints relative to rape and sexual assault com-
plaints suggest that the impacts are unlikely to be driven by measurement error in the
data.
    We cannot rule out the possibility of some displacement of rape and sexual assault
from public spaces outside homes to rape by family members inside homes. While mar-
ital rape is vastly underreported in India since it is not considered a crime, it is likely to
be increasing during the lockdown period. In fact, if marital rape is reported it gener-
ally gets reported as domestic violence (The Hindu, June 30, 2016), and we are finding
large increases in domestic violence during the lockdown period. Unfortunately we do
not have the data to tease out how much of the increase in domestic violence is physical
vs. psychological vs. sexual abuse. However, using NFHS data we know that of the 33


                                             12
percent of women who experience domestic violence, approximately 20 percent report
sexual violence as compared to 41 percent psychological and 89 percent physical violence
(the percents do not sum to 100 as some women experience more than one type of vio-
lence). Therefore, while the incidence of marital rape might be increasing it is unlikely to
account for the entire increase in domestic violence we observe during the lockdown.

6     Exploring the Role of Attitudes Toward Violence Against Women
We now explore the role of attitudes toward domestic violence by husbands and wives
in the increase in domestic violence complaints received by the NCW during lockdown
in India. These attitudes are measured using National Family Health Survey data from
2015–2016, several years before the COVID-19 pandemic. 49% of women believe that a
husband is justified in beating his wife, while 42% of men report that they are justified in
beating their wife.
    We re-estimate equation (1) and include an additional interaction term with “husband
believes it is justified to beat wife” and “wife believes it is justified for husband to beat
her.” This is basically a triple-difference empirical strategy that interacts the month and
zone dummies with the district mean of the proportion of husbands and wives who re-
ported in the NFHS-4 survey that a husband is justified in hitting or beating his wife.6
The coefficients from this regression capture the differential impact of districts classified
into the red zone relative to the impact of districts classified into the green zone (or the
orange zone relative to the green zone), in month i relative to the monthly average from
January 2018–September 2019, for districts where a greater proportion of husbands report
that hitting or beating his wife is justified (or where a greater proportion of wives report
that hitting or beating by the husband is justified).
    Figure 4 presents the coefficients from this regression where the top panel of Figure
4 plots the triple-interaction sets of coefficients for husbands and the bottom panel for
wives. Districts where a greater proportion of husbands report that hitting or beating his
wife is justified experience greater increases in domestic violence complaints received by
the NCW in April and May 2020 in red zone districts relative to green zone districts, al-
though the point estimates are not statistically significant at conventional levels. Districts
in which a greater proportion of husbands report that hitting or beating his wife is justi-
fied experience greater increases in domestic violence complaints received by the NCW
in April and May 2020 in orange zone districts relative to green zone districts (p-values =
6   The estimating equation and results from this regression are presented in Table C.6 in the appendix.



                                                      13
0.03 and 0.13 for April and May 2020, respectively). The regression controls for the role
of domestic violence attitudes by wives.
    In the bottom panel of Figure 4 we observe that districts in which a greater proportion
of wives report that a husband hitting or beating his wife is justified see fewer domestic
violence complaints received by the NCW in May 2020 in red zone districts relative to
green zone districts (p-value = 0.03). A similar pattern of results is seen for orange zone
districts relative to green zone districts, although the magnitudes of the point estimates
are smaller and not statistically significant at conventional levels. These results control
for the attitudes of husbands toward domestic violence.
    Overall, these results highlight the role of attitudes toward domestic violence in the
incidence and reporting of domestic violence complaints to the NCW. Districts in which
a greater proportion of husbands view domestic violence as justified experience increases
in complaints during the lockdown, while districts in which a greater proportion of wives
view domestic violence as justified experience decreases in complaints during the lock-
down relative to their comparison groups.

7   Discussion and Conclusion
We establish an increase in domestic violence and cybercrime during the COVID-19 lock-
downs in India, with increases most concentrated in districts that saw the strictest lock-
down measures. In addition, we show that rape and sexual assault complaints fell, con-
sistent with decreased mobility in public spaces, public transport, and workplaces. Dis-
tricts in which a greater proportion of husbands viewed domestic violence as justified
saw larger increases in domestic violence complaints during the lockdown.
    We acknowledge a large number of factors that could be mechanisms that explain
our results. For example, Peterman et al. (2020a) document nine possible mechanisms
through which increases in domestic violence could occur during the COVID-19 pan-
demic. While an analysis of the relative importance of possible channels is beyond the
scope of the paper, we note that issues related to (i) economic insecurity and poverty-
related stress, as well as (ii) quarantines and social isolation were the top two channels in
the analysis of Peterman et al. (2020a). Such channels are likely to play an important role
in our setting. Importantly, lockdowns increase women’s day-to-day exposure to poten-
tial perpetrators of violence. Recent evidence from Bangladesh shows that in households
where men were offered interest-free loans to facilitate migration, migration reduced fe-
male exposure to physical and/or sexual intimate partner violence over a six-month pe-
riod by 3.5 percent (Mobarak and Ramos, 2019).

                                             14
    Our findings that attitudes toward domestic violence play an important role in the
incidence and reporting of domestic violence during the lockdowns highlight that addi-
tional interventions are needed to reverse the trends in violence against women. Behavior
Change Communication (BCC) interventions have been shown to be effective in reduc-
ing physical violence in Bangladesh (Roy et al., 2019). Similarly, Shah and Muz (2019)
find that a soccer intervention to empower and change social norms targeting boys and
young men decreases adolescent female reports of intimate partner violence. Dhar et
al. (2018) also find that a school-based intervention in India that engaged adolescents in
classroom discussions about gender equality saw program participants reporting more
gender-equitable behavior. Social norms and attitudes around violence are important
drivers of both violent behavior and reporting.
    A further area of research is whether these are intensive margin or extensive margin
changes we are observing in violence against women. Some anecdotal evidence suggests
we are observing an increase in the intensity of domestic violence (Al Jazeera News, April
17, 2020), however, it will be hard to answer these questions until we are past the pan-
demic. While lockdowns may be an effective way of controlling disease spread, they
also come with costs. Our study highlights that the lockdowns also caused a “Shadow
Pandemic” in which violence against women increased at home and on online platforms.
However, a silver lining is the temporary decrease in rape and sexual harassment, high-
lighting the heterogeneity of impacts of one policy on various outcomes related to vio-
lence against women.




                                           15
8    References
Adams, Adrienne E, Megan R Greeson, Angie C Kennedy, and Richard M Tolman, “The Effects of Ado-
  lescent Intimate Partner Violence on Women’s Educational Attainment and Earnings,” Journal of Interper-
  sonal Violence, 2013, 28 (17), 3283–3300.

Agüero, Jorge M., “COVID-19 and The Rise of Intimate Partner Violence,” 2020. Unpublished Manuscript.

Aizer, Anna, “The Gender Wage Gap and Domestic Violence,” American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (4),
  1847–59.

    , “Poverty, Violence, and Health the Impact of Domestic Violence During Pregnancy on Newborn
    Health,” Journal of Human Resources, 2011, 46 (3), 518–538.

Al Jazeera News, “Locked down with abusers: India sees surge in domestic violence,” Al Jazeera News,
  April 17, 2020.

Borker, Girija, “Safety First: Perceived Risk of Street Harassment and Educational Choices of Women,” Job
  Market Paper, Department of Economics, Brown University, 2018.

Boserup, Brad, Mark McKenney, and Adel Elkbuli, “Alarming Trends in US Domestic Violence During
  the COVID-19 Pandemic,” The American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 2020.

Bullinger, Lindsey Rose, Jillian B. Carr, , and Analisa Packham, “COVID-19 and Crime: Effects of Stay-
  at-Home Orders on Domestic Violence,” Working Paper 27667, National Bureau of Economic Research
  2020.

Business Today, “Coronavirus lockdown: Areas may be divided into red, orange, green zones; here’s how
  they will differ,” Business Today, April 13, 2020.

Centers for Disease Control, “Costs of Intimate Partner Violence Against Women in the United States,”
  Department of Health and Human Services. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control, 2003.

Cheema, Ali, Asim I Khwaja, Farooq Naseer, and Jacob N Shapiro, “Glass Walls: Experimental Evidence
  on Access Constraints Faced by Women,” Working Paper 2020.

Deshpande, Ashwini, “In locked down India, women fight coronavirus and domestic violence,” Quartz
  India, April 15, 2020.

Devries, Karen M, Joelle YT Mak, Claudia Garcia-Moreno, Max Petzold, James C Child, Gail Falder,
  Stephen Lim, Loraine J Bacchus, Rebecca E Engell, Lisa Rosenfeld et al., “The Global Prevalence of
  Intimate Partner Violence Against Women,” Science, 2013, 340 (6140), 1527–1528.

Dhar, Diva, Tarun Jain, and Seema Jayachandran, “Reshaping Adolescents’ Gender Attitudes: Evidence
  from a School-Based Experiment in India,” 2018. Unpublished Manuscript.

Ellsberg, Mary, Lori Heise, Rodolfo Pena, Sonai Agurto, and Anna Winkvist, “Researching Domestic
   Violence against Women: Methodological and Ethical Considerations,” Studies in Family Planning, 2001,
   32 (1), 1–16.

Eswaran, Mukesh and Nisha Malhotra, “Domestic Violence and Women’s Autonomy in Developing
  Countries: Theory and Evidence,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 2011, 44 (4), 1222–1263.



                                                   16
Field, Erica and Kate Vyborny, “Transport, Urban Labor Markets, and Women’s Mobility: Experimental
   Evidence from Urban Pakistan,” Working Paper 2019.

Garcı́a-Moreno, Claudia, Cathy Zimmerman, Alison Morris-Gehring, Lori Heise, Avni Amin, Naeemah
  Abrahams, Oswaldo Montoya, Padma Bhate-Deosthali, Nduku Kilonzo, and Charlotte Watts, “Ad-
  dressing Violence Against Women: A Call to Action,” Lancet, 2015, 385, 1685–1695.

Heise, Lori, “What Works to Prevent Partner Violence? An Evidence Overview,” STRIVE Research Consor-
  tium, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, 2011.

Hindustan Times, “Explained: India’s lockdown 3.0 in one chart for red, orange and green zones,” Hindus-
  tan Times, May 2, 2020.

  , “‘Significant’ increase in cybercrime against women during lockdown: Experts,” Hindustan Times, May
  3, 2020.

IIPS Mumbai, India, “National Family Health Survey (NFHS-4), 2015–16: India,” 2017.

India Today, “Full list of Red, Yellow, Green Zone districts for Lockdown 3.0,” India Today, May 1, 2020.

Leslie, Emily and Riley Wilson, “Sheltering in Place and Domestic Violence: Evidence from Calls for
  Service During COVID-19,” Working Paper 3600646, Social Science Research Network 2020.

Lewbel, Arthur and Krishna Pendakur, “Inefficient Collective Households: Abuse and Consumption,”
  Boston College Unpublished Manuscript, 2019.

Mahmud, Mahreen and Emma Riley, “Household Response to an Extreme Shock: Evidence on the Imme-
 diate Impact of the Covid-19 Lockdown on Economic Outcomes and Well-being in Rural Uganda,” 2020.
 Unpublished Manuscript.

Mobarak, MA and Alejandra Ramos, “The Effects of Migration on Intimate Partner Violence: Evidence for
 the Exposure Reduction Theory in Bangladesh,” 2019. Unpublished Manuscript.

Peterman, Amber, Alina Potts, Megan O’ Donnell, Kelly Thompson, Niyati Shah, Sabine Oertelt-
  Prigione, and Nicole van Gelder, “Pandemics and Violence Against Women and Children,” Center for
  Global Development, 2020. Working Paper 528.

  , Megan O’ Donnell, and Tia Palermo, “COVID-19 and Violence against Women and Children: What
  Have We Learned So Far?,” Center for Global Development, June 2020.

Poblete-Cazenave, Ruben, “The Impact of Lockdowns on Crime and Violence Against Women - Evidence
  From India,” Working Paper, SSRN 2020.

Rawlings, Samantha and Zahra Siddique, “Domestic Abuse and Child Health,” IZA Discussion Paper,
  2014.

Ribero, Rocio and Fabio Sánchez, “Determinants, Effects and Costs of Domestic Violence,” Bogotá, Colom-
  bia: Universidad de Los Andes, 2005.

Roy, Shalini, Melissa Hidrobo, John Hoddinott, and Akhter Ahmed, “Transfers, Behavior Change Com-
  munication, and Intimate Partner Violence: Postprogram Evidence from Rural Bangladesh,” Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 2019, 101 (5), 865–877.

Sabia, Joseph J., Angela K. Dills, and Jeffrey DeSimone, “Sexual Violence Against Women and Labor
  Market Outcomes,” American Economic Review, May 2013, 103 (3), 274–78.

                                                    17
Shah, Manisha and Jennifer Muz, “Including Males: Improving Sexual and Reproductive Health for Fe-
  male Adolescents,” Working Paper 2019.

Silverio-Murillo, Adan and Jose Roberto Balmori de la Miyar, “Families under Confinement: COVID-19,
   Domestic Violence, and Alcohol Consumption,” 2020. Unpublished Manuscript.

The Economic Times, “NCW launches WhatsApp number to report domestic violence during COVID-19
  lockdown,” The Economic Times, April 10, 2020.

  , “Red, orange, green zones may come up during extended lockdown,” The Economic Times, April 14,
  2020.

The Hindu, “Marital rape: the statistics show how real it is,” The Hindu, June 30, 2016.

  , “Lockdown: NCW receives 315 domestic violence complaints in April,” The Hindu, May 4, 2020.

Thomson Reuters Foundation, “Exclusive: India most dangerous country for women with sexual violence
  rife - global poll,” Thomson Reuters Foundation, Jun 25, 2018.

Times of India, “Lockdown 2.0: What are red, orange, green zones?,” Times of India, April 16, 2020.

United Nations Women, “COVID-19 and Ending Violence Against Women and Girls,” 2020.

World Health Organization, “Violence Against Women,” http://https://www.who.int/news-room/
 fact-sheets/detail/violence-against-women 2017.




                                                     18
                              Figure 1: Complaints Received by the National Commission for Women

                                          Domestic Violence Complaints                                                                                                       Cybercrime Complaints
                   2                                                                                                                           .4



               1.5                                                                                                                             .3
 Complaints




                                                                                                                                  Complaints
                   1                                                                                                                           .2



                .5                                                                                                                             .1



                   0                                                                                                                           0

                   Oct 2019    Nov 2019     Dec 2019   Jan 2020      Feb 2020   Mar 2020    Apr 2020      May 2020                              Oct 2019    Nov 2019     Dec 2019    Jan 2020     Feb 2020    Mar 2020     Apr 2020      May 2020
                                                                                    |_____________ _____________|                                                                                                 |_____________ _____________|
                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                             |
                                                                                              Lockdown                                                                                                                      Lockdown


                                         Red Zone                 Orange Zone                Green Zone                                                               Red Zone                 Orange Zone                 Green Zone




                                              Harassment Complaints                                                                                              Rape & Sexual Assault Complaints
               4                                                                                                                       .8



               3                                                                                                                       .6
  Complaints




                                                                                                                          Complaints




               2                                                                                                                       .4



               1                                                                                                                       .2



               0                                                                                                                          0

                Oct 2019      Nov 2019     Dec 2019    Jan 2020      Feb 2020   Mar 2020    Apr 2020      May 2020                             Oct 2019    Nov 2019    Dec 2019     Jan 2020    Feb 2020     Mar 2020    Apr 2020      May 2020
                                                                                   |_____________ _____________|                                                                                                |_____________ _____________|
                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                            |
                                                                                             Lockdown                                                                                                                     Lockdown


                                     Red Zone                     Orange Zone               Green Zone                                                            Red Zone                 Orange Zone                   Green Zone




Source: Complaint & Investigation Cell, National Commission for Women, India (accessed June 1, 2020).
Notes: The figure plots the district mean number of complaints received by the NCW from October 2019–
May 2020 by lockdown zone color category (red, orange, and green). India imposed a nationwide lockdown
on March 25, 2020.




                                                                                                                     19
     Figure 2: Google Searches in India for Domestic Violence-Related Terms in 2020

              100
                                                      Lockdown



               80



               60
      Score




               40



               20



                0
                    Jan 5   Jan 26    Feb 16      Mar 8          Mar 29      Apr 19      May 10   May 31



                                     Domestic Abuse               Domestic Violence Helpline


Source: Google Trends (accessed June 6, 2020).
Notes: The scores represent search interest relative to the highest point on the chart for India on the given
date for each search term. A value of 100 is the peak popularity for the search term. A value of 50 means
that the search term is half as popular. A score of 0 means that there was not enough data for this search
term. India imposed a nationwide lockdown on March 25, 2020.




                                                      20
                      Figure 3: Event Study Plots of Differential Number of Complaints Received by Zone

                                        Domestic Violence Complaints                                                                                               Cybercrime Complaints
            1                                                                                                                            .25

                                                                                                                                          .2

                                                                                                                                         .15
           .5
                                                                                                                                          .1

                                                                                                                                         .05
Estimate




                                                                                                                       Estimate
            0                                                                                                                             0

                                                                                                                                        -.05

                                                                                                                                         -.1
           -.5
                                                                                                                                        -.15

                                                                                                                                         -.2

           -1                                                                                                                           -.25
                     Oct 2019    Nov 2019   Dec 2019   Jan 2020   Feb 2020   Mar 2020   Apr 2020   May 2020                                    Oct 2019 Nov 2019 Dec 2019 Jan 2020 Feb 2020 Mar 2020 Apr 2020 May 2020

                                                   Red Zone        Orange Zone                                                                                           Red Zone        Orange Zone




                                              Harassment Complaints                                                                                  Rape & Sexual Assault Complaints
           1.5                                                                                                                    1


                 1

                                                                                                                                  .5
             .5
Estimate




                                                                                                                   Estimate




                 0
                                                                                                                                  0
            -.5


             -1
                                                                                                                              -.5

           -1.5


                                                                                                                                  -1
                      Oct 2019   Nov 2019   Dec 2019   Jan 2020   Feb 2020   Mar 2020   Apr 2020   May 2020                            Oct 2019   Nov 2019   Dec 2019   Jan 2020    Feb 2020   Mar 2020   Apr 2020   May 2020

                                                   Red Zone        Orange Zone                                                                                      Red Zone         Orange Zone




             Source: Complaint & Investigation Cell, National Commission for Women, India (accessed June 1, 2020).
             Notes: The figure plots coefficients { β i,r } and { β i,o } from Equation (1). The black circles depict { β i,r }, the
             differential impact of red versus green zone districts in month i relative to the monthly mean from January
             2018–September 2019 (the omitted months). The gray diamonds depict { β i,o }, the differential impact of
             orange versus green zone districts in month i relative to the monthly mean from January 2018–September
             2019. 95% confidence intervals are shown.




                                                                                                              21
                        Figure 4: The Role of Attitudes Toward Domestic Violence

                                                               Husband's Attitudes
                                4

                                3

                                2

                                1
                    Estimate




                                0

                               -1

                               -2

                               -3

                               -4
                                    Oct 2019   Nov 2019   Dec 2019    Jan 2020   Feb 2020   Mar 2020   Apr 2020   May 2020

                                                                 Red Zone         Orange Zone



                                                                     Wife's Attitudes
                               4

                               3

                               2

                               1
                   Estimate




                               0

                               -1

                               -2

                               -3

                               -4

                                    Oct 2019   Nov 2019   Dec 2019    Jan 2020   Feb 2020   Mar 2020   Apr 2020   May 2020

                                                                 Red Zone         Orange Zone


Sources: National Family Health Survey 4 (2015–2016) and Complaint & Investigation Cell, National Com-
mission for Women (NCW), India (accessed June 1, 2020).
Notes: The figure in the top panel plots coefficients { β i,rh } and { β i,oh } from the estimated equation in Table
C.6. The black circles depict { β i,rh }, while the grey diamonds depict { β i,oh }. The figure in the bottom panel
plots coefficients { β i,rw } and { β i,ow } of the estimated equation in Table C.6. The black circles depict { β i,rw }
and the gray diamonds depict { β i,ow }. 95% confidence intervals are shown.




                                                                          22
              Table 1: Impact of Zonal Classification on Number of Complaints
                                                (1)              (2)           (3)               (4)
                                          Domestic Violence   Cybercrime   Harassment   Rape & Sexual Assault
    Panel A: Main Specification
    Red Zone ∗ May 2020                       0.562∗∗∗         0.129∗∗∗       0.126           -0.310∗∗∗
                                               (0.157)         (0.0287)      (0.365)           (0.104)
    Red Zone ∗ Apr 2020                         0.286          0.0635∗      -1.159∗∗          -0.457∗∗∗
                                               (0.212)         (0.0362)      (0.464)           (0.118)
    Orange Zone ∗ May 2020                     0.0885          0.0217∗∗     -0.00900          -0.0635∗
                                              (0.0601)         (0.0109)      (0.122)          (0.0330)
    Orange Zone ∗ Apr 2020                    -0.0436          -0.00458     -0.321∗∗          -0.0945∗∗
                                              (0.0510)         (0.00842)     (0.143)           (0.0384)

    Red Zone - Orange Zone (May 2020)         0.474***         0.108***       0.135            -0.246**
    p-value                                    [0.002]          [0.000]      [0.725]            [0.028]
    Red Zone - Orange Zone (Apr 2020)           0.330           0.068*       -0.838*          -0.362***
    p-value                                    [0.118]          [0.062]      [0.087]            [0.004]
    Adjusted R2                                0.768            0.793        0.748             0.728
    District FEs                                 X                X            X                 X
    Month-Year FEs                               X                X            X                 X
    Dependent Variable Mean                     0.43             0.07         1.15              0.26
    Observations                               15,208           15,208       15,208            15,208
    Panel B: Flexible Form
    Red Zone ∗ May 2020                       0.612∗∗∗         0.130∗∗∗       -0.750          -0.466∗∗∗
                                               (0.173)         (0.0319)      (0.636)           (0.165)
    Red Zone ∗ Apr 2020                         0.336           0.0637      -2.035∗∗∗         -0.613∗∗∗
                                               (0.220)         (0.0391)      (0.747)           (0.178)
    Orange Zone ∗ May 2020                      0.102          0.0221∗        -0.174          -0.0917∗
                                              (0.0668)         (0.0121)      (0.208)          (0.0514)
    Orange Zone ∗ April 2020                  -0.0300          -0.00423     -0.487∗∗          -0.123∗∗
                                              (0.0531)         (0.00920)     (0.233)          (0.0561)
    Red Zone - Orange Zone (May 2020)         0.510***         0.108***      -0.576            -0.374**
    p-value                                    [0.002]          [0.001]      [0.386]            [0.032]
    Red Zone - Orange Zone (April 2020)        0.366*           0.068*      -1.548**          -0.491***
    p-value                                    [0.097]          [0.086]      [0.048]            [0.009]
    Adjusted R2                                0.774            0.797        0.756             0.737
    District FEs                                 X                X            X                 X
    Month-Year FEs                               X                X            X                 X
    Dependent Variable Mean                     0.43             0.07         1.15              0.26
    Observations                               15,208           15,208       15,208            15,208

Source: Complaint & Investigation Cell, National Commission for Women, India (accessed June 1, 2020).
Notes: The sample consists of district-month level number of complaints from January 2018–May 2020.
Panel A presents coefficients { β i,r } and { β i,o } from Equation (1) for April and May 2020. Panel B reports
coefficients { β i,r } and { β i,o } from Equation (1) for April and May 2020, but omitting May 2018, instead of
January 2018 - September 2019. All regressions include district fixed effects and month-year fixed effects,
as well as district-year level population controls. Standard errors are clustered by district and are shown in
parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                         23
                               Online Appendix

A   Data Appendix
NCW data. Cybercrimes include online abuse, indecent exposure, unsolicited obscene
pictures, threats, ransom demands, and online blackmail (Hindustan Times, May 3, 2020b).
Harassment complaints include sexual harassment, sexual harassment at the workplace,
stalking and voyeurism, molestation, and complaints related to the right to live with dig-
nity. Rape and sexual assault complaints includes sexual assault, rape, and attempt to
rape. Notably, marital rape or forced sex by a husband is not a criminal offense un-
der the Indian Penal Code, unless the wife is below the age of 15. More details on
the processing and categorization of complaints received by the NCW are available at
http://ncw.nic.in/sites/default/files/SOPSnICell06112019.pdf.
    For an illustration of our disaggregation of the data, consider a two-type two-district
example: say that across India, there were 300 complaints in April 2020, of which 150
were domestic violence complaints. Chennai and Delhi had 100 and 200 total complaints,
respectively. The proportion of domestic violence complaints across India in April 2020
= 0.5. Thus, we estimate that there were 50 and 100 domestic violence complaints from
Chennai and Delhi, respectively. If red zone districts receive a greater proportion of do-
mestic violence and cybercrime complaints during the lockdown months and green zone
districts receive a smaller proportion of such complaints, we would underestimate the
difference in these types of complaints between red and green zone districts by assuming
that the month-wise distribution of complaints does not differ by district within the given
month.
Google data. To explore spatial variation in the intensity of lockdown measures, we
combine the NCW data with district-wise data on lockdown zone categories as issued by
the Ministry of Home Affairs, India. We assess the effect of these lockdown zone measures
on mobility of individuals using state-week level data from Google Community Mobility
Reports. We also compare trends in the NCW data with trends in the relative search
interest for domestic violence-related terms using Google Trends data.
NFHS data. We explore the role of attitudes toward domestic violence in explaining
the changes in domestic violence complaints during lockdown across zone categories
using the large and nationally representative National Family Health Survey 4 (2015 -
2016), based on the Demographic Health Surveys (IIPS Mumbai, India, 2017). We use
self-reported responses to questions on attitudes toward domestic violence posed sepa-

                                           24
rately to husbands and wives. The survey question asks whether a husband is justified
in hitting or beating his wife in a number of situations, including neglect of the house or
children, improper cooking, disrepect for in-laws, and refusal to have sex. We average
and aggregate individual-level responses separately across 122,351 women and 112,122
men to the district level using survey weights to obtain district attitudes toward domestic
violence.




                                            25
B   Figures

     Figure B.1: Spatial Distribution of Red, Orange & Green Lockdown Districts




                   Red Zone
                   Orange Zone
                   Green Zone




    Source: Ministry of Home Affairs, India (May 1, 2020). 2011 Census district boundaries used.




                                                26
                  Figure B.2: Correlations Between Fraction of State Population in
                         Red Lockdown Districts & Google Mobility Index

                                                                                                March 2020
                                                                 -10


                                                                 -20




                                         Google Mobility Index
                                                                 -30


                                                                 -40


                                                                 -50


                                                                 -60


                                                                 -70


                                                                 -80
                                                                           0     .2             .4             .6             .8         1

                                                                                Fraction of State Population in Red Zone Districts


                                                                                                    April 2020
                                                                 -10


                                                                 -20
                                         Google Mobility Index




                                                                 -30


                                                                 -40


                                                                 -50


                                                                 -60


                                                                 -70


                                                                 -80


                                                                           0     .2             .4             .6             .8         1

                                                                                Fraction of State Population in Red Zone Districts

                                                                                                May 2020
                                                            -10


                                                            -20
                               Google Mobility Index




                                                            -30


                                                            -40


                                                            -50


                                                            -60


                                                            -70


                                                            -80
                                                                       0        .2             .4             .6             .8      1

                                                                               Fraction of State Population in Red Zone Districts

Source: Google Community Mobility Reports (accessed June 9, 2020).
Notes: Mobility is defined in the Google Community Mobility Reports as the percentage change in mobility relative to the baseline
5-week period from January 3 - February 6, 2020. The state mean is taken over the categories “Grocery & pharmacy”, “Parks”, “Transit
stations”, “Retail & recreation”, and “Workplaces” for the months of March, April, and May 2020, respectively, to create the Google
Mobility Index. Google calculates mobility based on data from users who have opted-in to Location History for their Google Account.


                                                                                                     27
                  Figure B.3: Correlations Between Fraction of State Population in
                       Orange Lockdown Districts & Google Mobility Index

                                                                                                  March 2020
                                                                 -10


                                                                 -20




                                         Google Mobility Index
                                                                 -30


                                                                 -40


                                                                 -50


                                                                 -60


                                                                 -70


                                                                 -80
                                                                           0       .2             .4             .6             .8          1

                                                                                Fraction of State Population in Orange Zone Districts


                                                                                                      April 2020
                                                                 -10


                                                                 -20
                                         Google Mobility Index




                                                                 -30


                                                                 -40


                                                                 -50


                                                                 -60


                                                                 -70


                                                                 -80
                                                                           0       .2             .4             .6             .8          1

                                                                                Fraction of State Population in Orange Zone Districts

                                                                                                  May 2020
                                                            -10


                                                            -20
                               Google Mobility Index




                                                            -30


                                                            -40


                                                            -50


                                                            -60


                                                            -70


                                                            -80
                                                                       0          .2             .4             .6             .8       1

                                                                               Fraction of State Population in Orange Zone Districts

Source: Google Community Mobility Reports (accessed June 9, 2020).
Notes: Mobility is defined in the Google Community Mobility Reports as the percentage change in mobility relative to the baseline
5-week period from January 3 - February 6, 2020. The state mean is taken over the categories “Grocery & pharmacy”, “Parks”, “Transit
stations”, “Retail & recreation”, and “Workplaces” for the months of March, April, and May 2020, respectively, to create the Google
Mobility Index. Google calculates mobility based on data from users who have opted-in to Location History for their Google Account.


                                                                                                       28
                  Figure B.4: Correlations Between Fraction of State Population in
                        Green Lockdown Districts & Google Mobility Index

                                                                                                 March 2020
                                                                 -10


                                                                 -20




                                         Google Mobility Index
                                                                 -30


                                                                 -40


                                                                 -50


                                                                 -60


                                                                 -70


                                                                 -80
                                                                           0      .2             .4             .6             .8          1

                                                                                Fraction of State Population in Green Zone Districts


                                                                                                     April 2020
                                                                 -10


                                                                 -20
                                         Google Mobility Index




                                                                 -30


                                                                 -40


                                                                 -50


                                                                 -60


                                                                 -70


                                                                 -80


                                                                           0      .2             .4             .6             .8          1

                                                                                Fraction of State Population in Green Zone Districts

                                                                                                  May 2020
                                                            -10


                                                            -20
                               Google Mobility Index




                                                            -30


                                                            -40


                                                            -50


                                                            -60


                                                            -70


                                                            -80
                                                                       0         .2             .4             .6             .8       1

                                                                               Fraction of State Population in Green Zone Districts

Source: Google Community Mobility Reports (accessed June 9, 2020).
Notes: Mobility is defined in the Google Community Mobility Reports as the percentage change in mobility relative to the baseline
5-week period from January 3 - February 6, 2020. The state mean is taken over the categories “Grocery & pharmacy”, “Parks”, “Transit
stations”, “Retail & recreation”, and “Workplaces” for the months of March, April, and May 2020, respectively, to create the Google
Mobility Index. Google calculates mobility based on data from users who have opted-in to Location History for their Google Account.


                                                                                                      29
C     Tables

                         Table C.1: District Characteristics by Zone Color Categories
                                                  Red Zones (120)    Orange Zones (257)   Green Zones (262)     Difference (p-value)
                                                                                                               Red-    Red-    Orange-
                                                  Mean       SD      Mean       SD        Mean      SD        Orange   Green    Green
 Population (millions)                             3.87     2.54      2.35     1.44       1.30      1.13      0.000    0.000    0.000
 Cumulative COVID-19 Cases (April 30)             252.71   789.01     17.64    25.52      0.94      5.45      0.000    0.000    0.000
 Cumulative Cases per Million People (April 30)   313.75   2787.80    9.29     14.88      1.24     10.11      0.080    0.070    0.000
 New COVID-19 Cases (April 16 - 30)               164.55   546.59     6.65     12.15      0.42      3.85      0.000    0.000    0.000
 New Cases per Million People (April 16 - 30)     174.66   1490.58    3.14     5.59       0.63      7.43      0.065    0.059    0.000
 Days Taken for Cases to Double (April 30)        11.71     7.22      16.97    8.85       24.46    10.52      0.000    0.000    0.004



Source: www.covindia.com, accessed May 31, 2020.
Notes: These are summary statistics based on 120 red zone districts, 257 orange zone districts, and 262
green zone districts (2011 Census district identifiers used). “Population” refers to the projected district
population in 2020, in millions (projection based on growth rates calculated from the 2001–2011 Census
data. “Cumulative COVID-19 Cases” refers to the total number of COVID-19 cases reported in the district
as of April 30, 2020. “Cumulative COVID-19 Cases per Million People” refers to the total number of COVID-
19 cases reported in the district as of April 30, 2020 divided by the district population in millions. “New
COVID-19 Cases” refers to the number of new COVID-19 cases reported between April 16-30, i.e. in the
two weeks prior to the announcement of the zone categories on May 1, 2020. “New Cases per Million
People” refers to the number of new COVID-19 cases reported between April 16-30 divided by the district
population in millions. “Days Taken for Cases to Double” refers to the number of days taken for cases to
double to reach the number of COVID-19 cases observed on April 30, 2020.




                                                                     30
    Table C.2: Nationwide Number of Complaints by Type: January–May (2018–2020)

                         (1)                  (2)               (3)                  (4)
                   Domestic Violence       Cybercrime       Harassment      Rape & Sexual Assault
 Panel A: 2020
 May                        392                  73              635                    54
 April                      315                  55              300                    16
 March                      298                  37              538                   109
 February                   302                  21              593                   122
 January                    271                  32              547                   154
 Panel B: 2019
 May                        266                  49              460                   163
 April                      193                  35              341                    60
 March                      148                  22              375                    67
 February                   181                  30              440                    75
 January                    133                  39              380                   102
 Panel C: 2018
 May                        188                  35              882                   198
 April                      200                  41              911                   261
 March                      129                  14              710                   207
 February                   191                  24              731                   137
 January                    124                  26              428                    86


Source: Complaint & Investigation Cell, National Commission for Women, India (accessed June 1, 2020).
Notes: Cybercrimes include online abuse, indecent exposure, unsolicited obscene pictures, threats, ransom
demands, and blackmail. Harassment complaints include sexual harassment, sexual harassment at the
workplace, stalking and voyeurism, molestation, and complaints related to the right to live with dignity.
Rape and sexual assault complaints include sexual assault, rape, and attempt to rape.




                                                   31
               Table C.3: Impact of Zone Categories on Number of Complaints
                                (in Standard Deviation units)
                                                (1)               (2)          (3)               (4)
                                          Domestic Violence   Cybercrime   Harassment   Rape & Sexual Assault
                                             (z-score)         (z-score)    (z-score)         (z-score)
    Panel A: Main Specification
    Red Zone ∗ May 2020                       0.474∗∗∗         0.697∗∗∗      0.0379           -0.393∗∗∗
                                               (0.132)          (0.154)      (0.110)           (0.132)
    Red Zone ∗ Apr 2020                         0.241           0.342∗      -0.348∗∗          -0.580∗∗∗
                                               (0.179)          (0.195)      (0.140)           (0.150)
    Orange Zone ∗ May 2020                     0.0746          0.117∗∗      -0.00270          -0.0805∗
                                              (0.0507)         (0.0585)     (0.0368)          (0.0419)
    Orange Zone ∗ April 2020                  -0.0368          -0.0246      -0.0966∗∗         -0.120∗∗
                                              (0.0430)         (0.0453)      (0.0430)         (0.0487)

    Red Zone - Orange Zone (May 2020)         0.400***         0.580***       0.041            -0.312**
    p-value                                    [0.002]          [0.000]      [0.725]            [0.028]
    Red Zone - Orange Zone (April 2020)         0.278           0.366*       -0.252*          -0.460***
    p-value                                    [0.118]          [0.062]      [0.087]            [0.004]
    Adjusted R2                                0.768            0.793        0.748             0.728
    District FEs                                  X                X            X                 X
    Month-Year FEs                                X                X            X                 X
    Dependent Variable Mean                     0.000            0.000        0.000             0.000
    Observations                               15,208           15,208       15,208            15,208
    Panel B: Flexible Form
    Red Zone ∗ May 2020                       0.516∗∗∗         0.698∗∗∗        -0.226         -0.592∗∗∗
                                               (0.146)          (0.172)       (0.191)           (0.209)
    Red Zone ∗ Apr 2020                         0.283            0.343      -0.612∗∗∗         -0.778∗∗∗
                                               (0.186)          (0.210)       (0.224)           (0.226)
    Orange Zone ∗ May 2020                     0.0861           0.119∗        -0.0524           -0.116∗
                                              (0.0564)         (0.0652)      (0.0627)          (0.0653)
    Orange Zone ∗ April 2020                  -0.0253          -0.0227       -0.146∗∗          -0.156∗∗
                                              (0.0448)         (0.0495)      (0.0700)          (0.0712)

    Red Zone - Orange Zone (May 2020)         0.430***         0.579***      -0.173            -0.475**
                                               [0.002]          [0.000]      [0.386]            [0.031]
    Red Zone - Orange Zone (April 2020)        0.309*           0.365*      -0.466**          -0.623***
                                               [0.096]          [0.085]      [0.047]            [0.009]
    Adjusted R2                                0.774            0.797        0.756             0.737
    District FEs                                  X                X            X                 X
    Month-Year FEs                                X                X            X                 X
    Dependent Variable Mean                     0.000            0.000        0.000             0.000
    Observations                               15,208           15,208       15,208            15,208

Source: Complaint & Investigation Cell, National Commission for Women, India (accessed June 1, 2020).
Notes: The sample consists of district-month level number of complaints from January 2018 - May 2020,
standardized to a z-score. Panel A reports coefficients { β i,r } and { β i,o } from Equation (1) for April and
May 2020. Panel B presents coefficients { β i,r } and { β i,o } from Equation (1) for April and May 2020, but
omitting May 2018, instead of January 2018 - September 2019. All regressions include district fixed effects
and month-year fixed effects, as well as district-year level population controls. Standard errors are clustered
by district and are shown in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.



                                                         32
        Table C.4: Impact of Zone Categories on Number of Complaints per Capita
                                                 (1)                (2)          (3)               (4)
                                          Domestic Violence    Cybercrime   Harassment   Rape & Sexual Assault
    Red Zone ∗ May 2020                       0.0329∗           0.00582∗       -0.124           -0.0616
                                             (0.0188)           (0.00307)     (0.130)          (0.0556)
    Red Zone ∗ Apr 2020                        0.00470          -0.000451      -0.228          -0.0731
                                              (0.00740)         (0.00209)     (0.206)          (0.0640)
    Orange Zone ∗ May 2020                     0.00271          0.000224      -0.00638         -0.00305
                                              (0.00440)        (0.000800)    (0.00918)         (0.00228)
    Orange Zone ∗ April 2020                  -0.00206         -0.000657      -0.0137           -0.00365
                                              (0.00378)        (0.000623)    (0.00852)         (0.00239)
    Red Zone - Orange Zone (May 2020)          0.030*            0.006*       -0.117            -0.059
    p-value                                    [0.085]           [0.067]      [0.349]           [0.277]
    Red Zone - Orange Zone (April 2020)         0.007             0.000        -0.214           -0.069
    p-value                                    [0.360]           [0.918]      [0.286]           [0.265]
    Adjusted R2                                0.796             0.819        0.755             0.735
    District FEs                                 X                 X            X                 X
    Month-Year FEs                               X                 X            X                 X
    Dependent Variable Mean                     0.03              0.01         0.09              0.02
    Observations                               15,208            15,208       15,208            15,208

Source: Complaint & Investigation Cell, National Commission for Women, India (accessed June 1, 2020).
Notes: The sample consists of district-month level number of complaints per 100,000 people from January
2018–May 2020. The table reports coefficients { β i,r } and { β i,o } from Equation (1) for April and May 2020.
All regressions include district fixed effects and month-year fixed effects, as well as district-year level pop-
ulation controls. Standard errors are clustered by district and are shown in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗
p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                          33
             Table C.5: Impact of Zone Categories on on Number of Complaints
                           Including State x Month Fixed Effects
                                                (1)               (2)           (3)               (4)
                                          Domestic Violence   Cybercrime   Harassment   Rape & Sexual Assault
    Red Zone ∗ May 2020                      0.478∗∗∗          0.110∗∗∗      -0.0219          -0.343∗∗∗
                                              (0.153)          (0.0280)      (0.371)           (0.107)
    Red Zone ∗ Apr 2020                         0.223           0.0481      -1.219∗∗∗         -0.467∗∗∗
                                               (0.194)         (0.0333)      (0.417)           (0.111)
    Orange Zone ∗ May 2020                     0.0722           0.0180       -0.0559          -0.0814∗∗
                                              (0.0635)         (0.0114)      (0.129)           (0.0356)
    Orange Zone ∗ Apr 2020                    -0.0364          -0.00451     -0.321∗∗         -0.0988∗∗∗
                                              (0.0472)         (0.00807)     (0.130)          (0.0368)

    Red Zone - Orange Zone (May 2020)         0.406***         0.092***       0.034            -0.262**
    p-value                                    [0.005]          [0.001]      [0.930]            [0.022]
    Red Zone - Orange Zone (April 2020)         0.260            0.053      -0.897**          -0.368***
    p-value                                    [0.172]          [0.112]      [0.041]            [0.002]
    Adjusted R2                                0.776            0.808        0.762             0.742
    District FEs                                 X                X            X                 X
    Month-Year FEs                               X                X            X                 X
    State-Month FEs                              X                X            X                 X
    Dependent Variable Mean                     0.43             0.07         1.15              0.26
    Observations                               15,201           15,201       15,201            15,201

Source: Complaint & Investigation Cell, National Commission for Women, India (accessed June 1, 2020).
Notes: The sample consists of district-month level number of complaints from January 2018–May 2020.
The table reports coefficients { β i,r } and { β i,o } from Equation (1) for April and May 2020. All regressions
include district fixed effects, month-year fixed effects, and state-month fixed effects as well as district-year
level population controls. Standard errors are clustered by district and are shown in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10,
∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                         34
                 Table C.6: The Role of Attitudes and Domestic Violence Complaints

                                                                                  (1)             (2)
                                                                               Domestic Violence Complaints
                                                                               ∗ Red Zone           ∗ Orange Zone
                           Husband Justifies DV ∗ May 2020                         0.926                 0.536
                                                                                  (1.132)               (0.357)
                           Husband Justifies DV ∗ Apr 2020                         0.943                0.824∗∗
                                                                                  (1.654)               (0.378)
                           Wife Justifies DV ∗ May 2020                          -2.215∗∗                -0.299
                                                                                  (1.022)               (0.363)
                           Wife Justifies DV ∗ Apr 2020                            -0.820               -0.381
                                                                                  (1.449)               (0.399)
                           Adjusted R2                                              0.769                  0.769
                           District FEs                                               X                      X
                           Month-Year FEs                                             X                      X
                           Dependent Variable Mean                                  0.43                    0.43
                           Observations                                            15,208                  15,208

Sources: National Family Health Survey 4 (2015-2016) and Complaint & Investigation Cell, National Commission for Women, India
(accessed June 1, 2020).
Notes: The sample consists of district-month level number of complaints from January 2018 - May 2020. Lockdown months (April
and May 2020) are highlighted in bold. The table reports coefficients { β i,rh }, { β i,rw }, { β i,oh }, and { β i,ow } from estimating the following:
                            8                         8                            8                                       8
Ydmy = α + γd + λmy + ∑ β i,r θi ∗ RedZoned + ∑ β i,o θi ∗ OrangeZoned + ∑ β i,h θi ∗ HusbandJusti f iesDVd + ∑ β i,w θi ∗ Wi f eJusti f iesDVd
                           i =1                     i =1                          i =1                                    i =1
         8                                                         8
      + ∑ β i,rh θi ∗ RedZoned ∗ HusbandJusti f iesDVd + ∑ β i,oh θi ∗ OrangeZoned ∗ HusbandJusti f iesDVd
        i =1                                                      i =1
         8                                                  8
      + ∑ β i,rw θi ∗ RedZoned ∗ Wi f eJusti f iesDVd + ∑ β i,ow θi ∗ OrangeZoned ∗ Wi f eJusti f iesDVd + Xdy δ + ε dmy
        i =1                                               i =1
The set of coefficients { β i,rh } captures the differential impact of districts classified into the red zone relative to the impact of districts
classified into the green zone, in month i relative to the monthly average from January 2018 - September 2019, for districts where
a greater proportion of husbands reported that hitting or beating his wife was justified. The set of coefficients { β i,rh } captures the
differential impact for districts where a greater proportion of wives reported that hitting or beating by the husband was justified
(column 1). Analogously, the sets of coefficients { β i,oh } and { β i,ow } capture the impacts for orange zone districts (column 2). The
regression includes district fixed effects and month-year fixed effects, as well as district-year level population controls. Standard
errors are clustered by district and are shown in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                                         35
