                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   MEASURING MOVEMENT AND SOCIAL CONTACT WITH SMARTPHONE DATA:
                A REAL-TIME APPLICATION TO COVID-19

                                         Victor Couture
                                       Jonathan I. Dingel
                                        Allison E. Green
                                        Jessie Handbury
                                       Kevin R. Williams

                                      Working Paper 27560
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27560


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




We are very grateful to Hayden Parsley and Serena Xu for outstanding research assistance under
extraordinary circumstances. We thank Drew Breunig, Nicholas Sheilas, Stephanie Smiley,
Elizabeth Cutrone, and the team at PlaceIQ for data access and helpful conversations. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of PlaceIQ, the
National Bureau of Economic Research, nor CEPR. This research was approved by the
University of California, Berkeley Office for Protection of Human Subjects under CPHS Protocol
No 2018-05-11122. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science
Foundation under Grant No. 2030056, the Tobin Center for Economic Policy at Yale, the Fisher
Center for Real Estate and Urban Economics at UC Berkeley, the Zell-Lurie Real Estate Center at
Wharton, and the Initiative on Global Markets at Chicago Booth.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Victor Couture, Jonathan I. Dingel, Allison E. Green, Jessie Handbury, and Kevin R.
Williams. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring Movement and Social Contact with Smartphone Data: A Real-Time Application
to COVID-19
Victor Couture, Jonathan I. Dingel, Allison E. Green, Jessie Handbury, and Kevin R. Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 27560
July 2020
JEL No. C8,R1,R23,R4

                                        ABSTRACT

Tracking human activity in real time and at fine spatial scale is particularly valuable during
episodes such as the COVID-19 pandemic. In this paper, we discuss the suitability of smartphone
data for quantifying movement and social contact. We show that these data cover broad sections
of the US population and exhibit movement patterns similar to conventional survey data. We
develop and make publicly available a location exposure index that summarizes county-to-county
movements and a device exposure index that quantifies social contact within venues. We use
these indices to document how pandemic-induced reductions in activity vary across people and
places.

Victor Couture                                 Jessie Handbury
University of California, Berkeley             The Wharton School
Haas School of Business                        University of Pennsylvania
2220 Piedmont Avenue                           1463 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900                        Philadelphia, PA 19104
couture@berkeley.edu                           and NBER
                                               handbury@wharton.upenn.edu
Jonathan I. Dingel
Booth School of Business                       Kevin R. Williams
University of Chicago                          Yale School of Management
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                     165 Whitney Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637                              New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER                                       and NBER
jdingel@chicagobooth.edu                       kevin.williams@yale.edu

Allison E. Green
Princeton University
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
aegreen@princeton.edu




COVID Indices GitHub repo is available at
https://github.com/COVIDExposureIndices/COVIDExposureIndices
1        Introduction
Personal digital devices now generate streams of data that describe human behav-
ior in great detail. The temporal frequency, geographic precision, and novel content
of the “digital exhaust” generated by users of online platforms and digital devices
offer social scientists opportunities to investigate new dimensions of economic
activity. The COVID-19 pandemic has demonstrated the potential for real-time,
high-frequency data to inform economic analysis and policymaking when tradi-
tional data sources deliver statistics less frequently and with some delay.
        In this paper, we discuss the suitability of smartphone data for quantifying
movement and social contact. We show that these data cover a significant fraction of
the US population and are broadly representative of the general population in terms
of residential characteristics and movement patterns. We use these data to produce
a location exposure index (“LEX”) that describes county-to-county movements
and a device exposure index (“DEX”) that quantifies the exposure of devices to
each other within venues. These indices reveal substantial declines in inter-county
travel and social contact in venues in March and April 2020. Compared to pre-
pandemic levels, long-distance travel and the social contact of devices residing in
more college-educated neighborhoods declined relatively more.
        We publish these indices each weekday in a public repository available to all
non-commercial users for research purposes.1 Our aim is to reduce entry costs for
those using smartphone movement data for pandemic-related research. By creating
publicly available indices defined by documented sample-selection criteria, we
hope to ease the comparison and interpretation of results across studies.2 More
broadly, this paper provides guidance on potential benefits and relevant caveats
when using smartphone movement data for economic research.
    1
     The indices and related documentation can be downloaded from https://github.com/
COVIDExposureIndices.
   2
     Examples of research using our indices thus far include Gupta, Nguyen, Rojas, Raman, Lee,
Bento, Simon, and Wing (2020), Monte (2020), Yilmazkuday (2020b), and Yilmazkuday (2020a).

                                              1
    Researchers in economics and other fields are turning to smartphone movement
data to investigate a great variety of social-science questions. Chen and Pope (2020)
use similar smartphone data covering almost 2 million users in 2016 to document
cross-sectional variation in geographic movement across cities and income groups.
We focus on the distinctive advantages of these data’s frequency and immediacy.
A growing body of both theoretical and empirical research investigates human
movement, social contact, and economic activity in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic.3 Our indices provide empirical measures of these phenomena, com-
plementing private-sector real-time measures of social distancing and movement.4
We describe properties of smartphone data, compare the residential distribution
and movement patterns of devices to those in traditional data sources, produce
publicly available indices that can be used to easily compare results across stud-
ies, and investigate potential measurement issues that arise in the context of the
ongoing pandemic.



2    Data
Our smartphone movement data come from PlaceIQ, a location data and analytics
firm. In this section, we describe how PlaceIQ processes devices’ movements to
define visits to venues, and how we select the devices, venues, and visits included
when we compute our exposure indices. We then compare these devices and their
movements to residential populations and movements reported in traditional data
sources.
    3
      Among many others, see Greenstone and Nigam (2020) on the value of social distancing, Mal-
oney and Taskin (2020) on private social distancing, Brzezinski, Deiana, Kecht, and Van Dijcke
(2020) on the effect of government-ordered lockdowns, Engle, Stromme, and Zhou (2020) on corre-
lates of observed social distancing, Farboodi, Jarosch, and Shimer (2020) on optimal policy, Monte
(2020) on mobility zones, and Xiao (2020) on the value of contact-tracing apps.
    4
      For example, Unacast reports distance traveled; Google’s community mobility reports capture
visits to different venue types; and SafeGraph reports time spent at and away from home. Relative
to these measures, our indices are designed to summarize travel and overlapping visits relevant for
COVID-19 circumstances in an IRB-approved public release.



                                                2
2.1      Device Visit Data

PlaceIQ aggregates GPS location data from different smartphone applications using
each device’s unique advertising identifier. The raw GPS data come as pings
that register whenever the application requests location data from the device.5
These pings are joined with a map of two-dimensional polygons, corresponding
to buildings or outdoor features such as public parks, which we denote “venues.”
A timestamped set of pings within or in the close vicinity of a polygon constitutes
a “visit.”6 Since a device’s location is measured with varying precision, PlaceIQ
assigns each visit an attribution score based on ping characteristics and geographic
features. We retain all visits with an attribution score greater than a minimum
threshold. See Appendix A.1 for details.


2.2      Sample Selection

2.2.1     Devices covered

For the typical smartphone in the PlaceIQ data, we observe about six months of
movements, but there is considerable heterogeneity across devices. Each Android
and iOS smartphone has an identifier that uniquely identifies the device at any
given time, and the device’s unique advertising identifier can be refreshed by the
user and may be refreshed by some system updates. Thus, the average lifespan
of an advertising identifier is less than that of a physical phone. Even devices
observed over a long time period may not ping regularly. Ping frequency reflects
a device’s applications, settings, and movements.
       To focus on devices whose (non-)movements can be reliably characterized, we
restrict the set of devices included in the computation of our indices to those that
pinged on at least 11 days over any 14-day period from November 1, 2019 through
   5
      The set of applications is not revealed to us. Some applications collect location data only when
in active use, while others collect location data at regular intervals.
    6
      If a device pings multiple times during a visit, then we have information about visit duration.


                                                  3
the reporting date. The earliest date for which we report our indices is January 20,
2020, so this criterion selects a set of devices based on a window of at least 80 days
of prior potential activity. Later reporting dates have longer windows. Given the
reduced movement associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, a criterion using a
fixed window of prior potential activity would exclude devices that temporarily
reduced their movements. As of June 4, 2020, 53 million devices met this device
selection criterion. On any given day, about 20 million of these devices ping at least
once.
   For a subset of devices, we can assign a residential location with reasonable
confidence, based on the duration of their residential visits since November 1,
2019. Appendix A.2 describes our home assignment algorithm. In short, we
assign home locations based on where devices repeatedly spend time at night. We
use Census-reported demographic characteristics for block groups, which contain
about 600 to 3,000 people, as proxies for device demographics. Since many people
temporarily moved to other residential locations during the pandemic, we assign
a device to a block group of residence based on the block group of its first home
location after November 1, 2019. As of June 4, 2020, 30 million devices have an
assigned block group of residence.
   In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, a potential concern is that devices
may not generate pings when “sheltering in place”, due to their lack of movement.
Indeed, there was a general decline in the number of devices generating pings in
March 2020, presumably due to pandemic-induced declines in movement. When
defining our exposure indices in the next section, we discuss how they are impacted
by devices sheltering in place and suggest potential adjustments.
   Even absent a pandemic, the number of devices appearing in the data varies
meaningfully over time. That variation may reflect changes in smartphone own-
ership patterns, smartphone device settings, app usage, PlaceIQ app coverage,
seasonal variation in behavioral patterns, or an Android or iOS operating system


                                          4
update. These are unlikely explanations for the general decline starting in March
2020, as that decline coincides with the COVID-19 outbreak in the United States
and there has not been a major OS update or major shift in PlaceIQ app coverage
since the beginning of 2020. When publishing our indices, we also publish the
number of devices underlying these values so that researchers can assess when
changes in the exposure indices may not reflect true changes in behavior.7


2.2.2     Venues covered

Venues include commercial establishments, public parks, residential locations, and
polygons lacking an identified business category. When assigning devices’ homes,
only residential locations are relevant. When tracking devices’ movements across
geographic units in the LEX, visits to all such venues are informative.
       When measuring potential social contact by the DEX defined in Section 3, we
restrict attention to venue categories in which most venues are sufficiently small
that visiting devices would be exposed to each other. In particular, we omit the
categories “Residential”, “Nature and Outdoor", “Theme Parks", “Airports", “Uni-
versities", as well as venues without a category identified by PlaceIQ. Finally, note
that PlaceIQ excludes certain venue categories for privacy reasons, such as hospi-
tals, schools, and places of worship.
       The commercial categories included in our DEX calculations account for three-
quarters of a million venues. Since a venue corresponds to a building, certain
types of buildings can belong to multiple categories. For instance, a building with
a coffee shop inside a book store would map to two categories (restaurant and
retail). In most categories, the coverage of chains is high, but we observe a smaller
share of independent businesses.8 For instance, the largest category is restaurants,
   7
      For example, the number of devices drops about 10 percent during April 14-18, 2020. In the
absence of an obvious nationwide shock, this presumably reflects a change in smartphone data
provision rather than a common change in behavior. Such variation will be absorbed by day fixed
effects in difference-in-differences research designs.
    8
      See Appendix C of Couture, Gaubert, Handbury, and Hurst (2020) for details.


                                               5
which has about 200,000 distinct venues containing 370,000 restaurants.9 Table A.2
reports the number of venues within each venue category in the DEX. There is little
variation in the number of venues within January to June 2020.


2.2.3     Locations covered

We report our indices for all US states and most US counties. Many US counties
have few residents and therefore few devices in the PlaceIQ data. The indices we
report are restricted to counties with reasonably large device samples. To imple-
ment this restriction, we assign each device to a unique daily “residential county”,
where that device had the highest (cumulative) duration of time at residential lo-
cations on that date. We report our indices only for the 2,018 counties that were the
residential county of at least 1,000 devices on every day from January 6 to 12, 2020.


2.3      Representativeness

Smartphone data cover a significant fraction of the US population. However, dif-
ferences in smartphone ownership and app use, sample selection rules specific to
research applications, and the use of small geographic units may produce unrepre-
sentative samples.10 For example, older adults are less likely to own smartphones,
making smartphone-derived samples unbalanced across age groups.11
       In this section, we compare the residential distribution and movement patterns
of devices in our sample to those in traditional data sources. This analysis re-
quires restricting our sample to devices assigned a residential block group, which
   9
      US County Business Patterns reports there were about 570,000 establishments in NAICS 7225
in 2017.
   10
      For instance, SafeGraph, another location data provider, found that about 10 percent of block
groups contain 30 to 40 percent of the devices in their data, leading to “disproportionately and some-
times impossibly high” numbers of devices relative to the Census-reported residential population
(Squire, 2019).
   11
      The Pew Research Center estimates that 81 percent of US adults own a smartphone. That
rate varies from 96 percent for ages 18-29 to only 53 percent for those over 65 years. See https:
//www.pewresearch.org/internet/fact-sheet/mobile/.



                                                  6
constitute about 80 percent of the devices in our sample.12
       Panel A of Figure 1 shows that geographic units with larger residential popula-
tion have more devices in our sample residing in them. Regressing the log number
of devices on the US Census Bureau’s 2019 estimate of log residential population
yields an R2 of 0.96 for states and 0.95 for counties. On average, the number of
devices in our sample is about one-tenth of the total population.
       Panel B of Figure 1 investigates the distribution of devices across residential
block groups within each county. The panel shows the share of devices living in
block groups in ten population deciles ranked by income, share white, education,
and population density. For instance, the top-right chart shows that about 10
percent of devices live in each decile of a county’s block group median household
income distribution. Similarly, about 10 percent of devices live in each decile when
we rank block groups within their county by the share of their residents who are
white or college graduates. When looking at deciles ranked by population density,
denser block groups are somewhat underrepresented: only about 7 percent of
devices live in block groups in the highest population-density decile.
       In Appendix Figure B.1, we reproduce Panel B of Figure 1 using national pop-
ulation deciles instead of within-county population deciles. In that case, we find
greater overrepresentation of block groups with low population densities and large
shares of white residents.13 Given that our sample is more representative within
counties than across counties, we suggest that researchers focus on applications of
our indices that rely on within-county variation or on intertemporal cross-county
variation in relative changes. Applications relying on cross-county differences in
levels may be prone to sample-selection bias.



  12
     This restricted sample is the same that we will later use to compute our indices broken down
by demographic group.
  13
     When examining SafeGraph data, Squire (2019) reports the opposite pattern: SafeGraph data
have fewer devices in block groups with more white residents. This suggests that representativeness
may vary across smartphone data providers or sample-selection criteria.


                                                7
                                                                                                           Figure 1: Spatial and Demographic Balance of Device Populations
                                                           (a) Number of devices and residential population                                                                                                    (b) Share of devices by block-group demographic decile
                                                                                       State                                                                                           County                                                            Population Density                                                    Median Household Income




                                                                                                                                                                14




                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .1




                                                           14
                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .05




                                                           13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Proportion of Devices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Proportion of Devices




                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10                                 1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10




                                                                                                                                                                8




                                                           11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Share White                                                        Share College Educated




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .15




              Smartphone Devices Residing in State (log)
                                                                                                                  Smartphone Devices Residing in County (log)
                                                                                                                                                                6




                                                           10
                                                                13       14       15           16     17     18                                                      8          10        12         14   16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .1




                                                                            State Population (log)                                                                              County Population (log)
                                                                           2                                                                                                    2
                                                                β = 1.08, R = 0.96                                                                                   β = 0.93, R = 0.95




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Proportion of Devices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Proportion of Devices




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10                                 1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Deciles by Population




8
                                                                          (c) Annual Out-of-State Mover Share                                                                                                                                    (d) Device Movement Representativeness

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .1




                                                            .1
                                                            .08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .08




                                                            .06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Density




                                                            .04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                .04




                                                            .02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .02




              Out−of−State Mover Share (PlaceIQ)
                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                     0                  .02                .04                                                           .06                   .08        .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0                                   10                                                 20                                30
                                                                                          Out−of−State Mover Share (IRS returns)                                                                                                                                                      Distance Traveled (km)
                                                                                                    Fitted line                                                                45−degree line                                                                NHTS Low Pop Density                                                   NHTS High Pop Density
                                                                                          2                                                                                                                                                                  PlaceIQ Low Pop. Density                                               PlaceIQ High Pop. Density
                                                                     β = 0.74, R = 0.85, Number of devices = 5.35 million


    Panel A compares the number of devices residing in a geographic unit (vertical axis) to the Census’s estimated 2019 residential population (horizontal axis) for all states, and
    for the 2,018 counties in the DEX and LEX. Panel B depicts the share of devices with residing in block groups in each within-county decile of population density, median
    household income, share of white residents, and share of residents over 25 years with a bachelor’s degree or higher. These block group characteristics are from the 2014-2018
    American Community Survey. Panel C compares, for each state, the share of devices that resided in another state over the last year (vertical axis) to the share of tax filers who
    reported an address in a different state on the previous year’s tax return in the 2017-2018 IRS Migration Data (horizontal axis). Panel D depicts a kernel density plot of trip
    length in kilometers, for trips from home to a commercial venue in the PlaceIQ data and in the 2017 NHTS, for residents of block groups in the top and bottom quartile of the
    population-density distribution.
       Panel C of Figure 1 examines residential migration. For each state, Panel C
compares the share of devices that moved from another state during the prior
year to the share of new residents in the 2017-2018 Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
Migration Data. To facilitate this comparison, we restrict attention to the 5.4 million
devices in the PlaceIQ data with non-missing home assignments in both the first
and last week of 2019. Using this sample, we compute the share of devices in each
state in the last week of 2019 that were residing in a different state in the first week
of 2019. At the state level, this share of devices and the share of IRS-reported tax
returns are highly correlated: regressing the PlaceIQ share on the IRS share yields
an R2 exceeding 0.8. At the county level, the correlation is considerably weaker,
yielding an R2 of only 0.15. This reflects in part smaller samples at the county level:
if we restrict attention to counties with populations greater than 100,000, the R2
increases to 0.25, and for county populations greater than 200,000 people, the R2
rises further to 0.50.
       Panel D of Figure 1 examines travel from home to commercial venues by depict-
ing the distributions of trip lengths in our smartphone data and the 2017 National
Household Transportation Survey (NHTS). For the PlaceIQ data, we show trips to
venues included in the DEX computation.14 For the NHTS, we show trips within
the trip-purpose categories that most closely match DEX venues.15 The figure de-
picts two trip-length distributions for each data source, one for people or devices
living in block groups within the top quartile of the population density distribution,
and one for people or devices living in the bottom quartile. The smartphone and
NHTS trip-length distributions are remarkably similar, and both show a greater
propensity to make shorter trips in more densely populated areas.
       Overall, the patterns documented in Figure 1 suggest the potential of broadly
  14
      A trip is from home if the device’s previous visit was its home within the previous hour. We
estimate driving distance (trip length) as 1.5 times the straight-line distance between the home and
venue.
   15
      These NHTS categories are "buy goods", "buy services", "buy meals", "other general errands",
"recreational activities", and "exercise".


                                                 9
representative smartphone data for use in economic research. That said, we encour-
age researchers using these data to evaluate the precision and representativeness of
their sample in their particular context. To help researchers assess whether our in-
dices are suitably precise for their research application, we publish the underlying
number of devices for each index, day, and geographic unit.



3        Exposure Indices
In this section, we describe how we compute the location exposure index, which
measures state-to-state or county-to-county movement, and the device exposure
index, which measures state- or county-level average exposure of devices to each
other within commercial venues.


3.1      Notation and Preliminaries

We use the following notation when defining the LEX and DEX. Let i index devices,
j index venues, g index geographic units (counties or states), and t and d index
dates. Let pijt ∈ {0, 1} and pigt ∈ {0, 1} be equal one if device i pinged in venue j
or geography g, respectively, on date t. Define pit ≡ max g pigt as an indicator that
equals one if device i pinged in any geographic unit on date t. Let rigt ∈ {0, 1} be
equal one when device i resided in g at date t, where we assign residence based on
the geographic unit in which the device spent the most time in residential venues
on that date.16
     Next, we define sets of devices and venues based on these indicators. Let
       n            o           n            o
I j,d ≡ i : pijd = 1 and I g,d ≡ i : pigd = 1 denote the sets of devices that pinged in
                                                                    n          o
venue j or geographic unit g, respectively, on date d. Let G g,d ≡ i : rigd = 1 denote
                                                                            n         o
the set of devices that reside in geographic unit g on date d. Let Ji,d ≡ j : pijd = 1
denote the set of venues where device i pinged on date d.
    16
    In the event of a tie, the geographic unit of residence is assigned based on visits to non-residential
locations.

                                                   10
3.2      Location Exposure Index (LEX)

The LEX is a matrix that answers the following query: Among smartphones that
pinged in geographic unit g0 on date d, what share of those devices pinged in
geographic unit g at least once during the previous 14 days? We report the LEX as
a daily G × G matrix, in which each cell reports, among devices that pinged on day
d in the column location g0 , the share of devices that pinged in the row location g at
least once during the previous 14 days (conditional on pinging anywhere during
the previous 14 days). Thus, each element of this matrix is
                                   nPd−1              o P n                                       o
                                                 >
                                                                                   Pd−1
                                                                             =                 >
                      P
                      i∈I g0 ,d  1           p
                                      t=d−14 igt   0      i  1 i  :  p   0
                                                                       ig d    1 &         p
                                                                                    t=d−14 igt   0
       LEX gg0 d   ≡ P              nPd−1            o = P n                      Pd−1           o .
                       i∈I g0 ,d 1           p
                                       t=d−14 it > 0       i 1  i  : p     0
                                                                        ig d = 1 &         p
                                                                                     t=d−14 it > 0

As an example, if g0 is New York County, NY and g is Suffolk County, NY, then
LEX gg0 d is the share of devices pinging in Suffolk County on day d that also pinged
in New York County over the last 14 days (conditional on pinging anywhere in the
US in the last 14 days).
       We define the LEX to summarize people’s movements with pandemic-related
applications in mind. The index describes the share of people in a given location
who have been in other locations during the prior two weeks. Thus, if COVID-19
cases surge in county g, LEX gg0 d describes the potential exposure of county g0 to
the infectious disease via prior human movement from county g to g0 . We chose
the 14-day period of exposure based on the incubation period commonly cited
by public-health authorities during the ongoing pandemic.17 We chose to focus
on all devices pinging in a given location rather than only residents because all
human movement is relevant for potential disease exposure. Similarly, LEXd is
not a transition matrix and its columns do not sum to one because a device can
  17
    The CDC’s COVID-19 FAQ page: “Based on existing literature, the incubation period (the
time from exposure to development of symptoms) of SARS-CoV-2 and other coronaviruses (e.g.
MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV) ranges from 2–14 days.”



                                                      11
visit multiple location during the 14-day period. The temporal frequency and
geographic units were selected to protect device user privacy in the context of
a public data release. For other research applications, the appropriate length of
exposure or geographic units may vary.
   Starting in March 2020, there was a general decline in the number of devices
generating pings, presumably due to individuals restricting their movements in
response to the pandemic. Both the numerator and denominator of LEX gg0 d restrict
attention to devices that ping in g0 on day d (i ∈ I g0 ,d ), so the LEX captures the
locational histories of devices that are “out and about” in geographic unit g0 on
date d and does not capture the locational histories of devices sheltering-in-place
and not generating any pings. This seems the relevant notion of potential exposure
in the context of the ongoing pandemic: the index captures non-local exposure
associated with “active” devices that are moving around within location g0 . For
applications that require measuring exposure for the entire population of devices,
including those that do not generate pings, we have published the daily number of
devices that ping in each county, so that researchers can adjust their computations.


3.3   Device Exposure Index (DEX)

The DEX is a county- or state-level scalar that answers the following query: How
many distinct devices does the average device living in g encounter via overlapping
visits to commercial venues on each day? To compute the DEX, we first calculate
the daily exposure set of device i as the number of distinct other devices that visit
any commercial venue that i visits on date t:

                                            [
                                 EXPi,d =            I j,d .
                                            j∈Ji,d




                                         12
The DEX is then defined as the average size of the exposure set for devices that
reside in geographic unit g on date d:

                                              1 X
                            DEX g,d ≡                    |EXPi,d |.
                                            |G g,d | i∈G
                                                          g,d




Note that the DEX values are necessarily only a fraction of the number of distinct
individuals that also visited any of the commercial venues visited by a device, since
only a fraction of individuals, venues, and visits are in the device sample.
   We have defined the DEX to summarize social contact with pandemic-related
applications in mind. The index captures overlapping visits to venues on the same
day, which is relevant for potential virus exposure. We chose to define overlapping
visits as visits to a venue on the same day rather than during the same hour based
on both sample size and the concern that SARS-CoV-2 can persist in circulating air
and on surfaces for multiple hours. The geographic units were selected to protect
user privacy in the context of a public data release.
   Note that devices sheltering in place would drop out of the sample used to com-
pute the DEX if they did not generate any pings. As a result, the DEX may underes-
timate the reduction in exposure following the COVID-19 outbreak. We therefore
implement a simple adjustment of the DEX g,d denominator as one means of ad-
dressing the potential sample selection problem associated with devices sheltering-
in-place. Define a counterfactual set of pinging devices G∗g,d such that any device
in G∗g,d but not in the observed G g,d is sheltering in place with |EXPi,d | = 0. The
adjusted DEX is
                                      adjusted       |G g,d |
                             DEX g,d             =            DEX g,d .
                                                     |G∗g,d |

We assign the counterfactual set G∗g,d to be the largest number of devices observed
on any day from January 20, 2020 to February 14, 2020 in geographic unit g, so that:


                          [
                          |G∗
                             g,d
                                 |=              max                |G g,d |
                                      d∈[20 Jan 2020,14 Feb 2020]


                                                 13
             ∗                            adjusted
Given that |G
            d
              g,d
                  | is an upper bound, DEX g,d     likely overestimates the drop in
exposure following the COVID-19 outbreak. On the other hand, as noted above,
the unadjusted DEX g,d likely underestimates the drop in exposure.18 Together, these
series should offer useful bounds. As mentioned before, even absent a pandemic
there is meaningful variation in the number of devices in the sample that affect the
DEX.
       For devices that have a home assigned, we compute DEX values by the de-
mographic characteristics of their residential block group. We only report these
demographic DEX values at the state level, due to sample size and privacy consid-
erations.


DEX by income Within each state g, we partition all census block groups into
four median income quartiles with an equal number of block groups. We index
these quartiles by q ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}. Within each state g on each day d, we denote by
G g,q,d the set of devices i that have a home in a block group within quartile q.19 The
DEX by income is then:

                                                         X EXPi,d
                                DEX-income g,q,d =
                                                        i∈G
                                                            |G g,q,d |
                                                           g,q,d




DEX by education The DEX by education is the same as the DEX by income,
except that the four quartiles are based on the college share within each block
  18
      In practice, while the average absolute difference between the state-level unadjusted and ad-
justed DEX values is 7 percent, the two indices have a correlation coefficient of 0.996 in levels and
0.992 in first differences. Figure B.2 shows that the population-weighted median values of the
unadjusted and adjusted DEX track each other closely over time. The adjusted DEX should not be
used when |G g,d | > |G∗g,d |, which will occur as social contact resumes and devices stop sheltering in
place.
   19
      Note that the residential block group is not necessarily within geographic-unit-of-residence g.
This allows for cases where a device leaves their assigned home to shelter in place somewhere
else. For example, if a device’s home is in a block group in New York corresponding to the bottom
income quartile, and it moves to Pennsylvania to shelter in place, that device is still assigned to the
first income quartile but its state of residence changes to Pennsylvania.




                                                  14
group.20


DEX by race/ethnicity We report DEX values by racial/ethnic categories available
in the Census of Population. For each r ∈ {Asian, Black, Hispanic, White}, we report
a weighted average of device-level exposure,

                                                    X wi,r EXPi,d
                               DEX-race g,d,k =        P           ,
                                                   i∈G
                                                             w i,r
                                                      g,q,d   i∈G g,q,d



where wi,r is the residential share of race/ethnicity r in device i’s block group.21



4        Tracking activity during the 2020 pandemic
We now use the LEX and the DEX to document pandemic-induced reductions in
activity during 2020 and explore how they vary across people and places.


4.1      Reduced movement between US counties

To illustrate the movement detail captured by the county-to-county LEX, in Figure 2
we plot the fraction of devices that pinged in Manhattan (New York County), one
of the early US epicenters of the pandemic. The maps depict the share of devices
in each US county that had pinged in Manhattan during the previous two weeks
on the last Saturday of February, March, April, and May 2020. The February panel
shows a clear role for physical distance, as counties closer to Manhattan typically
have a larger share of devices that have been in Manhattan during the previous
two weeks, but it also makes clear that physical distance and county-to-county
    20
    The college share is the share of adults 25-65 years old with at least a four-year college degree.
    21
    To be precise, the categories “Asian,” “Black,” “Hispanic,” and “White” are shorthand for
non-Hispanic Asian, non-Hispanic black, all Hispanic, and non-Hispanic white residents. These
four categories are sufficiently large to be reported for many geographic units. In a few states, the
number of recorded devices is low for some of these four racial/ethnic groups. We only report the
DEX-race for a given racial/ethnic group in states where the weighted number of devices for that
group is at least 1,000 devices every day from January 6 to 12, 2020.


                                                 15
movements are distinct. These measures of county-to-county movement should
be more useful than physical distance in applications describing person-to-person
economic linkages and disease spread.
   The LEX reveals a swift decline in travel between New York County and other
counties over the course of March 2020. While Figure 2 suggests a broad decline
in the share of devices that had been in New York County during the previous
two weeks, the decline appears greater in counties farther from New York City.
Movements connected to New York County became more spatially concentrated
by late April. A modest increase in inter-county travel is visible by late May.
   Figure B.3 provides a contrasting example, depicting counties’ exposure to
Houston, Texas (Harris County). In that case, although there is a sizable decline in
the shares of devices on the east coast that have recently been in Houston, travel
from Houston to southern and southwestern counties shows little to no decline.
Because the county-to-county LEX matrix reports more than 4 million values for
each day, maps like those in Figure 2 and B.3 offer only a glimpse of the movement
patterns captured by these data.
   To summarize daily LEX values for the entire United States, Figure 3 depicts
changes in state-level LEX values by physical proximity. We group pairs of states
based on the distance between them and compute the daily mean value of LEX gg0 d
for each group. For example, the shortest-distance group consists of all states g and
g0 such that the distance between the population-weighted centroids of g and g0 are
less than 100 miles apart. The longest-distance group consists of state pairs with
population-weighted centroids more than 1,500 miles apart. To illustrate relative
declines, Figure 3 depicts the mean daily LEX value for each distance-defined group
of state pairs relative to its value on March 1, 2020.




                                          16
                                  Figure 2: County-Level Exposure to New York County (Manhattan)

                      Panel A: February 29, 2020                                                  Panel B: March 28, 2020




                         Panel C: April 25, 2020                                                   Panel D: May 30, 2020




17
     Notes: Each panel of this figure depicts, for each of 2,018 counties, the share of devices pinging in that county that had pinged in New York,
     New York during the previous 14 days. The four panels depicts this for four Saturdays in early 2020. Using the notation of Section 3, the
     three panels depict LEX36061,g0 ,d for d equal to February 29, March 28, April 25, and May 30 of 2020, where 36061 is the FIPS code for New
     York County.
                                                 Figure 3: State-level LEX values by distance between states



                                        100
Percentage, Relative to March 1, 2020




                                         80

                                         60    State LEX, distance band of 0-100 miles
                                               State LEX, distance band of 100-250 miles
                                         40    State LEX, distance band of 250-750 miles
                                               State LEX, distance band of 750-1500 miles
                                               State LEX, distance band of > 1500 miles
                                         20    State LEX, Alaska and Hawaii
                                               TSA throughput
                                               Highway Traffic
                                          0
                                                      02/01               03/01             04/01     05/01   06/01   07/01
                                                                                               Date

Notes: This figure depicts average LEX values for pairs of states grouped by the distance between
their population-weighted centroids. Each series is normalized relative to its value on March 1,
2020. The TSA throughput series reports the number of travelers passing through TSA checkpoints
on each day.


                                         Although the average LEX value declines for all state pairs through late April,
pairs of states that are farther apart tended to exhibit larger relative declines. By
mid-April, state-level LEX values at all distances were down 40 percent relative to
their earlier levels. For comparison, monthly total vehicle-miles traveled, a measure
that reflects both intrastate and interstate travel, fell by about 40 percent from
February to April.22 The steepest decline observed is for state pairs that include
Alaska or Hawaii where across-state movements depend heavily on air travel.23
This decline, which was down about 90 percent by mid-April, closely tracks the
decline in daily checkpoint totals at US airports reported by the Transportation
Security Administration (TSA) two weeks earlier, as the LEX captures inter-state
movements using a fourteen-day window. Inter-state travel at all distances began
   22
      We computed this figure using monthly seasonally adjusted vehicle-miles-traveled estimates
from the Federal Highway Administration (series TRFVOLUSM227SFWA at https://fred.
stlouisfed.org). Note that total distance traveled and the notion of exposure captured by the
LEX are distinct concepts.
   23
      Alaska and Hawaii are both at least 1,400 miles from every other US state.


                                                                                            18
to rise in late April 2020.


4.2       Reduced overlapping visits to venues

Figure 4 maps the county-level DEX on the last Saturday of February, March, April,
and May 2020 relative to its level on Saturday, February 1. Panel A shows a rise in
activity nationwide in late February. The median county saw a 20 percent increase
in the DEX between February 1 and February 29. A similar relative uptick in
activity in February 2019 suggests this increase is likely regular seasonal variation
rather than a pandemic-induced shift. Panel B shows a reduction in activity over
the subsequent four weeks in all but two counties. On March 28, the median
county’s DEX was just 35 percent of its February 1 level.24 Panel C shows that by
late April, activity had increased across much of the country, though even in late
May (Panel D) it remained lower than it was in early February, by more than a
factor of two in the greater New York City area, California, Washington, and the
southern tip of Florida. The counties that saw outsized growth in activity by late
May are often summer vacation destinations, such as Dare County, NC (containing
the Outer Banks) and Bay County, FL (containing Panama City).
       Some of this variation might be explained by policy differences. Appendix
Figure B.5 depicts the evolution of the county-level DEX around policy events after
controlling for county and time fixed effects. As in Brzezinski, Deiana, Kecht, and
Van Dijcke (2020), we find that some of the DEX decline coincided with the timing of
shelter-in-place orders, after which the DEX dropped by approximately 20 percent.
A similar event study suggests a more modest and gradual increase in activity
following the re-opening of non-essential businesses, with the DEX increasing by
less than 10 percent relative to its pre-opening level a week after the event. We
note that given how many forces are simultaneously impacting people’s movement
during the pandemic, these simple regressions are necessarily only suggestive.

  24
       Figure B.4 plots the population-weighted median and interquartile range of the DEX over time.


                                                  19
                    Figure 4: County-Level Device Exposure (DEX) Normalized to Level on February 1, 2020

                     Panel A: February 29, 2020                                             Panel B: March 28, 2020




                       Panel C: April 25, 2020                                               Panel D: May 30, 2020




20
     Notes: This figure shows the county-level average device exposure (DEX) on a given date (February 29 in Panel A, March 28 in Panel B,
     April 25 in Panel C, and May 30 in Panel D) as a percentage of its level on February 1, 2020.
                                                                         Figure 5: DEX values by block-group demographics
                                                              (a) by educational attainment                                                                         (b) by racial/ethnic demographics
                                                    1.75




                                                                                                                                                             1.75
 Group−Specific DEX Rel. to Aggregate DEX Feb. 1, 2020




                                                                                                          Group−Specific DEX Rel. to Aggregate DEX Feb. 1, 2020
                                            1.5




                                                                                                                                                     1.5
                                     1.25




                                                                                                                                              1.25
                              1




                                                                                                                                       1
                     .75




                                                                                                                              .75
               .5




                                                                                                                        .5
      .25




                                                                                                               .25
 0




                                                                                                          0

                                                           1/20 2/4 2/19 3/5 3/20 4/4 4/19 5/4 5/19 6/3                                                             1/20 2/4 2/19 3/5 3/20 4/4 4/19 5/4 5/19 6/3
                                                                               Date                                                                                                       Date
                                                                   First Quartile       Second Quartile                                                                           White           Asian
                                                                   Third Quartile       Fourth Quartile                                                                           Black           Hispanic


Notes: These plots depict the state-level DEX by demographic groups. For each state, the demo-
graphic DEX time series is divided by the level of the aggregate DEX on February 1, 2020. The
depicted series is a device-weighted average over all states. Panel A depicts this series for DEX by
education and Panel B depicts this series for DEX by race/ethnicity as defined in Section 3.


                                      Figure 5 reveals variation in the reduction in activity across educational at-
tainment and race. Panel A depicts each DEX-education quartile relative to the
aggregate DEX on February 1. Prior to the onset of COVID-19 in the U.S., residents
of block groups with more college graduates were more exposed to other devices
than average.25 In March, exposure fell for residents of all block groups, but res-
idents of block groups with more college graduates exhibited a proportionately
greater decline. As a result, by the end of March 2020, there was little discernible
difference in device exposure across neighborhoods with different shares of col-
lege graduates. After converging, device exposure remained at low levels through
        25
    This is consistent with the finding that devices from higher-income neighborhoods visit more
places (Chen and Pope, 2020).



                                                                                                          21
April and May, at roughly one-third of the pre-pandemic average. This represents
a 70 percent decline in the DEX for devices residing in block groups above the
median college-graduate share and a 55 percent decline in the DEX for devices in
below-median block groups.
   Panel B of Figure 5 depicts device exposure by racial/ethnic demographics. Prior
to the pandemic, devices living in block groups with more Black, Hispanic, and
White residents had similar levels of exposure, while devices living in block groups
with more Asian residents had higher DEX values. From mid-March onwards, all
four demographic groups exhibited similarly low exposure levels.
   The limited variation in device exposure across different demographic groups
after March 15 may imply a limited role for heterogeneous exposure rates in ex-
plaining differences in these demographic groups’ infection and mortality rates
during the pandemic. Researchers investigating these questions could combine
these local measures of social contact by demographic traits with other observed
demographic differences that may explain disparate outcomes.
   These initial applications of our indices demonstrate the potential of smart-
phone movement data to quantify movement and social contact with high fre-
quency and spatial precision. We have also articulated a number of caveats relevant
for researchers using such data. We hope that our publicly available indices will
support deeper and varied investigation of human movement during the ongoing
pandemic.




                                        22
References
Brzezinski, A., G. Deiana, V. Kecht, and D. Van Dijcke (2020): “The covid-19 pan-
  demic: government vs. community action across the united states,” Discussion
  paper, CEPR.
Chen, M. K., and D. G. Pope (2020): “Geographic Mobility in America: Evidence
 from Cell Phone Data,” Working Paper 27072, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.
Couture, V., C. Gaubert, J. Handbury, and E. Hurst (2020): “Income Growth and
 the Distributional Effects of Urban Spatial Sorting,” .
Engle, S., J. Stromme, and A. Zhou (2020): “Staying at home: Mobility effects of
  Covid-19,” Discussion paper, Covid Economics: Vetted and Real Time Papers.
Farboodi, M., G. Jarosch, and R. Shimer (2020): “Internal and External Effects of
  Social Distancing in a Pandemic,” mimeo.
Greenstone, M., and V. Nigam (2020): “Does social distancing matter?,” Discussion
 Paper 2020-26, University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics.
Gupta, S., T. D. Nguyen, F. L. Rojas, S. Raman, B. Lee, A. Bento, K. I. Simon, and
 C. Wing (2020): “Tracking public and private response to the covid-19 epidemic:
 Evidence from state and local government actions,” Discussion paper, National
 Bureau of Economic Research.
Maloney, W. F., and T. Taskin (2020): “Determinants of social distancing and
 economic activity during COVID-19: A global view,” Discussion Paper 9242,
 World Bank, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper.
Monte, F. (2020): “Mobility Zones,” mimeo.
Raifman, J., K. Nocka, D. Jones, J. Bor, S. Lipson, J. Jay, and P. Chan (2020):
  “COVID-19 US state policy database,” Boston, MA: Boston University.
Squire, R. F. (2019): “Quantifying Sampling Bias in SafeGraph Patterns,”
  https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1u15afRytJMsizySFqA2EPlXSh3KTmNTQ.
Xiao, K. (2020): “Saving Lives versus Saving Livelihoods: Can Big Data Technology
  Solve the Pandemic Dilemma?,” Discussion paper, Available at SSRN 3583919.
Yilmazkuday, H. (2020a): “COVID-19 and Unequal Social Distancing across De-
  mographic Groups,” Discussion paper, Available at SSRN 3580302.
       (2020b): “COVID-19 Deaths and Inter-County Travel: Daily Evidence from
  the US,” Discussion paper, Available at SSRN 3568838.

                                       23
                  Appendix – For Online Publication

A        Data appendix

A.1       Smartphone visits data

Each observed visit consists of a device, a venue, a timestamp, and an attribution
score. PlaceIQ’s attribution scores are larger when a device is more likely to have
been within a venue, based on the number and density of pings, data source of
pings, and proximity of the pings to the polygon defining the venue. We retain
all visits with an attribution score greater than a threshold value recommended
by PlaceIQ based on their experience correlating their data to a diverse array of
truth sets, including consumer spending data and foot-traffic counts. PlaceIQ
also reports a lower bound for the visit’s duration based on the time between
consecutive pings at the same venue.
       We also clean the visit data to remove simultaneous visits. For instance, when
two venues are in close proximity to one other, a single visit event may have an
attribution score for both venues that exceeds the threshold value recommended
by PlaceIQ. We retain only the visit to the venue with the highest attribution score.
In other cases, the polygons of two different venues overlap.26 When two polygons
overlap, we retain polygons with an identified business category over those lacking
a category.
       Table A.1 summarizes the smartphone movement data after this cleaning for
days between January 20 and March 1, 2020. On the average day, there were
176 million visits produced by 33 million devices visiting 40 million residential
and non-residential venues. The average device appears in the data for 25 days
between January 20 and March 1, but a notable number appear on only one day.
  26
     This could happen, for instance, if the basemap contains one polygon representing a business
establishment and a second polygon representing both that building and the accompanying parking
lot.

                                              A1
After we apply the device selection criteria we use when computing the LEX and
DEX indices (devices that pinged on at least 11 days over any 14-day period from
November 1, 2019 through the reporting date), there are 152 million visits from 23
million devices visiting 37 million venues on an average day. The selected devices
appear in the data between January 20 and March 1 for 35 days on average.

        Table A.1: Summary statistics for cleaned visits and indices samples

                      Cleaned visits sample                           Indices sample
                 Mean         SD        5th      95th        Mean         SD        5th      95th
  Devices   33.43  1.92  31.15                  36.58        22.80      0.49     22.05      23.61
  Venues    40.46  0.81  39.17                  41.51        36.88      0.92     35.35      38.28
  Visits   175.85 11.33 154.15                 191.12       151.56     11.30    132.59     166.74
  Duration  25.81 14.31   1.00                  41.00        34.91      9.89     11.00      41.00
  Notes: This table summarizes PlaceIQ data for January 20, 2020 to March 1, 2020 after our
  cleaning of the visits as described in the text. The counts of devices, venues, and visits are
  stated in millions per day. Duration is the number of days between a device’s first and last
  appearance in the data (between January 20 and March 1).




A.2     Home assignments

Residential venues are a distinct category in the PlaceIQ data. This allows us
to construct a weekly panel of home locations for a subset of devices using the
following assignment methodology:

   1. For each week, we assign a device to the residential venue where its total
       weekly visit duration at night (between 5pm and 9am) is longest, conditional
       on it making at least three nighttime visits to that venue within the week.27 If
       a device does not visit any residential location on at least three nights, then
       on initial assignment that device-week pair has a missing residential location.
  27
     Since we only observe minimum duration, there are instances where total duration is 0 across
all residential locations. In these cases, we assign the residential venue as the venue a device makes
the most nighttime visits.



                                                 A2
                         Table A.2: Venue categories in DEX

                      Retail                                   209,274
                      Restaurants                              200,839
                      Gas Station/Convenience Stores           118,307
                      Night Clubs/Bars                          88,784
                      Banks                                     79,150
                      Shipping                                  36,745
                      Hotels                                    32,303
                      Home Improvement Stores                   27,097
                      Grocery Stores                            25,770
                      Financial Services                        23,238
                      Pharmacies                                22,408
                      Car Dealerships                           20,644
                      Beauty Stores                             15,556
                      Big Box Stores                            11,558
                      Real Estate Offices                        9,732
                      Gyms                                       9,289
                      Car Rental                                 8,999
                      Pay Day Loan                               6,043
                      Storage                                    5,935
                      Movie Theaters                             4,632
                      Library                                    1,962
                      Liquor Stores                              1,193
Notes: This table lists the venue categories that enter the computation of the Device Exposure
Index (DEX) and shows the total number of distinct venues on 30 June 2020 in each category.
Some venues belong to multiple categories, so the number of distinct venues (about three-
quarters of a million) is smaller than the sum of all rows in this table.



2. After this preliminary assignment, we fill in missing weeks and adjust for
    noisiness in the initial panel using the following interpolation rules:

Rule 1: Change “X · X" to “X X X”: If the residential assignment for a week is
          missing and the non-missing residential assignment in the weeks before
          and after is the same, we replace the missing value with that residential
          assignment.

Rule 2: “a X Y X b” to “a X X X b” where a , Y and b , Y: If a device
          has a residential assignment Y that does not match the assignment X in

                                             A3
            the week before or after, we replace Y with X as long as Y was not the
            residential assignment two weeks before or two weeks after.28

   3. After step 2’s interpolation, for any spells of at least four consecutive weeks
       where a device is assigned the same residential venue, we assign that venue
       as a device’s "home" for those weeks. Spells of less than four weeks are set to
       missing.

   4. If a device has more than one home assignment and the pairwise distance
       between them is less than 0.1 kilometers, we keep the home that appears for
       the most weeks.

   5. If a device has the same home assignment in two non-consecutive periods and
       no other home assignments in between, then we assign all weeks in between
       to that home assignment.




  28
    For cases where a device’s residential location is bouncing between two places (“Y X Y X X”)
we are not able to ascertain whether Y or X is more likely to be a device’s residence in a given week


                                                A4
B     Figures appendix




Figure B.1: Balance of devices’ residences across block groups by national demo-
graphic deciles



                                              Population Density                                                     Median Household Income
                               .15




                                                                                                          .15
          Proportion of Devices




                                                                                     Proportion of Devices
                       .1




                                                                                                  .1
             .05




                                                                                        .05
                       0




                                                                                                  0




                                      1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10                                    1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10


                                                  Share White                                                         Share College Educated
                                .15




                                                                                                           .15
          Proportion of Devices




                                                                                     Proportion of Devices
                       .1




                                                                                                  .1
             .05




                                                                                        .05
                       0




                                                                                                  0




                                      1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10                                    1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10

                                                                      Deciles by Population


Notes: This figure shows the total share of devices living in census block groups corresponding to
the national deciles for each of the four demographic categories.


                                                                                A5
                        Figure B.2: DEX and DEX-A over time
                         Panel A: Raw Device Exposure Index




                       Panel B: Normalized to February 1, 2020




Notes: This figure shows the population-weighted median unadjusted and adjusted device expo-
sure indices (DEX and DEX-A) over time.




                                            A6
                                     Figure B.3: County-Level Exposure to Harris County (Houston)

                      Panel A: February 29, 2020                                                  Panel B: March 28, 2020




                         Panel C: April 25, 2020                                                   Panel D: May 30, 2020




A7
     Notes: Each panel of this figure depicts, for each of 2,018 counties, the share of devices pinging in that county that had pinged in Harris
     County, Texas during the previous 14 days. The four panels depicts this for four Saturdays in early 2020. Using the notation of Section 3, the
     three panels depict LEX48201,g0 ,d for d equal to February 29, March 28, April 25, and May 30 of 2020, where 48201 is the FIPS code for Harris
     County.
                  Figure B.4: Interquartile Range of DEX over time
                         Panel A: Raw Device Exposure Index




                       Panel B: Normalized to February 1, 2020




Notes: This figure shows the population-weighted median and interquartile range, of the device
exposure index over time.




                                             A8
              Figure B.5: Changes in DEX Relative to Lockdown Policies
                                 Panel A: Using All Variation




        Panel B: Only Using Cross-State Variation within Commuting Zones




Notes: Each plot in this figure presents the coefficients estimated in a regression of the county-level
device exposure index on dummies for the time since a given policy change. In Panel A, these
regressions also include county and date fixed effects. In Panel B, the regressions include county
and commuting zone-by-date fixed effects. Each plot presents the results for a different state-wide
policy, each drawn from Raifman, Nocka, Jones, Bor, Lipson, Jay, and Chan (2020). Each point
represents the coefficient on the dummy for a given number of days since the policy was instituted,
with the bands reflecting 95% confidence bounds on those estimates.
                                                 A9
