                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                FINANCIAL FACTORS IN BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS




                                Mark Certler

                             R. Glenn Hubbard




                           Working Paper No. 2758




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                November 1988




Prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's Symposium on Financial
Market Volatility, August 17-19, 1988. In Jackson Hole, Wyoming. This
research is part of NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                      NBER Working Paper #2758
                                      November 1988


                FINANCIAL FACTORS TN BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS


                                 ABSTRAcT




Recent research in macroeconomics —- both theoretical and empirical-- has

resurrected the idea that capital market imperfections may be

significant factors in business volatility by making new progress in

characterizing the mechanisms. This paper outlines a case for a

financial aspect to business fluctuations, in light of the contributions

of this rew literature. We present a theoretical model that explicitly

motivates how financial factors may affect investment. We then report

some existing tests of the model's basic predictions4 and also present

two new sets of results. The first demonstrates that the inverse

relation between sales variability and size documented in many studies

may be due to financial rather than technological factors, in contrast

to the conventional view. The second lends support to a theoretical

prediction of the model4 that the effects of capital market frictions on

investment should be asyrnetric -- having more impact in recessions than

booms. The final section presents conclusions, and addresses some

policy questions.




Matk Gertler                           R. Glenn Hubbard
Department of Economics                Graduate school of Business
University of Wisconsin                Columbia University
7430 social Science Building           Uris Hall. 609
Madison, WI 53706                      New York, NY 10027
INTRODUCTION

  What role do financial market imperfections         play   in bu.siness

fluctuations? This is a very old question, of course, one which surfaced

as early as the Great Depression, motivated then by the collapse of the

financial eystem that occurred just       prior   to the trough. There is new

interest, however. Events such as the stock market crash, the debacle in

Texas banking, the farm debt crisis, and the Third World debt problem have

filtered    into lunch table conversations, prompting new debates about the
link between the financial system and the macroeconomy. At a more formal
level, recent    research in    macroeconomics -- both   theoretical and

empirical    - - has   resurrected the idea that capital. market imperfections may
be significant factors in business volatility by making new progress in
characterizing the mechanisms.
  This    paper outlines the case for a financial aspect to business

fluctuations,    in light of the contributions of this new literature. It
also reviews some of the main evidence supporting this idea, evidence based
on both historical and contemporary data. Finally, it presents some new
empirical results consistent with the notion that particular capital market
imperfections may contribute to the volatility of business output and

business fixed investment, in particular.         -

  To   keep matters manageable, the analysis concentrates mainly on the
implications of financial market frictions         for investment volatility,

though some of the basic arguments are relevant to explaining fluctuations

in employment demand,       inventory investment, and consumption' (particularly
expenditures    on durable goods), as we discuss below. Also for
                                        2,
tractability, the paper focuses on financial as opposed to monetary factors

in business fluctuations. The following crude distinction is made: Factors

involving imperfections in markets for borrowing and lending are considered

"financial," while those involving variations in the quantity of the medium

of exchange are considered "monetary.

  the next'section expands on themotivation, and provides a general

overview of the arguments we plan to make. We review informally existing

evidence that supports these arguments. We then present a theoretical

model that explicitly motivates how financial factors may affect

investment, one which is a simplified and representative version of the

models currently popular in macroeconomics   Following that presentation,

we report some existing tests of the model's basic predictions, and also

present two new sets of results. The first demonstrates that the inverse

relation between sales variability and size documented in many studies may

be due to financial rather than technological factors, in contrast to the

conventional view (see, e.g., Mills and Schumann, 1985). The second lends

support to a theoretical prediction of the model, that the effects of

capital market frictions on Investment should be asymmetric, having mqre

impact in recessions than booms. The final section presents conclusions

and addresses some policy questions. (As the reader might expect,) we

discuss why the fact that the stock market crash has not had a major impact

on the economy is not inconsistent with our overall message.
                                            3

THE INTERDEPENDENCE OF FINANCIAL AND REAL DECISIONS

Overview
  It    is   first   useful to place this discussion in the context of
contemporary research in macroeconomics.          Over the last decade,     much of the
effort in this field has involved developing models of business
fluctuations in which the structural relationships are explicit outcomes of
rational economic behavior. The centerpiece is the "real business cycle"
paradigm,      developed by Kydland and Prescott (1982). Roughly speaking, this

framework explains fluctuations        using   the stochastic competitive

equilibrium growth model, altered to included variable lsbor supply.

Tractability is a key aspect. To date, the (suitably modified) stochastic

growth model      is   the only macroeconomic framework which evolves purely from

first principles and       which, at the same time, is capable of     confronting

actual business cycle data (see Prescott, 1986)

  There are two features of real business cycle theory highly relevant to

the discussion here. First, financial factors are completely absent.

Because      alt markets function perfectly in the competitive equilibrium
growth model, the Modigliani-Miller       theorem applies; financial structure is

both    irrelevant and indeterminate. This limits the ability of this
paradigm to explain severe economic contractions such as the           Depression,

where    breakdowns in    financial trade appear to play an important role (see

Bernanke,      1983). In addition, the framework is silent about the regular
cyclical movements of financial variables such as balance sheet positions,
liquidity ratios, and bank       credit, documented by a number of economists

(e.g.    Vojnilower, 1980; Eckatein    and Sinai, 1986; and Frie&nan,     1982,
1983).       This issue is important, to the extent that    these   financial
                                     4

variables may not merely be responding passively to the oscillations in

real output.

  The second key aspect is that the basic real business cycle model relies

on large and persistent exogenous productivity disturbances in order to

explain the observed magnitudes of business cycles. The problem here is

that it is difficult to identify these disturbances in practice. They are

not directly observable, making it difficult to corroborate the basic story

(see Summers, 1986).

  This latter feature has motivated a new stage of research aimed at

enriching the endogenous component of the propagation mechanism. The

common objective is to rationalize and test theories that csn explain how

relatively small exogenous shocks can produce large fluctuations in output.

Several different avenues are currently being pursued: one is to make

productivity changes endogenous (e.g., Christisno and Cichenbaum, 1988); a

second is to introduce increasing returns to scale and imperfect

competition to motivate demand externalities (e.g.. Hall, 1986); and a

third, which we consider here, is to explore the implications of certain

capital market imperfections. These approaches can be viewed as

complementary; they certainly need not be mutually exclusive.2

  The notion of a financial aspect to the growth and fluctuation in output

was comaon in earlier work (see for example Fisher, 1933; Curley and Shaw,

1955, 1960; Roosa, 1951; Kindleberger, 1978; and Minsky, 1964, 1975). A

main contribution of the new research is to place the ideas in the

traditional literature on firmer theoretical ground, to attempt to match

the standard set in real business cycle theory. To this extent, it borrows

heavily from the econoisics of information and incentives to explicitly
                                       S

motivate frictions in capital markets and, correspondingly, a meaningful

role for financial structure in real economic activity.3

  The new work stresses two basic avenues in which financial factors may

contribute to investment volatility. Each presumes a setting where

informational asymmetries between borrowers and lenders introduce incentive

problems in financial relationships.                             -



  The first involves the firm's internal net worth, which becomes a

critical determinant of the terms under which it can borrow in this type of

environment. To the extent that movements in the fin's collateralizable

net worth are procyclical. an "accelerator' mechanism emerges. During

booms it become easier to borrow; the rise in borrower net worth reduces

the premium attached to (uncollateralized) external finance. Conversely,

the premium rises in recessions, making it more difficult to borrow. The

countercyclical movement in the wedge between the cost of external and

internal funds makes investment more volatile than it would otherwise be -•

note that this wedge does not exist in a setting of perfect markets.
  A related implication is that redistribution.s of wealth between

creditors and debtors also contribute to investment variability. This

occurs due to the impact of the redistribution on borrower net worth. One

example is the erosion of borrowers' collateral during the Depression.

A large unanticipated price deflation induced this erosion. Declining

prices   increased the real debt burdens of borrowers by nearly 40 percent in
the period from 1929 to 1933. Indeed, Irving Fisher (1933) cited the "debt
deflation"   as the main reason for the severe investment collapse (see also

Tobin, 1975). Two more recent exsmples involve the decline in agricultural

and oil prices. In each case (many argue), there was a financial factor
                                         6

present which magnified the impact of the price decline on investment

activity. In particular, the drop in prices reduced the ability of firms

in each sector to borrow by lowering their collateralizable net worth.

  The second main avenue stressed involves the supply of intermediary

credit, particularly business loans supplied by commercial banks.

Underlying this channel is the idea that certain classes of borrowers -       -


those for whom the added costs of finance induced by incentive problems are

large relative to their funding needs - - may find it prohibitively

expensive to obtain financing by directly issuing securities on the open

market. Financial intermediaries help overcome this friction by exploiting

scale economies in the evaluation and monitoring of borrowers. By doing

so, they facilitate the flow of funds between savers and certain kinds of

investors. In this regard, the terms under which intermediary credit is

available is a key determinant of investment by firms that do not have easy

access to direct credit.

  The corollary argument is that factors which alter the flow of

intermediary   credit may have important consequences for investment
behavior. Examples include the flight of depositor funds       out   of the
banking system during the Great Depression     and the sharp rise in interest

rates   that induced disintermediation in the mid-l9GOs. In addition,         some

economists   have resurrected the view that monetary policy matters primarily

by influencing the supply of commercial bank credit rather than the

quantity of    the medium of exchange   (e.g., see Blinder end Stiglit:, 1983).

The   idea is that substitutes for money are more readily available than
substitutes for coercial bank     credit (again, for certain classes of

firms).
                                           7

   Theoretical models which motivate these types of real-financial

mechanisms from first principles       are now in abundance. The    main challenge

remaining   is to quantify their inportance. This task is at an early stage.
A basic problem is that many       different theories make similar predictions
about   the time-series behavior of investment. This has prompted a strategy

of testing the cross-sectional implications of competing hypotheses. in

contrast   to   the   basic neoclassical model   of investment (which the real

business cycle model embeds), these new theories stressing financial

effects predict that investment should vary across firms according to their

net worth positions, holding constant everything else. This prediction

offers a way to test the theories, to the extent that it is possible to

find proxies for firms' internal net worth. As we discuss below, several

papers have pursued this strategy; and subject to the caveat just

mentioned, they have found evidence supporting a role for financial

factors.

  A related cross-sectional prediction is that financing patterns should

vary across firms according to the differences in the (incentive-induced)

costs   they face in obtaining external finance, In particular, firms
subject to capital market frictions should be more likely to rely on

retained earnings and bank debt, than on direct credit. These financing

patterns do indeed emerge in the data, as we elaborate below, given that a

firm's size is a reasonable rough proxy of its ability to borrow. Keep in

mind that the basic real business cycle framework suggssts no determinate

pattern.
                                         B

  Overall, the theme that emerges from this initial empirical work is that

financial factors are important to the behavior of small growing firms, at

least relative to large mature firms.        (Though we believe it would be a

mistake to conclude that large firms never confront capital market

friction-s --   Chrysler   and Texaco provide good counterexamples.) This

raises the question: How significant are small firms in business

fluctuations? We are currently trying to obtain a precise answer to this

question -   - it   requires an ambitious effort. However, we present some

numbers later indicating that small firms play a nontrivial role in the

economy. This preliminary evidence supports pursuing the issue further.


Financial Factors: HistoricaL Evidence

  The historical evidence linking financial factors to business

fluctuations is compelling. The Great Depression provides the most

prominent example. Bernanke (1983) details the breakdown in credit flows

that likely amplified the downturn over the period from 1930 to 1933.

There were two main causes: first, the collapse of the banking system; and

second, the precipitous decline in borrower net worth. Regarding the

former, nearly half of the banks existing in 1930 cessed operating by 1933,

and many of the surviving ones suffered large losses. This had the effect

of reducing credit flows to borrowers who did not have easy access to non-

intermediated funds.3 Regarding the latter, the ratio of debt service to

national income more than doubled. The combined effect of declining output

and deflation sharply deteriorated borrower balance sheets, shrinking their

collateral, thus constraining their ability to obtain further credit.
                                             9

  Calomiris    and Hubbard (1987) obtain related evidence for the period from

1879 to 1914, prior to the founding of the Federal Reserve System. They

show that the basic debt-deflation story isay         apply   to this era, as well.

Their    results indicate that deflationary shocks preceded declines in bank
loan    supply and output. Moreover, deflationary episodes were associated

with increasing spreads between the interest rates on "low quality" and

"high quality"     commercial   paper of similar maturities.

  During    both   these periods, there were also obvious differences in

behavior across firms. Smaller firms tended to be more sensitive to the
effecta of financial market disturbances. Calozeiris and Hubbard cite
contemporary academic studies and newspaper accounts emphasizing the
closing   of many small solvent husinesses during the panics of 1884 and

1893. Credit was largely unavailable to small businesses during those

periods; they were required to settle in cash. Sprague (1910) noted that

during periods of tight bank credit, smaller firnis were differentially

affected both because lenders sought only notes of the highest quality and

because   larger firma   had access   to   the commercial paper market.

  Evidence    of heterogeneity in the impact of credit stringency on firms            in

the   early l930s is widespread. See for example Hart's (1938) discussion of
the   problems faced by farmers and state        and local governments; Kiebaners
(1974) analysis of the difficulties faced by unincorporated businesses and
small corporations in 1931 end 1932; Kisssel's (1939) account of the strong

positive relationship between firm size and the availability of bank crsdit

(holding constant the line of business); and the results of the Hardy-Viner

study of credit availability in the Seventh Federal Reserve District(see
                                          10

Stoddard,   1940), noting the problems of small businesses (previously deemed
by local lenders to have been of high quality)      in   obtaining bank credit.
  It is interesting to observe that small firms bore a disproportionately
large   share of the decline in profits during the Great Depression. Merwin

(1943) notes that, as a class, large firms (with assets of more than $50

million) reported positive profit-s even during 1931, 1932, end 1933.

Similar evidence is discussed by Chandler (1971). Fbricant (1935) reports

the high rate of losses relative to capitalization for small fins, a

pattern mitigated or reversed for large firma. This differential impact on

small versus large firms is further suggestive that financial influences

may have been significant.


Financial Factors and the Modern Economy

  Documenting   the significance of financial factors      for contemporary

business fluctuations is less straightforward, due to the absence of events

as pronounced as the Depression. Nonetheless, there is a pattern of

evidence which, at a minimum, is sufficient to justify further pursuit of

this topic. The pattern is roughly as follows: First, small firms' sales

snd investment (per dollar of assets) sre more volatile than large fins' -

Second, there is evidence that       capital market imperfections may be an
important   determinant   of   this added volatility.8 Third, small firms are a
nontrivial component of ON?, using various measures of "smallness" (see
below). Beyond this, there are several recent episodes in which it is
clearly   possible to identify important finsncisl influences on investment

(we elaborate below).
                                            11

      As a stylized fact, sales, employment, and investment are more volatile

 in   small firms than   large fins. These      patterns are well known. Hymer and
 Pashigian (1962) and Evans      (1987)   find that the variability of firm growth
 decreases   with firm size, and Evans (1987) finds that the probability of

 firm failure decreases with age. Greater variability of earnings and sales

 in smeller firms is true historiclly as well (see, for example, Mervin.

 1943). The negative correlation between firm age and life expectancy in

 the decade after World War II has been documented by Churchill (1955).

     There exist nonfinancial theories capable of explaining qualitatively

why firm volatility declines with size (see Jovanovic, 1982a; and Mills and

Schumann, 1985). However, there is also considerable reason to believe

financial factors are 'at work as well. To        begin   with, firms differ

systematically in how they finance investment. These differences are

related to firm size in a way that suggests they reflect varying abilities

to obtain credit] Small firma tend to rely more heavily on internally

generated    funds than do large firms, and the use       of non-bank debt is

important    only   for large firms.   Commercial banks are an important source
of    credit for small and medium-sized firms, which lack access to impersonal

centralized securities markets.

  Using data from the Quarterly Financial Reoort of Manufacturint Minina

and Trade Cornorations, we summarize financing practices of manufacturing

firms by size in Table I.' Two features of Table I are of particular

interest. First, internal finance provides the largest fraction of net

funds raised for firms in all size categoriea. In addition, the proportion

of income retained by firms varies acroas size classes; there is a negative

correlation between firm size and the retention ratio. That retention
                                            12

ratios and the fraction of net worth accounted for by accumulated retained

earnings is negatively correlated with firm size is true historically as

well (see Zutters and Lintner, 1945 and the references therein). This

feature is noted in contemporary data on individual firms by Fazzari,

Hubbard, end Petersen (1988a), hereafter PEP. Second, there are important

differences     in the composition of debt finance across firms. The

percentage     of long-term debt coming from banks -    - lending   institutions

specializing in monitoring borrowers through customer relationships -          -

declines   with firm size. The financing patterns present in the

manufacturing sector tend to hold economywide, as well (see The State of

Small Business: A Reoort of the President. 1988).

  A second general type of evidence involves econometric studies of firm

investment behavior using panel data. Indeed using panel data from

individual     manufacturing corporations, PEP find     that proxies for internal

net   worth   are important in explaining investment behavior, particularly for

smaller firms in the sample. These results arise after controlling for

measures of investment opportunities, as we discuss in detail later.

  PEP's results indicate that firms with assets of under $25 million (in

1982 dollars) tend to face capital market frictions (in the sense that

internal      funds   were important for   investment, controlling for investment
opportunities). How important are these kinds of firms in the aggregate?
Let   us error on the side of      underststing their importance by picking a more
conservative      benchwork of $10 million in assets. In the nonfinancial

business sector as a whole, firms in this category (under $10 million in

assets) accounted for 45 percent of total assets and 46 percent of net
                                      13

 worth in 1986 (Thtitpte oLSmall Business: A Report of the President.

J.IftL p. 160).

   More detailed breakdowns of shares of total assets and receipts

 accounted for by firms of various sizes (as measured by total assets) are

available for the cormorate sector, and are presented in Tables 2 and 3.

Firms with less than $10 million in assets accounted for 31.7 percent of

receipts in the corporate sector as a whole. The industry sector

breakdowns for firms with less than $10 million are as follows: 72.4

percent in construction, 17.4 percent in mining, 14.8 percent in

manufacturing 71.6 percent in services, 10.4 percent in transportation and

utilities, 45.3 percent in wholesale and retail trade, and 11.8 percent in

finance, insurance, and real estate. It is important to recognize that

these figures for the corporate sector understate the economy-wide

importance of small firms, since the latter are much more predominant

among unincorporated businesses (proprietorships and partnerships).

Further, the unincorporated sector is nontrivial. It has accounted for 60

percent of total business and capital income in the postwar period.

Corporate profits were 87 percent of proprietors' income of sole

proprietorships and partnerships in 1950, and 88 percent in 1986, the most

recent year for which complete data are available (Nelson, 1988).

  The number of employees is another measure available to assess the

importance of small firms. Indeed, the official definition of a "small

business" is a firm with no more than 500 employees. Using this criterion,

small businesses accounted in 1986. for about 54 percent of total

employment. Je provide a further breakdown in Table 4 of the shares of

small firms (those with fewer than 500 firms) in gross product originating
                                            14

(GPO) and employment. Small business shares are nontrivial in all sectors,

ranging from 19 percent of GPO in manufacturing to about 84 percent in

construction and retail trade. As the Small Business Administration report

mentioned previously emphasizes1 these firms are likely to face borrowing

constraints; they have small asset bases (typically less than $10 million),

and are likely to finance investments with reüined earnings or bank

credit. (The emergence of the "junk bond" market is changing this

somewhat, at least for medium-sized firms. In the conclusion, we discuss

why capital market frictions remain relevant to firms issuing junk bonds.)

  Finally, several contemporary events provide some informal evidence         in

support of the themes being develbped here. Consider the "credit crunch"

of 1966. During this period, rising interest rates caused funds to flow

out   of depository   institutions (which   were subject   to deposit interest rate


ceilingsat the time).5 Figure 1 highlights differences in the rate of
investment and the growth rate of real sales for various size classes of
manufacturing firms during this period (the groups are those classified in
the Quarterly Financial Renort of Manufacturin_Mining. and Trade
cQxnrations). Declines in the rate of investment and in the growth rate
of real sales were disproportionately borne by smaller firms, - - firms
largely dependent on bank credit for external finance. The analysis of
such episodes with panel data on individual firms is an important task for
future research. We believe, however, that the preliminary evidence here is
 at   least suggestive of the importance of f in heterogeneity in response to

 financial disturbsnces.

      The recent deflations in the agricultural and oil sectors provide

 evidence supporting the idea that internal net worth may be a key factor          in
                                          15

the investment decision. Calomiris, Hubbard, and Stock (1966) document how

the collapse in fan land values (collateral) made it difficult for small

farmers to obtain financing for still-profitable projects. Raise (1988)

notes that for the     domestic   petroleum industry,   finance   constraints on

"independents" contributed to their sharp       decline   in exploration end

development spending. He finds important effects of declines in cash flow

on   declines in investment spending, holding constant measures of investment
opportunities.      In addition, Reiss describes ways in which      debt contracts
placed restrictions on firms' decisions during deflationary periods, and

analyzes the strong links between the value of firms oil and gas reserves

and the amount which     producers could borrow.

A THEORZTICAL MODEL OF FINANCIAL INFLUENCES ON INVESTMENT

     This   section presents a simple partial equilibrium model of investment.
We design the framework for expository purposes; it is intended to capture


some of the basic aspects of the newly developed models of finance and

business fluctuations.'° Our goals here are threefold: first, to illuatrate

how it is possible to rationalize formally an interdependence between real

investment behavior and financial structure; second, to trace out the

macroeconomic implications of this link; and third, to suggest some testable

hypotheses. The subsequent section pursues these tests.                  -




  The model we develop characterizes the ixivestment and financial decisions

of an entrepreneur who undertakes risky projects. A central feature is that

the entrepreneur has greater knowledge ebout certain aspects of the

investment process than do the lenders from whom she seeks funding. This

precipitates a conflict of interests between the two parties. The conflict
 -
                                              16

(en "agency" problem) manifests itself by driving a wedge between the price

of externally and internally generated funds. For this reason the cost of

investing end hence the borrower's investment decision, depends on her

financial position particularly her collateralizable net worth.

     In the   example we   choose,   lenders cannot fully observe how the
entrepreneur uses     investment funds. It is not important that the

informational     friction assume this particular form; a wide variety of-
plausible     scenarios generate the same qualitative results.11 Nonetheless,

scholars from both the past (Earle and Means, 1932) and the present

(Easterbrook, 1984; Jensen, 1986) emphasize that the inability of lenders to

monitor perfectly the actions of borrowers is characteristic of many

financial relationships, and is s fundamental source of "imperfections" in

capital markets.

     The problem arising under this information strwture is that the

entrepreneur has the incentive to misallocate funds to favor herself (e.g.,

to overinvest in perquisites or to select projects which provide her with

some additional personal gratification). Lenders account for this problem by

insisting that financial relationships be structured in a way that aligns the

borrower's incentives with their own. The agency problem introduces real

costs to the investment process to the extent that the provisions of the

financial contract induce the entrepreneur to invest in a way that differs

from what she would choose under symmetric information. In this regard, real

and financial decisions are interdependent.

     The model works as follows. There are two periods, zero and one. In

period zero1 a risk neutral entrepreneur uses hard capital K and (possibly)

soft capital C to produce output '1 which becomes available to sell in period
                                               17

one. The technology is risky, making output random.                There are two    possible
productivity states, "good" and "bad," and this uncertainty is realized after

the      investment decision is made. Output is         the numeraire good, and each kind

of    capital has      its   price normalized at unity.    "Hard   capital" refers to
machinery.         "Soft capital" stay be   thought of as any input which improves the
likelihood        that a given level of hard capital input will generate a good

output realization. Examples include organizational expenditures.

maintenance expenditures, and inventories.

     To keep things as simple as possible, suppose the entrepreneur can improve

the probability of a good output realization if she uses enough soft capital

to satisfy a required level that is proportional to the quantity of hard

capital used. In particular, suppose



              y.((af(K),
                   f(K),
              —                  with probability ir
(is)
                         with probability b
if

(ib)         C ) nc,

and

(2a)         V — sf(K),
if

(2b)         C <    ilk,
where f(k)        is twice continuously differentiable, strictly increasing, end

strictly concave,          with 1(0)    0, f'(O) •   m, and ft(z) —   w, Further,
     +   5b — 1, 0 c a <      i, and n > 0. Also,     essuste for simplicity that the
rando,     productivity realization       (when soft capital is employed) is

uncorrelats with events elsewhere in the economy.

     Clearly,     the entrepreneur will either use UK unita of soft capital or none
at    all)Z Suppose that, for any level         of hard capital employment, it. is
always     efficient to use soft capital, in the sense that the expected gain in
                                                 18

output net of costs is positive. This requires the following parameter

restriction:


(3)                 +   ba;iii + v) > a.

  It follows that in the absence of informational frictiona the entrepreneur

invests (chooses K) to satisfy


(4)          (if9   + b)ff(K,     — (1 +   v)r

where r is the gross riskless interest rate and is given exogenously. The

first term in equation (4) is the expected marginal-benefit from adding a

unit of hard capital, given a complementary addition of v    units   of soft

capital. The second term is the marginal cost. Let K* be the value of K

that satisfies equation (4), and refer to it as the "first best" value. Note

also that K* is unrelated to financial variables; the Modigliani-Miller

theorem applies.

      The same need not hold under asymmetric information. Suppose, as alli.4ed

to earlier, that lenders cannot perfectly observe how the entrepreneur

allocates the funds she borrows. In particular, suppose that expenditures on

hard capital are observable by outsiders, but expenditures on soft capital

are unobservable. The idea is that the quantity of machines in place is

relatively easy to weasure, but that organizational, maintenance, and

 inventory expenditures are difficult to monitor. The problem arising is that

 the entrepreneur may be tempted to divert funds intended for soft capital to

 enhance her personal gain. While this personal gain can assume many subtle

 forms (refer to Berle and Means, 1932, for a classic discussion) ,    we will
                                                19

posit simply that the entrepreneur can abscond with the funds, and invest

them secretly in a risicless asset (e.g.. a Swiss bank account).

      Rational lenders recognize the incentive problem. They accordingly

require that the financial contract be designed to eliminate the

entrepreneur's incentive to cheat. The net effect is that K may              fall below
K*, and that the extent bf this decline will depend inversely on the

borrower's net worth. To see this formally, think            of   the entrepreneur es

entering a contract with a competitive financial interinediary.' Assume the

entrepreneur has an initial liquid asset position of W (in units of the

nuisersire good) and collateralizable expected future profits worth V/r in

present value, where V is the value of this profit stream in the subaequent

period (period one).' (Her net worth is thus W ÷ VJr.) Suppose further

that W is less than K*, to guarantee that the entrepreneur will want to

borrow.
      The cohtract specifies a quantity borrowed (equal to (l4v)K — W), a

payment    F' to the intermediary in the event that the project         yields the

"good"    output level, f(K), and a payment Pb in the event of the "bad output
level,gj' (K).      The features of the contract are chosen to maximize the

entrepreneur's      expected profits, given by

(5)         (w9 +   b)f(K}   -   ffgg - bpb

  The    contract must offer the intermediary an expected return equal to the
opportunity costs of its funds, the gross riskless interest rate times the
quantity borrowed. (The          intermediary   uses no resources; it simply channels
                                           20

funds   from depositors to lenders;) Accordingly, the contingent payments P

and t must satisfy


(6)        ffgg +          rUl+Q)K — WI.
  The contract must also provide the entrepreneur with the incentive to

allocate funds as promised, i.e., to invest in soft capital as a

complementary input to hard capital, rather than to take the money for

personal use. Thus, the provisions of the contract must satisfy the

following "incentive constraint":


(7)        ( + a)f(K)      — (ggpg   + ,rbPb)   (df(K)   pb) + ruK.


Equation (7) requires that the entrepreneur's expected gain from honesty

exceed her gain from misallocating the funds intended for investment in soft

capital. The latter is the sum of the net co.ntractual payoff, oI(K) —

she receives when there is s bad output realization (which is guaranteed when

soft capital is not used) and the return on the funds she invests for

personal use, r'uK.

  A way to lower the entrepreneur's temptation to cheat is to raise p, the

smount she   must   pay the intermediary in the event of a bad   outcome. The
problem, however, is that the amount the entrepreneur can credibly promise to

pay is limited by her available assets, in this case the sum of the gross

revenue she earns in the bad state and the market value of her expected

future   profits. Thus, the following "limited liability" condition is also a
constraint   on the form the contract takes:



 (8)        b af(K) + v.
                                                           21

     The formal contracting problem is to choose K, F' and ph to maximize (5)

subject to (6), (7), end (8). When the incentive constraint is not binding.

K simply adjusts to K* -            - this     can be seen by substituting equation (6) into

equation (5) and maximizing with respect to K. Further, the pattern of

contractual payments is indeterminate; any combination of P' and ph which

satisfies the expected return constraint (6) is acceptable.

     Real investment and financial decisions are no longer independent when the

incentive constraint (7) is binding. To see this, first note thst the

limited liability constraint (8) must also bind in this situation; this is

because it is desirable to raise ph as much as possible to lower the

entrepreneur's temptation to cheat. We csn sccordingly obtain a relation for

K by using (6) and (8) to eliminate F' and ph from equation (7):


9)         (7y9 +   ir0a)f(K)   —
                                     r-(1 + 2v)K + r(W          +   V/r}   =   0.

     When equation (9) holds, investment is an increasing function of the

borrower's net worth;'3 "            thst      is,

                 3K
(10)          a(w+v/r) =   ((1      4   2i')   -
                                                   (w9 +    wba)fu(K)/r]_t          >   0.

The problem here is that the entrepreneur's temptation to cheat depends

positively on the amount of uncollsteralized funds she borrows. Hence,

additional net worth makes it feasible to invest more without violating the

                                                                    -
incentive constraint.

     Figure   2 illustrates the solution. The (tO) curve portrays expected

output as a function of hard capital input, given that soft capital is used

as a complementary input. The (OC) curve portrays the opportunity coat of

investment, also as a function of K. The first-best optimum corresponds to
                                           22

the   value of K where the slopes are equal; that is, K equals K" at this

point. The (IC) curve represents the sua of the entrepreneur's net gain from

dishonesty and the cost of the funds she borrows, expressed as a function of

K. Thus, the difference between the (EO) and (OC) curves reflects the

entrepreneur's expected profits if she invests honestly, while the difference

between the (IC) snd (OC) curves is her, gain from misusing the soft capital

funds.

  The way the curves are drawn, the incentive constraint is violated if

investment is fixed at C -.       the gap between the (IC) and (OC) curves exceeds

the   gap between the (EO) and (OC) curves where K equals C.       The   smount of
uncollateralized borrowing must decline therefore K must fall below C.           The

solution is at the point below the first-best optimum where the (EC) and (IC)
curves   intersect. At this point, the entrepreneur's expected profits are

maximized subject to the incentive constraint being satisfied. The incentive

constraint holds since the gsps between the (ED) and (DC) curves and between

the (IC) and (OC) curves are identical. Expected profits are maximized since

they are lower at any smaller value of K, and since any larger value of K is

not feasible (i.e. ,    the   incentive constraint is not satisfied)

  A rise in borrower net worth shifts the (IC) curve rightward, pushing K

toward iC. By increasing her personal stake in the project, the rise in

(V +   V/r)   reduces the entrepreneur's incentive to misallocate funds intended

for soft capital investment. This allows the entrepreneur to borrow more,

permitting K to rise. Figure 3 illustrates this behavior. Once investment

reaches C, further increases in net worth have no impact; we return to this

point later. In this situation, it is feasible to fix investment at the
                                            23

first-best optimum, so there is no reason to do otherwise; additional

investment only lowers the entrepreneurs expected profits.

   It is also useful to note that K depends inversely on the gross interest

rate r, even when the incentive condition constrains investment below the

firet best optimum. A rise in r pivots the (IC) curve leftward, moving K

further below C.'      The rise in r magnifies the incentive problem. by

worsening the entiepeneur's financial position, thus increasing her gain from

cheating (relative to being honest); the level of investment K declines

accordingly.'5

  Finally, it is interesting to observe that financial structure becomes

determinate    in this case. The optimal financial contract specifies a unique
pattern    of payoffs, in contrast to the    case of perfect information. This
occurs    because the contract is designed to minimize the incentive problem.

It is also interesting that the theorecicalfinancial contract derived here

resembles most reai world contracts in the basic sense that lenders receive

a smoother pattern of payoffs across risky outcomes than does the borrower.LS

(Recall   that the optimal contract has lenders receive everything in the event
of a bad outcome.)
  Several    features of the model   are   of the model are particularly relevant

to thinking about economic fluctuations. First, the analysis suggests how

there could emerge an "eccelerator mechanism which magnifies investment

fluctuations. During booms, when borrower net        worth   is high -.   either   due to

past   accumulation of assets (resulting in a high W) or to optimism about the
future (resulting in a high V) - - egency costs of finance are relatively low,
providing   added stimulus to investment. Conversely, the decline in borrower
                                        24

net worth during recessions raises agency costs of obtaining finance, further

depressing investskent.2021

  A second prediction is that investment fluctuations may exhibit

asymmetries. Investment dowriswings in recessions may be sharper than

upswings during booms. In booms, it is more likely the incentive constraints

ae relaxed; if this is so, further increases in borrower net worth may have

a minimal impact on   investment. In downturns, it is much mote probable     that

the constraints bind - -   alternatively,   it is more likely that they bind over

a wider cross-section of firms. Thus, in recessions, investment may be more

sensitive to movements in borrower net worth.

  What are the testable implications of this model? Unfortunately, it is

difficult to discriminate between competing theories with a pure time-series

analysis. Most macroeconomic theories predict a "procyclical" relationship

between investment and output (thoi.igh some purely neoclassical frameworks

have difficulty explaining the magnitude of investment fluctuations).

However, the model presented here has implications for cross-sectional

differences in investment behavior. In contrast to the frictionless

neoclassical model, the framework here predicts that, ceteris osribus,

investment will vary across firms positively with differences in firms'

internal net worth. Furthermore, this variation is likely to he more

pronounced in recessions than in booms.

   A related prediction, one consistent with evidence presented earlier, is

that financing patterns should vary across firms, depending on their

respective net worth positions. In particular, internal financing should be

 relatively more predominant among firms with low net worth relative to their

 desired investment levels. Relatedly, bank loans --      which involve monitoring
                                           25

and close customer relationships to address the incentive problems -- should
be the principal form of external finance for this class of fins.

EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE ON FINANCIAL FACTORS AND REAL OUTCOMES

Evidencs_fori(anufacturint Fins
     In   the previous section, we outlined testable implications of the

"financial factors approach for cross-section, time-series data. These

implications involve: (i) variation across firms in financing patterns, (ii)

a    link between investment    and internal net worth (holding constant measures

of investment opportunities), and (iii) an asymmetry in the effect of changes

in internal net worth on investment.

     To test these propositions, we use data on 421 isanu.facturing firms over the

period from 1970 to 1984 constructed from Value Line sources by FliP (1988a).

We follow FliP in using long-run retention behavior as a proxy for perceived

differences in the cost of internal and external funds. Such a criterion is

intuitive. If the cost disadvantage of external finance is small, then

retention behavior should be irrevelant to real investment decisions. On the

other hand, firms that finance most of their investment from retained

earnings may do so because they face high costs of obtaining external finsnce

at   the margin for the kinds     of reasons discussed in the previous section.

Fluctuation     in internal net worth should affect investment spending for these
types     of fins. Insiders' net worth is, ofcourse, unobservable in the data;

we follow FHP, and use firm_cash_ flow as a proxy.

     To implement the classification hy retention behavior, we group firms into

three categories --     "high   retention," "medium retention," and "low

retention." "High retention" firms have a ratio of dividends to net income
                                                 26

of less than 0.1 for at least 10 years. 'Medium retention" firms have a

dividend-income ratio less then 0.2 (but greater than 0.1) for at least 10

years. The remaining firms        comprise   the "low retention" category. This is

the classification suggested by FHP.

  We present summary       statistics   for the firms in each claas in Table 5Z2

Firm   size is negatively correlated with retention of earnings, corroborating

the general pattern for the manufacturing sector illustrated in Table 1. By

construction, the high-retention firms            are   closest to the margin of requiring

external,   funds to   finance investment opportunities. The evidence in Table 5

suggests that these firms       had   more variable internal          net worth and investment
than   other firms   in   the sample - -   the   standard deviations of the cash flow-

capital ratio and investment-capital ratio are greatest for the high-

retention   group. In addition, sales variability -- measured by the standard

deviation of the growth rate of real sales over the period --                     is
substantially higher for the high-retention firms                   than   for the low-retention

firms.      While   a technological choice model (see for example Mills and

Schumann,    1985) might be able to explain heterogeneity in the variability of
sales growth,Z* it would not explain thE coincidence of sales and investment

variability across retention classes. In Table 6. we report standard

deviations of sales growth by retention class for five (two-digit-S.I.C.)

industry groups in which       high-retention         firms   are   most important. There are,

of course differences across industry groups in sales growth variability. In

all cases, however, the standard deviation of the growth rate of real sales

is roughly twice as large for the smaller, high-retention firms than for the

larger, low-retention firms.
                                               27

  We next test directly for the sensitivity of firms'           investment   spending to

movements in internal net worth. We work within the robin's q framework,

since q - -     the   ratio of the market value of the firm    to   the replacement value

of its capital stock --        wilt   capture the .arket'e assessment of the firm's

investment      onnortunities.25 If     financial   factors are unimportant, internal
and external      funds will be perfect su4stitutes, and q will be a sufficient

statistic       summarizing investment    opportunities; contemporaneously dated

information      about internal net worth (here firm      cash flow) should be

irrelevant.2' Specifically, we estimate for each retention class a model of

the    form:2



(11)       1it"i,t—l —      a+            +   (c + d RECESSION) (CF/K)itt +      uj.
where i and t      represent   the firm and time period, respectively.

  All variables are measured a: the end of the period. I and K denote

investment and the replacement value of the capital stock; Q            represents   the

value of Tobin's q (defined as the sum of the value of equity and debt less

the    value of inventories divided by the replacement cost of the capital
stock), adjusted for personal and         corporate   tax considerations. CF denotes
cash    flow (after-tax earning plus depreciation).         RECESSION is a dummy

variable equal to unity in 1974, 1975, 1981, and 1982, and equal to zero

otherwise; it is included to test whether the effect of internal net worth

on investment varies over the cycle. u is an error term. The equations

were estimated over the 1970-1984 period with fixed firm and time effects.

Results are reported in Table 7.
                                            28

         Two features of the results in Table 7 are of particular interest.

    First, there are important economically and statistically significant

    differences across retention classes in the effects of the previous

    period's cash flow on investment.20 Greater retention is associated with a

    closer link between internal finance and investment, suggesting that

    internal   and external finance are imperfect substitutes for high-retention
    fins.    That such firms are on average small and rapidly growing (relative

    to   other firms in the sample) is consistent with the predictions of models

    of asymmetric information stressing the importance of firms' internal net

    worth (balance sheet position). Second, the asyuetric effect of internal.

    net worth on investment predicted by the model is present. Cash flow

    effects for high-retention firm and medum-retention firms are substantially

    stronger in economywida recession years. The same is not true for the

•   large, mature low-retention firms.
         Large   firms, of course, account for a greater fraction of firms in the
    Value Line sample than they do in the economy. Again, we note          that

    manufacturing     firms of the same size or smaller than the fins in the high-
    retention     and medium-retention classes account for an important fraction of

    aggregate sales and assets. From Table       3,   manufacturing   corporations with
    less    than $100 million in assets account for about 15 percent of total

    assets and 25 percent of total sales in the manufacturing sector.


    CONCLUDING DISCUSSION

         Recent research by macroeconomists has stressed the development of

    business cycle frameworks in which financial structure is irrelevant. It

    seems doubtful, however, that such models can explain the magnitude of or
                                             29

heterogeneity in investment fluctuations without appealing to large
exogenous disturbances. The approach taken here is to emphasize the role
of   financial factors in amplifying investment swings, the motive being to

lessen the need to rely on external driving forces to explain economic

fluctuations. While the issue is far from resolved, we believe there is

su.fficient evidence     to date to continue trying to      model and measure the

role of financial factors" in the business cycle.

     We finish by addressing some issues pertinent to our analysis.

     Imvlicationa of thejtock_market crash.          Most economists agree that    the

October 1987 crash appears       to   have had a minimal impact on real activity.

After a temporary period of decline, initial public offerings of equity are

back to their normal levels. Further, it is difficult to identify any

obvious effects of the crash on the behavior of aggregate variables. How

does this square with the analysis here?

  The    story we presented emphasized that the critical determinant of        a

firm's borrowing capacity is its internal net worth, the value of the stake
of inside owners/managers. In this regard, it is important to recall that
stock    prices rose dramatically in the nine months prior to the crash; the

effect of the crash was largely to wipe out these gains and return the

market    to   trend. Even if one believes that movements in stock prices are

closely connected to movements in internal net worth (we do not), it is

still probably the case that the annual change in internal net worth was

not exceptionally large (i.e., the change from January [98? to January

1988). It is unlikely that high frequency variation (e.g., weekly

variation)     in net worth   has much impact     on investment because of adjustment
                                      3D

costs.   Seen in this light, it is not surprising that the stock market

volatility had little impact.

  It is probebly also true that short-run variation in stock prices does

not mirror movements in fins' internal net worth. First, a sizable

fraction of a pubicly traded fin's equity is typically held by outside

parties who have no more intonation than any other claimants about the

inner workings of the firm; it is not appropriate to include their holdings

in the measure of internal net worth. What ultimately matters for out

purposes is the value of the collateral (broadly defined) that creditors

perceive the firm has to offer. This value may be unrelated to high-

frequency variation in stock prices, and particularly so if this variation

is not tightly connected to changes in fundamentals.

  Also, before drawing any parallels with earlier times, it is important

to recognize that the stock market crash in 1929 was not the most

economically significant financiaP event of the Depression. Rather, as

Bernanke (1983) emphasizes the banking collapse and the debt crisis

(induced by the massive deflation) had far more substantial effects on the

severity of the downturn. Similar events, of course, did not arise in the

aftermath of the 1987 crash. This was at least in part dueto the

commitment   of the Federal Reserve to preserve the smooth functioning of the
financial system - - monetary policy was expansionary in response to the
crash - - in conjunction with institutional safeguards   such as deposit

insurance.

   Fluctuations in emuloynent demand and in spendinr on consumer durablee.

To the extent that labor is a quasi-fixed factor (as in Farmer. 1985) or

there is a lag between labor input and production (as in Creenwald and
                                               31

Stiglitz, 1986), then the theory          of   investment demand presented here

extends     naturally to a theory of employment demand. In either of these
cases,     firms may need to borrow to finance labor input. It follows that
procyclical        movements in internal net worth can lead to accelerator effects

on   employment demand, in. the same way they may for investment demand.
Indeed, using English data, Nickell and Wadhwani (1987) find negative
affects     of leverage    and debt service on employment, holding. constant real
variables.
     One   could   also envision developing a theory linking (household) net

worth to durable goods demand: Suppose that consumers need to self-insure

against adverse movements in their respective labor incomes due to the

absence of perfect insurance markets. The need to hold precautionary

balances may make their spending on large durables higjtly sensitive to

their existing asset positions. Indeed, there is evidence linking

household spending on durables to balance sheet variables (e.g., Mishkin,

1978). Thus, financial factors could have a role in the volatility of

spending on consumer durables, as well as of spending on producer durablea.

     Agency costs of "free cash flows." The analysis presented here cay

appear in conflict with the "free cash flow" theory of investment, invoked

recently to explain the current wave of corporate restructuring as a

product of excessive investment (see, e.g., Jensen, 1986). We stress,

however, that the two        approeches   are not in conflict. Indeed, in the model.

we developed, outside lenders cannot determine directly whether borrowers

are efficiently allocating investment funds,            which   is precisely the problem

upon which the free cash flow theory builds. Underinvestment can occur in

the approach we characterize here because the outside lenders take into
                                    32

account borrowers' incentives before supplying funds. The free cash flow

story typically begins at a later stage, jf    lenders   have already

provided funds to the firm.

  Further, the conclusion of the free cash flow theory that management

should pay out outsiders' cash is perfectly consistent with our analysis.

This is true because the theory we presented emphasizes the role of

internal net worth in investment, and not cash flow, per se. The confusion

arises (we think) because empirical researchers must rely on variables such

as firm cash flow as proxiea for movements insiders' net worth.

  "Junk hands" and increased leverage. The recent growth of markets for

non-investment-grade bonds ("junk bonds") has extended to smaller

corporations the ability to issue marketable securities.29 However,

available evidence suggests that the terms under which these securities are

issued are closely connected to the financial position of the firm, in a

way consistent with the theory presented here --   indeed the security in our
theoretical model is easily interpretable as a junk bond. Coupon rates on

these bonds are typically quite high relative to Treasury bonds of similar

maturity, reflecting a perceived default risk.35 Further, studies indicate

that measures of (ftg J,jg) internal net worth and liquidity predict this

default risk well, and thus predict well the spread between junk bond

coupon rate and the riskless rate (see Altman, 1987). Given that the

agency costs of investing are positively related to this spread (as our

theoretical model predicts), then the link between internal net worth and

real investment decisions clearly remains for firms issuing junk bonds.

 What about the more general issue of the increased use of leverage in the

corporate sector? In the theory presented here, the important distinction
                                     33

is how the value of the firm is divided between insiders and outsiders,

given that the insiders' net worth governs the agency costs of investing.

Less important is how the liabilities issued to outsiders are divided

between equity and debt, the point being the there are likely to be agency

costs associated with issuing equity, es well as with issuing debt. Thus,

in our view, increased leverage is significant for macroeconomic stability

only if it is associated with declining internal net worth, and/or only to

the extent it makes insiders vulnerable to the risk of a sudden wealth

redistribution, as occurred in the debt-deflation of the l930s. (See also

the discussion in Bernanke and Campbell, 1988).
                                      34

                                  ENDNOTES

1. The importance of dliquidityconstrsined consumers for aggregate

movements in consumption is examined by Scheirilcan and Weiss (1986) and

Hubbard and Judd (1986).


2. Hall (1988) suggests one way in which the tatter two   approaches   may be

synthesized.     -




3.   See Certler (1988) for a survey of the new literature and, as welt, a

discussion of the traditional work.


4. cutter and Summers (1987) discusa measures of the costs of financial

distress in the recent Texaco-Pennzoil case.


5. This is distinct from the purely monetary transmission mechanism (i.e.

the decline in the money supply) stressed by Friedman and Schwartz (1963).


6. Brock and Evans (1988) put forth a related argument. They note that

small corporations account for moat of the observed mean-reversion behavior

(i.e.. non-random-walk behavior) in stock prices, and they cite finance

constraints as a possible explanation.



7. Costs of flotation alone are not likely to be sufficient to account for

these differences; see the review of studies in Fazzari, Hubbard, and

Petersen (l988a).



8. These data exclude new equity issues, which are small in the aggregate.
                                         35

9. In the first half of 1966, primarily saving and loans felt the

crtmch;' mortgage lending fell dramatically. Coiwsercial banks        felt   the


pinch   in the second half of the year, when the   Federal Reserve   towered the

ceiling rate on bank time deposits and increased reserve requirements.


10. See for example Bernanlce    and   Gertler (1989), Calomiris and Hubbard

(1987), Farmer (1984), Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986), Townsend (1988), and

Williamson (1987).


11. For example, in Bernanke     and   Gertler (1987), entrepreneurs have

private information about the expected return      on   their investment projects,

which adds an Akerlof (1970) 'lemons premium" to the cost of external

finance, analogous to Creenwald, Stiglitz, and Weiss (1984) and Myers and

Majluf   (1984).   In Calomiris and Hubbard (1987), entrepreneurs have private

irtformation about the riskiness of their projects, which leads to credit

rationing of some classes of borrowers, as in Keeton (1979) and Stiglita

end Weiss (1981).


12. See Gertler and    Rogoff   (1988) for a setting in which project success

probabilities are continuous concave functions of the quantity of soft

capital employed. In that setting, the amount       of soft   capital used is a

continuous function of the model's parameters.


13. One key feature of the new literature on realfinancial interactions

is that contractual arrangements are derived endogenously so that the

theoretical predictions do not hinge on arbitrary restrictions on financial

structure.
                                                   36

14. See Gertler (1988) for a model in which V is derived explicitly. In

that modal, production is repeated over time, and                        entrepreneurs      enter

isultiperiod contracts with intermediaries.


15. This result is a central feature of Bernanke                         and Gertler   (1987, 1989)

and Celomiris and Hubbard (1987).



16. To see that the derivative is positive, note that from                            equation   (a.},



                               (iT9 +
                                                   +
                                                        1W +   v/r        in9 +   nba)f (K)
                                                                                        I



                           L            K/r               K                       r
                                                                                             —


since               >



1'?.   The effect of a rise in r is unambiguous in this case since K >                           W.


18. One way in which the rise in r lowers investment is by reducing the

entrepreneur's collateralizable net worth (i.e., V/r falls). Indeed,

Fisher (1911) originally stressed this mechanism. In s description of the

impact    of   rising interest rates, he states:

   Further, with the rise of interest, the value, of certain collateral

   securities, such as bonds, on the basis of which loans are made, begins

   to fall. Such securities, being worth the discounted value of

   fixedsums,      fall   as interest rises, and therefore cannot be used as

   collateral for loens as large as before. (p. 64)


19. For an      example in       which   the   contracts may resemble either equity or

intermediary credit lines, see Zemnnnjce                 and   Gertler (1987).
                                         37

20. Calomiris end Hubbard (1987) discuss how this kind of setting may

induce precautionary saving-by firms. Certler (1988) also discusses how

entrepreneurs will have the incentive to adjust production to insure

against fluctuations in their net worth, resulting in production being more

volatile than otherwise. The relevance of these channels for economic

fluctu.ations is documented in Eckstein and Sinai (l986.


21. In the context of the model we presented effects of investment tax

credits or changes in tsx depreciation rules on the cost of capital will

depend on internal net worth as well. In the perfect information case, the
introduction of an investment tax credit would pivot the (OC) curve to the
right, increasing C.     However, for values of internal net worth for which

incentive problems arise, the (IC) curve will also pivot to the right,

raising actual investment K. In general, ths net worth effects of tax

policies -- and not just their effects on the cost of capital --        will be
important. Average tax burdens -. end not just effects of taxation on

marginal incentives -   - will be   important for investment decisions in some

firms (see Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen, l9BSh).


22. Further discussion of the classification system is given in

FHP(l988a).                                                         -




23.   This pattern holds up within individual two—digit-S.I.C. categories.


24, One explanation is that firms of different sizes could coexist in

equilibrum in an industry subject to random demand. Mills and Schumann

(1985) note that some firms could assume greater fixed costs taking
                                          38

advantage   of scale economies, while other firms could rely more on variable

factors (e.g., labor), trading off static efficiency for "f1exibility.

Using data on manufacturing firms from GOMPUSTAT, Mills and Schumann find

that sales and employment variability are negatively related to firm size

and market share within an industry. The assertion that high fixed costs

are incurred to take advantage of scale economies is probably questionable,

since minimum efficient scales in U.S. manufacturing afe in general small

(see the discussion in Domowitz, Hubbard, and Petersen. 1988),

      To pursue these ideas further, we regressed the firm standard

deviations of real sales growth on (the log of) the beginning-of-sample-

period capital stock (as a'measure of size) and two-digit-S.I.C. industry

dummies (as proxies for industry-specific sales variability), We found

that firm size is negatively related to sales variability. Whan.ve allow

for different intercepts by retention class, and pure size effect virtually

disappeared. Such results are again suggestive of the role played by

financial considerations for smaller firms.



25. Variable definitions and construction are descrived in FHP       (1988a,
Appendix B).




26.   This is strictly true under   assumptions   of perfect competition
(equality   of price and marginal cost)    and constant returns to scale. In
general,   output measures may matter. FR? (1988a) explore this issue

further. Whet we stress here are differences across retention classes in

the effect of internal finance on investment.
                                     39

27. For a derivation based on adjustment costs of investment, see Summers

(1981), Hayashi (1982), and FR? (1988a).


28. Similar evidence has been obtained for Japanese manufacturing firms by

Hoshi, Kashyap, and Scharfstein (1988). They find that membership in a

keiretsu group and the presence of a group bank are important in the

provision of information and the avoidance of credit rationing when

investment opportunities are promising. Indeed, Hoshi, Kashyap, and

Scharfstein use panel data on Japanese firms to show that investment is

sensitive to fluctuations in internal finance --     after   adjusting for

investment opportunities measured by q - -   only   for firms not in keiretsu

groupings. The investment behavior of firms in the groups with access to a

group "main banlC is well described by standard perfect-capital-market

investment models.


29. Such bonds have existed previously (e.g., in the 1930s), but their

popularity has reeurged in the past decade (see the discussion in Loeys,

1986).


30. Loeys (1986, p.6) notes that the risk premium of non-investment grade

bonds over Treasury issues averaged 300-600 basis points over the 1981-1986

period. Over the period from 1970 to 1984, the default rate of non-

investment-grade bonds averages 2.1 percent per annum, relative to roughly

zero for investment-grads securities (see Altman and Namacher, 1986, Table 10)
                                      40

REFERflICES



Abel,   Andrew S. and Olivier J. Blanchard, "The Present Value of Profits and

  Cyclical Movements in Investment," Econometrica 54 (March 1986):

  pp. 249-273.

Akerlof, George A., "The Market for Lemons': Quality Uncertainty end the

  Market Mechanism," Quarterly JournaLof    Econodics   84 (August 1970):

  pp. 488-500.

Altman, Edward I., "The Anatomy of the High-Yield Bond Market," Financial

  Analysts Journal (July-August 1987): pp. 12-25.

Altman, Edward I. and Scott A. Naacher, "The Anatomy of the High Yield

  Debt Market: 1985 Update," New York: Morgan Stanley, June 1986.

Berle, Adolph and Gardiner Means, The Modern Corooration_and Private

  Prooertv, New York: Macmillan, 1932.

Bernanke, Ben, "Non-Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the

  Propagation of the Great Depression," American Economic Review 73 (June

  1983): pp. 257-276.

Bernanke, Ben and John Y. Campbell, "Is There a Corporate Debt Crisis?,"

  Brookines Payers on_Economic Actjyjy (1988:1): pp. 83-125.

Bernanke, Sen and Mark Certler, "Agency Costs, Collateral, and Business

  Fluctuations," Americsn Economic Review, forthcoming, 1989.

Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler, "Financial Tragility and Economic

  Performance," Working Paper No. 2318, National Bureau of Economic

  Research, July 1987.

Blinder, Alan and Joseph E. Stiglitz, "Money, Credit Constraints, and

  Economic Activity," American Economic Review 73 (May 1983), pp. 297-302.
                                     41.


Brock, William and David Evans, "The Role of Small Businesses in

  Macroeconomics and Finance," Mimeograph, University of Wisconsin, 1988.

Butters, J. Keith and John V. Lintner, Effect of Federal Taxes on Growing

  Entertrises, Boston: Division of Research, Graduate School. of

  Business Administration, Harvard University, 1945.

Calomiris, Charles W. and ft. Glenn Hubbard, "Firm Heterogeneity, Internal

  Finance, and Credit Rationing" Working Paper No. 2497, National. Bureau

  of Economic Research, December 1987.

Calomiris, Charles W. and ft. Glenn Hubbard, "Price Flexibility, Credit

  Availability, and Economic Fluctuations: Evidence from the United

  States, 1879-1914," Mimeograph, Northwestern University, 1987.

Calomiris, Charles It., K. Glenn Hubbard, and James H. Stock, "The Farm Debt

  Crisis and Public Policy," Brookirtes Paters on Economic Activity

  (1986:2): pp. 441-479.

Chandler, Lester, American. N.pneflrv Policy. 1928-1941, New York: Harper

  and Row, 1971.

Christiano, Lawrence and Martin Eichenbaum, "Notes on Endogenous Growth and

  Aggregate Fluctuations," Mimeograph, Federal Reserve Bank of

  Minneapolis, 1988.

Churchill, Betty C., "Age and Life Expectancy of Business Firms," Survey of

  Current Business (December 1955): pp. 15-20.

Cutler, David M. and Lawrence H. Summers, "The Costs of Conflict Resolution

  and Financial Distress: Evidence from the texaco-Penzoil Litigation,"

  Working Paper No. 2418, National Bureau of Economic Research, October

  1987.

Domowitz, Ian, ft. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen, •Markec Structure

  and Cyclical Fluctutations in U.S. Manufacturing," Review of Economics

  and Statistics 70 (February 1988): pp. 55-66.
                                         42

Easterbrook, Frank H., "Two   Agency-Coat Explanations of Dividends,"
  American Economic Review 74 (June      1984):   pp. 5O-6S9,

Eckstein, Otto and Allen Sinai, "The Mechanisms of the Business Cycle in

  the Postwar Era," in Robert J. Gordon, ed., Tht Seticari Business Cycle;

  Continuitrand Chanae. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986.

Eisner, Robert, Factors in BusinenJntestment, Cambridge: Ballinger

  Press, 1978.

Evans. David S., "The Relationships Between Firm Growth, Size, and Age,"

  Journal of Industrial Economics 35 (June 1987): pp. 567-587.

Fabricant, Solomon, Profits. Losses, and Business Assets. 1929.4934,

  Bulletin 55, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1935.

Farmer, Roger E.A., "A New Theory of Aggragate Supply," American Economic

  Review 74 (December 1984): pp. 920-930.

Farmer, Roger E.A. ,   "Implicit   Contracts with Asymmetric Information and

  Bankruptcy: The Effect of Interest Rates on Layoffs," Review of Economic

  Studies 52 (1985): pp. 427-442.

Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen, "Financing

  Constraints and Corporate Investment," Brookinas Pacers on Economic

  Actixitx (1988a:l): pp. 141-195.

Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard and Bruce C. Petersen, "Investment,

  Financing Decisions, and Tax Policy," American EconoaicReview 78 (May

  1988: pp. 200-205.

Fisher, Irving, "The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions,"

  Eonometrica 1 (October 1933): pp. 337-357.
                                       63

Fisher, Irving, The Purchasing Power of Money, New York: Macmillan, 1911.

Friedman, Benjsmin Pt., "Debt and Economic Activity in the United States,"

  in Benjemin Pt. Friedman1 ed., The Changing     Roles   of Debt and Eouitv in

  Financing U.S. Caoital. Formation,   Chicego:   University of Chicago

  Press 1982.

Friedman, Benjamin M., The Roles of Money and Credit in Macroeconomic

  Analysis," in James Tobin, eth Macroeconomics. Incas and Quantities:

  Essays itt Memory of ArthuflM.   Okun, Washington,      D.C.: Brookings

  Institution, 1983.

Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United

  States._1870-l96O,    Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1963.

Gentler, Mark, "Financial Capacity, Reliquification, and Production in an

  Economy with Long-term Financial Arrangements," Mimeograph, University

  of Wisconsin, 1988.

Gertler, Mark, "Financial Structure and Aggregate Economic Activity,"

  Journal of Money. Credit. and Eankine, 20 (3) Part II (August, 1988):

  pp. 559-588.

Gertler, Mark and Kenneth Rogoff, "International Capital Flows and the

  'Siphoning Effect,'" Mimeograph, University of Wisconsin, 1988.

Creenwal.d, Bruce and Joseph E. Stiglitz, tnformation, Finance Constraints,

  and Business Fluctuations," Mimeograph, !ninceton University, 1986.

Greenwald, Bruce and Joseph S. Stiglitz, end Andrew Weiss, "Information

  Imperfections in the Capital Market and    Macroeconomic Fluctuations,"

  American Economic Review 74 (May 1984): pp. 194-199.

Gurley, John and Edward S. Shaw, "Financial Aspects of Economic Development,'

  American Economic Review 45 (September 1955): pp. 515-538.
                                      -44
Gurley, John   0. and Edward   S. Shaw, MoMLjn a Theory of Finance.

    Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1960.

Hall, Robert E., 'Market Structure and Macro fluctuations,' Brook±-nes

    fliers on Economic Activity (1986:2): pp. 285-377.

Hall, Robert E., •A Noncompetitive, Equilibrin Model of Fluctuations,'

-
    Working Paper No. 2516, National Bureau of Economic Research, May 1988.
Hart, Albert Gaylord, Debts azid    Recover',.   1929-1937, New York: Twentieth

    Century Fund, 1938.

Hayashi, Fuzeio, "Tobin's Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical

    interpretation," Economecrica 50 (January 1982): pp. 213-224.

Hubbard, R. Glenn and     Kenneth L. Judd, 'Liquidity Constraints, Fiscal
    Policy, and Consumption," Brookinza Payers on Economic Activity

    (1986:1): pp. 1-SO.

}lymer, Stephen and Peter Pashigian, 'Fin Size and       Rate   of Growth,' Journal

    of Political Economy   70 (December 1962): pp. 556-569.

Jensen, Michael G., 'Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and

    Takeovers,' American Economic Review 76 (May 1986): pp. 323-329.

Jovanovic, Boyan, 'Selection and the Evolution of Industry,' Econometrica

    50 (May 1982). pp. 649-670.

Keeton, William, Eauilibriinn Credit Rationinj, New York: Garland Presa,

    1979.

Kiimsel, Lewis H., The Availability of Bank Credit. 1933-38, New York:

    National Industrial Conference Board, 1939.

Kindleberger, Charles, Maniaa Panics. and Crashes, New York: Saaic Books,

    1978.
                                           45

Kiebaner, Benjamin, CommerciaL Bankinz in the U.S.: A History, Hinsd.ale:

  Dryden Press, 1974.

Kydland, Finn and Edward Prescott, "Tii to Build and Aggregate

  Fluctuations," Econometrica 50 (November 1982): pp. 1345-1370.

Loeys.    Jan, "Low Grade Bonds: A Growing Source of     Corporate Funding,

  Federal    Reserve Bank of Philadelohia Business Review (November-December
  1986): pp. 3-12.
Mervin,    Charles L., Financina Small Corporations, New York: National

  Bureau of Economic Research. 1943.

Meyer, John R. and Edwin Kub, The Investment Deci.sion, Cambridge: Harvard

  University Press, 1957.

Mills, David E. and Laurance Schumann, "Industry        Structure with   Fluctuating

  Demand," American Economic Review 75 (September 1985): pp. 758-767.

Minsky, Hyman P. •     "Financial   Crisis, Financial Systams, and the Parformance

  of the Economy," in Commission on Money and Credit, Private Capital

  Markets, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1964.

Minsky, Hyman P. • John Maynard Keynes, New York: Columbia University

  Press, 1975.

Mishkin, Frederic S., "The Household Balance Sheet and the Great

  Depression," Journal of Economic History 38 (December 1978): pp. 918-937.

Myers, Stewart C. and Nicholas S. MajIuf, "Corporate Financing and

  Investment Decisions When Firms Have information That Investors Do Not

  Have," Journal of Financial Economics 13 (June        1984):   pp. 187-221.

Nelson, Susan    C.,   Noncorporate Business Taxation: Before and After the

  tax Reform Act of 1986," U.S. Department of treasury, Office of Tax

  Analysis Working Paper 59, May        1988.
                                     46

Nickell, S. and S. Wadhwani, "Financial Factors, Efficiency Wages, and

  Employment: Investigations Using U.K. Micro Data," Discussion Paper

  No. 295, Centre for Labor Economics, London School of Economics,

  November 1987.

Popkin, Joel, "Measuring Gross Product Originating in Small Business:

  Methodology, and Annual Estimates, 1955 to 1976,' Final Report,

  Contract No.: SM 2624-OA-79, submitted to Small Business

  Administration, September 1980.

Prescott, Edward, "Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement," Federal

  Reserve Bank of Minneanolis Quarterly Review (Fall 1986), pp. ?-?.

Roosa, Robert V., "Interest Rates and the Central Bank,' in Money. Trade.

  and Economic Growth, New York: Macmillan, 1951.

Reiss, Peter C., "The Effect of Credit and Finance on Oil and Gas

  Exploration," Mimeograph, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1988.

Schankerman, Mark, "Micro and Aggregate Shocks to Investment Decisions,"

  Mimeograph, London School of Economics, May 1988.

Scheinlunan, Jose and Laurence Weiss, "Borrowing Constraints and Aggregate

  Economic Activity," Econometrica 54 (January 1986): pp. 23-46.

Shapiro, Eli and Charles Wolf, The Role of Private Placements in Cornorate

  Finance, Boston: Division of Research, Graduate School of Business

  Administration, Harvard University, l972

Sprague, 0.M.W., History of Crises Under the National Banking System.

  National Monetary Commission, U.S. Senate Document No. 538, 61st

  Congress, 2nd session, 1910.

Stiglit:, Joseph F. and Andrew Weiss, "Credit Rationing in Markets with

  Imperfect Information," American Economic Review 71 (June 1981): pp. 393-410.
                                         47

Stoddard, W.L., "Small Business Wants Capital," Harvard Business Review 18

   (Spring 1940): pp. 18-24.

Ssners, Lawrence   H.,   "Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q-Theory

  Approach." Brookinss Peners on Economic Activity (1981:1): pp. 67-127.

Summers. Lawrence, "Some Skeptical Observations on Real Busiess Cycle

  Theory," Federal Reserve 3ank of Minneaoolic Quarterly Review (Fall

  1986), pp. 23-27.

Tobin, James, "Keynesian Models of Recession and Depression," American

  Economic Review 75 (May 1975): pp. 195-202.

Townsend, Robert, "Information Constrained Insurance: The Revelation

  Principle Extended," Journal of Monetary Economics 21 (March-May 1988):

  pp. 411-450.

U.S. Small Business Administration, The State of Small Business: A Repn&

  ol the President, 1988.

Williamson, Stephen D. ,   "Financial   Intermediation, Business Failures, end

  Real Business Cycles," Journal of Political Econy 95 (December 1987),

  pp. 1196-1216.

Wojni].ower, Albert H., "The Central Role of Credit Crunches in Recent

  Financial History," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1980:2): pp.

  277-326.
                       INVESTMENT/CAPITAL
    0.13
    0.12
    11-u
     0.1
    0.09
    0.00
    0.07
    0.00
    0.00
    0.04
    0.03
    8.00
    0.01


   —8.OL
   —0.112

   —0.
   —11.84
   -0.85
            1900               1960              1967


C 4umL             +                  •   350M—$250     .A   )$0501L



                   GROWTH RATE OF REAL SALE5




                                                                toll
                   + 1O—$50X          •   *60—$2!lfl(        >$2085(
                       T1CVRE 3

    Effect of an Increase in Net Worth on Investment




             /                                          LEG)



         /                                       (sc)
     /


                  t
0
     S K'
Internal Net Uorzh and the Investment Decision




                           r N÷ V/r)
                                            (1tFT) cc
                                                  r I t) K
                                                 bc)




    K                                                  K
                                                               TABlE 1

                                                 Sc*arces of Fuixis by Size C1ass
                                               U.S. Manufacturing Finns, 1970-1984


                                         Sairces of   FUnis   (percent of total)
                                                                 Other
                                      Short-Irm laq—'lerm      L0n3—Terin   Ratained
                                                                                        —
                                                                                       of   1aq-'ln
                                                                                        bt Fran       Average
                                                                                                      Retention
Fin Class                             Bank Debt   Bank Debt       It        Earninjs        Banks      Ratio

All Firns                       ,        0.6           8.4        19.9       71.1           29.6        0.60

By   size class
tinier $10 million                       5.1          12.8        6.2       75.9            67.3        0.79
      —         million                  5.9          17.4
$10       $50                                                     6.9        698            71.6        0.76
      —          million                 3.1          12.9        5.3
$50       $100                                                              78.7            71.0        0.68
$100 — $250 million                     —0.2          13.3        12.0      74.9            52.4        0.63
$250 — $1 billion                       —2.3          10.6       15.4       76.3            40.8        0.56

Over $1 billion                         —0.6          4.8        27.9       67.9            114.7       0.52


Notes;     &tries are      authors'
                                calonatiosis basal on data taken fran U.S. Departnent of OnIenE, Bureau of the
                     Quarterly FinenialRerort of )trnfacturim. Mthim. arxl Trade COrPorations, variws issues.
           The data unlerlyirq the calc'ilaticz are expressed In 1982 dollars. "Size class" refers to the value
           of net plant.      FuSs    raised frau nat equity Issues are e.xcluied fran the cala.alations.
                                       TABLE 2

              Firm   Size.   Assets, and Receipts: All Corporations


                                       Accounting for Percentage of Total

Asset Size Class ($0005)         Number of Firms       Assets          Receipts


No.assets                              3.8%               0%                1.1%

<100                                  51.1               0.53               3,2

100-250                               18.5               0.87               3.3

250-500                               10.4               1.1                3.6

500-1000                               6.9               1.4                4.4

1000-5000                              6.4               3.9            11.7

5000-10,000                            0.83              1.7                4.2

10,000-25,000                          0.62              2.9                4.9

25,000-50,000                          0.30              3.6                3.4

50,000-100,000                         0.19              4.0                3.4

100.000-250,000                        0.1.4             5.8                5.3

,250,000                               0,12             74.2            51.5
                                     100,0             100.0           100.0




Note: All figures are for 1984, and are taken from Source Book:
       Statistics of Incoae. Active Corioration Income Tax Returns. 1984
       (published in 1987).
                                                             ThBEE3

                         Firm Size Assets, aril    fipts:        CbrpDraticris in Major Irdustry Grotçs

                                                          Major Irdustry                                      Fiiwice,
Asset Size                                                                                     tholessie &    Inairaz,
Class ($000s)     Ontnction             141nirq    Msrufaobirirx7    Services     utilities Retail    Trade   aid Real Estate
                   A          P         A    P       A      P        A     R       A      P     A     P         A         P


No Assets           0%       1.2%      0%   1.6%     0%    0.76%     0%    1.1%     0%    0%    0%    0.8%      0%       2.51
<100               3.0       9.0      0.29 1.5      0.16 0.50       6.9 21.2        0     0     2.1   3.5      0.14       1.5

100—250            5.1       1.9      0.50 1.0      0.35 0.74       7.7 14.0       0.33 1.5     4.5   5.1      0.26       1.4

250—500           7.2        9.5      0.91 1.5      0.56 1.2        6.3    9.1     0.46 1.7     5.8   6.1      0.32       1.0

500—1000          9.7       12.1      1.3   2.7     0.93 1.8        6.6    7.9     0.59 1.7     7.6   a.o      0.4        1.1

1000—5000         23.2      24.6      4.4   5.9     3.5    6.5      13.8 13.1      1.6   4.3    2.0 21.8       1.2        2.1

5000—10,000        6.7       8.1      2.8   3.2     1.9    3.3      5.3    4.1     0.65 1.2     7.2   7.0      0.7        1.3
10,000—25,000      9.5       7.4      4.8   4.4     2.9    4.3      7.0    5.1     1.1   2.0    7.7   7.2      2.2        2.6
25,000—50,000      5.9       4.3      4.1   4.2     2.4    3.2      4.8    3.5     0.91 1.5     5.1   3.9      3.4        3.8
50,000—100,000     4.5       3.3      3.3   3.4     2.5    3.1      5.7    3.7     0.86 1.3     4.5   4.0      5.0        4.6
100,000—250,000    4.0       2.4      7.7   5.9     5.1    5.6      8.0    4.8     1.8
                                                                          2.4. 7.8 6.1                         6.7        6.0
>250,000          19.2      10.2      68.9 64.7 79.7 69.0 27.9 12.4 91.7 82.5 45.7 26.5                       79.7       71.5
                 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0                      100.0   100.0


Note: "A" aid "R" refer to "assets"         aid "receipts," respectively. All figures are for 1984, aid are
       tskni fran Swrr        Book:    Statistics of jrxnie. Active Cbiwration        Tax Retuti. J984
                                                                                         lrie
       (published in 1987).
                                       TA3LE 4

              The Relative Importance of Small Firms in Major Industries



                     Share in Cross Product       Share of Firma with <500 Employees
Major Industry         Originating (1976)        In GPO (1976)   In Employment (1986)


Agriculture                     NA                    NA                   79.1%

Mining                         3.0%                   32.2%                34.7

Construction                   5.3                    83,5                 85,4

Manufacturing                 28.7                    19.1                 35.2

Transportation                10.8                    21.6                 33,2
 Coranications,
  and Public Utilities

QhoI.as1e Trade                9.2                    83.9                 70.4

Retail Trade                  12.0                    62.4                 59.0

Finance Insurance,            16.7                   45.6                  44.5
  and Real Estat.

Services                      14.3                    82.0                 49.1



Note: Shares in CPO by sector and aize for 1976 are taken from Joel Popkin,
       "Measuring Cross Product Originating in Small Business: Methodology and
       Annual Estimates, 1955 to 1976," Report to the Small Business
       Administration, September 1980. Shares in employment for 1986 are taken
       from The State of Small Business: A Renortof the President. 1988,
       pp. 62-63. "Small businesses" are defined as firms with fewer than 500
         fins.
                                      TABLE 5

      U.S Manufacturing Firms Grouped by Retention Patterns, 1970-84
                               Summary     Statistics

                                                  Category of Firm

                                   High                   Medium        Low
Statistic                       Retention               Retention    Retention


Number of finis                       49                   39           334

Average retention ratio               0.94                 0.87         0.58

Average real sales' growth        13.7                     8.7          4.6
  (percent per year)

Average of firm standard              0.17                 0.09         0.06
  deviations of investment-
  capital ratios

Average of firm standard              0.20                 0,09         0.06
  deviations of cash f low-
  capital ratios

Average of firm standard          260                     19.1         140
  deviations of annual growth
  rate of real sales (percent
  per year)

Median capital stock, 1970        27.1                    54.2        401,6
  (millions of 1982 dollars)      .




Median capital stock, 1984        94.9                   1925         480.8
  (millions of 1982 dollars)


Source: Authors' calculations based on samples selected from the Value
         Line data base.
                                   TABLE 6

       Sales Variability Across Retention Classes Within Industries


                                  Standard Deviation of Real Sales Growth
                                             (Percent per Year)

                                All       High        Medium       Low
Industry Group                  Firma   Retention   Retention   Retention


20: Food and Kindred Products    15,1     28.5        27.6        11.2

28: Chemicals and Allied
                    -
                                 13.1     21.3        17.5        11.7.
    Products                                 .



35: Machinery Except             21.2     26.6        17_a        17.0
    Electric Machinery

37: Transportation Equipment     19.1     38.2        16.4        15.5

38: Instruments and Related      16.4     23.8        12.1        11.3
    Products


Source: Authors' calculations based on samples of firms drawn from the
         Value Line data base.
                                       TABLE 7

                Effects of Q and Cash Flow on Investment, 1970-1964


                                         Category of Firm
Variable              High Retention     Medium Retention       Low Retention


                          0,0005              0.004                  0.002
91t
                         (0.0004)            (0.0009)               (0.0003)

                          0.506               0.339                  0.246
(CF/K)ij
            .            (0.034)             (0.038)                (0.011)
                                                            •

                          0.197               0.099                 -0.026
(CF/K)iti*
                         (0.054)             (0.050)                (0.012)
RECESSION
2                         0.37                   0.30                0.20


Note: The dependent variable is the investment-capital ratio (I'K)ft for
       the ith firm at time c, where I is investment in plant end equipment
       and K is the beginning-of-period capital stock. Independent
       variables are defined as follows: Q is the sum of the value of
       equity and debt less the value of inventories, divided by the
       replacement cost of the capital stock, adjusted for corporate and
       personal tax considerations; CF/K is the cash flow-capital ratio,
       RECESSION is a dummy variable equal to unity in 1974, 1975, 1981,
       and 1982, and equal to zero otherwise. The equations were estimated
       using fixed firm and year effects (not reported) .  Standard errors
       appear in parentheses.
