NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE TARGETING AND IMPACT OF PAYCHECK PROTECTION PROGRAM LOANS TO
SMALL BUSINESSES
Alexander W. Bartik
Zoe B. Cullen
Edward L. Glaeser
Michael Luca
Christopher T. Stanton
Adi Sunderam
Working Paper 27623
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27623

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2020

We thank Karen Mills for connecting us to Alignable and the Alignable founders for providing
data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27623.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Alexander W. Bartik, Zoe B. Cullen, Edward L. Glaeser, Michael Luca, Christopher
T. Stanton, and Adi Sunderam. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Targeting and Impact of Paycheck Protection Program Loans to Small Businesses Alexander
W. Bartik, Zoe B. Cullen, Edward L. Glaeser, Michael Luca, Christopher T. Stanton, and Adi
Sunderam
NBER Working Paper No. 27623
July 2020
JEL No. D22,G01,G2,L26,M13
ABSTRACT
The Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) aimed to quickly deliver hundreds of billions of dollars
of loans to small businesses, with the loans administered via private banks. In this paper, we use
firm-level data to document the demand and supply of PPP funds. Using an instrumental
variables approach, we find that PPP loans led to a 14 to 30 percentage point increase in a
business’s expected survival, and a positive but imprecise effect on employment. Moreover, the
effects on survival were heterogeneous and highlight an important tradeoff faced by
policymakers: while administering the loans via private banks allowed for rapid delivery of
funds, it also limited the government’s ability to target the funding - instead allowing pre-existing
connections between businesses and banks to determine which firms would benefit from the
program.
Alexander W. Bartik
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
1407 W. Gregory Road
214 David Kinley Hall
Urbana, IL 61821
abartik@illinois.edu

Michael Luca
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mluca@hbs.edu

Zoe B. Cullen
Rock Center 210
Harvard Business School
60 N. Harvard
Boston, MA 02163
zcullen@hbs.edu

Christopher T. Stanton
210 Rock Center
Harvard University
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
christopher.t.stanton@gmail.com

Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

Adi Sunderam
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 359
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
asunderam@hbs.edu

I.

Introduction

The COVID-19 pandemic has led to a rapid contraction in economic activity, including sharply
reduced employment and widespread temporary business closures (Bartik et al 2020a). Small
businesses have been particularly hard hit by the crisis, with employment during April 2020
declining over 18 percent at firms with under 50 employees, compared to only 13 percent at firms
with over 1000 employees (ADP April Employment Report, 2020).
In anticipation of the economic impact of COVID-19 related disruptions, Congress created the
Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) as part of the CARES Act passed on March 27, 2020. PPP
allowed small and medium sized firms that certified that their businesses were “substantially
affected by COVID-19 to take up uncollateralized, low-interest rate loans for up to 2.5 times
monthly pre-COVID payroll – with the potential for loans to be forgiven altogether.
The scale of the stimulus package was enormous – offering $649 billion in loans across two
tranches. To expedite delivery of the funds, PPP loans were guaranteed by the federal
government’s Small Business Administration (SBA) but administered by banks. Applications for
the first tranche of PPP loans started on April 3, 2020 and included funds for $349 billion in loans
- which were exhausted by April 16, 2020. The second tranche, approved in a revised bill on April
24, began being distributed on April 27, 2020 and included over $300 billion in additional funding.
While administering PPP via banks allowed for rapid delivery, it also reduced the government’s
ability to target the funds (e.g. to businesses most in need, or to businesses where the funds would
have the largest impact). Instead, program take-up was largely left to bank decisions, especially
during the first tranche when there was considerable excess demand for funding.
In this paper, we investigate the take-up and impact of first-tranche PPP loans, using surveys
of small businesses conducted via Alignable between April 25 and April 27. Ninety percent of
these survey responses were collected prior to the first day of the second tranche of PPP funding,
at a time when access to loans was restricted. We evaluate the allocation of funds from the firsttranche using a model where the social planner trades off the speed of loan delivery with the
effectiveness of loan targeting.
How did banks allocate PPP funds? We find that businesses that were more impacted by
COVID-related disruptions were more likely to seek funds. Businesses with less cash on hand,
2

businesses in more affected industries, and businesses reporting more distress due to the crisis
were markedly more likely to apply for PPP loans. However, these applications from distressed
businesses were less likely to be approved. Although, more affected businesses were less likely to
receive PPP loans during the first tranche, to evaluate whether this allocation of loans was
suboptimal we must discern whether the impact of PPP funding differed for these businesses
relative to less affected businesses.
We first estimate the causal impact of PPP on business survival and employment, on
average, before turning to treatment effect heterogeneity. To address the endogeneity of PPP
approval decisions, we instrument for approval using information about pre-existing banking
relationships of businesses. We use the fact that individual banks varied in their approval rates,
with the largest banks having lower approval rates. Specifically, among the top 20 banks by size
in the U.S., we find that the top 4 had the lowest PPP approval rates, followed by the top 5-10.
These differences in approval rates likely reflect operational challenges in administering the
program as borrowers rushed to apply, but they may also reflect intentional choices made by the
very largest banks to focus on certain clients first.2 Restricting the sample to firms that bank with
top 20 banks, we use dummies to indicating which group of banks the firm uses as an instrument
for PPP approval. The exclusion restriction for these instruments boils down to the assumption
that firms using large banks are similar except for the bank’s handling of PPP. Similarly, among
smaller financial institutions, credit unions had lower approval rates than community banks, likely
because many credit unions did not have pre-existing relationships with the SBA. In a second
specification, we restrict the sample to firms that bank with community banks or credit unions, and
use business owners’ past affiliation with a credit union as an instrument for PPP approval. The
exclusion restriction in this case boils down to the assumption that small firms using credit unions
are similar to those using community banks.
Using these different versions of our bank instrument and a variety of controls, we
consistently find that PPP approval during the first-tranche was associated with an increase in selfreported firm survival probability of 14 to 30 percentage points. PPP approval is also estimated to
increase employment, but the employment estimates are imprecise and more sensitive to the
particular instrument and controls used. To corroborate our main results and shed light on realized
closure rates, we conducted a phone survey in July. Specifically, we called businesses to see if
2

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/22/business/sba-loans-ppp-coronavirus.html

3

they were open. The results are consistent with our main analysis, suggesting that PPP funding
ultimately led to fewer businesses closing.
Finally, we explore heterogeneity in treatment effects by different firm characteristics to
test if banks targeted PPP funds based on the efficacy of the loan for business survival. Along
some dimensions, such as firms’ self-reports of the pandemic’s impact and remaining cash-onhand, approval likelihoods were lower than average despite these firms having high individuallevel treatment benefits from receiving PPP funding.

Along other dimensions, most notably

payroll size, the businesses approved for funding did have higher estimated treatment effects. This
sheds light on the implications of delegating lending decisions to banks, rather than having the
government pick recipients. Loans were delivered very rapidly and were well-targeted on some
but not all dimensions. Some banks seem to have favored firms with closer relationships to the
bank, rather than those in greater distress or with higher treatment effects. On balance, banks’
targeting appears to do better than random allocation of the loans; designing programs with rules
for better targeting may have resulted in further delay in getting funds to needy businesses.
This paper contributes to a growing literature studying the effects of the CARES act
provisions. Recent research has studied the effects of PPP loans, exploiting variation in PPP loan
receipt intensity between firms of different sizes (Chetty et al. 2020, Autor et al. 2020) and
locations (Granja et al. 2020, and Bartik et al. 2020c). Employment effects are generally positive
in these other papers, but they tend to be modest. To our knowledge, our paper is the first to
leverage individual firm-bank relationships to understand the targeting and effectiveness of PPP
loans. This enables a clearer picture of which firms were most likely to apply for, receive, and
benefit from PPP loans, shedding light on how this new program may interact with an established
literature on financial constraints (Myers and Majluf 1984, Holmstrom and Tirole 1997, Fazzari
et al. 1988, Kaplan and Zingales 1997). Relative to complementary work, we are also able to
quantify changes in firms’ expectations about survival and resilience, providing important context
for the long-run effects of PPP if improved balance sheets allow firms to better weather the
COVID-19 crisis.
The paper proceeds as follows. The next section describes the history of the CARES act and
the design of the Paycheck Protection Program. We then introduce a theoretical framework of
public crisis-lending that illuminates the tradeoffs the government faces in deciding whether to
delegate loan delivery or not between providing loans quickly or targeting loans to those firms’
4

that have the highest social benefit from receiving the loans. The fourth section describes the
survey data we use from Alignable. In Sections 5-6, we present results on the characteristics of
firms who applied for and received PPP loans. Section 7 then presents estimates of the causal
effect of PPP loans on firm reported survival probabilities and employment. Section 8 concludes
and discusses the implications of our results for public crisis-lending.
II.

The Paycheck Protection Program and the CARES Act

The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or CARES Act, is essentially unique
in its combination of expeditious enactment, vast size, and unanimous support. The Congressional
Budget Office estimated that it would add $1.7 trillion to the U.S. deficit, and yet the Senate passed
it unanimously.3

We will focus on one particular component of the CARES Act – the Paycheck

Protection Program of PPP – but here we briefly summarize the history of the overall act and its
successor.
As of March 7, 2020, there were only 275 diagnosed COVID-19 cases in the United States.
Almost 2,000 were diagnosed between March 7 and March 14. Another 1,992 tests came back
positive on March 15 and March 16. On March 17, cities in the San Francisco Bay Area started
issuing shelter-in-place orders.

March 17, 18 and 19 turned up another 10,993 cases, and on

March 20, New York followed California in issuing a statewide stay-at-home order.4
While the American onset of the disease was remarkably rapid, observers immediately grasped
that the economic impact of the pandemic could be catastrophic.

Even before the first major

lockdown, on March 15, the trade group Airlines for America requested $50 billion in aid.5 On
March 18, the National Restaurant Association called for $325 billion in restaurant-related aid
programs,6 but by then the Trump administration had already called on Congress to pass a one
trillion dollar stimulus package. The original Treasury Department plan featured $500 billion for
direct payments to taxpayers, $200 billion for distressed industries including the airlines, and $300
billion for “small business interruption loans.”7

3

https://www.cbo.gov/system/files/2020-04/hr748.pdf
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/cases-updates/cases-in-us.html
5
https://www.theguardian.com/business/2020/mar/16/us-airline-industry-seeks-50-billion-bailout-amidcoronavirus-pandemic
6
https://restaurant.org/downloads/pdfs/business/natl-rest-association-covid-letter
7
https://www.washingtonpost.com/context/department-of-treasury-proposal-for-coronavirusresponse/6c2d2ed5-a18b-43d2-8124-28d394fa51ff/
4

5

As the economic fear spread, legislators lost any concern for fiscal restraints. Between
March 4 and March 23, the Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped by 8,498 points or 31 percent
of its March 4 level. The Standard and Poor’s 500 Index fell by 28.5 percent over the same time
period.

On March 26, the Department of Labor announced that unemployment claims had

increased from 282,000 during the week that ended on March 14 to 3.28 million during the week
that ended on March 21. By that evening, the size of the bill had grown, and the Senate was close
to a deal.
It took until Tuesday, March 24th for the Senate to agree, unanimously, on a stimulus
package—the CARES Act-- that authorized over $2 trillion dollars of outlays. The bill was so
popular among legislators that it had 369 co-sponsors. Hospitals and local governments together
were allocated more than $250 billion and households received more than $750 billion in aid
through direct payments, increased unemployment insurance, and tax deferrals.
Over $800 billion was allocated for corporate loans, which was split between the $349
billion Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), which targeted smaller businesses, and the $500
billion Exchange Stabilization Fund (ESF), which focused on larger firms.
In most industries, PPP was limited to firms with fewer than 500 employees and loans were capped
at $10,000,000. The size limit of PPP to firms with under 500 employees was relaxed in some
industries, most notably for industries in NAICS code 72, which includes restaurants, leisure, and
hospitality, where firms are eligible for PPP as long as they had fewer than 500 employees at each
location.9 Any recipient of a PPP loan was meant to make a “good faith certification” that, among
other things, acknowledged “that funds will be used to retain workers and maintain payroll or make
mortgage payments, lease payments, and utility payments.”

Indeed, the share of the loan that

was spent on payroll, mortgage, rent and utilities could be forgiven if the firm didn’t reduce its
number of workers. The total amount of forgiveness would decline by the percentage decline in
the firm’s labor force relative to a pre-crisis comparison point.10

This $349 billion dollar program

was therefore more of a grant program than a loan program.
The money was to be distributed through qualified financial intermediaries, but the
procedure for allocating the $349 billion across potential lenders was far from clear. The CARES

9

https://www.sba.gov/funding-programs/loans/coronavirus-relief-options/paycheck-protectionprogram
10

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/BILLS-116hr748enr/pdf/BILLS-116hr748enr.pdf
6

Act endowed the Secretary of the Treasury and the Administrator of the Small Business
Administration (SBA) to choose how to give the money out across banks, and in the first round of
the PPP, the money was allocated through the SBA and its E-TRAN system to banks on a firstcome first serve basis. The program moved precipitously fast. One banking industry official said
that “banks were handed the operator’s manual for a $350 billion program at 6:30 p.m.” on April
2, the night before the PPP was supposed to launch.
Banks rushed to get applications into the E-TRAN system. Some of the larger banks were
able to move fast. Bank of America, for example, took in 10,000 applications during the first
morning of the program. Immediately, there were complaints that banks were favoring borrowers
with established credit relationships. Senator Rubio, the Chair of the Small Business Committee
tweeted with outrage that “BOA denied #PPP loan because they don’t have a credit account,”
which was “A ridiculous requirement that isn’t anywhere in law.”
The demand for these loans was so enormous that the original $349 billion was exhausted
within two weeks. Senator Rubio tweeted that “700,000 small business applications are in limbo”
and #PPP will grind to a halt tonight.”11 J.P Morgan Chase reported that they had received 60,000
applications on the first day of the program, but were only able to make 27,000 loans before the
money ran out.12 This mismatch between supply and demand gave banks an extraordinary role in
allocating the first round of funds.
Figure 1 displays the timing of loan approvals and fund deployment, as recorded by the
SBA. The first round of the program ran out on April 16, and lending approvals stopped until
April 27, after which Congress added more than $300 billion more to the program.

This extra

sum proved to be sufficient, since each business was only allowed a single PPP loan totaling 2.5
times their monthly payroll, and the loan remained capped at $10,000,000. Since evaluating the
impact of a program that is open to all is difficult, we focus on the impact of receiving a PPP loan
prior to April 24, which corresponds to the period where PPP lending was constrained by limited
funds.

We now turn to our model, which attempts to understand the conditions under which the

PPP’s structure, which includes delegating the allocation of funds to banks and a cap on loan
amounts, may be optimal.

11

https://twitter.com/marcorubio/status/1250516086136754176

12

https://www.nbcnews.com/business/business-news/small-business-loan-program-ran-out-moneywithin-minutes-some-n1187051
7

III. Crisis Lending: Delegation, Delay and Regulation
Large-scale public lending programs have been one major response to economic crises
since the creation of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation in 1932, but rarely has a public
program been as large and as unregulated as the Paycheck Protection Program. The PPP had few
restrictions on who should receive the loans or the size of the loan, other than the $10 million cap
and the requirement that loans be less than 2.5 times average payroll from the prior year. In this
section, we consider three normative policy questions: What forces determine whether it is optimal
to delegate authority over a public lending program in a largely unregulated way? What forces
determine whether it is optimal to allow the delegated agent to determine the size of the loan?
When is it optimal to set the loan size at a low enough level so that all borrowers essentially receive
aid, which is what eventually happened with the PPP loans, and when is it optimal to for lenders
to distribute larger loans?
The price of delegated discretion is that the lenders’ preferences may be poorly aligned
with social welfare. The price of regulation or government provision is the business deaths that
are caused by delay.
We consider the optimization problem of a benevolent social planner that has a total fund
of T dollars to allocate across businesses. We assume that these funds are given as loans, but the
problem is unchanged if the money is just a gift.

However, note that although the model is

unchanged, the parameters governing the public and private benefits of the funding, and their
covariances, may vary with the type of funding, so the implications of delayed control versus
immediate delegation may vary between a program administered as a grant versus a loan. We will
abstract away from many issues that are central to public lending programs, such as ensuring that
private lenders have skin-in-the-game and thinking about repayment probabilities.
Our focus is the tradeoff between speed and targeting. The planner will have the option
of either immediately having the banking sector allocate funds or delaying long enough to establish
more control over the process. This control can come either from direct public delivery of the
funds or by crafting terms and incentives that shift the choices of the banking sector. It should be
noted that this tradeoff could be ameliorated if the planner had the ability to directly deliver the
funds themselves in a rapid and controlled way. In practice, this was likely not possible during
this crisis, given the structure of the SBA, but the responsibility could have been given to

8

alternative institutions. Our approach takes these institutions as fixed and characterizes the
tradeoffs given these institutional capacity limitations.
We take a reduced form approach to the benefits of the program and assume that if firm i
receives x dollars in lending, from either a bank or a public authority, then this will generate
𝑣(𝑥, 𝛼& ) dollars of public benefit. This benefit can include extra employment, loan repayment,
reduced bankruptcy probabilities, and anything good that might flow from public largesse. The
term 𝛼& represents the firm-specific benefit of receiving funding, where 𝑣( (𝑥, 𝛼 ) > 0, 𝑣(+ (𝑥, 𝛼 ) >
0 and 𝑣(( (𝑥, 𝛼 ) < 0. We will also specifically assume that 𝑣 (𝑥, 𝛼 ) = 𝑒 + 𝑥 / , 𝛾 < 1, although many
of the model’s qualitative conclusions are true with a more general functional form.
If 𝛼& were observable, and the social planner directly controlled lending, then it would
allocate the T funds to maximize: ∫+ 𝑣(𝑥, 𝛼 )𝑓(𝛼 )𝑑𝛼 subject to the constraint 𝑇 = ∫+ 𝑥𝑓(𝛼 )𝑑𝛼.
We normalize the total population of businesses to equal one, so T would be the amount received
per borrower if all loans were equal in size.

If second order conditions hold, then social optimal

lending would imply that for all values of 𝛼 that receive loans (and there may be some low 𝛼 firms
that do not), 𝑣( (𝑥, 𝛼 ) = 𝜆, where 𝜆 is a constant, so that the marginal social value of lending is
equalized across borrowers
We consider three institutional choices: (1) immediate bank lending, (2) delayed public
lending and (3) regulated bank lending, where the regulation fixes the maximum loan size amount
for every firm. We will assume that delay is costly because some of the firms have died before
the delayed payments can be made. We assume that a random fraction of the firms, denoted 1 −
𝛿, disappear because of delay and, consequently, delay eliminates the benefit of lending if the firm
dies. There are no other costs of delay in our model other than the loss of potential borrowers.

Immediate Delegation vs. Delayed Control
Our first comparison is between the immediate delegation to banks and delayed control by
the planner. Our assumption is that the planner can create a bureaucracy that targets the money to
preferred borrowers, albeit imperfectly, if she waits, or she can hand the money over to a bank and
let it lend money to their preferred borrowers. We assume a single lending entity allocates T across
the entire economy, but the results would be equivalent if we assume there were N banks, each of
which had access T/N funds to allocation to a measure 1/N of firms that were randomly selected
from the distribution of all firms.
9

If the bank distributes the funds immediately, it will allocate money to maximize
𝑣 (𝑥, 𝜙𝛼 + 𝜉 ) = 𝑒 =+>? 𝑥 / instead of 𝑣 (𝑥, 𝛼 ), where 𝑣 (𝑥, 𝑧) = 𝑒 A 𝑥 / . The variables 𝛼 and 𝜉 are
normally distributed, with mean zero independent random variables and variances 𝜎+C and 𝜎?C ,
respectively.

If the government slows down the process, and designs a more targeted allocation

mechanism, which may be a hybrid public-private model, then the funds will be allocated to
maximize 𝑣(𝑥, 𝜃𝛼 + 𝜁 ) = 𝑒 F+>G 𝑥 / , where 𝜁 is a third independent mean zero normal random
variable with variance 𝜎GC . We will assume that 1 ≥ 𝜃 > 𝜙 and 𝜎GC ≤ 𝜎?C .
Delayed targeting must (weakly) increase the correlation of the decision-making with true
social value, because the planner always has the option of still using the bank after the delay occurs.
We assume that the variance relationship is strict, so that there is some benefit of delay, even if it
is tiny. We do not assume that a pure public provision is necessarily better targeted than a bank
provision. Politics may significantly distort any public allocation of loans. We do assume that
delay allows the creation of some system, public or private or a hybrid, that may provide weakly
better targeting than rapidly moving cash out the door.
Proposition 1 follows (all proofs are in Appendix 1):
Proposition 1: There exists a firm survival rate, denoted 𝛿 ∗ between 0 and 1, for which public
welfare with immediate bank lending is equal to the public welfare with targeted but delayed
lending. Targeting provides higher welfare than immediate lending if and only if 𝛿 > 𝛿 ∗ . The
value of 𝛿 ∗ is falling with 𝛾, 𝜃, 𝜎?C and 𝜎+C , and rising with 𝜙 and 𝜎GC .
The proposition provides the basic intuition behind the speedy action taken by the CARES
Act and the Paycheck Protection Program.

There is a survival rate that determines whether

delayed targeting is optimal. When the firm dissolution rate is sufficiently large, then immediate
non-targeted lending dominates delayed targeting.

Abundant evidence suggests that the firm

closing rate during this period was extraordinarily high (Bartik et al., 2020a).
This cutoff survival rate depends on the four parameters associated with targeted and nontargeted lending.

When the banks’ preferences are more closely aligned with social welfare (𝜙

is high and 𝜎?C is low) then the cutoff survival rate is higher, and immediate lending yields higher
welfare for a larger range of survival. When the delayed targeting brings decision-making more
closely aligned with social welfare (𝜃 is high and 𝜎GC is low), then the cutoff survival rate falls and
targeting is optimal even when the odds of survival are lower. Consequently, it was possible to
10

support immediate lending either because of good faith that the banks would take actions that were
in the public welfare or because of skepticism towards greater regulation of lending or publicly
provided loans.
The survival threshold is also falling with 𝜎+C and 𝛾. The comparative static on 𝜎+C reflects
the assumption that 𝜃 > 𝜙 and that delay increases the weight on social welfare in the lending
decision.

When the heterogeneity in the social welfare of lending to different entities is large,

i.e. 𝜎+C is larger, then it is more valuable to delay to improve targeting based on social welfare.
A higher value of 𝛾 means that the diminishing returns involved in lending to any one
borrower become weaker. Consequently, there may be almost as many benefits to lending to a
smaller number of surviving firms as there are lending to a larger number of initial firms. Weaker
diminishing returns also means that targeting can lead to larger gains by giving particularly
generous loans to high social value borrowers. We now turn to the regulation of lending.

Regulation of Delegated Lending
Previously, we assumed that regulation took time and enabled better targeting of loans.
Here we focus on a particularly simple form of regulation that should take no time at all: fixing
the loan size. In the previous section, loans were quite flexible and all borrowers received some
financing. Here we compare flexibility with a fixed loan size that is small enough so that everyone
can borrow.
We first compare fixing the loan size at T with allowing bank flexibility. We then compare
whether it is optimal to set the loan size at T, so that all businesses receive the same size loan, or
whether the fixed loan size should be larger so that banks can allocate more financing to the firms
that they favor, and loan distribution is not universal. Proposition 2 compares bank lending with
fixed and flexible quantities:

Proposition 2: When banks allocate loans, fixing the loan size at T generates higher social welfare
MO

=M O

L

than allowing bank flexibility if and only if > O NO O or PO > 2𝜙 − 𝜙 C .
C
M >= M
M
P

N

N

The condition in Proposition 2 is intuitive. The term 𝜙𝜎+C is the covariance between the
social welfare term (𝛼) and the bank’s targeting rule (𝜙𝛼 + 𝜉) while 𝜎?C + 𝜙 C 𝜎+C is the variance
of the bank’s targeting rule.

Consequently, the term
11

O
=MN
O
O
MP >= O MN

is the regression coefficient that

would be estimated if social welfare of lending was regressed on the bank’s rule. If that slope is
more than one-half, so that on average banks get it right, then social welfare benefits by giving the
banks discretion. If that slope is smaller than one-half, then higher social surplus is generated by
tying the banks hands.
That regression coefficient is larger when 𝜎+C is larger and 𝜎?C is smaller, which just means
that the ratio of good signal to noise is larger in the bank’s lending objectives. If we rewrite the
MO

expression as MPO > 2𝜙 − 𝜙 C then it is obvious that higher values of 𝜙 make fixed loan sizes less
N

appealing.
So far, we have either allowed total flexibility or a low fixed loan size, but neither of those
assumptions fits perfectly with the implementation of the PPP in April 2020. Loan sizes were too
high to allow all business to borrow, at least at first, but there was a cap to loan size. We now
compare loans that are fixed in size at T, with loans that are fixed in size at T’>T. This proposition
formally treats the recommendation of Hanson et al. (2020) that more smaller loans may be more
advantageous than fewer larger loans.

We now assume that 𝛽 = 𝜙𝛼 + 𝜗𝜉, where 𝜗 =

T(𝜎UC − 𝜙 C 𝜎+C )/𝜎?C . This assumption allows us to vary the correlation between bank preferences
and social preference (𝜙), without varying the variance of 𝛽.
Proposition 3: (i) If banks allocate loans of fixed size T’, then if 𝜙 ≤ 0, then it is never optimal to
set T’>T.
(ii) If 𝜙 >0, then the optimal value of T’ is greater than T.
(iii) If a loan size value T’ yields the same social welfare as a loan size of T for a given
value of 𝛾, denoted 𝛾W, then for all values of 𝛾 > 𝛾W, a loan size of T’>T will yield higher welfare
than a loan size of T.
(iv) If a loan size value T’ yields the same social welfare as a loan size for of T for a given
value of 𝜙, denoted 𝜙X, and if 𝜎?C = 𝐾 − 𝜙 C 𝜎+C for some constant K, then for all values of 𝜙 > 𝜙X,
a loan size of T’>T will yield higher welfare than a loan size of T.
Proposition 3 makes four claims about fixed loan amounts. If 𝜙 ≤ 0, then loans should be
allocated equally across all firms. This case corresponds to zero or negative correlation between
the desires of the lenders and the social desirability of targeting a particular buyer. If 𝜙 > 0, then
12

some targeting is optimal. The case for targeting is stronger when 𝛾 is higher and the social returns
to lending are less concave. The case for targeting is also stronger when 𝜙 is higher, as long as
the total variance of bank preferences is held constant. The implication is that better alignment of
bank preferences and social preferences should lead to higher lending limits.

IV.

Data Description

The survey was conducted by Alignable <www.alignable.com>, the largest network of small
businesses across North America, with nearly 5 million members who are either owners or senior
managers of small businesses. Alignable regularly sends out polls via emails to network members,
and responses to other surveys have been used by researchers to assess the effects of the pandemic
on the financial health of small businesses, remote work, and business reopening decisions (Bartik
et al. 2020a, Bartik et al. 2020b, Balla-Elliott et al. 2020). The primary survey wave underpinning
our analysis of PPP was distributed April 25, 2020, nine days after the final approvals for the first
tranche of funding but prior to the second tranche of funds being approved for loans by the SBA.
Ninety percent of the survey responses were received prior to April 27, 2020, the first day of the
second tranche of the PPP program.
The survey contained information about the business owner’s application status for PPP
funding, including how much funding had been received to date and the reason for denial or not
applying. Following these questions were a series of questions about the owner’s relationship with
their primary bank and the status of the business, including cash on hand, employment, and beliefs
about remaining operation over the following 8 months.

The survey also included a series of

retrospective questions, including employment, typical monthly payroll, fixed expenditures and
typical loan balance with their bank prior to the pandemic.
The Alignable surveys contain a unique identifier allowing us to link individuals to their
business profile and other survey waves, which included additional information about prior
employment, industry, location, and demographics.

We include the survey instrument in the

Appendix.
Summary Statistics
Table 1 provides summary statistics about the responses received. We restrict the sample
to observations for which our main variables of interest---expected survival probability, whether
13

the firm applied for PPP, impact of COVID on the firm, and information on the firm’s banking
relationship---are not missing. This leaves us with 6,137 observation - 56% of businesses
observed were open at the time of the survey, and 44% were closed. A significant share of
respondents forecast upcoming headwinds, as the average reported probability of surviving to
December 2020 was 73%.
65% of respondents attempted to apply for PPP funding in the first tranche, and among
those that attempted application, 25% were approved. The remaining (51%) were either waiting
for approval or had been denied (24%).

Our definition of denial includes both rejected

applications from the SBA and the inability to apply, which picks up rationing applications. The
inability to submit an application accounts for about two-thirds of the 24% who were denied.
At the time of the survey, the average firm had 5.7 employees, down from an average of 9
employees in January, 2020. Firms reported $24,700 in average monthly payroll expenses and
$15,100 in fixed monthly expenditures. These averages are somewhat skewed by the few larger
firms in our sample. Median current employment, payroll, and fixed expenses are 2 employees,
$5,000, and $5,000 respectively. Firms reported having cash on hand to cover about 5.3 weeks
worth of expenses.
Approximately one third of the sample reported having primary banking relationship with one
of the top 4 largest banks. Twelve percent used banks 5-10, while 10% used a credit union. 40%
of firms report having an existing loan with their bank, which includes credit card loans. 23% of
firms report having a relationship with a loan officer at their bank.

V.

Which Businesses Received a PPP Loan?

We now turn to the factors that determine whether a business applied for and received a PPP
loan in our Alignable sample. We will argue that pre-existing banking relationships serve as a
plausible source of exogenous variation in the probability of receiving a PPP loan. Consequently,
we will document differences in approval rates based on the firms’ prior banking experience. First,
however, we will establish some basic facts about the correlates between firm characteristics and
both application and approval rates. We begin by looking at the application and loan measures
captured by different measures of distress, but we emphasize that higher distress may not signify
a higher value borrower. We then turn to firm size, age, and industry. We also examine correlates
of application rates and outcomes with lender characteristics. Remarkably, application rates are
14

nearly identical among top 4 banks, banks 5-10, and banks 11-20, yet outcomes vary dramatically
for these banks’ customers. We have checked for differences among female, veteran, and minority
owned business and find little difference in either application or approval rates, which is shown in
Figure A1 in the appendix.

Applications, Approvals and Distress
The stated goal of the PPP loans was to keep workers paid and employed, which
presumably implies that the social benefit of lending to a particular firm (the model’s 𝑒 + ), reflects
the marginal pay and employment generated per dollar of lending. But are those marginal effects
highest for firms that are the weakest or are those firms lost causes, in which case funds would be
better spent for firms that are somewhat less distressed?
Figure 2 shows the patterns of application and approval by the impact of COVID-19 on the
firm. Firms fall into three categories. Low Impact firms said that COVID-19 is “not impacting
my business.” Medium Impact firms said that “It’s starting to impact by business,” and High
Impact firms said that “it’s really impacting my business.”
The application rates rise monotonically with the severity of the crisis to the firm. Over
60 percent of firms who suffered high impact from COVID-19 applied for PPP loans. Fewer than
one-fifth of the firms with the least severe harm applied for the loans. We cannot determine if this
higher application rate reflects greater demand, or the belief that the most severely impacted firms
are more likely to be approved for a PPP loan. Yet if firms have that belief, they are mistaken.
The most severely impacted firms are most likely to apply, but they are also the most likely to be
denied a PPP loan conditional on application. There are four reasons for denials. First, as discussed
above, some banks initially only processed applications from existing customers. Second, some
firms did not qualify under the initial program parameters put in place by the SBA. Third, some
banks misunderstood the rules put in place by SBA and denied firms that should have qualified.
Fourth, firms were unable to submit an application for other reasons. All of these reasons are
categorized as denials, although some may have allowed future applications for the second tranche
of funds. The denial rate rises from 12% in the lowest severity category to 25% in the highest
severity category. The approval rate is roughly the same between the least severe and the median
severity category, but lower for the most severely impacted firms.

15

The gap between approval and denial reflects the large share of firms whose loan
applications were pending at the end of the time period. These firms did not receive loans in the
first round of the PPP program, and so if the government had been more cash constrained they
would have been excluded. In this case, public funding was so generous that we suspect that a
large fraction of those firms did eventually receive PPP loans, but our focus here is on expectations
for firms that had the knowledge that their loans were approved.
The lower approval rate for higher severity firms could reflect the lender’s private
incentives to allocate cash to a firm that is more likely to be a valuable client in the future.
Alternatively, the higher application rate for high severity borrowers could mean that many of the
high severity borrowers had other problems and perhaps were unlikely to survive in any case.
While we certainly cannot rule out the possibility that the lenders are behaving in a socially optimal
way, it is hard to understand how firms in the lowest severity category can even truthfully certify
that “the uncertainty of current economic conditions makes necessary the loan request to support
the ongoing operations of the eligible recipient.” That certification is a legal requirement for
receiving a PPP loan.
Our second measure of firm distress is the amount of cash that the firms have on hand,
measured relatively to their usual weekly expenses. In Bartik et al. (2020a), we found that a
measure of cash on hand was strongly correlated with firms’ expectations of survival probability.
Additionally, firms with abundant cash on hand will presumably find it more difficult to truthfully
certify that the loan is “necessary” in order to support the firm’s “ongoing operations.”
Most small firms have relatively little cash on hand, and Figure 3 shows that there is little
correlation between the level of cash on hand and the probability of applying for a loan, as long as
the firm has two months or less of cash on hand.

The application rate does drop from over sixty

percent to close to forty percent among those firms that have three months or more cash on hand.
Once again, however, we see that pattern where loans were most likely to go to firms that have
been impacted the least severely. The approval rate for firms with three of more months of cash
on hand is 38 percent. The approval rate for firms with two weeks or less of cash on hand is less
than 20 percent. Again, this may be socially optimal because the firms with little cash may fold
with or without a loan. However, the higher approval rate for more liquid firms could also reflect
the banks private incentives.

16

Firm Size, Age and Industry
We now turn to differences in applications and approval rates across firm size, age, and
industry. Figure 4 shows the patterns of application and approval by the number of employees.
Just under one half of firms with zero or one employees applied, which is much lower than other
firms. This likely reflects ambiguity around the rules for sole proprietors’ eligibility, which came
in a SBA announcement on April 10. It is also possible that this limited interest reflects the fact
that such firms have much lower (or no) payroll expenses, but it may also reflect a lower return
for paying the fixed costs of an application. The application rate then rises to over eighty percent
among firms with over six employees.
By contrast, approval rates monotonically increase with firm size. Denial rates and pending
rates decrease with firm size. These patterns might reflect the greater capacity of large firms to
apply for a loan quickly and with the appropriate documentation. Alternatively, lenders might
have been favoring larger firms, because larger loans generate higher fees13 and because satisfying
a larger customer is presumably more valuable than satisfying a smaller customer.
Figure 5 measures firm size, using the firm’s monthly fixed expense before the onset of COVID19. In this case, the application rate is distinctly lower for both the largest and for the smallest
firms, in terms of fixed expenditure.14
The approval rate appears to be generally increasing with the firm’s monthly expenses,
which may represent either firm capacity to file swiftly or the lender’s interest in taking care of
this borrower.

The pending and denial rates show less of a clear pattern. The firms with the

lowest and the largest expenses have the highest denial rates, perhaps because the larger firms are
also asking for larger loans. The pending rate shows little clear pattern, except that the largest
firms have a particularly low pending rate.

13

Banks received fees equal to five percent of the loan for loans up to $350,000, three percent
for loans between $350,000 and $2 million, and one percent for loans above $2 million:
https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/PPP%20Lender%20Information%20Fact%20Sheet.p
df
14
Fewer than one-half of the firms with monthly expenses over $500,000 in our sample applied
for PPP loans. It is possible that these firms had alternate sources of funding, and that the
generally modest size of PPP loans made them unappealing. It is also possible that the few firms
that have expenses of that size in the relatively small Alignable survey are non-representative of
overall firms in this category.
17

Figure 6 shows the patterns by business age. Older firms are more likely to apply and more
likely to be approved. This pattern could easily mean that the older firms have learned to live
with banks, or that their documentation is in better shape.

A less benign view is that older firms

have a more established relationship with the lender.
Figure 7 shows overall patterns by industry. Application rates were particularly high in
accommodation and retail, two sectors that were particularly hammered by COVID-19 and the
associated lockdown. Construction also saw high application rates.

Lenders and Approval Rates
We now turn to the nature of the relationship between the lender and the borrower and to
the size of the lender. We primarily differentiate between the big four banks, banks ranked five
to ten, other large banks (ranked eleven to twenty) and smaller banks.15

Appendix Table A1

provides the number of borrowers, average loan sizes, and total lending for these four categories.
Most lending is done by smaller banks in our sample, but of course, the larger banks handle more
loans per bank. Among the respondents, the small banks and credit unions received around 2,000
applications. The big four got about 1,300 application, and banks 5-20 received about one-half of
that number.
The gap in applications is much smaller than the gap in total dollar amount that was
processed by the lenders in the three categories. The small lenders approved about ten times the
value of loans than did any another category of lender. The gap roughly reflects that small banks
taken together received twice as many applications, were twice as likely to approve applications,
and approved loans at twice the rate of the big banks.
Figure 8 shows the application and approval rates by bank size. For the application rate,
we divide the share of firms in our sample who applied to a lender in that category by the sum of
that number and the share of firms in our sample who said that their primary lender was in that
category but did not apply. The approval, rejection, and pending numbers are all reported as a
fraction of the firms that applied to a bank in that category.

15

The top 4 banks are J.P. Morgan Chase, Citigroup, Bank of America, and Wells Fargo. Banks 5-10 are
U.S. Bank, PNC, Capital One, TD Bank, Truist, and Bank of New York Mellon (which does not appear in
our sample). Banks 11-20 are HSBC, Fifth Third, Ally Bank, Citizens Bank, KeyBank, BMO Harris,
State Street, Goldman Sachs, Schwab, Morgan Stanley (the last four of which do not appear in our
sample).
18

The application rates are roughly equal across size of lender, although the rate falls slightly
among firms that banked regularly with smaller banks. We cannot distinguish if the lower
application rate reflects the accessibility of the bank or the characteristics of the borrower. More
strikingly, the approval rate is sharply higher for loan applications to banks ranked 11+, with
respect to size. Thirty-three percent of applications to non-ranked banks were approved, while
only twelve percent of applications to the big four were approved. That heterogeneity in approval
rates will lie at the heart of our instrumental variables strategy in the next section.
The denial rates decline slightly with lender size, but the larger difference lies in the
pending rate. Small lenders just seem to have been able to handle their loan applications far more
expeditiously than the large lenders. One explanation for this difference, which is consistent with
reporting around the PPP program, is that the large lenders where simply swamped by the vast
number of applications. The smaller banks had to deal with fewer applications per bank and found
it easier to scale up their operations.
Appendix Figures A2 - A4 show the approval rates by lender size, based on different types
of connections with the bank. Figure A2 shows that approval rates were only slightly higher for
firms that had a business account with the bank. Figure A3 shows that borrowers that have an
existing loan were significantly more likely to have their loans approved, especially among smaller
banks. The probability of being approved was approximately forty percent for firms with existing
loans at smaller banks, as opposed to twelve percent among firms without loans at larger banks.
Figure A4 show approval rates based on whether the firm already knows a bank loan officer. There
is a strong correlation between knowing a loan officer and being approved, especially at smaller
banks. This correlation suggests that importance of informal connections between borrowers and
lenders, especially during a period when lending is rushed.
One interpretation of these results is that they reflect only the value of personal
connections, which help spread knowledge. Another interpretation is that banks guided loans to
their indebted clients, who could then use the PPP funds either to remain solvent or possibly even
to repay the bank itself.

Banks should have a larger incentive to ensure the solvency of firms

that owe them larger sums of money, so Figure 9 looks at approval rates by the size of existing
loans. All borrowers in this figure have preexisting loans, so presumably all of them have some
connection with the bank.

19

The approval rates are much higher for borrowers with larger existing debt among the
smallest lenders. The gap is smaller, but still quite noticeable with the Big Four. Mid-sized banks
show the least connection between approval rates and size of existing loan. The magnitudes are
striking. The approval rate among firms that already owe more than $500,000 to a small bank was
almost 70 percent. By contrast, the approval rate among firm that owe less than $50,000 to a small
bank is less than 40 percent.
Perhaps banks disproportionately approved the loans from high debt firms because those
firms were particularly likely to go bankrupt without PPP support. To test this possibility, Figure
10 shows approvals rates based on both the size of existing loan and the level of cash on hand.
Low levels of cash on hand should suggest more vulnerability, and so if banks are targeting loans
to the vulnerable, then low cash on hand should predict a higher approval rate.
The figure shows the opposite.

Firms with more cash on hand were more likely to be

approved, just as firms with larger debt were more likely to be approved. A firm with less than
two weeks of cash on hand and an existing loan under $50,000 experienced a 20 percent change
of being approved for a PPP loan. A firm with one to two months of cash on hand and an existing
loan or $300,000 had an almost sixty percent change of being approved. These estimates suggest
that if a firm with expenses of $200,000 borrowed 1.5 months of expenses before COVID-19 hit,
that firm would almost triple their probability of receiving a PPP loan. Consistent with the idea
that banks may have steered PPP to firms at high risk of bankruptcy, approval rates are much
higher for low-cash firms with large existing debts than other low-cash firms. Appendix Figure
A5 shows that impact of have a large loan and low cash is largest among small lenders, but also
quite visible for the Big Four.
Table 2 shows these results in a multivariate regression format. The table shows three
linear probability models. In the first column, we regress a binary variable that takes a value of
one if the firm applies for PPP on firm and lender characteristics. In the second column, we take
only those firms that have applied for a loan and regress a binary variable that takes on a value of
one if the loan was approved on firm and lender characteristics. In the third column, we again take
only firms that applied and use a binary variable that takes on a value of one if the loan was denied
as our dependent variable. The coefficients in the second and third regressions will not add to one,
because many firms’ applications were still pending at the end of our sample period.

20

The application rates seem primarily to be a function of firm need. The firms that indicated
that they were significantly impacted by COVID-19 were 23.8 percentage points more likely to
apply for a loan. Firms with significant cash on hand were 12 percent less likely to apply for a
loan, holding payroll constant. Firms with a large payroll were 21 percent more likely to apply for
a loan, which presumably reflects both the need to meet a large payroll and the ability to cover the
fixed costs of applying for a loan.
In the lower half of the table we show the coefficients on lender characteristics and on the
relationship between the lender and the bank. The size of the bank doesn’t significantly impact
application rate, but firms that bank with credit unions are 5.1 percent less likely to apply for a
loan. The relationship between lender and borrower does matter. Firms that knew a loan officer
were 9.5 percentage points more likely to apply for a loan. Firms that had an existing loan were
4.5 percent more likely to send in an application.
The factors that determine approval are often diametrically opposite to the factors that
determine application. Firms that said that COVID-19 impacted them more were 3.3 percent less
likely to receive a loan. Firms that had high level of cash were 15.2 percent more likely to receive
a loan. A large payroll positively predicts both loan application and loan acceptance. Firms with
a large payroll were 13.1 percent more likely to receive a loan.
Bank attributes are far stronger predictors of loan approval than loan application. Firms
that have relationship with top four banks are 22.3 percentage points less likely to be approved for
a PPP loan. This correlation lies behind our instrumental variables estimates of the impact of PPP
loans. A relationship with a bank in the top ten that is outside the top four reduces the probability
of loan approval by 14.6 percent. Credit unions also have a strong negative correlation with
approval.
The strength of ties to the bank also appear to be important for approval. A preexisting
loan with the bank is associated with a 4.4 percentage point increase in the probability of approval.
Firms with a preexisting relationship with a bank loan officer were six percentage points more
likely to have their loans approved.
The last column shows the coefficients where the dependent variable is being denied the
loan. In some cases, the coefficients in this column are exactly the opposite of the coefficients in
column (2). For example, the coefficients on high COVID-19 impact, high payroll, being with a
credit union and having an existing loan are all within .02 of the comparable coefficient in the
21

second column times minus one. Consequently, this variable shifts firms from denial to approval
but has a small impact on the third category: loan pending.
Abundant cash increases approval more than it decreases denial, meaning that firms with
more cash, and presumably less need to an immediate infusion of money, were actually less likely
to have been left waiting for an answer on their application. Large banks were much more likely
to have left applications pending than smaller banks, so the coefficient on denial is much smaller
in magnitude than the coefficient on approval. This suggests that the large banks were not being
pickier, but they were just unable to handle the large number of loan applications.
The existing loan coefficient for denial is almost exactly equal to minus one times the existing
loan coefficient for acceptance, but knowing a loan officer is much more correlated with
acceptance than with denial. This suggests that knowing a loan officer helps generate loans
because the officer ensures that your application rises to the top of the pile, rather than by
converting a denial into an acceptance.

We now turn to our estimated impact of PPP loans on

firm survival and employment growth.

VI.

The Impact of PPP Loans on Expected Firm Survival and Employment

We now turn to the impact of PPP loans of firm’s expected survival and employment. We
examine both the ordinary least squares coefficient on receiving a PPP among those firms that
apply for a PPP loan, and the coefficient where we use the size of their pre-COVID-19 bank as an
instrument for receiving a loan. We have two different outcome variables: (1) employment in the
April 25 survey and (2) the expected probably of being open during December 2020. The first
variable reflects actual employment, rather than expectations, but it may not capture the full impact
of a PPP loan, if those loans work primarily by enabling the firm to survive through the summer.
Those firms that received a PPP loan should face the incentive to keep their workforce, in order to
be eligible for full loan forgiveness. Many of them may not have yet received the funding and so
illiquidity may have led them to furlough workers. The expectations variable does capture a longer
term outcome, but we must trust the firms’ ability to project their own likelihood of surviving. The
effect of receiving a PPP loan may be muted if the firms that did not receive a loan expect to get a
loan during the next round of PPP lending.
Table 3, Panel A, shows our ordinary least squares results assessing the impact of receiving a
PPP loan on the firm’s expected probability of remaining open in December 2020. The first
22

column shows that those firms receiving a loan thought that they were fourteen percentage points
more likely to remain open in December. The second column includes control for industry and
state fixed effect and the coefficient changes little, from .144 to .145. While it is unclear if this
result reflects a true treatment effect of the PPP loan, or whether PPP loans have flown to sturdier
firms (as suggested by the positive correlation between approval and cash on hand), the estimated
coefficients are both large and estimated with reasonable high levels of precision. A further
possibility is that the loans have a real treatment effect on the optimism of the firm, but that this
will not translate into a higher survival probability.
The third regression controls for whether the business is currently open (business status). The
coefficient on receiving a PPP loan drops to .127. Finally, the fourth column includes the amount
of cash on hand, which reduces the estimated coefficient to .094, implying that a loan increases
the perceived probability of being open in December 2020 by nine percentage points. The
coefficient drops when we control for firms with more cash on hand, because firms with cash
where more likely to receive loans, and cash on hand is a strong predictor of firms’ expectations
about their ability to survive.
The final two columns report validation exercise for these measures. Column 5 restricts the
sample to include only the firms where we have the phone follow up in late July. Column 6 then
changes the dependent variable to an indicator that the phone follow-up returned an affirmative
answer to the question of whether the business was operational. For this sample, the expected
probability of being operational in December was 73%, whereas 64% of firms answered that they
were operational in the follow up phone calls.16 The coefficients in these specifications are quite
similar, with a 9.1 percentage point increase in survival expectations due to PPP in the survey and
a 13.7 percentage point increase in the probability of being open in the follow up study. These
results improve our confidence that our findings using self-reported expectations about December
contain real signal about firm survival probabilities.
Panel (b) repeat these specifications, but using employment as the outcome. Employment is
defined as the level of employment in our April 27 survey round, and we control for the level of
employment in January. We have experimented with other specifications and the results are
16

It is difficult to tell definitively whether businesses are closed, as the follow up was unable to reach most
businesses that did not respond with a “yes” to the question. Not answering the business phone line is likely
correlated with closure, but some non-response is likely due to measurement error that biases the share of
operational businesses downward.

23

broadly similar.

The level of employment specification means that the coefficient can be

interpreted as the extra jobs associated with receiving a PPP loan. Naturally, we have no way of
quantifying how long each of those jobs will last.
The first column shows a coefficient of 3.86, with a standard error of .49 This coefficient
suggests that the average loan was associated with almost four extra jobs. In the second column,
we control for industry and state fixed effects. The estimated coefficient declines slightly to 3.76.
In the third specification, we control for business status and the coefficient falls to 3.39. When we
also control for cash on hand in the fourth column, the coefficient declines to 3.1.
The controls do lead to an attenuation of the coefficient, but it remains highly significant
statistically and quite reasonable in terms of economic magnitude. As the average PPP loan in our
sample is $185,000, this represents about $60,000 dollars per employee. Any cost-benefit analysis
of that price, however, must both address the duration of these jobs and whether these payments
to firms represent lost resources or simply a transfer.
The endogeneity of the loan approval leads to our instrumental variable strategies. Our
first strategy restricts firms to those whose primary banking relationship is with one of the nation’s
20 largest banks. We then use two indicator variables that take on a value of one either if the bank
is among the four largest, or if the bank is ranked between five and ten. This strategy leverages
the fact that loans were more likely to be approved by smaller banks. We restrict our sample,
though to firms with lenders among the top 20 to ensure reasonable comparability among the
borrowers.

The first stage F-statistic is 18.4 for our base specification using this instrument.

Our second strategy is to restrict the sample to those firms that banked with either community
banks or credit unions before the COVID-19 crisis. We then instrument for receiving a loan with
being a customer of a credit union. The mean approval rate was 17 percent for Credit Unions and
41 percent for Community Banks. The first stage F-statistic is 6.0 for the core specification with
this instrument.

These two samples are both somewhat different, as one skews towards the

customers of big banks and the other towards the customers of small banks. Consequently, we
see the use of both samples as testing whether slightly different identification strategies used on
somewhat different samples yield comparable results.
Table 4, Panel A, shows results for expectations about being open in December. Table 4,
Panel B, provides our findings for employment. The first four regressions in Panel A and Panel B

24

show results for the large bank sample. The second four regressions in each panel provide results
for sample with smaller lenders.
The estimated coefficient is .22 in the first regression, which includes no other controls,
and .21 in the fourth regression, where we control for industry, state, cash on hand and business
status. The first and fourth regressions yield almost identical coefficients, because controlling for
state and industry fixed effects lead the estimated coefficients to rise and controlling for cash on
hand leads the estimated coefficients to fall. In the second coefficient, where we control for
industry and state, but not the endogenous business attributes, the coefficient rises to .3. In the
third regression, where we control for the business being open, the coefficient drops slight to .28.
These estimates are larger than the ordinary least squares coefficients. The equivalent of the fourth
regression in Table 3 yields a coefficient of .094, which is more than fifty percent below the Table
4 coefficient. The instrumental variables estimates of PPP treatment effects should be higher than
the ordinary least squares estimates if loans were flowing to firms that would otherwise have a
lower probability of survival. Some evidence supports that view. Firms that have existing loans
were more likely to receive a loan. But other evidence is contradictory, firms that reported a larger
impact of COVID-19 or less cash on hand were actually less likely to receive a loan. Alternatively,
the instrumental variables estimates may be biased upwards, if the identity of a firm’s pre-COVID19 lender is correlated with expected survival probability for other reasons. A third possibility,
which we examine further below, is that PPP flowed to firms for which the effect of receiving
funds was small.
Regressions (5)-(8) in Table 4, Panel A show results using our second instrumental
variables procedure and they are broadly similar.

The coefficient in regression (5) is almost

exactly the same as the coefficient in regression (1). The coefficients in (6) and (7) are higher
than those in regression (5), but lower than the coefficients in (2) and (3). Finally, regression (8)
shows a more dramatic drop when we control for cash on hand. The coefficient falls to .14, which
is not statistically distinct from zero at conventional significance levels, but it is still larger than
the equivalent coefficient in Table 3 and it is not statistically distinct from the coefficients
estimated in (5), (6) or (7).
In Panel B, we show our results for employment, following the same structure as Panel A.
The coefficients are generally not statistically different from zero, but they are also quite close to
the ordinary least squares estimates. For example, the ordinary least squares coefficient with all
25

of our controls is 3.1. The instrumental variable estimates using the Credit Union instrument is
3.31. The parallel estimate in column (4) is 4.99.
The coefficients are uniformly higher with the large bank sample. The coefficients are also
quite insensitive to different specifications ranging from 4.99 to 5.63. Given the standard errors,
there are reasons to be careful about accepting these coefficients, yet their similarity to our more
precisely estimated ordinary least squares coefficients provides us with somewhat more confidence
in the employment estimates in Table 3.

Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
While the average impact of receiving a PPP loan on survival and employment is important
for evaluating the overall program, the heterogeneity of treatment effects is more important for
evaluating the delegated implementation of the program. If all loans had the same social impact,
then there is no social welfare loss in allowing lenders to decide who receives what loan, or just
allocating the loans randomly for that matter. If the impact on employment or survival was much
higher for some borrowers than for others, then the allocation rules that lenders followed become
more important.
Table 5 estimates heterogeneous treatment effects of PPP loans on expected survival
probability along six different dimensions. Each column considers one form of heterogeneity.
Panel A shows IV results for the full sample, using Top 4, Top 5-10, and Credit Union dummies
interacted with dummies for above/below median characteristics Z as instruments. Panel B shows
results for the big lender sample. Panel C shows results for Credit Unions and Community Banks.
These specifications include no other controls except dummies for the baseline characteristics Z.
The first column splits the sample based on the impact of COVID-19 to the business. In all cases,
the split of variable Z is at the median value of the variable. The top coefficient in Panel A shows
that receiving a PPP loan increased the expected probability of survival by 22 percentage points
among those firms that were more impacted by COVID-19. The bottom coefficients shows that
receiving a PPP loan increased the expected probability of survival by only 12 percentage points
among firms that were less impacted by COVID-19. This difference is intuitive. As the PPP loans
were meant to reduce the damage done by COVID-19, it is reassuring that the loans had a larger
impact on expected survival for those firms that were more impacted by COVID-19.

26

In Panels B and C, we show the instrumental variables coefficients for the firms that were
more and less impacted by COVID-19 impact. The large lender sample shows results that are
comparable to the IV results in Panel A. Among the more impacted businesses, receiving a PPP
loan improves the probability of survival by over twenty percentage points. There is essentially
no impact among firms that were not impacted by COVID-19 in panel B.
The bottom panel, however, finds the opposite pattern. The coefficient on the highly
impacted subsample is positive but not distinct from zero. The coefficient on the less impacted
subsample is extremely large, but also not distinct from zero. We conclude that the Credit
Union/Community Bank sample of banks has too little variation to estimate the heterogeneous
treatment effects by COVID-19 impact.
In the second column, we show results based on cash on hand. Again, Panels A and B
show similar, intuitive results. The expected survival impact of a PPP loan is estimated by .125
for firms with more cash on hand in the top panel and .073 for the more liquid firms in Panel B.
The estimate impact of the loan on the more constrained firms is estimated at .21 in the top panel
and .15 in the bottom panel. These differences are understandable, if PPP loans were more
valuable for firms that had less cash on hand.
Panel C shows a larger impact of firms with more cash, perhaps because of the different
sample of borrowers. Cash on hand appears to reduce the impact of a PPP loan among the large
lender sample and overall, but not among the small lender sample. One possible explanation is
that in the small bank sample, the firms without cash stand little chance of survival with or without
PPP loans, and so the marginal impact of those loans is larger with firms that have cash on hand.
Alternatively, the results for this sample could just reflect noise.
The third and fourth regressions interact receiving a PPP loan with the ex ante relationship
between the borrower and the bank. In panel A and B, the coefficients are quite similar. Knowing
a loan officer does not appear to increase the impact of receiving a loan on expected survival.
Having a pre-existing loan does not increase the impact of a PPP loan on expected survival. If
true, these results suggest that the tendency of banks to target loans towards firms with pre-existing
relationships does not increase the probability that the loan will enable a firm to survive.
In panel C, we find that knowing a bank officer is associated with a lower treatment effect but
having a pre-existing loan is associated with a higher treatment effect. These results are not
impossible. Bank officers could favor businesses that they like over businesses where the loan
27

would have a larger marginal impact. Firms with pre-existing loans may be closer to closing and
may experience a larger treatment effect of a PPP loan. However, given the larger standard errors
and the divergence between these coefficients and the coefficients in Panels A and B, we tend to
interpret these differences as reflecting primarily noise.
The final two regressions split the sample based on either payroll expenditures or overall
fixed expenditures. In all three specification, the impact of a PPP loan of firm survival is larger
among firms with larger payroll levels.

The difference in coefficients is also statistically

significant in Panel A. Among firms with larger payrolls, a PPP loan is associated with a 31
percentage point increase in expected survival in the ordinary least squares specification, a 32
percentage point increase in expected survival in the large lender instrumental variables
specification and a 20 percentage point increase in expected survival in the smaller lender
specification. All of these coefficients are statistically distinct from zero.
In Panels A and B, the impact of loans on expected survival for low payroll firms is quite close to
zero. In Panel C, we estimate that receiving a PPP loan reduces the probability of survival by nine
percentage points, but this is not statistically significant. These results do suggest that lending had
more impact when firms have more workers to pay.
In the sixth and final column, we show results where we split by fixed expenditures. The
estimated impact of the PPP loans was larger for firms with lower levels of fixed expenditures in
Panels A and B, possibly because PPP loan forgiveness only applies to payroll expenditures, not
fixed expenses. In other words, the program is effectively more generous for low fixed expenditure
firms. The impact was larger for firms with high levels of fixed expenditures in Panel C. Standard
errors prevent us from concluding much here, but it does seem as if payroll may indicate the
marginal return from loans more than fixed expenditures.
Table 6 shows results on employment where we split the sample along the same six
variables. In no case is the difference in coefficients significant. In some cases, the instrumental
variables estimates are statistically different from zero in one of the subsamples.
Panel A shows only one column where there are treatment effects that seem economically different
in magnitude. Once again, the loans appear to have a larger impact for firms with higher levels of
payroll. Among high payroll firms, a PPP loan is associated with an extra 5.5 employees. Among
low payroll firms, a loan is associated with only an extra 2 employees. While these results seem
reasonable and in line with the Table 4 results, the difference is not statistically significant.
28

In Panel B, the coefficient is also higher for the high payroll sample. The coefficient is again 5 in
the high payroll set of firms and effectively zero in the low payroll set of firms. Panel B estimates
also suggests that the loans are more effective in firms which have been impacted more by COVID19 and firms with less cash on hand. These results are also in line with the results found in Table
4.
In Panel C, we find no differences that are economically or statistically meaningful. Our
instrument just does not appear to be powerful enough to estimate heterogeneous treatment effects
in this sample. We now turn to whether the characteristics that predict greater impact of PPP loans,
also increase the probability of receiving a PPP loan.
Was the Allocation of Loans Efficient?
Tables 7 and 8 ask whether the variables that predict loan effectiveness also predict loan
applications and loan approvals. Table 7 looks at loan applications. Table 8 examines loan
approvals. The columns mirror the columns in Table 5 and 6, so column one splits the businesses
based on COVID-19 impact, column two splits on cash and so forth. We show coefficients from
OLS regressions based on having above or below the median value of the variable, just as we do
in Tables 5 and 6. The regressions are run without an intercept so that the coefficient can be
interpreted as the share of firms in each group that applied, or conditional upon applying, the share
of firms that were approved. Consequently, the two coefficients can be multiplied to determine
the share of firms in each group that actually received a loan in the first round.
All regressions are ordinary least squares, but we still have three panels in each table,
corresponding to the different samples in the two instrumental variables specifications. Panel B
includes only those firms that banked with a large bank prior to the crisis. Panel C includes only
those firms that banked either with a Credit Union or a Community Bank.
The first column in Table 7, Panel A, shows that 71.2 percent of firms that claimed a high
COVID-19 impact applied for PPP loans, and only 44 percent of firms that claimed a low COVID19 impact applied for those loans in the overall sample. Panels B and C show that those
probabilities are quite similar to the probabilities in the different subsamples. These application
rates seem in line with the estimates in Panels A and B of Table 4 and Panel B of Table 5 showing
that PPP loans were more effective for firms suffered more impact from COVID-19.

29

However, the first column of Table 8 shows that firms that faced a larger impact from
COVID-19 were actually less likely to have their loans approved, which also appeared in Table 2
regression 2. For the overall sample, 23 percent of firms that experienced a high impact where
approved as opposed to 34 percent of firms that experienced a low impact. Multiplying the
probabilities in Tables 6 and 7 together suggests that 16.6 percent of firms facing high COVID-19
impact received loans while 15 percent of firms facing low COVID-19 impact received PPP loans.
High COVID-19 impact induced more applications but lower approval rates and on net the two
forces cancelled each other out, so that the system did little to target founds towards firms that
were more impacted by COVID-19.
If we examine the two subsets, we find that in the large bank sample 11.1 percent of high
COVID impact firms received PPP loans and 9.8 percent of low COVID impact firms received
loans. In the small lender sample, 22.8 percent of high impact firms received loans and 18.7
percent of low impact firms received loans. The small lenders were more effective at processing
the loans and the did a slightly better job of targeting the funds towards firms that had experienced
more of an impact from COVID-19.
Again in Table 5, Panels A and B, and Table 6 panel B, we found that the loans were more
effective for firms that had less cash on hand. Were those firms more likely to receive loans? In
Table 7, Panel A, we find that 58 percent of firms with more cash apply for PPP loans and 73
percent of firms with less cash apply for PPP loans in the overall sample. The applications figures
are roughly comparable for the other samples as well.
Table 8, Panels A, B and C, show that the approval rates are much high for firms that have
more cash on hand. Multiplying both probabilities together, in the overall sample, the chance that
a high cash firm received a loan is 20.4 percent. The chance that a low cash firm received a loan
is 11.7 percent. In Panels B and C, the overall chance that a low cash firm received a loan is much
higher than the chance that a high cash firm received a loan. This system certainly did not seem
to target funds well towards the most desperate borrowers, many of whom appeared to have
particularly high returns to borrowing.
The relationship variables did not have a strong correlation with the impact of lending, but
they did increase the probability of receiving a loan. For example, knowing a loan officer seems
to have increase the probability that a firms receives a loan from 12.8 percent to 26.4 percent in
the overall sample. Having an outstanding loan to the lender increases the probability of receiving
30

a PPP loan from 17.4 percent to 28.4 percent among the small lenders. Connections with the bank
did seem to play a role in allocating loans, although those connection-based do not seem to have
reduced the efficacy of PPP loans on average.
The interaction with personnel costs was the strongest effect in Tables 5 and Table 6. In
Table 7 and Table 8, we do indeed find that firms with more personnel costs were more likely to
apply and to receive loans. High personnel cost firms in the overall sample received a loan with a
30 percent probability. Low personnel cost firms received a loan with an 8.4 percent probability.
In this case, high personnel cost firms were both more likely to apply for a loan and more likely to
receive a loan.
Overall, the results on efficacy were mixed. Firms that were impacted by COVID-19 more
were not significantly more likely to receive a loan, even though some of our measures indicate
that the returns to loans were higher for that group. Firms with connections to the banks were
more likely to receive loans, even though the loans do not seem more effective for that group.
However, loans flowed more steadily to firms with higher payroll costs and the loans were more
effective for those firms. Along this important latter dimension at least, the allocation mechanism
appears to have been well matched to social returns.

Table 9 takes an omnibus look at application and approval based on an index of individual
treatment effects from Tables 5 and 6. We regress application and approval on 𝑍𝛽[ , estimated in
these prior tables, which allows us to assess demand for PPP based on our estimates of
heterogeneous benefits as well as actual deployment of funds. Although there is a disconnect
between demand for PPP and approval rates based on the benefit to the firm, in no case is the
approval rates coefficient negative. Based on a benchmark of purely random allocation of loans
(where we would expect a zero coefficient), the banks’ targeting rules appear to do slightly better
than random. It is an open question whether different rules would have brought the approval rates
closer to overall loan demand for firms with high treatment effects, but doing so would have likely
delayed the process. In fact, our source of identifying variation for these effects likely comes from
banks own delays in processing applications, which yielded lower approval rates.

VII.

Conclusion

31

Using survey data on business owners collected by the Alignable network, we link receipt
of a Paycheck Protection Program loan with expectations of firm survival and reported
employment levels. We find large survival effects when instrumenting PPP receipt with the firm’s
banking

relationship,

while

effects

on

employment

are

positive

and

imprecisely

estimated. Despite the very generous provisions of PPP that make the program attractive for most
firms, the applicants in our sample exhibit self-selection in applying based on their need. Among
the small firms that constitute the majority of small business in the United States and in our sample,
those more affected by COVID-19, with less cash-on-hand, and with higher payroll costs were
more likely than others to apply for PPP. Application patterns may differ for larger SMEs with
over 250 employees, but these firms make up a small fraction of our sample.

The targeting effectiveness of loan approval was more mixed. On some dimensions, we
find that the program allocated funds well, with firms estimated to have higher treatment effects
being more likely to be approved. On the other hand, firms with stronger connections to banks
were more likely to have their applications approved, while firms more negatively affected by
COVID and with less cash-on-hand were less likely to be approved, suggesting that lending to
bank customers in better financial positions may have been prioritized, possibly crowding out less
connected

firms

that

would

have

had

greater

benefits

from

the

loans.

Relative to an emerging literature studying this unprecedented program, we believe ours is the first
paper to lever individual firm level data linked to program application and approval through the
banking relationship. This unique dataset allows us to study the costs and benefits of allocating
public aid for firms through private financial intermediaries. We are also able to uniquely focus
on a segment of smaller firms, where identification may be challenging using other strategies.

References
Autor, D., Cho, D., Crane, L., Goldar, M., Lutz, B., Montes, J., Peterman, W., Ratner, D., Villar, D.,
Yildirmaz, A., 2020. “An Evaluation of the Paycheck Protection Program Using Administrative Payroll
Microdata.” MIT Working Paper.
Balla-Elliott, D., Cullen, Z.B., Glaeser, E.L., Luca, M. and Stanton, C.T., 2020. “Business Reopening
Decisions and Demand Forecasts During the COVID-19 Pandemic” (No. w27362). National Bureau of
Economic Research.

32

Bartik, A.W., Bertrand, M., Cullen, Z., Glaeser, E.L., Luca, M. and Stanton, C., 2020a. “The impact of
COVID-19 on small business outcomes and expectations.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences.
Bartik, A.W., Cullen, Z.B., Glaeser, E.L., Luca, M. and Stanton, C.T., 2020b. “What Jobs are Being Done
at Home During the COVID-19 Crisis? Evidence from Firm-Level Surveys” (No. w27422). National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Bartik, A., Bertrand, M., Lin, F., Rothstein, J., and Unrath, M., 2020c. “Measuring the Labor Market at the
Onset of the COVID-19 Crisis,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J.N., Hendren, N. and Stepner, M., 2020. “How did covid-19 and stabilization
policies affect spending and employment? a new real-time economic tracker based on private sector
data” (No. w27431). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Fazzari, S.M., R.G. Hubbard and B.C. Petersen (1988), “Financing Constraints and Corporate
Investment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 141-195.
Granja, J., Makridis, C., Yannelis, C. and Zwick, E., 2020. “Did the Paycheck Protection Program Hit the
Target?” (No. w27095). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hanson, S., Stein, J., Sunderam, A., and Zwick, E. 2020. “Business Continuity Insurance and Loans.”
Working Paper.
Holmstrom, B., and J. Tirole (1997), “Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and the real sector”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112:663−691.
Kaplan, S.N., and L. Zingales (1997), “Do investment-cash flow sensitivities provide useful measures of
financing constraints?”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112:159−216.
Myers, S.C., and N.C. Majluf (1984), “Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms have
information that investors do not have”, Journal of Financial Economics 13:187−222
Zwick, E., and J. Mahon (2017). Tax Policy and Heterogeneous Investment Behavior
(with James Mahon), American Economic Review, 107(1): 217-48.

33

APPENDIX 1: Proofs of Propositions
Proof of Proposition 1: If the banks hand out cash 𝑒 =+>? 𝑥 /\L is constant over borrowers or 𝑥 =
a

a

]𝑒 U /𝑘_ `abc, where 𝑘_ solves the adding up constraint of 𝑇 = ∫U ]𝑒 U /𝑘_ `abc 𝑔(𝛽 )𝑑𝛼, or 𝑇 =
(𝑘 _ )

ba
abc

𝑒

eO
f
O(abc)O

, where 𝛽 = 𝜙𝛼 + 𝜉 and 𝜎UC is the variance of 𝛽. This implies that under bank

landing, 𝑥 = 𝑇𝑒
+

∫? 𝑒 g𝑇𝑒

eO
f
f
\
abc O(abc)O

eO
hNiP
f
\
abc O(abc)O

Condition upon 𝛼, welfare based on bank discretion is

.

/

ℎ(𝜉 )𝑑𝜉 = 𝑒

j

yields total social welfare of 𝑇 / 𝑒
Under public lending, 𝑒
𝜃𝛼 + 𝜁 and

𝛿 L\/ 𝑇 / 𝑒

𝜎pC

𝛿>𝑒

ceO
P

Integrating over 𝛼 then

.

O(abc)

l

is constant over borrowers or 𝑥 = m 𝑒
l

+

is the variance of 𝛽. Welfare equals ∫+ 𝛿𝑒 gm 𝑒

eO
n
n
\
abc O(abc)O

eO
n
n
\
abc O(abc)O

, where 𝑞 =
/

, j 𝑚(𝑞 )𝑑𝑞 =

O
]abc(abr)O`eO
N bces
O(abc)

.

Welfare is higher with delay if and only if 𝛿
/

c]hO eO `

N
\
\
𝑇 / 𝑒 O(abc)O 𝑒 O(abc)

O
]abc(abh)O`eO
N bceP

F+>G /\L

𝑥

(abcihc)N
abc

O
O
t(abr)O b(abh)O ueO
N ies beP
O(abc)O

L\/

/

𝑇 𝑒

O
]abc(abr)O`eO
N bces
O(abc)

/

>𝑇 𝑒

O
]abc(abh)O`eO
N bceP
O(abc)

or

. This condition clear does not hold when 𝛿 = 0 and must hold when

𝛿 = 1 as we have assumed that [(1 − 𝜙)C − (1 − 𝜃)C ]𝜎+C + 𝜎?C − 𝜎GC > 0. As the left hand side
is monotonic and continuous in 𝛿, there must exist a value of a firm survival rate, denoted 𝛿 ∗
between zero and 1, for which public welfare with immediate bank lending is equal to the public
welfare with delayed targeting. Targeting provides higher welfare that immediate lending if and
only if 𝛿 > 𝛿 ∗ , where 𝛿 ∗ = 𝑒

\/

O O
t(abh)Ob(abr)O ueO
N bes ieP
O(abc)O

. Differentiation then yields that 𝛿 ∗ is falling

with 𝛾, 𝜃, 𝜎?C and 𝜎+C , and rising with 𝜙 and 𝜎GC .

Proof of Proposition 2: If loan sizes are fixed at a level T so that everyone receives a loan, then
/

total public welfare is 𝑇 𝑒

eO
N
O

+

eO
N
O

since the average value of 𝑒 is 𝑒 . Total public welfare from

34

/

flexibly sized loans is 𝑇 𝑒

O
]abc(abh)O`eO
N bceP
O(abc)

, so fixed loans yields higher welfare if and only if
MO

=M O

L

𝜎+C (1 − 𝛾) > (1 − 𝛾(1 − 𝜙)C )𝜎+C − 𝛾𝜎?C or C > MO >=NO MO or MPO > 2𝜙 − 𝜙 C .
N

P

N

Proof of Proposition 3: If loan sizes are fixed at T’>T, then there will be a minimum value of 𝛽 =
𝜙𝛼 + 𝜗𝜉 (where 𝜗 = T(𝜎UC − 𝜙 C 𝜎+C )/𝜎?C ) that is serviced by the banks, and we denote that
minimum 𝛽[ , which solves

l
lx

l

= 1 − 𝐺]𝛽[ ` or 𝑇 x =
∫f|f
}

bfO
OeO
z f {U

.

As T’ determines 𝛽[ exactly, we will think of the social planner as choosing 𝛽[ rather than T’ for
mathematical
g∫U~U} 𝑒
b

∫N

zNz
b

∫N z

bfO
OeO
f

convenience.

Social

=𝑒

\/

∫U~U} 𝑒

O
b(fbheO
N)
O
Oef

𝐸(𝑒 + |𝛽) =

eO
N
O

eO
N
O

𝑑𝛽 j

∫U~U} 𝑒

O
b(fbheO
N)
OeO
f

We also know that ∫U~U} 𝑒
𝜙𝜎+C ,

we have ∫U~U} 𝑒

=

𝑇 /.

Welfare when selected individuals receive T’>T, equals 𝑇 𝑒
g∫U~U} 𝑒

fbhN

∫N •‚ ƒ „…(+){+

𝑇 / times

/

\/

∫N z N •‚ ƒ „…(+){+

𝑑𝛽 = 𝑉(𝛽[ ; 𝑍), were Z is a vector of exogenous variables.

Welfare when everyone gets T equals 𝑒

bfO
OeO
f

equals

O O O
OfheO
N iƒ eP eN
OeO
f

Hence the overall objective function is 𝑒
𝑑𝛽 j

lending
fbhN

𝑇 / ∫U~U} 𝐸(𝑒 + |𝛽) 𝑔(𝛽 )𝑑𝛽where

𝑑𝛽 j

(fbhN)O
NO
b
OƒO eO
P z OeO
N {+

g∫U~U} 𝑒

from

\/

(fbhN)O
NO
b
OƒO eO
P z OeO
N {+

bfO
OeO
f

welfare

bfO
OeO
f

eO
N
O

times

𝑑𝛽 = 𝑉(𝛽[ ; 𝑍), were Z is a vector of exogenous variables.
l

𝑑𝛽 = lx, and that (using a simple change of variable so that 𝑥 = 𝛽 −

O
b(fbheO
N)
OeO
f

𝑑𝛽 = ∫(~U}\=MO 𝑒

bˆO
OeO
f

N

35

𝑑𝑥.

Hence g∫U~U} 𝑒

bfO
OeO
f

\/

𝑑𝛽 j

∫U~U} 𝑒

O
b(fbheO
N)
O
Oef

l L\/

If 𝜙 = 0, then this equals ‚lx„
If 𝜙 < 0, then ∫(~U}\=MO 𝑒

bˆO
OeO
f

N

T’>T and 1 > 𝛾.

𝑑𝛽 = g∫U~U} 𝑒

bfO
OeO
f

\/

𝑑𝛽 j

∫U~U}\=MO 𝑒

bfO
OeO
f

N

𝑑𝛽

, which will be less than 1 whenever T’>T and 1 > 𝛾.

𝑑𝑥 < ∫U~U} 𝑒

bfO
OeO
f

L\/

l
l
𝑑𝛽 = lx and so 𝑉]𝛽[ ; 𝑍` < ‚lx„

≤ 1, whenever

Consequently, it is never welfare enhancing to let T’>T if 𝜙 ≤ 0.

The derivative of 𝑉(𝛽[ ; 𝑍) with respect to 𝛽[ yields:
𝛾𝑒

}O
bf
OeO
f

g∫U~U} 𝑒

bfO
OeO
f

and only if 𝛾 >

\/\L

𝑑𝛽 j

z

∫U~U} \=MO 𝑒

bfO
OeO
f

N

} bhOe‰
OheO
Nf
N
OeO
f

∫f|f
} bheO

∫f|f
}z

N

bfO
OeO
f

bfO
OeO
z f {U

{U

𝑑𝛽 − g∫U~U} 𝑒

bfO
OeO
f

\/

𝑑𝛽 j

𝑒

O
} bheO
b(f
N)
OeO
f

, which is positive if

. If 𝜙 > 0, then as 𝛽[ goes to negative infinity (which

corresponds to T=T’), the right hand side of the equation goes to zero, and consequently, increasing
T’ above T is optimal.
The
− g∫U~U} 𝑒

derivative
bfO
OeO
f

of

\/

𝑑𝛽 j

∫U~U} 𝑒

O
b(fbheO
N)
OeO
f

𝑉(𝛽[ ; 𝑍)

with

𝑑𝛽 𝑙𝑛 g∫U~U} 𝑒

bfO
OeO
f

respect

to

𝛾

is

𝑑𝛽 j > 0, and so that if some value of T’>T

yields the same welfare as T for any value of 𝛾, then for all values of 𝛾′ > 𝛾, an allocation of T’
will yield higher welfare than T.
If the variance of 𝛽 is independent of 𝜙, then the derivative of 𝑉(𝛽[ ; 𝑍) with respect to 𝜙 (holding
𝜎UC constant) is positive, and given by 𝜎+C 𝑒

} OiOheO
} bhO e‰
bf
Nf
N
O
O
„
O‚h eN ieO
P

g∫U~U} 𝑒

bfO
OeO
f

\/

𝑑𝛽 j

> 0. Consequently,

if some value of T’>T yields the same welfare as T for any value of 𝜙,then for all values of 𝜙′ >
𝜙 (holding 𝜎UC constant), T’ will yield higher values of 𝑉]𝛽[ ; 𝑍`.

36

Appendix 2: Survey Instrument
What impact are you currently experiencing from the Coronavirus Outbreak?

o It's not impacting my business
o It's starting to impact my business
o It's really impacting my business
o The impact is on the decline
o The impact is over
Have you applied for any loans or assistance under the government's Payroll Protection Plan?

o Approved, and I have received the funds
o Approved, but I have not yet received the funds
o Application is pending
o Application was denied
o I tried to apply but was unable to submit an application
o I did not apply
When did you first apply for a loan?

37

Did your bank give you any of the following reasons for the denied loan application? (Please
select all that apply)

▢

Insufficient documentation

▢

Did not meet federal qualification criteria

▢

Did not apply in time to receive funds

▢

Not a priority customer

▢

I received a different reason (not listed here)

▢

I did not receive a reason

38

How much assistance did you receive?

o Less than $10k
o Between $10-25k
o Between $25-50k
o Between $50-75k
o Between $75-100k
o Between $100-150k
o Between $150-300k
o Between $300-500k
o Between $500k-$1 million
o $1 million - $2 million
o $2 million - $3 million
o $3 million - $4 million
o $4 million - $5 million
o $5 million - $6 million
o $6 million - $7 million
o $7 million - $8 million
o $8 million - $9 million
o $9 million - $10 million
39

o $10 million - $20 million
o More than $20 million

40

Which of the following reasons describes why you did not apply? Please select all that apply.

▢

I can remain operational without extra cash

▢

I’ve already taken out a business loan and don’t want to take on any more loans

▢

I don’t want to deal with the hassle of applying

▢

I don’t think I would receive the money in time for it to help my business

▢

I don’t feel confident I can maintain my payroll for the loan to be forgiven

▢

I don’t trust that the government will forgive my loan even if I maintain my payroll

▢

I don’t trust that my bank will forgive my loan even if I maintain my payroll

▢

I don’t believe I qualify for this loan (credit history, size of business, etc.)

▢

I don’t trust that the COVID-19 disruptions will be over soon enough for my business to
recover so I can maintain my payroll or pay back the loan

▢

I’m confused about the terms of the loan

▢

I would prefer other assistance that does not risk going into debt and being unable to

▢

I’ve applied for a loan before and was denied

▢

Closure is inevitable, even with the cash

▢

Other, please specify: ________________________________________________

pay it back

41

42

How many of the following types of workers, including yourself, will your business employ in
the first week of May?
_______ Full-Time employees
_______ Part-Time / Temporary employees

What is the likelihood of your business remaining operational by Dec. 31, 2020? Please provide
your best guess.

o Extremely Likely
o Very Likely
o Somewhat Likely
o Somewhat Unlikely
o Extremely Unlikely

43

What is the likelihood of your business remaining operational by Dec. 31, 2020? Please provide
your best guess.

o 0% Extremely Unlikely
o 10%
o 20%
o 30%
o 40%
o 50%
o 60%
o 70%
o 80%
o 90%
o 100% Extremely Likely

44

Is your business open?

o Yes, it is currently open.
o No, it is temporarily closed due to COVID-19, but I intend to reopen.
o No, it is temporarily closed for other reasons, but I intend to reopen.
o No, it is permanently closed due to COVID-19.
o No, it is permanently closed for other reasons.

How many of the following types of workers, including yourself, did this business employ on
January 31st before COVID-19 disruptions?
_______ Full-Time employees
_______ Part-Time / Temporary employees

45

How much was your typical monthly payroll before COVID-19 disruptions?

o Less than $10k
o Between $10-25k
o Between $25-50k
o Between $50-75k
o Between $75-100k
o Between $100-150k
o Between $150-300k
o Between $300-500k
o Between $500k-$1 million
o $1 million - $2 million
o $2 million - $3 million
o $3 million - $4 million
o $4 million - $5 million
o $5 million - $6 million
o $6 million - $7 million
o $7 million - $8 million
o $8 million - $9 million
o $9 million - $10 million
46

o More than $10 million

47

Some of your business expenses, like rent and interest payments, don't change even when you're
not open. What was the total of these fixed expenses before COVID-19 disruptions, each
month?

o Less than $10k
o Between $10-25k
o Between $25-50k
o Between $50-75k
o Between $75-100k
o Between $100-150k
o Between $150-300k
o Between $300-500k
o Between $500k-$1 million
o $1 million - $2 million
o $2 million - $3 million
o $3 million - $4 million
o $4 million - $5 million
o $5 million - $6 million
o $6 million - $7 million
o $7 million - $8 million
o $8 million - $9 million
o $9 million - $10 million
48

o More than $10 million
Consider the cash you have on hand today. How long will the cash you have today last under the
current COVID-19 disruptions?

o Already gone
o Less than 2 weeks
o 2 weeks to 1 months
o 1 to 2 months
o 3 months or more

49

Have you taken the following actions? (select all that apply)

▢

Reduced Pay Rates (per person)

▢

Reduced Rent Payments

▢

Reduced Loan Payments

▢

Reduced Mortgage Payments

▢

None of the above

Who is your primary bank? (start typing, then select a name)
________________________________________________________________

50

How likely are you to recommend your bank to someone else?

o0
o1
o2
o3
o4
o5
o6
o7
o8
o9
o 10

51

What was the nature of your relationship with that bank? (Please select all that apply)

▢

I had a loan or credit card from the bank

▢

I had a business bank account

▢

I used the bank for services other than loans or a bank account

▢

I had a relationship with a banker or loan officer

▢

None of the above

52

How large was your typical loan balance with the bank in total ($) before COVID-19
disruptions?

o Less than $10k
o Between $10-25k
o Between $25-50k
o Between $50-75k
o Between $75-100k
o Between $100-150k
o Between $150-300k
o Between $300-500k
o Between $500k-$1 million
o $1 million - $2 million
o $2 million - $3 million
o $3 million - $4 million
o $4 million - $5 million
o $5 million - $6 million
o $6 million - $7 million
o $7 million - $8 million
o $8 million - $9 million
o $9 million - $10 million
53

o More than $10 million

54

What is your main industry?

o Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting
o Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction
o Utilities
o Construction
o Manufacturing
o Wholesale Trade
o Retail Trade
o Transportation and Warehousing
o Information
o Finance and Insurance
o Real Estate and Rental and Leasing
o Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services
o Management of Companies and Enterprises
o Administrative Support or Waste Remediation Services
o Educational Services
o Health Care and Social Assistance
o Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation
o Accommodation and Food Services
55

o Other Services (except Public Administration)
o Public Administration

56

Once more for the books! What is the likelihood of your business remaining operational by Dec.
31, 2020? Please provide your best guess.

o Extremely Likely
o Very Likely
o Somewhat Likely
o Somewhat Unlikely
o Extremely Unlikely

57

Figure 1. PPP program daily new loan approvals and cumulative funds deployed over time, based on
data provided by the SBA.
500000

400000
400
300000

200000

New Loans

Cumulative Funds (Billions)

600

200
100000

0

0

01apr2020

01may2020

01jun2020

01jul2020

Date
Cumulative Funds

Daily New Loans

Red lines indicate the end of tranche 1 on 4/16/2020 and the beginning of tranche.
2 on 4/27/2020. Cumulative funds are overstated due to using the midpoint
of amounts for loans over $150k.

Figure 2. Fraction of respondents applying and application outcomes by impact of Covid on the firm as of
April 27, 2020. Low impact firms reported that COVID-19 is “not impacting my business.” Medium impact
firms said that “It’s starting to impact by business,” and high impact firms said that “it’s really impacting
my business.” The sample includes 3993 firms that report expectations of surviving until December 2020
and Covid impact.

Figure 3. Fraction of respondents applying and application outcomes by amount of cash on hand as of
April 27, 2020. Respondents were asked “Consider the cash you have on hand today. How long will the
cash you have today last under the current disruptions?” The sample includes 3993 firms that report
expectations of surviving until December 2020 and Covid impact.

Figure 4. Fraction of respondents applying and application outcomes as of April 27, 2020 by January
employment. The sample includes 4571 firms that report employment and Covid impact.

Figure 5. Fraction of respondents applying and application outcomes as of April 27, 2020 by pre-Covid
fixed monthly expenses ($000s). Fixed expenses come from the survey question “Some of your business
expenses, like rent and interest payments, don't change even when you're not open. What was the total
of these fixed expenses before COVID-19 disruptions, each month?” The sample includes 3993 firms that
report expectations of surviving until December 2020 and Covid impact.

Figure 6. Fraction of respondents applying and application outcomes as of April 27, 2020 by business age.
The sample includes 2383 firms that report their age.

Figure 7. Fraction of respondents applying and application outcomes as of April 27, 2020 by industry. The
sample includes 3993 firms that report expectations of surviving until December 2020 and Covid impact.

Figure 8. Fraction of respondents applying and application outcomes as of April 27, 2020 by bank size.
The sample includes 3993 firms that report expectations of surviving until December 2020 and Covid
impact.

Figure 9. Approval rates by bank size and the size of the firm’s existing loan. The sample includes 2559
firms that applied for PPP and report loan amounts.

Figure 10. Approval rates by cash on hand as of April 27, 2020 and size of the firm’s existing loan.
Respondents were asked “Consider the cash you have on hand today. How long will the cash you have
today last under the current disruptions?” The sample includes 2559 firms that applied for PPP and
report loan amounts.

Table 1. Summary Statistics. This table reports summary statistics for our sample. Survival expectations
are the probability a firm expects to be open in December 2020. PPP denied/unable is an indicator that
the firm was unable to apply for PPP or that the SBA denied the application. Cash is cash on hand, reported
in terms of weeks the firm’s cash will last if its current impact from Covid-19 persists. This variable is topcoded at 12 weeks. Payroll and fixed expenses are for the typical month before Covid-19 disruptions. Top
4, top 5-10, and credit union are all dummies indicating the type of bank the firm uses. Existing loan
indicates the firm had a loan from its bank prior to PPP. Loan officer indicates the firm has a relationship
with a loan officer at its bank.

Currently Open
Survival Exp
Applied for PPP
PPP Approved
PPP Pending
PPP Denied/Unable
4/27 Employees
Jan Employees
High Covid Impact
Cash (weeks)
Payroll ($k)
Fixed Expenses ($k)
Top 4 Bank
Top 5-10 Bank
Credit Union
Existing Loan
Loan Officer

N
6137
6137
6137
3993
3993
3993
5994
5994
6137
6137
6137
6137
6137
6137
6137
6137
6137

mean
0.56
0.73
0.65
0.25
0.51
0.24
5.70
8.78
0.77
5.29
24.67
15.14
0.32
0.12
0.10
0.40
0.23

sd
0.50
0.29
0.48
0.43
0.50
0.43
21.59
41.80
0.42
4.51
76.24
39.91
0.47
0.32
0.30
0.49
0.42

p25
0
0.5
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
5
5
0
0
0
0
0

p50
1
0.8
1
0
1
0
2
3
1
6
5
5
0
0
0
0
0

p75
1
1
1
0
1
0
5
7
1
12
17.5
17.5
1
0
0
1
0

Table 2. PPP Applications, Approvals, and Denials. This table relates application, approval, and denial rates
for PPP as of April 27, 2020 to firm characteristics. In the second and third columns, the sample is restricted
to firms that applied for PPP. Standard errors clustered by bank are reported in parentheses.

High Covid Impact
High Cash
High Payroll
Top 4 Bank
Top 5-10 Bank
Credit Union
Existing Loan
Loan Officer

Application Rate
0.242
0.018
-0.113
0.012
0.204
0.010
0.021
0.017
0.019
0.025
-0.037
0.017
0.052
0.008
0.086
0.013
0.17
6137

Approval Rate
-0.033
(0.017)
0.152
(0.015)
0.131
(0.019)
-0.223
(0.015)
-0.146
(0.019)
-0.123
(0.027)
0.044
(0.012)
0.060
(0.018)
0.16
4644

Denial Rate
0.047
(0.017)
-0.075
(0.013)
-0.133
(0.014)
0.030
(0.027)
0.034
(0.017)
0.101
(0.012)
-0.042
(0.011)
-0.020
(0.013)
0.06
4644

Table 3. Expectations, Operational Status, Employment, and PPP Approval: OLS. This table runs OLS
regressions relating whether a firm had been approved for the PPP program as of April 27, 2020 to its
expectations of survival at the time of the survey, operational status as-of late July, and employment at
the time of the survey. The sample is restricted to firms that applied for PPP, including firms that were
ultimately denied and firms that tried to apply but were unable to submit an application. Sample sizes are
somewhat larger here than in the following tables because we do not condition on the firm reporting the
impact of Covid in this table. In Columns 1-5 of Panel A, the dependent variable is the probability a firm
expects to be open in December 2020. Firms report the probability of being open in December in 10
percentage point increments. The dependent variable is in raw units. Column 5 of Panel A restricts to the
sample in Column 6. Column 6 reports the results of a phone audit of a random sample of these
businesses where owners were asked if they were open or operational in late July. Answers are coded as
1 if the owner answers yes and 0 for owners who answer no or if there is no response to two separate
phone calls. In Panel B, the dependent variable is employment as of April 27, 2020, and we control for
firm employment in January. In both panels, column 2 controls for industry and state, column 3 for
whether the business is currently open or closed, and column 4 for its remaining cash on hand. Standard
errors reported in parentheses, clustered by bank.
Panel A: Survival Expectations and July Operational Status
Survival Expectations
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
0.091
PPP approved
0.144
0.145
0.127
0.094
(0.007) (0.008) (0.007) (0.007) (0.010)
0.21
Adj R2
0.05
0.09
0.14
0.20
2328
N
4509
4509
4509
4509
Y
Industry FE
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
State FE
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Bus Status FE
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Cash FE
N
N
N
Y

PPP approved
Adj R2
N
Jan. Emp Control
Industry FE
State FE
Bus Status FE
Cash FE

Panel B: Employment
(1)
(2)
3.86
3.76
(0.49)
(0.51)
0.45
0.45
5840
5840
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
N
N
N

(3)
3.39
(0.51)
0.46
5840
Y
Y
Y
Y
N

(4)
3.10
(0.48)
0.46
5840
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Status
(6)
0.137
(0.020)
0.097
2328
Y
Y
Y
Y

Table 4. Expectations, Employment, and PPP Approval: IV. This table runs IV regressions relating whether
a firm had been approved for the PPP program as of April 27, 2020 to its expectations of survival and
employment. The sample is restricted to firms that applied for PPP. In Panel A, the dependent variable is
the probability a firm expects to be open in December 2020. Firms report the probability of being open in
December in 10 percentage point increments. The dependent variable is in raw units. In Panel B, the
dependent variable is employment as of April 27, 2020, and we control for employment in January. In
both panels, columns 1-4 restrict the sample to firms with banks in the top 20 and instrument for PPP
approval with whether the firm’s bank is ranked 1-4 or 5-10. The first stage F-statistic is 18.4. Columns 58 restrict the sample to firms with community banks and credit unions and instrument for PPP approval
with whether the firm’s bank is a credit union. Columns 2 and 6 control for the firm’s state and industry.
Columns 3 and 7 control for whether the business is currently open, its industry, and its state. Columns 4
and 8 control for whether the business is currently open, its remaining cash on hand, its industry, and its
state. Standard errors reported in parentheses, clustered by bank in columns 1-4 and by state in columns
5-8.

PPP approved
Adj R2
N
Industry FE
State FE
Bus Status FE
Cash FE

PPP approved
Adj R2
N
Jan. Emp. Control
Industry FE
State FE
Bus Status FE
Cash FE

(1)
0.216
(0.054)
0.01
2214
N
N
N
N

(1)
5.61
(4.02)
0.47
2830
Y
N
N
N
N

Panel A: Survival Expectations
Top 20 Banks
Community Banks/Credit Unions
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.301
0.276
0.205
0.219
0.233
0.221
0.140
(0.085) (0.085) (0.081) (0.053) (0.069) (0.070) (0.081)
0.02
0.07
0.16
0.06
0.10
0.14
0.19
2214
2214
2214
1090
1090
1090
1090
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y
N
N
Y
N
N
N
Y
Panel B: Employment
Top 20 Banks
(2)
(3)
(4)
5.63
5.03
4.99
(4.13)
(4.16)
(4.20)
0.47
0.48
0.48
2830
2830
2830
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
N
N
Y

Community Banks/Credit Unions
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
1.87
3.21
3.17
3.31
(1.47)
(2.11)
(2.05)
(2.51)
0.71
0.70
0.71
0.71
1395
1395
1395
1395
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y
N
N
N
Y

Table 5. Survival Expectations and PPP Approval: Heterogeneous treatment effects. This table relates the
probability a firm expects to be open in December 2020 to whether it had been approved for the PPP
program as of April 27, 2020 as function of firm characteristics denoted Z. The sample is restricted to firms
that applied for PPP. Firms report the probability of being open in December in 10 percentage point
increments. The dependent variable is in raw units. Panel B restricts the sample to firms with banks in the
top 20 and instruments for PPP approval interacted with Z with whether the firm’s bank is ranked 1-4 or
5-10, also interacted with Z. Panel C restricts the sample to firms with community banks and credit unions
and instruments for PPP approval interacted with Z with whether the firm’s bank is a credit union, also
interacted with Z. Panel A combines the sample and uses all instruments. Standard errors reported in
parentheses, clustered by bank in Panel B and by state in Panels A and C.

Z=
PPP approved x
high Z
PPP approved x
low Z
Adj R2
N

Z=
PPP approved x
high Z
PPP approved x
low Z
Adj R2
N

Z=
PPP approved x
high Z
PPP approved x
low Z
Adj R2
N

Cash
0.125
(0.036)
0.212
(0.094)
0.12
3993

Panel A: All firms
Loan
Officer
0.200
0.233
(0.033)
(0.064)
0.281
0.204
(0.078)
(0.065)
0.02
0.03
3993
3993

Payroll
0.305
(0.041)
-0.011
(0.125)
0.00
3993

Fixed Exp
0.188
(0.055)
0.270
(0.065)
0.02
3993

Covid Impact
0.212
(0.080)
0.008
(0.132)
0.076
1958

Cash
0.073
(0.068)
0.151
(0.155)
0.114
1958

Panel B: Top 20 Banks
Loan
Officer
0.218
0.268
(0.082)
(0.115)
0.255
0.214
(0.125)
(0.097)
0.000
0.001
1958
1958

Payroll
0.315
(0.067)
0.004
(0.106)
0.000
1958

Fixed Exp
0.137
(0.083)
0.267
(0.101)
0.000
1958

Covid Impact
0.090
(0.073)
1.238
(1.592)
0.00
957

Panel C: Community Banks/Credit Unions
Cash
Loan
Officer
Payroll
0.162
0.268
0.088
0.204
(0.080)
(0.100)
(0.163)
(0.071)
0.028
0.065
0.163
-0.096
(0.174)
(0.200)
(0.095)
(0.215)
0.11
0.02
0.07
0.00
957
957
957
957

Fixed Exp
0.299
(0.105)
0.049
(0.172)
0.00
957

Covid Impact
0.223
(0.041)
0.123
(0.066)
0.09
3993

Table 6. Employment and PPP Approval: Heterogeneous treatment effects. This table relates firm
employment to whether it had been approved for the PPP program as of April 27, 2020 as function of firm
characteristics denoted Z. The sample is restricted to firms that applied for PPP. We control for January
employment in all specifications. Panel B restricts the sample to firms with banks in the top 20 and
instruments for PPP approval interacted with Z with whether the firm’s bank is ranked 1-4 or 5-10, also
interacted with Z. Panel C restricts the sample to firms with community banks and credit unions and
instruments for PPP approval interacted with Z with whether the firm’s bank is a credit union, also
interacted with Z. Panel A combines the sample and uses all instruments. Standard errors reported in
parentheses, clustered by bank in Panel B and by state in Panels A and C.

Z=
PPP approved x
high Z
PPP approved x
low Z
Adj R2
N
Jan. Emp. Control

Covid Impact
7.31
(2.66)
7.92
(3.74)
0.45
4571
Y

Cash
7.58
(2.41)
6.84
(4.23)
0.45
4571
Y

Panel A: All firms
Loan
Officer
9.04
7.76
(1.97)
(2.39)
6.07
7.56
(3.94)
(3.72)
0.44
0.44
4571
4571
Y
Y

Payroll
5.51
(2.16)
2.07
(3.41)
0.53
4571
Y

Fixed Exp
6.95
(3.45)
5.62
(4.12)
0.47
4571
Y

Panel B: Top 20 Banks
Loan
Officer
3.65
4.74
(3.22)
(6.04)
8.83
5.49
(5.23)
(3.58)
0.48
0.49
2217
2217
Y
Y

Z=
PPP approved x
high Z
PPP approved x
low Z
Adj R2
N
Jan. Emp. Control

Covid Impact
6.79
(3.31)
1.00
(5.69)
0.48
2217
Y

Cash
3.64
(4.06)
9.46
(6.66)
0.48
2217
Y

Payroll
5.00
(2.31)
-0.01
(4.69)
0.55
2217
Y

Fixed Exp
8.86
(4.23)
3.08
(4.40)
0.50
2217
Y

Z=
PPP approved x
high Z
PPP approved x
low Z
Adj R2
N
Jan. Emp. Control

Covid Impact
-1.05
(1.79)
13.35
(17.63)
0.72
1083
Y

Panel C: Community Banks/Credit Unions
Cash
Loan
Officer
Payroll
1.41
-0.37
-0.37
-0.12
(1.72)
(2.05)
(3.12)
(1.73)
-3.05
0.66
-0.41
-1.08
(4.01)
(2.70)
(2.29)
(5.67)
0.74
0.74
0.74
0.75
1083
1083
1083
1083
Y
Y
Y
Y

Fixed Exp
5.78
(3.65)
-4.39
(3.05)
0.73
1083
Y

Table 7. Heterogeneity in PPP Application Rates. This table reports OLS regressions relating the probability
a firm has applied for the PPP program as of April 27, 2020 as a function of firm characteristics denoted Z.
The model is run without a constant, so coefficient estimates are means for each group. Panel A examines
all firms, Panel B restricts the sample to firms with banks in the top 20, and Panel C restricts the sample
to firms with community banks and credit unions. The regressions are run with no constant so the
coefficients are the means for high- and low-Z firms. Standard errors reported in parentheses, clustered
by bank in Panel B and by state in Panels A and C.

Z=
High Z
Low Z
Adj R2
N

Z=
High Z
Low Z
Adj R2
N

Z=
High Z
Low Z
Adj R2
N

Covid Impact
0.712
(0.008)
0.440
(0.011)
0.67
6137

Cash
0.579
(0.010)
0.726
(0.011)
0.66
6137

Panel A: All firms
Existing Loan
Loan Officer
0.708
0.776
(0.011)
(0.014)
0.613
0.613
(0.011)
(0.009)
0.65
0.66
6137
6137

Payroll
0.821
(0.010)
0.547
(0.009)
0.68
6137

Fixed Exp
0.848
(0.010)
0.573
(0.009)
0.67
6137

Covid Impact
0.726
(0.011)
0.474
(0.015)
0.69
2912

Cash
0.591
(0.016)
0.750
(0.012)
0.68
2912

Panel B: Top 20 Banks
Existing Loan
Loan Officer
0.716
0.809
(0.015)
(0.016)
0.640
0.639
(0.016)
(0.013)
0.67
0.68
2912
2912

Payroll
0.831
(0.013)
0.572
(0.012)
0.70
2912

Fixed Exp
0.852
(0.014)
0.599
(0.012)
0.69
2912

Covid Impact
0.697
(0.012)
0.420
(0.029)
0.65
1512

Cash
0.571
(0.017)
0.706
(0.016)
0.64
1512

Panel C: Community Banks/Credit Unions
Existing Loan
Loan Officer
Payroll
0.678
0.761
0.818
(0.020)
(0.016)
(0.013)
0.602
0.583
0.533
(0.018)
(0.014)
(0.016)
0.63
0.64
0.66
1512
1512
1512

Fixed Exp
0.832
(0.018)
0.560
(0.015)
0.66
1512

Table 8. Heterogeneity in PPP Approval Rates. This table reports OLS regressions relating the probability
a firm has been approved for the PPP program as of April 27, 2020 as a function of firm characteristics
denoted Z. The model is run without a constant, so coefficient estimates are means for each group. Panel
A examines all firms, Panel B restricts the sample to firms with banks in the top 20, and Panel C restricts
the sample to firms with community banks and credit unions. The regressions are run with no constant so
the coefficients are the means for high- and low-Z firms. Standard errors reported in parentheses,
clustered by bank in Panel B and by state in Panels A and C.

Z=
High Z
Low Z
Adj R2
N

Z=
High Z
Low Z
Adj R2
N

Z=
High Z
Low Z
Adj R2
N

Covid Impact
0.233
(0.017)
0.341
(0.033)
0.25
3993

Cash
0.353
(0.031)
0.162
(0.012)
0.29
3993

Panel A: All firms
Existing Loan
Loan Officer
0.288
0.354
(0.025)
(0.027)
0.219
0.209
(0.016)
(0.016)
0.25
0.27
3993
3993

Covid Impact
0.154
(0.013)
0.207
(0.028)
0.16
1958

Cash
0.232
(0.033)
0.111
(0.010)
0.18
1958

Panel B: Top 20 Banks
Existing Loan
Loan Officer
0.180
0.203
(0.026)
(0.029)
0.148
0.150
(0.012)
(0.015)
0.16
0.16
1958
1958

Covid Impact
0.327
(0.027)
0.445
(0.041)
0.35
957

Cash
0.469
(0.038)
0.227
(0.021)
0.39
957

Payroll
0.352
(0.029)
0.155
(0.013)
0.29
3993

Fixed Exp
0.341
(0.027)
0.195
(0.017)
0.27
3993

Payroll
0.219
(0.027)
0.111
(0.014)
0.18
1958

Fixed Exp
0.218
(0.021)
0.130
(0.016)
0.17
1958

Panel C: Community Banks/Credit Unions
Existing Loan
Loan Officer
Payroll
0.419
0.470
0.513
(0.034)
(0.039)
(0.041)
0.289
0.281
0.205
(0.024)
(0.022)
(0.020)
0.36
0.37
0.41
957
957
957

Fixed Exp
0.475
(0.042)
0.274
(0.022)
0.37
957

Table 9. Applications, Approvals, and Estimated PPP Effects. This table relates PPP application and
approval rates as of April 27, 2020 to our estimates of PPP’s effect on the probability a firm expects to be
open in December 2020. The dependent variable in the first three columns of the table is an indicator for
whether the firm applied to PPP. The dependent variable in the last three columns in an indicator for
whether the firm was approved as of April 27. To form a firm-level estimate of PPP’s effect, we take an
equal-weighted average of effects implied by Table 4. For example, if a firm is highly impacted by Covid,
has high cash, does not have an existing bank loan, does not have a relationship with a loan officer, has
low payroll, and has low fixed costs, we average the coefficients on (PPP Approved x high Z) in columns
(1) and (2) of Table 4 with the coefficients on (PPP Approved x low Z) in columns (3)-(6) of Table 4. Columns
(1) and (4) of the table use estimates for all firms, corresponding to Table 4 Panel A. Columns (2) and (5)
use estimates for firms with banks in the top 20 (Table 4 Panel B). Columns (3) and (6) use estimates for
firms with community banks and credit unions (Table 4 Panel C). Standard errors are bootstrapped using
1000 replications and reported in parentheses.

Estimated
PPP effect
Adj R2
N

Panel A: Survival Expectations
Application Rate
Top 20
Community
Banks/CUs
All firms Banks
All firms
5.81
5.54
0.86
1.73
(1.90)
(0.93)
(1.14)
(1.90)
0.10
0.10
0.01
0.01
6137
2912
1512
3993

Approval Rate
Top 20
Community
Banks
Banks/CUs
0.55
2.88
(0.93)
(1.14)
0.00
0.11
1958
957

Estimated
PPP effect
Adj R2
N

Panel B: Employment
Application Rate
Top 20
Community
Banks/CUs
All firms Banks
All firms
0.260
0.144
0.101
0.244
(0.118) (0.058)
(0.056)
(0.090)
0.059
0.102
0.004
0.069
6137
2912
1512
4571

Approval Rate
Top 20
Community
Banks
Banks/CUs
0.002
0.096
(0.029)
(0.049)
0.000
0.070
2217
1083

Appendix Figures and Tables
Figure A1. This figure plots PPP application, approval, pending, and denial rates as of April 27, 2020 by
firm owner demographics. The sample includes 1699 that report owner demographics.

Figure A2. Approval rates by bank size and whether firm has a business account with bank. The sample
includes 3993 firms that report expectations of surviving until December 2020 and Covid impact.

Figure A3. Approval rates by bank size and whether firm has an existing loan. The sample includes 3993
firms that report expectations of surviving until December 2020 and Covid impact.

Figure A4. Approval rates by bank size and whether the owner knows a loan officer. The sample includes
3993 firms that report expectations of surviving until December 2020 and Covid impact.

Figure A5. Approval rates by bank size for firms with low cash and large existing loans. The sample
includes 127 such firms.

Table A1. Total PPP applications, approvals, and PPP loan amounts by bank size. This table reports
aggregate statistics on PPP applications, approvals, and PPP loans amounts by bank size. For total
applications and approvals, the sample includes 3993 firms that report expectations of surviving until
December 2020 and Covid impact. Note that not all firms that report being approved for PPP report the
size of the loan they receive. For total loan amounts and average loan amounts, the sample includes the
683 out of 995 approved firms that report loan amounts. Therefore, total dollars of loans approved are
understated.

Total PPP applications
Total approved PPP loans (#)
Total approved PPP loans ($m)
Average PPP loan size ($000)

Top 4
1337
169
10.7
124.8

Top 5-10
492
96
5.8
82.2

Top 11-20
129
53
3.9
114.9

Others
2035
677
106.4
215.9

