NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NORWEGIAN AND US POLICIES ALLEVIATE BUSINESS VULNERABILITY
DUE TO THE COVID-19 SHOCK EQUALLY WELL
Annette Alstadsæter
Julie Brun Bjørkheim
Wojciech Kopczuk
Andreas Økland
Working Paper 27637
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27637

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2020

We thank the editor, Bill Gentry, for extremely helpful comments and suggestions. Financial
support from the Research Council of Norway, grants number 283322 and 316475, is gratefully
acknowledged. We thank Tiril Eid Barland for research assistance and Statistics Norway for rapid
data delivery. Any remaining errors and inconsistencies are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Annette Alstadsæter, Julie Brun Bjørkheim, Wojciech Kopczuk, and Andreas Økland.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Norwegian and US Policies Alleviate Business Vulnerability Due to the Covid-19 Shock Equally
Well
Annette Alstadsæter, Julie Brun Bjørkheim, Wojciech Kopczuk, and Andreas Økland
NBER Working Paper No. 27637
August 2020
JEL No. H25
ABSTRACT
We use Norwegian administrative data and applications for emergency government support to
simulate magnitude and distribution of business revenue shock due to the Covid-19 pandemic.
We rely on it to analyze the impact of business support policies available in Norway and the
United States by comparing simulated results from the various policies on a common data set. We
find that policies supporting payroll and fixed costs that were available in both countries have a
similar impact of reducing firms' economic distress, by cutting the negative effect of the crisis on
profitability, liquidity, debt, and solvency by over a half.

Annette Alstadsæter
School of Economics and Business
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
P.O. Box 5003, NO-1432 Ås
Norway
annette.alstadsater@nmbu.no
Julie Brun Bjørkheim
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
P.O. Box 5003, NO-1432 Ås
Norway
julie.brun.bjorkheim@nmbu.no

Wojciech Kopczuk
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, Rm. 1022 IAB
MC 3323
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
wk2110@columbia.edu
Andreas Økland
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
P.O. Box 5003, NO-1432 Ås
Norway
andreas.okland@nmbu.no

1

Introduction

The Covid-19 pandemic has posed novel challenges to global public health and to the world
economy. In most of the Western world, lockdowns closed businesses and services relying
on physical proximity overnight. Other businesses saw demand fall sharply due to social
distancing measures or experienced supply disruptions. The shock was unprecedented and
unexpected, which has made it even harder to assess its magnitude and distribution. This
has posed large challenges in shaping and evaluating counteracting policy measures.
To better understand the consequences of economic policy, we examine vulnerability of
firms to this kind of revenue loss and ability of policy to weaken the impact. We build on
the ideas proposed by Bachas and Brockmeyer (2020) and utilize firm-level administrative
records. A lockdown induces a change in revenue and costs. What consequences does that
have for profits, liquidity and survival of firms? Financial support to firms can mitigate these
effects. To what extent?
We utilize rich Norwegian administrative firm-level data in combination with real time
data on the distribution and extent of the economic shock imposed by the Covid-19 crisis to
evaluate in a simple simulation framework the effectiveness of various government interventions
in mitigating the negative effects of the shock on observable firm-level measures.
The pre-crisis data provide us with information from the firms’ balance sheets and profit
statements. We also have access to applications of Norwegian firms for emergency support
that provide us with information about the distribution of realized revenue losses during the
Covid-19 induced crisis. Putting these together, we can study the effect of the crisis taking
into account heterogeneity of firms in the economy and consider implications of both actual
and counterfactual policy measures. We do so by comparing simulated results for policies
from both the US and Norway on a common data set of Norwegian firm, thus enabling us to
separate the impact of policies from differences in economic structures. First, we consider an
unmitigated shock. Second, we study the impact of policies implemented in Norway. Third,
we apply the policy intervention that approximates the Paycheck Protection Program that
was implemented in the US.
We find that the shock is large and threatening many businesses, but also that the policy
is effective in mitigating it. The impact of the crisis on our measures of profits, liquidity,
and solvency falls by over a half both when we model policies available in Norway and
those available in the United States. In fact, all fully implemented policy interventions
have ultimately fairly similar effects, with the key aspect being support for payroll through
the temporary unemployment scheme in Norway or the Paycheck Protection Program in
the United States, rather than due to the fixed cost compensation scheme implemented in
Norway.

2

The Norwegian government imposed the lockdown on March 12, 2020, as a response
to the domestic Covid-19 outbreak getting out of control. Economic policy measures to
counteract the following drop in output were introduced during the same week. Two main
elements of the emergency package were changes in the rules for unemployment insurance
and the introduction of a new compensation scheme for businesses. Under the Norwegian
system, workers may be laid off temporary or permanently, and both types of layoffs entitle
the worker for unemployment benefit payments under the social security system. On March
16, the Norwegian parliament changed the rules for temporary layoffs with immediate effect,
drastically reducing the layoff-costs for firms and increasing the compensation amount for the
employees. A separate compensation scheme for businesses was first announced on March 27
and passed in the parliament on April 7. The scheme is set to compensate parts of the fixed,
unavoidable costs of businesses during the lockdown.
In the US, the massive CARES Act was enacted on March 27. We focus on the small
business support scheme part of the CARES Act, that takes the form of loans that are
forgivable if firms maintain employment and use the loans primarily for payroll.
We add to the literature on the economic effects of the Covid-19 pandemic and to the
understanding of the economic policy response. By relying on micro administrative data and
actual measures of revenue loss, we can account for heterogeneity of firms and shocks in the
economy in a realistic data-driven way.
Our results are in line with a recent analysis of the Danish crisis measures that allow for
both furloughing and fixed costs compensation scheme. In practice, the Danish furloughing
scheme is a combination of the Norwegian and US approaches: compensating the employer
for wage costs of keeping the employee on the payroll, but disallowing employees from
working. Bennedsen et al. (2020) combine a representative survey of more than 10,000
Danish firms during the Covid-19 with 2016 firm-level administrative data, documenting
great heterogeneity across sectors in the impact of the crisis. They find that the firms selfreported take-up of the furloughing scheme was the most important correlate of retaining
labor.
In this work we don’t focus on behavioral or incentive effects and we do not study
employment impacts. In a recent analysis, Markussen et al. (2020) utilize the real-time
compensation application data, in addition to real-time sector-wise unemployment rates and
sector-wise turnover and wage data calculated from 2017 administrative corporate income
tax data, to analyze the employment incentives inherent in the current Norwegian cash
compensation scheme for businesses. They find that the compensation scheme provides
disincentive for maintaining or rehiring the employees and that this can be counteracted by
including wage costs in the base for calculating the cash compensation scheme. Employers’
incentives under the Norwegian and US policies are not identical — one is an unemployment

3

scheme, the other one is wage support. Norwegian employers can choose to lay off workers
temporarily and at a fractional scale, but in principle should pay for work that is actually
performed. In contrast, in the US, the criterion is employment but not necessarily work, so
that the scheme can both substitute for unemployment and for wages for work performed
(even if it is not as productive as usual). These differences are undoubtedly important and
are worth further studying in future work.
The paper is organized as follows.

In Section 2, we discuss the relevant aspect of

institutional setting: the lock down and policies implemented in Norway and the Paycheck
Protection Act in the U.S. In Section 3 we describe our data sources. Section 4 contains the
description of the simulation strategy and Section 5 presents our results, before concluding.

2

Institutional setting

2.1

The Covid-19 lockdown in Norway

The first case of infection in Norway was recorded on February 26, 2020. By March 12, there
were 810 registered cases of infections and one death. As a response to the growing number
of domestic cases, the Norwegian government ordered a severe lockdown of the Norwegian
society on March 12, 2020.1 At the same time as the pandemic related uncertainty and
the combination of government-imposed and voluntary social distancing were hurting the
Norwegian economy, international conditions also worsened rapidly. Norway is an open, oildependent economy. In addition to lower global economic activity hurting the oil price, a
price war between OPEC and Russia also contributed negatively. The result was a sharp fall
in oil prices, to levels even lower than those seen during the 2014-2016 oil crisis. At the same
time, the Norwegian currency depreciated dramatically. Preliminary estimates carried out for
the Official Norwegian Expert Group on Covid-19 related economic questions indicate that
approximately one-third of the negative economic impact of the pandemic on the Norwegian
economy is due to the fall in the oil price and other international conditions (Holden et.
al., 2020), while two-thirds is due to domestic government imposed and voluntary social
distancing.
1

All childcare and educational institutions were closed. Workers that were able to, were instructed to work
from home. Pubs and bars that did not serve food was closed. Restaurants and cafeterias were obliged to ensure
more than one meter between each guest, and buffets were banned. In the capital Oslo, serving of alcohol
was banned the day after, effectively closing most food serving establishments as well. All entertainment
establishments were closed, and all professional and non-professional sport events were canceled. Most of the
customer fronting service sector, including hairdressers and physiotherapists, was also closed. However, most
shops and malls stayed open, and only individuals in quarantine (due to traveling abroad or having symptoms
of or confirmed Covid-19 infection) were explicitly restricted to staying home. Severe travel restrictions were
imposed, both domestic and internationally. Public transport was cut back, and all leisure trips and movement
were strongly discouraged.

4

Unemployment increased dramatically during the first weeks of the crisis, when approximately
12% of the labor force signed up for unemployment benefits. Under the Norwegian system,
workers my be furloughed, or laid-off temporarily. 90% of all the new unemployed were laid
off temporarily. As documented by Alstadsæter et al. (2020), there was a clear social gradient
in who was laid off during the first weeks of the crisis, with a higher risk of layoff for employees
with lower education, lower annual income, and lower hourly wage

2.2

Norwegian Covid-19 economic measures

Following the lockdown, the Norwegian government introduced a range of economic measures
to support firms and counter the disappearance of activity. This section presents some of the
most important measures, focusing on the enhanced temporary layoff scheme and the new
compensation scheme for businesses, which are also central to the analysis. These measures
are described in more detail in the Appendix.
Enhanced temporary layoff scheme.
Firms may lay off workers temporarily or permanently. Both options qualify for unemployment
insurance benefits for the employee (with potential reductions in the pay level), and induce
costs to the employer. Permanent layoffs require severance payments, and in the case of
temporary layoffs, the employer must cover wages for the first 15 days of the furlough period.2
One of the first responses to the lockdown was to change the rules regarding temporary
layoffs. The main purpose was to prevent the breach of the employer-employee link, to enable
as many re-hirings as possible after the crisis.
These rules for temporary layoffs were changed as of March 16, reducing the employer’s
responsibility for compensation from 15 to 2 days. The employee receives full wage payments
for the first 20 days of the temporary layoffs up to a cap of NOK 600,000 (measured in annual
wage), with reduction in the compensation above the cap. Also, the compensation is reduced
from (work) day 21 and onward.
This scheme is in its essence comparable to wage subsidy schemes introduced in other
countries. For instance, the Danish and Swedish schemes at first glance appear to be wage
subsidies for the firm to maintain employment, in line with the US system described below, as
a wage compensation is paid to the employer. But as the employee is not allowed to work for
the firm, this is effectively a furloughing/temporary layoff system similar to the Norwegian
one.3
2

The maximum duration of temporary layoff of an employee is in total 26 weeks during a period of 18
months. Unemployed persons with prior wage income are entitled to unemployment benefits for a maximum
of 104 weeks in general, but for maximum 52 weeks if prior income was low. Unemployed individuals who no
longer qualify for unemployment benefits may apply for financial assistance under the social security system.
3
Many countries introduced varieties of wage compensation/furloughing schemes to prevent permanent

5

Compensation scheme for businesses.
On March 27, the government announced a compensation scheme for fixed, unavoidable costs
for otherwise sound businesses that experienced a substantial revenue loss as a result of the
virus outbreak. Such compensation schemes for fixed costs were also established in several
other European countries, where the Swedish, Danish, and British schemes were more similar
to the Norwegian.4
The Norwegian program compensated businesses for their monthly unavoidable fixed
costs. The compensation was scaled by the size of the revenue drop they reported for the
given month and an adjustment factor. The fixed, unavoidable costs that are eligible for
compensation under the Norwegian scheme include rent, utilities, insurance costs, and net
interest rate costs.5
The minimum (self-reported) revenue decline to qualify for the scheme was 20% in March
and 30% in April and May. For businesses that were closed down by the authorities as part
of the social distancing measures (such as hairdressers), the compensation constituted 90% of
the revenue loss times the unavoidable fixed costs.For instance, if a firm had unavoidable fixed
costs of NOK 1 Million in March and experienced a revenue drop of 70% due to government
closure in March, it would receive NOK 630,000 in compensation for March, as 70% · 90% =
63%.
Businesses that were not closed down by the authorities were compensated at a lower
rate, 80%, and the unavoidable fixed costs were also adjusted by a standard deduction.6
The minimum payable cash support was NOK 5,000, and the maximum payable cash
support was NOK 80 Million. For any calculated cash support above NOK 30 million, only
50% of the amount exceeding this threshold would be paid out.

2.3

U.S. Paycheck Protection Program

The business support package for small businesses implemented in the US was structured
quite differently than the one in Norway. Naturally, US firms also can reduce their labor
costs by laying off workers. But in the absence of easily accessible temporary layoff scheme,
this is likely to have more adverse consequences for retaining firm-employee linkages. One of
layoffs, including Denmark, Sweden, the Netherlands, France, Germany, Italy, UK, US. See Bennedsen et al.
(2020) for a more thorough description of the various schemes.
4
Under the British, Swedish, and Danish schemes, a given percentage of fixed costs, up to a cap, is paid
to firms experiencing severe revenue decline and/or who were shut down by the government as part of social
distancing measures. Germany, The Netherlands, and France instead offered lump-sum payments to firms.
See Bennedsen et al. (2020) for a more thorough description of the various schemes.
5
The specific rules were announced on April 2, and the legislation was passed by the parliament on April
7 and revised on May 15: https://www.regjeringen.no/id2702881/
6
The deduction was NOK 10,000 for March and NOK 5,000 for April.

6

the objectives of the US CARES Act, enacted on March 27 and subsequently extended, was
to help firms in preserving employment.
We will focus here on one component of the CARES Act: The Paycheck Protection
Program which provides support to small (generally under 500 employees, with some exceptions)
businesses.7 The program provides an alternative to layoffs. Firms that are affected by the
crisis can apply for a loan to be used over a 24-week period that can be up to 2.5 times
average monthly payroll cost (or USD 10 Million, whichever is lower). If the firm maintains
employment and salaries above 75% of those in the baseline period and uses at least 60% of
the loan for payroll (the rest can be used for mortgage interest, rent or utilities), the loan
turns into a grant and is forgiven. There are other limitations and rules, for example relating
to limitations on the employee compensation that can be covered (up to USD 100,000). Most
importantly, this is an option of a substantial support that presents an alternative to reducing
labor costs via laying off workers.
We will investigate a stylized version of this policy adopted to the Norwegian environment
and availability of the data.

3

Data

3.1

Administrative data

We utilize very detailed, de-identified administrative firm-level data from Statistics Norway
covering the universe of Norwegian corporations.
Corporations submit income tax forms with detailed profit and balance sheet information.
The data source provides us with the main variables used in this analysis: firms’ operating
profits and its underlying components.
We utilize the most recent data set available, from the end of 2018. The corporate income
tax statement for 2019 was not supposed to be due until May 2020 and, subsequently, the
deadline has been extended until August 2020 as part of the Covid-19 measures.8 The key
assumption is thus that the firm-level tax statement data from end 2018 give a reasonable
representation of the structure of the Norwegian economy going into 2020.
We exclude from our sample corporations in sectors that do not qualify for the cash
compensation scheme (described in more detail in the Appendix), including the oil sector,
which then removes some of the more structural differences between Norwegian and US firms.
We also require that firms have real economic activity in order to be included in the sample,
7
For more info on the program, see https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/cares/assistance-for-smallbusinesses
8
For more information about corporate tax data and variables in the data delivered by Statistics Norway,
see https://www.ssb.no/data-til-forskning/utlan-av-data-til-forskere/variabellister/regnskap

7

by including only firms that have positive turnover and non-negative wage costs, fixed costs,
and material input costs. This leaves us with a total of 158,380 firms that serve as the base
for our simulations.

3.2

Real-time data

We supplement our (historical) administrative data with real time data in Firms’ revenue
losses and layoffs in order to use have realistic description of the crisis in our simulations.
Unfortunately, these real time data cannot be merged with our administrative micro data.
Instead, we use these data to measure revenue loss and layoff-rates by sector and incorporate
it into the simulations based on the administrative data from the end of 2018.
Cash compensation for businesses.
The Covid-19 compensation scheme for businesses is administered by the tax administration.
Since the firms’ 2019 income tax statements are yet to be submitted, there are no official
records for 2019 to compare the firms’ self-reported revenue loss to. As a measure to prevent
fraud, the full name of the firm being granted cash support is published, along with its
organization number, location, sector code, and self-reported turnover for the corresponding
support month (March, April, or May) for 2020 and 2019, as well as received cash compensation.
This information is updated daily in an easily downloaded format and has been widely utilized
also by journalists.9 There is a lag in the registration of compensation applications and cases,
so for the current paper, we will base the analysis on the compensations for March — the
only month, for which complete data are available at the time of this work.
Unemployment data.
The generous rules for temporary layoffs, effectively reducing the costs to the businesses of
laying off employees, as well as providing full wage compensation to the temporarily laid-off
employees lead to a sharp increase in unemployment. We use sector-wide unemployment
rates from Markussen et al. (2020).

3.3

Variable definitions

Based on the corporate income tax statements, we have detailed information on the various
components of the operating costs. Material input costs are costs of goods bought including
fees, and we use this variable in the simulation of the firms’ short-term cost reduction
responses, assuming that they can cut these costs in line with turnover in the short term.
9

Updated data are available at https://www.skatteetaten.no/presse/innsyn-kompensasjonsordning.

8

Labor costs include wages, payroll taxes and fees. Remaining costs is a residual that picks
up other types of fixed costs and variable costs. We use these detailed accounts to construct
standard ratio indicators of profitability, liquidity, and solvency: namely the profit margin,
the quick ratio, and the debt ratio.
The profit margin is constructed as operating profits divided by revenue. From the data,
we construct operating profits as turnover net of material costs, labor costs, and other nonfinancial costs.
We construct a short-term liquidity measure to indicate the firm’s short-term ability to
pay its bills. To do so, we focus on current assets and current liabilities. Because inventories
are the least liquid asset, especially in the context of this crisis, our short-term liquidity
measure excludes inventories.10 We thus construct the quick ratio as current assets net of
inventories, over current liabilities.
The most commonly used solvency measure, the debt ratio, indicates the firm’s long term
ability to meet its obligations. We define the debt ratio as total debt over total assets.
In order to simulate the effects of the compensation scheme for businesses, we construct a
separate variable for unavoidable fixed costs based on the regulations for this scheme described
in more detail in the Appendix.

3.4

Descriptive statistics

Table 1 shows basic summary statistics for over 158,000 active corporations in our data at
the end of 2018. The average revenue is approximately NOK 27 Million (USD 2.7 Million )
with an average profit rate of about 11%. Material/variable costs are the biggest component,
followed by labor costs. As usual with level firm data, there is tremendous variation in all of
these variables.
Figure 1 shows self-reported revenue loss for all firms for March. The bulk of the decline
in activity took place only after March 12. At the time of writing this article, we did not
yet have complete coverage of April filings (that would cover the whole month), so instead
we rely on the scaled version of March figures. The distribution of losses is widespread, with
firms with 100% revenue loss even though the data covers a month that was not fully affected
by the lockdown.
In order to simulate the distribution of losses for the full month we proceed by scaling up
the March figures by 133%. This naturally results in a much larger mass at 100% revenue
loss than that visible in Figure 1 but is selected to be broadly consistent with the incomplete
April numbers.11
10

Also, some types of inventories might also perish or depreciate in value if a firm has to close down
unexpectedly.
11
At the time of writing this paper, the number of firms with an approved applications for assistance
in April was 20,515 compared to 23,992 in March, 15% smaller, despite the expectation that the ultimate

9

Table 1: Summary statistics

Revenue
Total costs
Labor inputs
Material costs
Fixed operating costs and other costs
Fixed unavoidable costs*
Profits before taxes
Profit margin
Quick ratio
Debt ratio
Number of firms

Mean
27,740
26,106

Standard deviation
313,630
295,979

5,340
13,448
4,432
2,886

48,032
213,233
104,772
35,921

1,633

35,561

0.11
1.793
0.691
158,380

0.31
1.836
0.3162

Based on 175,281 Norwegian firms as of December 2018. All amounts are in thousands of Norwegian Krone
(1NOK ≈ 0.1 USD as of June 2020). The profit margin, quick ratio, and debt ratio are fractions. The definition
of fixed unavoidable costs follows from the Norwegian support scheme, and thus *includes net financial costs.

The effects of the lockdown shock were heterogeneous in nature. Some sectors were forced
to close down by the government, while others kept regular activity levels (Alstadsæter et al.,
2020). Figure 2 illustrates variation across industries in the effect of the crisis, as revealed
by the application data. Industries vary widely in terms of the effect of the crisis. There are
industries where few eligible firms applied and some industries where the majority of firms
applied. This is correlated with revenue loss conditional on applying - industries with more
firms applying, have on average higher revenue loss than those with few firms that apply.
However, even within the industries with few applicants, those that do apply exhibit large
losses, in almost all cases exceeding 50% of revenue on average.
The two dimensions in Figure 2 are the inputs into our simulation. An industry is
characterized by the share of firms applying and the (average) revenue loss conditional on
application. These two dimensions combined generate wide heterogeneity in the effect of the
crisis across industries. Figure 3 combines them to obtain an estimate of the revenue loss
for firms in the industry as a whole, including firms that did not apply. We assign a 10%
loss (half of the level for eligibility) for non-applicants and use the actual percentage loss for
applicants, and combine the two. The figure succinctly illustrates the wide heterogeneity in
number will be larger and explainable but not yet complete processing. We selected 133% adjustments to
March revenue loss to approximate the number of firms with full reported loss of revenue in April. 19.8% of
April applicants reported 100% loss of revenue and inflating March figures by 133% yields almost precisely
the same share of 19.8%. The adjustment by 150% would result in 35.5% of firms with full revenue loss, while
a smaller factor of 1.2 would give just 10.12%

10

Figure 1: Self-reported revenue decline in March

Notes: Density of self-reported revenue drop as reported in the application for the compensation scheme for businesses.
The vertical line is the cutoff for compensation.

the economy.

4

Simulation strategy

Our simulation strategy builds on the micro data to model heterogeneity of firms and the
impact of the crisis and incorporates the most important policy measures for Norway and
the US: the compensation scheme for businesses and the enhanced temporary layoff scheme
for Norway, and the PPP scheme for the US.
While our real-time cash support and unemployment data allows for observing the magnitude
of the shock and the administrative data allows for observing detailed pre-crisis financial
information about firms, we cannot link the real-time data to the administrative register
data on firm level. Instead, we account for heterogeneity in the effect of the crisis by drawing
from a simplified distribution of the shock conditional on industry. These industry-specific
distributions are characterized by two parameters: the likelihood of applying and the average
revenue loss conditional on applications, as illustrated in Figure 2.
Each firm in the administrative data is included, with weights, in each of the two regimes;
the application regime and the non-application regime. Firms in the application regime are

11

Figure 2: Turnover drop for reporting firms

assigned an industry-specific revenue loss based on actual applications and weighted by the
applications share in their sector from the application data. Firms in the non-application
regime are assigned a 10% turnover drop (half of what is required for eligibility for the
Norwegian cash support) and weighted by the non-application share in their sector. The
distribution reflects the mix of the two regimes consistently with the application shares and
the average revenue loss in each regime is consistent with the data.
This approach does not attempt to match the correlation of revenue loss with firm
characteristics beyond the industry level — we do not have sufficient information to do
so. In particular, we will proceed by reporting averages across firms without weighting
by revenue or other characteristics to avoid the impression that this procedure mimics the
precise distribution within industries. Despite this limitation, the approach allows for a lot of
heterogeneity for the economy as the whole due to first-order heterogeneity in the impact of
the crisis across industries and non-trivial heterogeneity within industries due to the interior
and heterogeneous application rate.

12

Figure 3: Simulated revenue loss and applications, all firms, by industry

Introducing Norwegian policies.
When the government introduced the enhanced temporary layoff scheme, it enabled firms to
layoff employees almost immediately with full compensation for the employees. We use the
first month of real time data on layoffs, on a sector level, to assign firms a fall in monthly
labor costs during the lockdown. This has been facilitated by the changes in policy that
reduced costs of laying off workers temporarily.
When estimating the potential compensation for unavoidable fixed costs that each firm is
eligible for, we consider the rules and restrictions described in Section 2.2 above. In particular,
we take into account that a firm cannot receive more than NOK 80 Million in compensation
for one month and that every NOK in compensation exceeding 30 Million is cut in half.
Introducing the US policy.
Modeling the PPP requires adapting it to the Norwegian situation and our data. First, while
the US scheme does not have an explicit revenue reduction eligibility criterion, we assume

13

that firms that meet the revenue loss criteria in Norway are eligible for the stylized PPP
scheme. This approximates the PPP requirement of eligibility that extends to firms that were
financially affected by the crisis. Second, the scheme covers up to 2.5 times monthly payroll
to be used over 24 weeks. We interpret it as the monthly amount equal to 2.5/6 ≈ 0.4166 of
monthly payroll. Third, we assume that a firm that chooses to apply for PPP does indeed
maintain employment and qualifies for forgiveness so that this becomes a grant rather than a
loan. Fourth, we convert the maximum amount of USD 10 Million over 24 weeks to NOK16
million per month. Our data do not account for individual employee salary limitations and
other criteria.
We consider two variants of the response to PPP. In the first one, firms maintain full
payroll. In the second one, firms reduce payroll to 75%, which is the minimum that allows
for full forgiveness of the loan. While PPP payments can be used for payroll or fixed costs,
our assumption of maintaining employment and payroll of at least 75% implies that the split
of funds between those two categories is not relevant.
When considering PPP, a firm considers its costs net of the PPP payment and compares
it to the cost if it laid off employees, choosing the lower of two. The potential layoffs if the
firm were to forego PPP are assumed the same as in the simulation using the Norwegian
policy (the layoff rate set at industry level).
This assumption ignores any non-immediate financial motivations that firms might have
in deciding whether to take up PPP, such as preserving employment links, that might lead
to take up even if the financial consequences of layoffs are more appealing. Unfortunately,
we do not have empirical evidence on this question.
Scenarios for the simulations.
In each of the simulations below, we consider six different scenarios. The baseline scenario is
just the situation as of December 2018. The Revenue shock scenario shows the impact of the
industry-specific revenue decline in the absence of any government interventions or layoffs,
where the only response margin for the firm is a reduction in material costs in proportion to
revenue loss. The next two scenarios include the Norwegian government interventions. Fixed
cost policy scenario includes the cash compensation for unavoidable fixed costs in addition
to the reduction in material costs, and the Fixed cost and layoffs scenario additionally allows
firms to reduce costs by laying off workers (implicitly, that corresponds to the unemployment
insurance system bearing the cost). The last two scenarios introduce the impact of the stylized
US PPP compensation scheme. The scheme gives firms the right to a given compensation,
conditional on retaining workers. The PPP scenario shows the effect of the firms keeping
employment fixed and receiving the compensation. The PPP, 75% Payroll scenario shows the
impact when the firm utilizes the opportunity to receive compensation and retains workers
14

Figure 4: A change in annual profits in response to a 1-month shock in revenue and policy

but reduces payroll costs to 75% of the prior level that still makes it eligible for receiving the
full compensation.

5

Results

We begin by considering the effect of the crisis on annual profits. Figure 4 illustrates the
impact under several scenarios, assuming that the shock lasts just one month. Norwegian
firms are on average profitable, although with a substantial distribution of the profit margin.
In the most extreme scenario, we assume that the firms experience a revenue shock and only
material costs adjust in proportion to the revenue decline. All other scenarios correspond to
mitigation through policy.
The shock unambiguously shifts the distribution to the left, but most firms remain
profitable. The Norwegian fixed cost scheme is almost indistinguishable from experiencing
the full shock — the implications of this transfer for the annual profit rate are trivial. On the
other hand, labor cost adjustments via (temporarily) laying off workers or taking advantage
of the PPP program do make a real difference, bringing the distribution much closer to the
15

Figure 5: A change in annual profits in response to a 3-month shock in revenue and policy

original one.
Figures 5 and 6 show the impact of the same revenue shock lasting for three and six
months. The consequences are much graver and progressing over time. The left tail of the
distribution of firms under the unmitigated shock is now thicker and the mode is now close to
zero. The fixed cost scheme makes again little difference. However, the adjustment of labor
costs significantly reduces the number of firms with negative annual profits.
The first two rows of each panel of Table 2 show the impact on the annual profit rate of
a shock lasting 1, 3 and 6 months, respectively, under different scenarios. On average, the
unmitigated profits rate falls from 9.9% to 9.0% after 1 month, to 6.9% after 3 months and to
just 3.1% after 6 months (all numbers on the annual basis). The Norwegian fixed cost scheme
alone does little to help if workers are not laid off, but any of the labor-related actions have
similar impact in terms of the profit rate, cutting the magnitude of the effect by between a
half and two-thirds.
Even more dramatically, as many as 9.7% of additional firms would have a negative profit
rate if the shock persisted for 3 months, but the layoffs or PPP reduce the magnitude of that
increase dramatically, to 2.1 or 2.8%. The impact is even larger after 6 months — instead
16

Figure 6: A change in annual profits in response to a 6-month shock in revenue and policy

of 45%, only about 33% of firms would continue having negative profits in the presence of
strong government support (relative to the baseline of 28.8%).
Interestingly, there is not a major quantitative difference in the impact of layoffs, PPP
and PPP with a 25% payroll reduction. Layoffs perform slightly better than PPP and PPP
with 25% payroll reduction performs slightly better than both of these. The main reason
for these relatively small differences is that covering 41% of payroll (PPP) or saving on 66%
of payroll (PPP with an additional 25% payroll reduction) should be contrasted with the
alternative of laying off workers. The hardest hit firms, those that would be willing to lay off
more than 66% of workers, will do so regardless under our assumptions. Firms that would
want to layoff between 41% and 66% of workers will make different decisions under the two
policies. Firms that would want to lay off fewer than 41% of workers are better off under
PPP. Thus, PPP is a preferred option to layoffs for firms that are not the ones most suffering
— it does provide an additional option and thus has to be beneficial, but its beneficial effect
is not in the tail of the distribution. Finally, when compared to the Norwegian policy-based
scenario, there is an additional option there of receiving compensation for fixed costs. Table 2
shows that this option happens to effectively offset the advantage of PPP unless we allow for
17

Figure 7: The effect of the crisis on liquidity after 1 month

Notes: The figure shows the distribution of quick ratio after 1 month under the six scenarios described in text. We
assume adjustment of liquid assets first so that a firm that runs out of them has the quick ratio of 0. Thus, the
distribution has a mass point at 0. The right axis shows the pdf. The scale on the left axis shows the share of firms
that would run out of liquid assets and have the quick ratio of 0. The circles represent the mass point at 0, the lines the
pdf elsewhere. The left scale is adjusted so that the mass point under the baselines coincides with the corresponding
continuous density as it approaches 0.

an additional payroll reduction.
Protecting profits of firms is not the direct objective of these policy measures, but
preserving jobs and preventing bankruptcies through reduscing firms’ financial distress (in
our context measured by illiquidity and insolvency) is. Figure 7 illustrates that a month-long
shock deteriorates short-term liquidity position of firms, as measured by the ”quick ratio”
— the ratio of short-term current (liquid) assets minus inventories to current liabilities. We
assume that this ratio adjusts by reducing current assets rather than additional borrowing.
The shock shifts the distribution to the left and policies mitigate it. But, after just one
month, this effect is mild. In particular, Table 2 shows that 1.2% of firms would run out of
liquid assets (the quick ratio falling to zero).
However, as Figure 8 shows, these effects grow dramatically over time. In the case of a
crisis that lasts 3 months, a nontrivial share of firms runs out of short-term liquid assets,

18

Figure 8: The effect of the crisis on liquidity in response to a 3-month shock in revenue and
policy

Notes: The figure shows the distribution of quick ratio after 1 month under the six scenarios described in text. We
assume adjustment of liquid assets first so that a firm that runs out of them has the quick ratio of 0. Thus, the
distribution has a mass point at 0. The right axis shows the pdf. The scale on the left axis shows the share of firms
that would run out of liquid assets and have the quick ratio of 0. The circles represent the mass point at 0, the lines the
pdf elsewhere. The left scale is adjusted so that the mass point under the baselines coincides with the corresponding
continuous density as it approaches 0

so that our quick ratio measure is equal to zero, and has to rely on outside borrowing.
Under unmitigated shock, 3.9% of firms would run out of liquid assets in order to cover
their routine expenses. All policies mitigate it to some extent, with fixed cost compensation
alone reducing it by 0.8pp, layoffs adding another 1.3pp and the alternative US-based policies
having a similar effect. After 6 months, as shown in Figure 9 all these effects grow — 8.1% of
firms would run out of liquid assets, with the fully implemented Norwegian policy reducing
it to 3.7%, PPP with maintaining payroll to 5.1% and PPP with reduced payroll to 3.6%.
Figure 10 shows the alternative measure of stress — the ratio of debt to assets — after
a 3-month shock. We assume that firms will finance their shortfall by borrowing so that the
debt ratio must increase. A debt ratio greater than one would indicate that the firm’s debt
exceeds assets and can be viewed as an indicator of insolvency risk, which in the end could
lead to bankruptcy. As before, the shock has significant adverse consequences. The debt

19

Figure 9: The effect of the crisis on liquidity in response to a 6-month shock in revenue and
policy

Notes: The figure shows the distribution of quick ratio after 6 months under the six scenarios described in text. We
assume adjustment of liquid assets first so that a firm that runs out of them has the quick ratio of 0. Thus, the
distribution has a mass point at 0. The right axis shows the pdf. The scale on the left axis shows the share of firms
that would run out of liquid assets and have the quick ratio of 0. The circles represent the mass point at 0, the lines the
pdf elsewhere. The left scale is adjusted so that the mass point under the baselines coincides with the corresponding
continuous density as it approaches 0

ratio increases by 0.165, so that the mean firm now has a debt ratio of 0.927 (Table 2) and
the the share of firms with debt greater than assets increases from 15.1% to 21.3%. The
policy is effective in reducing the damage, with all interventions on the payroll side cutting
the increase in debt ratio and in the number of firms with debt ratio over one by about a
third.

6

Conclusions

We simulate the results of public policies in both Norway and the US on the common
data set of the universe of active Norwegian corporations, which enables us to focus on
the impact of policies rather than on the differences in the structure of the economies. The

20

Figure 10: The effect of the crisis on debt ratio in response to a 3-month shock in revenue
and policy

Norwegian economy is more export oriented and has a relatively larger industrial sector,
though this is somewhat mitigated because we exclude the offshore oil industry from the
sample. Correspondingly, Norwegian consumption relies more heavily on imports, accounting
for a smaller share of domestic production. Another large difference between the countries
is the size of the welfare state, the coverage of unemployment insurance and the structure of
the labor market. This could mean that the longer-term effects of the various measures on
labor market outcomes may be different in the two countries for reasons going beyond the
different course of the crisis, but this relatively simple analysis framework cannot address
such questions.
The Norwegian context allows for observing the magnitude of revenue shocks based on
applications for assistance that firms filed early in the crisis. We consider scenarios that
correspond to persistence of these shocks for up to 6 months. This is a somewhat stylized
but, we believe, an interesting way to shed quantitative light on the potential impact of
the crisis on the financial situation of firms. Norway is already significantly under way of
reopening its economy as of July 2020, so that the assumption of 3-month persistence of the

21

full shock is on the high side. In the case of the United States, the process of re-opening has
also started, but the pandemic does not appear to be under control so that the 6 months
assumption is more realistic and may still prove too optimistic. Of course, revenue losses in
the following months do not need to be (and won’t be) of the same magnitude and firms can
adjust aspects of behavior that we do not model. Our work does not try to predict it, but
instead attempts to illustrate the immediate liquidity, solvency and profitability implications
of the crisis.
Our analysis focused on the ability of policies implemented in Norway and in the United
States to mitigate the crisis. Somewhat surprisingly, we found that the full package of policies
implemented in the two countries fares similarly well in terms of mitigating the damage
to profits and, most importantly, liquidity and insolvency risk. The key aspect in both
cases is support for payroll — either through a temporary unemployment scheme or through
forgivable loans. In contrast, a fairly generous, at least on paper, Norwegian scheme that
provides support for fixed costs turned out not to make an enormous quantitative difference,
primarily because it did not turn out to be particularly well targeted to the more financially
distressed firms.

22

Table 2: Profits and liquidity under different scenarios
Baseline

Revenue
shock

Average profit rate
Negative profits
Average quick ratio
Quick Ratio <1
Quick Ratio=0
Average debt ratio
Debt Ratio >1

0.099
0.288
2.813
0.389
0.003
0.762
0.151

0.090
0.327
2.783
0.413
0.012
0.817
0.172

Average profit rate
Negative profits
Average quick ratio
Quick Ratio <1
Quick Ratio =0
Average debt ratio
Debt Ratio >1

0.099
0.288
2.813
0.389
0.003
0.762
0.151

0.069
0.385
2.738
0.452
0.039
0.927
0.213

Average profit rate
Negative profits
Average quick ratio
Quick Ratio <1
Quick Ratio =0
Average debt ratio
Debt Ratio >1

0.099
0.288
2.813
0.389
0.003
0.762
0.151

0.031
0.450
2.699
0.497
0.081
1.092
0.261

Fixed cost Fixed cost
policy and layoffs
After 1 month
0.091
0.097
0.323
0.294
2.789
2.843
0.411
0.394
0.010
0.007
0.810
0.771
0.170
0.156
After 3 months
0.073
0.092
0.380
0.309
2.750
2.907
0.448
0.402
0.031
0.018
0.906
0.789
0.208
0.168
After 6 months
0.040
0.081
0.447
0.328
2.713
3.013
0.494
0.412
0.070
0.037
1.051
0.817
0.256
0.185

PPP

PPP, 75%
Payroll

0.096
0.298
2.837
0.396
0.009
0.777
0.158

0.097
0.296
2.843
0.393
0.007
0.770
0.156

0.089
0.316
2.893
0.406
0.024
0.808
0.174

0.090
0.311
2.909
0.400
0.017
0.787
0.166

0.073
0.335
2.995
0.418
0.051
0.856
0.193

0.077
0.330
3.017
0.411
0.036
0.814
0.183

Notes: The table presents six different scenarios as described in text: the baseline of no shock; the revenue shock with
material cost adjustments only; the Norwegian policy covering share of fixed costs; fixed costs and layoffs; the US PPP
scheme and the US PPP scheme with payroll of 75%. Profit rate is annual, based on the crisis lasting for 1, 3, and 6
months respectively and the return to the baseline afterwards.

23

References
Alstadsæter, Annette, Bernt Bratsberg, Gaute Eielsen, Wojciech Kopczuk,
Simen Markussen, Oddbjorn Raaum, and Knut Røed, “The First Weeks of the
Coronavirus Crisis: Who Got Hit, When and Why? Evidence from Norway,” Working
Paper 27131, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.
Bachas, Pierre and Anne Brockmeyer, “Using administrative tax data to
understand the implications of COVID-19 (coronavirus) for formal firms,” Blog,
The World Bank, Available at: https://blogs.worldbank.org/developmenttalk/
using-administrative-tax-data-understand-implications-covid-19-coronavirus-formal
2020.
Bennedsen, Morten, Birthe Larsen, Ian Schmutte, and Daniela Scur, “Preserving
job matches during the COVID-19 pandemic: Firm-level evidence on the role of government
aid,” Covid Economics: Vetted and Real-Time Papers, 2020, 1 (27), 1–30.
Holden et. al., “Samfunnsøkonomisk vurdering av smitteverntiltak – covid-19 Rapport
fra ekspertgruppe på oppdrag for Helsedirektoratet 7. April 2020,” report, Norwegian
Directorate of Health 2020.
Markussen, Simen, Gisle Natvik, and Fredrik Wulfsberg, “Alternative
kompensasjonsordninger for næringslivet med vekt på lønnsutgifter - anslagsvise
beregninger av fordelings- og insentiveffekter,” Report, The Frisch Centre, Available
at:
https://fagarkivet-hioa.archive.knowledgearc.net/bitstream/handle/20.
500.12199/3124/Kompordning_data_rev_RF.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y 2020.

24

A

Detailed description of the Norwegian Covid-19 economic
crisis measures

Following the lockdown, the Norwegian government introduced a range of economic measures
to counter the economic shock.12 This section presents some of the most important measures,
focusing on the enhanced temporary layoff scheme and the new compensation scheme for
businesses, which are also central to the analysis.
Enhanced temporary layoff scheme. One of the first responses to the lockdown
was an enhancement of the rules regarding temporary layoffs and unemployment insurance.
Workers may be laid off temporarily or permanently. Both options qualify for unemployment
insurance.
On March 16, the Norwegian parliament agreed to change the rules for layoffs with
immediate effect.
• First 20 days: 100 % compensation up to an annual income limit of approximately
NOK 600,000 — about USD 56,000.
• After 21 days: 100% of annual income under NOK 300,000 and 62.4% for annual income
between NOK 300,000 and 600,000.
• No compensation for lost income above NOK 600,000 (annually).
Prior to the rule change, unemployed were compensated with 62.4% for annual income up to
600,000 NOK. Employers’ responsibility to pay laid off in full was also reduced from 15 to 2
days. The payment was set to be made as soon as the technical solutions were in place.
The new compensation scheme for businesses. On March 27 the government announced
a compensation scheme for fixed, unavoidable costs for businesses that experienced a substantial
revenue loss as a result of the virus outbreak. The specific rules were announced on April 2.
Legislation passed parliament on April 7.13 The minimum revenue loss was set to 20 % in
March and 30 % in April and May.
For businesses that were closed down by the state, the compensation for a given month
is calculated as
• Compensation = Revenue loss × Fixed, unavoidable costs × 90 %
For businesses that were not closed down by the state, the compensation for a given month
is calculated as
12

For detailed information, see https://www.regjeringen.no/no/aktuelt/economic-measures-in-norway-inresponse-to-covid- 19/id2696858.
13
Rules adjusted somewhat May 15, for more information see: https://www.regjeringen.no/id2702881/

25

• Compensation = Revenue loss × (Fixed, unavoidable costs - Deduction)× 80 %
This deduction was NOK 10,000 for March and NOK 5,000 for April.
The fixed, unavoidable costs that are eligible for compensation include rent costs, electricity
costs, insurance costs, interest income less interest payments.
If the business was established in March 2019 or earlier, the revenue loss is calculated as
• Revenue loss =

Rev. Jan-Feb 2020
Rev. Jan-Feb 2019 − Rev. in month
Jan-Feb 2020
month in 2019 × Rev.
Rev. Jan-Feb 2019

Rev. in month in 2019 ×
Rev. in

in 2020

For businesses that were established in April 2019, it becomes
• Revenue loss =

Revenue Jan-Feb 2020 − Revenue in month in 2020
Revenue Jan-Feb 2020

If the calculated subsidy is less than NOK 5,000, the subsidy will not be paid. If the calculated
subsidy is more than NOK 30 million, the amount above NOK 30 million will be halved when
the subsidy is paid out. The subsidy amount may not exceed NOK 80 million.
Other criteria that must be met for a firm to qualify for the scheme are:
• It is liable to pay tax to Norway.
• It was registered before March 1 2020.
• It has employees.
• It has fulfilled its reporting obligation.
• It has not entered bankruptcy proceedings, nor has a bankruptcy petition been submitted.
• It has unavoidable fixed costs.
• It must not operate within industries that are excluded from the scheme, mainly because
these are covered by other crisis measures: finance industry, oil and gas production
companies that fall under the oil taxation regime, companies that produce, transfer
or distribute electricity, airlines with a Norwegian operating license, private daycare
centers.
Other fiscal measures.
Other measures included extra spending on health care and relaxation of tax and pension
rules to attract students and retirees with medical training into the labor force.
Self-employed and freelancers were given sick-leave benefits from day four and temporary
income protection equivalent to 80% of the average of the last three years of income up to
600,000. This compensation applied from day 17 after the loss of income.
26

A guarantee scheme was also announced to ensure liquidity for businesses, and the
Government Bond Fund was restored. The scheme was specifically aimed at new bank loans
to small and medium-sized businesses that suffered operating losses due to the extraordinary
situation related to the outbreak of Covid-19.
The payroll tax was cut, and the VAT payments deferred. Companies with deficits in
2020 were able to carry back losses. Owners of companies that report deficits in 2020 can
defer payments of wealth tax. The remittance of the payroll tax was also deferred to help
liquidity. For airlines, there was a temporary cancellation of the air passenger tax for flights
taking place between 1 January and 31 October 2020, and all airport fees were canceled up
to and including 30 June 2020.
Bankruptcy law. In Norway, a creditor must petition the court for a bankruptcy
proceeding, which entails a cost, before bankruptcy can be opened. If the court finds that
the firm is insolvent, a bankruptcy proceeding is formally opened and the control over firm’s
assets is transferred to a trustee, who oversees assets and claims and attempts to settle debts
to creditors. There is bankruptcy protection during restructuring as in the US Chapter 11
proceedings, that are intended to secure future operation of firms with liquidity problems.
Norwegian bankruptcy proceedings usually result in liquidation of the firm. As a temporary
Covid-19 measure, the government has expanded existing debt negotiation procedures (which
seldom are used), to enable firms to attempt solving their debt problems without going
bankrupt.14

14

Read more at https://www.regjeringen.no/id2697585/.

27

