                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    DOES FINTECH SUBSTITUTE FOR BANKS? EVIDENCE FROM THE PAYCHECK
                         PROTECTION PROGRAM

                                             Isil Erel
                                         Jack Liebersohn

                                       Working Paper 27659
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27659


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




We would like to thank René Stulz, Tejaswi Velayudhan, Daniel Green, Greg Howard, Victor
Lyonnet for very helpful comments. Thanks to May Zhu for excellent research assistance. All
errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Isil Erel and Jack Liebersohn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Does FinTech Substitute for Banks? Evidence from the Paycheck Protection Program
Isil Erel and Jack Liebersohn
NBER Working Paper No. 27659
August 2020
JEL No. G00,G01,G2,G21,G23,G28,H12,H2,H3

                                          ABSTRACT

New technology promises to expand the supply of financial services to borrowers poorly served
by the banking system. Does it succeed? We study the response of FinTech to financial services
demand created by the introduction of the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). We find that
FinTech is disproportionately used in ZIP codes with fewer bank branches, lower incomes, and a
larger minority share of the population, as well as in industries with little ex ante small-business
lending. Its role in PPP provision is also greater in counties where the economic effects of the
COVID-19 pandemic were more severe. To understand whether these differences arise because
certain groups are switching from traditional banks to FinTech or if they are being newly served
by FinTech, we study whether FinTech-enabled PPP loans were more widespread in areas with
fewer traditional loans. Using the predicted responsiveness of traditional banks to the program as
an instrument, we show that borrowers were more likely to get a FinTech-enabled PPP loan if
they were located in ZIP codes where local banks were unlikely to originate PPP loans.


Isil Erel
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
erel@fisher.osu.edu

Jack Liebersohn
University of California Irvine
cjlieber@uci.edu
1         Introduction

The COVID-19 pandemic has created “a crisis like no other,” with a projected global
economic contraction of 4.9 percent in 2020.1 It has induced tremendous stress on
financial institutions, with an unprecedented demand for their services. Li, Strahan
and Zhang (2020) show that, during the last three weeks of March 2020, commercial
banks faced the largest increase in demand for credit ever observed. Among firms
that needed emergency liquidity, small businesses have been hit the worst: According
to a recent State of Small Business Report, nearly one third of small businesses have
shut down; and many that still survive have faced important challenges with liquidity
and revenue.2 Our paper studies the role of FinTech in an important government
program aimed at providing immediate relief to small businesses during this crisis.
        As a response to the COVID-19 shock, the U.S. government created the Pay-
check Protection Program (PPP), which offers guaranteed and potentially-forgivable
small-businesses loans to “provide a direct incentive for small businesses to keep their
workers on the payroll.”3 Although the program is administered by the Small Busi-
ness Administration (SBA), approved financial institutions receive applications and
distribute the funds, but do not bear credit risk from the loans. Traditional financial
institutions (i.e., depository institutions), however, have been shown to be inefficient
in their allocation of financial services across customers from different locations and
demographics (Philippon, 2015), and, in the particular case of allocating PPP loans,
have been heavily criticized by the popular media for favoring their relationship bor-
    1
     World Economic Outlook Update, International Monetary Fund, June 2020.
    2
     May 2020 State of Small Business Report by Facebook and Small Business Roundtable.
   3
     PPP is an important part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act:
See https://www.sba.gov/funding-programs/loans/coronavirus-relief-options/paycheck-protection-
program. See also Hamilton and Veuger (2020) for the importance of direct emergency loans in
such unprecedented times.




                                               2
rowers at the expense of smaller firms that were hit hardest by the pandemic.4
      We also know that alternative sources of financial intermediation have been devel-
oping quickly. The role of Financial Technology (FinTech) has increased in different
types of credit and other financial services, by not only unregulated nonbanks but
also by regulated banks.5
      Our primary question is whether specialized FinTech lenders respond differently
than traditional banks to the demand for PPP. This question speaks directly to the
impact of including FinTech lenders when using banks as intermediaries to provide
government services. Furthermore, FinTechs are a growing share of the financial
industry, so this study helps us understand how access to financial services changes
as a result of their expansion.
      We have three main findings. First, we show that during Phase 1 of the program,
when traditional banks were most constrained, FinTech lenders provided more PPP
loans to areas with a worse economic shock while traditional banks provided less.
Second, we show that borrowers with less local access to the traditional banking
system — as proxied by the number of bank branches, for example — were more
likely to get FinTech-enabled PPP loans. Finally, we use a Bartik-style instrument
to show that at least part of the difference in borrower composition was because
applicants substituted to FinTech when traditional banks were not available. In
areas where our instrument predicts lower traditional bank PPP lending, FinTechs
originate more PPP loans per business. However, we estimate less than one-for-one
substitution between banks and FinTech lenders, suggesting that FinTechs do expand
access to the PPP program but do not fully close the gap in financial services across
regions.
  4
    E.g., “Banks Gave Richest Clients ‘Concierge Treatment’ for Pandemic Aid,” NYT, April 2020.
  5
    See, e.g., Buchak, Matvos, Piskorski and Seru (2018), Chernenko, Erel and Prilmeier (2019),
Stulz (2019), Liebersohn (2020), and Gopal and Schnabl (2020).


                                              3
   Our findings support the view in the popular press that traditional banks base
their PPP originations on past relationships and are geographically constrained by
the location of their physical branches, unlike FinTech which is mainly online and
where prior relationships are less relevant. Comparing ZIP codes located in the same
county, we find that a larger fraction of traditional bank PPP loans were originated to
applicants in areas with more bank branches. Relative to FinTechs, traditional banks
also provided a higher fraction of PPP loans to firms in industries with stronger ties
to the banking system, as proxied for by ex ante demand for SBA loans relative to
new PPP demand.
   Next we study whether small businesses substitute to FinTechs when banks orig-
inate few PPP loans. If small businesses do not substitute between traditional banks
and FinTechs, this may indicate that FinTechs supply financial services to a com-
pletely distinct market relative to the traditional banking system. To test whether
substitution happens, we first create a bank-level measure of PPP responsiveness at
the national level by calculating how many PPP loans each traditional bank origi-
nates per branch. Using the ex ante location of each bank’s branches, we predict how
much PPP origination we would expect based on the banks that happen to be lo-
cated in each ZIP code, in an approach that is akin to a shift-share (“Bartik”) design.
Note that using national lending patterns to predict local bank responsiveness yields
variation in traditional banks’ PPP lending that is independent of the magnitude of
the COVID-19 shock.
   We find that there are fewer FinTech PPP loans per business in ZIP codes where
local banks are more responsive. This finding implies that borrowers respond to a lack
of bank PPP provision by somewhat (but not fully) substituting to these other types
of financial institutions. It is important to note that we find evidence on substitution
despite the fact that it is harder to get authorized for extending government subsidies

                                           4
for unregulated FinTech lenders; and, therefore, some FinTech lenders in our sample
were granted authorization only during the last week of the Phase 1 of the PPP.
    The incentives in play for PPP loan origination are different from standard credit.
Although technically termed “loans,” PPP funds are forgiveable in many circum-
stances and the lender does not bear any credit risk. Therefore, the differences in the
response of FinTech and traditional banks in the PPP context may not map directly
to the differences in standard credit provision. Our results speak to the differences
between FinTechs and traditional banks’ use of relationships to allocate credit and
their use of new technology, but not to differences in credit evaluation and risk man-
agement. Nevertheless, the PPP program sheds light on how differences in technology
and reliance on relationships between FinTech and traditional banks affect financial
intermediation.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature on
FinTech lending. Section 3 describes the PPP, discusses the data collection process
and presents summary statistics. In Section 4, we present our main results on geog-
raphy of online and nonbank lending. Section 5 addresses whether ZIP codes with
less bank branches had more PPP loans by FinTech lenders, controlling for local de-
mographics. In Section 6, we calculate predicted responsiveness of banks to the PPP
and then test whether borrowers were more likely to get a FinTech-enabled loan if
they are located in ZIP codes where local banks were unlikely to originate PPP loans.
Section 7 concludes.



2     Literature Review

Our paper contributes to the nascent literature on the role of FinTech in providing
financial services to firms or individuals. One paper that has studied differences


                                           5
between FinTech and traditional banks in credit provision, Chernenko et al. (2019),
shows that FinTech provides relatively more credit to unprofitable businesses and
that this is because they are subject to different regulation. In effect they find that
the FinTech and traditional credit markets are highly segmented. We find that the
FinTech-enabled PPP loans partially substituted for traditional loans.
       Several other papers have studied the role of FinTech lending to firms. Davydiuk,
Marchuk and Rosen (2020) study commercial lending by Business Development Com-
panies (BDCs). Hanson, Shleifer, Stein and Vishny (2015), Cortes, Demyanyk, Li,
Loutskina and Strahan (2020), and Gopal and Schnabl (2020) show how various non-
bank lenders have been filling the gap when large commercial banks faced regulatory
constraints and, therefore, had to pull back from lending to small firms.6
       Although many purely online FinTech lenders started as peer-to-peer lenders ex-
tending only personal loans, they have also moved to direct small-business lending.
As Stulz (2019) discusses, two well-known FinTech firms, LendingClub and Kabbage,
make traditional small-business loans through a banking subsidiary or a funding bank
partner. Buchak et al. (2018) show that there has been a dramatic growth in online
FinTech lenders of mortgage loans post-financial crisis. FinTech banks have also been
competing aggressively on the funding side of the financial institutions’ balance sheet.
Abrams (2019) points to the rapid growth in deposit contracts offered by online banks
in the past decade: online banks now comprise four of the 30 largest banks by de-
posits, pay higher deposit rates, and have about the same amount of market power
over their depositors as midsize banks do. Given the way the PPP program is struc-
   6
    There are also papers using Dealscan data on larger loans to study loans extended by or sold
to nonbanks. For example, Carey, Post, and Sharpe (1998) focus on loans arranged by finance
companies. Berlin, Nini and Yu (2018), Lim, Minton and Weisbach (2014), Nadauld and Weisbach
(2012), Ivashina and Sun (2011), Massoud, Nandy, Saunders and Song (2011), and Jiang, Li and Shao
(2010), Biswas, Ozkan and Yin (2018), Irani, Iyer, Meisenzahl and Peydro (2020) study participation
by nonbanks in loans arranged and syndicated by banks.



                                                6
tured, having an existing relationship with a bank, even through a simple commercial
deposit account should matter.
       Insufficient access to bank credit is one important reason for borrowers to bank
with FinTech lenders (Cole, Cumming and Taylor (2019) Butler, Cornaggia and Gu-
run (2016)). Therefore, they are likely to serve the under-served and fill in gaps
in lending, where traditional bank lending has contracted due to increased regula-
tory constraints during and after the financial crisis. They also offer convenience
and faster processing through better technology (Buchak et al. (2018) and Fuster,
Plosser, Schnabl and Vickery (2019)).7 Carlin, Olafsson and Pagel (2020) find sig-
nificant reductions in high-interest, unsecured debt and bank fees when individuals
can get access to information about their bank balances and transactions more often.
Therefore, they conclude that FinTech has significantly improved consumers’ well-
being. However, FinTech firms have limitations on what they can offer to customers.
For example, Balyuk, Berger and Hackney (2020) show that FinTech lenders can sub-
stitute for hard-information-based lending by large out-of-market banks, but are less
able to compensate for the loss of relationship-based lending from small, in-market
banks.
       Lastly, we also contribute to the literature on government interventions – espe-
cially, directed lending programs. Such programs can run in a form of a direct subsidy
(e.g., Banerjee and Duflo (2014) using data from India) or an indirect subsidy as in a
loan guarantee (e.g., Claire, Sraer and Thesmar (2010) using data from France). PPP
is also a directed lending program, where the Small Business Administration offered
guaranteed and potentially forgivable loans to small businesses. But borrowers apply
   7
    There is also a growing literature on peer-to-peer personal loans that use FinTech, testing various
predictions on lax screening/bottom fishing or cream screaming, comparing these loans with bank
loans (see, e.g., Morse (2015) for a review; de Roure, Pelizzon and Thakor (2018), Di Maggio and
Yao (2018), Tang (2019), and Vallee and Zeng (2019) for more recent papers).



                                                  7
for and receive loans through the system of financial institutions. Therefore, the role
of these institutions in this process is essential. Some contemporaneous papers have
also studied the PPP program. Cororaton and Rosen (2020) study public firms that
got funding through the PPP and received significant media outrage as the program
aimed to help small businesses. They document that only 13% of the eligible public
firms, which is half of the public firms, end up participating. Using preliminary data,
Granja, Makridis, Yannelis and Zwick (2020) examine whether areas that were more
severely hit by the Covid pandemic, as measured by declines in hours worked or busi-
ness shutdowns, end up getting more allocations. Barrios, Minnis, Minnis and Sijthoff
(2020) develop a payroll-based framework and provide preliminary analyses that the
state-level funds, which were granted till May 1st, were allocated as predicted by their
framework. Bartik, Bertrand, Cullen, Glaeser, Luca and Stanton (2020) study the
effects of PPP on small businesses using a representative national survey.8 In this
paper, we focus on the differential effect of nonbanks and online banks in channeling
PPP funds.



3     Payroll Protection Program and Data

The Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), which authorized up to $659 billion (in two
Phases9 ) toward job retention by small businesses, is established by the CARES Act.
This program provides loans to small businesses and eligible nonprofit organizations
to pay up to 8 weeks of payroll costs including benefits, interest on mortgages, rent,
   8
     We also contribute to a broader literature studying the consequences of the COVID-19 crisis
on financial and capital markets (see e.g., Green and Loualiche (2020), Fahlenbrach, Rageth and
Stulz (2020), Pastor and Vorsatz (2020), Halling, Yu and Zechner (2020), and Falato, Goldstein and
Hortaçsu (2020)).
   9
     $349 billion was distributed in Phase 1.




                                                8
and utilities.10 With already over $521 billion approved —about 4.9 million loans
passed through 5,453 financial institutions— the PPP has been one of the largest
economic stimulus programs in U.S. history. According to data reported by program
participants, it has supported over 51 million jobs, clearly a majority of the small
businesses’ employment.
       The program is administered by the Small Business Administration (SBA) but
loans are allocated through eligible financial institutions. These eligible institutions
include any SBA 7(a) lender, federally insured depository institutions or credit unions,
or any other lender that is approved by the SBA and enrolled in the program. Lenders
neither charge any fees nor ask for collateral to grant these small business loans. Loans
issued prior to June 5 have a maturity of 2 years while the ones issued after June 5
have a maturity of 5 years. These PPP loans carry an interest rate of 1% but any loan
payment is deferred for six months. Most importantly, the loans are fully forgiven if
the funds are used for (at least 60%) payroll costs, interest on mortgages, rent, and
utilities. The majority of loans granted were for less than $150,000, with the overall
average loan size being $107,000.
       Our main data source is the database of PPP loans released by the Small Business
Administration (SBA) following an agreement between the Small Business Commit-
tee of the U.S. Senate and the Department of Treasury. Under the agreement, the
SBA released loan-level data on all PPP loans. Data include some characteristics
of borrowers and loans. For loans with a value above $150,000, borrower names are
available, but the loan amounts are grouped into bins. For smaller loans, the exact
dollar amount is available but not the borrower names. The borrower’s industry in-
formation is available at the 6-digit NAICS level for all loans. The SBA also provided
  10
   Tribal businesses, self-employed individuals, and independent contractors are also eligible if they
meet the PPP’s size standards.



                                                  9
the names of the financial institutions (but no other identifiers) that facilitated the
loan applications and distributions.11
       We match this loan-level data to bank identifiers from the FFIEC using the lender
names provided.12 Most of the names are matched using automated name matching.13
Lenders which we are not able to match automatically are a combination of non-
bank lenders, banks that have duplicate names, and banks that have idiosyncratic
names. We therefore hand-match all PPP lenders who originate over 750 PPP loans,
classifying separately non-bank lenders and banks which do not have a unique match
in the FFIEC database. This procedure allows us to match over 85% of all PPP
loans in the sample. The remaining lenders are mostly small community banks with
non-standard or non-unique names.
       After matching the PPP data to the relevant financial institutions, we match these
to institutional information for lenders that are deposit-taking banks. We obtain
bank-level characteristics, including bank size, from June 2020 Call reports and data
on the number of commercial bank branches by ZIP code from the 2018 FDIC Sum-
mary of Deposits database. Then we classify lenders into five categories: Large banks
(with assets above $20bn), small banks (with assets below $20bn), credit unions,
nonbanks and online banks. Note that nonbanks refer to non-depository financial in-
stitutions. Online banks are defined to be banks with only a single branch (Abrams,
2019).14 In addition, we will also use a simpler three-part classification: online banks,
  11
      News reports have raised concerns about errors in some loans’ data fields, especially free-form
text fields and information about borrower demographics (Yanofsky, 2020). Our findings do not
rely on borrowers’ specific address or demographic information. Insofar as there are mistakes in
ZIP codes, this would create measurement error in our dependent variables and would not bias the
results.
   12
      Specifically, we use the Attributes File from the end of June, 2020.
   13
      We start by searching for exact, unique name matches between the files. For unmatched lenders,
we try searching for common variants of their names, such as “N.A.” in place of “National Associa-
tion.” Names which remain unmatched are then matched by hand.
   14
      Measuring online banks based on number of loans per branch yields very similar results.



                                                 10
nonbank lenders, and all remaining traditional banks and credit unions. We describe
both online banks and nonbank lenders as FinTechs, but because of differences in
regulatory treatment we analyze them separately.15
       Many of our analyses will be at the ZIP code level, in which we aggregate PPP
lending based on the borrower’s ZIP code. Unless otherwise specified, all estimates
and summary statistics are weighted by the number of PPP loans per ZIP code. We
measure the fraction of nonbank, online, and bank/credit union lending by ZIP code
for borrowers whose type we have classified.16
       We match this data to demographic information from the 2000 Decennial Cen-
sus and the 2014-2018 American Community Survey (ACS) (Manson, Schroeder,
Van Riper and Ruggles, 2017). From the Decennial Census, we measure the frac-
tion of the population that is white. From the ACS, we measure total population,
median household income, and travel time to work. We recode travel time to create
an indicator that measures the fraction of households that report a travel time of
over 45 minutes. Census variables are measured by ZIP Code Tabulation Area which
we match to ZIP codes. To measure the economic characteristics of firms —i.e., the
number and size of establishments— in each ZIP code , we use data from ZIP Busi-
ness Patterns 2017 data. The average size of establishments is calculated as the total
employment divided by the number of establishments in each ZIP code.
       We measure the magnitude of the economic shock by county using data from the
Opportunity Insights Track the Recovery web site (Chetty, Friedman, Hendren and
Stepner, 2020). We focus on two main measures. First, we measure the four-week
change in unemployment claims by county as of April 11, 2020. This measure covers
  15
     Some nonbank lenders in the sample may not necessarily be traditional FinTechs (such as
Business Development Corporations), but most are.
  16
     Bank lending measured at the ZIP code level includes lending by credit unions, which are also
depository institutions like commercial banks.



                                               11
the last week before unemployment started rising until the peak level of unemploy-
ment claims nationally. Second, we measure the average of the daily count of COVID
cases by county in March. See Chetty et al. (2020) for more details on these measures.
       Summary Statistics by ZIP codes are shown in Table 1. The summary statics
weight all ZIP codes equally. Since we do not have loan amounts for all types of loans
— only those with a value below $150,000 — our analysis focuses on the number
of PPP loans rather than on their dollar amount.17 There are 134 PPP loans in a
given ZIP code, where median income about little under $60,000, only 17% of the
population commute at least 45 minutes per day to work, 83% is white, on average.
In a typical ZIP code with PPP loans, there are 4.5 branches with a higher standard
deviation though. Also, note that bank branch summary statistics are shown only
for ZIP codes with a non-zero number of branches. On average, total population in
a given ZIP code in our sample is about 4,500, with 231 establishments. These areas
also had 1% average COVID case rate and 3% unemployment growth.18



4        The Geography of Online and Nonbank Lending

Figure 1 shows the number of PPP loans by lender type over time. The X-axis of
this figure shows the approval date and the Y-axis shows the number of PPP loans
approved on each date by lender type. There is a gap between April 16, when PPP
Phase 1 ended, and April 27, when Phase 2 began.
       Media reporting during PPP Phase 1 suggested that smaller banks were better
able to process PPP loans than larger banks. The evidence in the upper panel of
this figure supports this view: During the initial weeks of PPP Phase 1, there were
  17
     Figure 6 shows the average loan size, as measured by self-reported jobs retained, for both types
of loans. On average, online banks and nonbanks originate smaller loans than traditional banks do.
  18
     Unemployment rates, which we can measure only at the county level, are not available every-
where.

                                                 12
more PPP loans arranged by small banks than by large ones.19 The difference shrank
towards the end of Phase 1, and by late Phase 2, large banks were responsible for
more PPP lending than small banks were.
       The lower panel of Figure 1 shows the fraction of PPP loans originated by online
banks and nonbanks. Overall, online banks were responsible for about 10% of PPP
loans and nonbanks for about 5%. The share of loans from these institutions was
higher during the later weeks of Phase 1, and particularly high towards the end of
Phase 2.20
       Before we present the geographic distribution of PPP loans by traditional and
Fintech lenders, we compare our measure of online lending to an independent measure
of interest in online PPP lending based on Google searches for online PPP lenders.
Specifically, we use Google Trends to calculate, at the state level, variation across
states in searches for the phrase “apply for ppp loan online” from March 1, 2020 to
July 10, 2020. States with few searches are excluded from the Google Trends data.21
Figure 2 shows the relationship between Google searches for online lending and our
measure of actual PPP loans, with missing states located at zero. The relationship
is positive and statistically significant whether or not we include states that have too
few searches to include.
       Next, we turn to the geographic distribution of relative PPP loan provision by
online banks and nonbanks. The specifications in Table 2 explore the geographic
correlates of PPP loan provision. Our first question is whether FinTech PPP loans
  19
      We believe that the unmatched banks in our sample are more likely to be community banks
than national banks, because community banks have names which are more difficult to match un-
ambiguously (e.g., “First Bank” and “Farmers and Merchants Bank” each refer to many possible
banks). Therefore, the difference between small and large banks may actually be understated in this
figure.
   20
      The share is highest of all in the first week of May, 2020, but this is not terribly meaningful
because of the low number of loans approved overall at this time.
   21
      The top state for online searches is Georgia. The largest FinTech lender in the sample is
Kabbage, Inc., which is based in Atlanta.


                                                 13
flowed unconditionally to the areas that needed it most in both periods, and PPP
lending is different for traditional banks versus online banks nonbank financial insti-
tutions. To measure which areas were most in need of PPP loans, we use county-level
variables collected by Chetty et al. (2020), the increase in unemployment claims rate
(between the months of March and April) and the average COVID-19 case rate. Our
other variables are measured at the ZIP code level. We control for the log number of
establishments by ZIP code to avoid a mechanical relationship between the number
of establishments and the number of loans. Regressions are run at the ZIP code-level
and estimates are weighted by total PPP loans by ZIP code. Robust standard errors
are reported. Our dependent variable is the log of total PPP loans by traditional
banks vs. nonbank/online lenders.
       During Phase 1, traditional banks did not provide PPP financing to the regions
with higher case rates or higher unemployment, as already found by Granja et al.
(2020). In fact, traditional banks provided fewer PPP loans to counties which needed
it more, along both measures. By contrast, online banks and nonbanks did provide
more loans to areas with a greater increase in unemployment during Phase 1. While
regions with a higher COVID-case rate did not get more PPP loans, they did not
not get less, either.22 During Phase 2, PPP loans flowed towards areas that needed
more assistance both from traditional banks and from online banks/online lenders.
Supporting the widely-reported problems with banks’ ability to provide PPP loans
to areas that needed it during Phase 1 of the program, these findings would seem to
indicate that online and nonbank lenders were better able to respond to local demand,
at least initially.
       Figure 3 is a county-level graph showing the fraction of PPP loans coming from
  22
    When we add more regional controls variables, the sign on the case rate becomes negative for
online lenders and remains negative for traditional banks. But for now, we are interested in the
unconditional relationship between case rate and PPP loan provision.


                                              14
each type of institution for the entire United States. Here, we consider a combination
of Phase 1 and Phase 2 loans. There are clear patterns visible in this figure. Major
metropolitan areas, such Atlanta, Miami, Houston and Chicago, as well as both
coasts, have a high fraction of their PPP loans originated both by nonbanks and by
online banks. Urban parts of New Mexico, Colorado and Arizona also have significant
nonbanks and online bank PPP loan origination.
   At a descriptive level, the national data on online and nonbank PPP lending sug-
gest that these sorts of loans are most common in areas that are already well-served
by the banking system: coasts and major metro areas. However, would these bor-
rowing patterns be similar at a more local level? To build intuition for these results,
we consider the geography of online and nonbank lending in the city of Chicago.
   Figure 4 shows the distribution of PPP loans for ZIP codes in Cook County, which
includes most of the Chicago metro population. We are interested in understanding
the distribution of online and nonbank loans in relation to demographic differences
in ZIP codes within the metropolitan area. As shown in the upper-left panel of this
figure, Cook County is characterized by large differences in income by ZIP code.
The North Shore is high-income and mostly white, as are the western parts of Cook
County. South Chicago has lower median incomes. Differences in income are sharp
across neighborhood boundaries.
   These differences manifest themselves in differences in the proportion of PPP
loans that come from online and nonbank lenders as opposed to from traditional
banks and credit unions. The next three panels of Figure 4 show the fraction of PPP
loans which we classify as coming from these categories. Businesses in the richer ZIP
codes of Chicago mostly get their loans from traditional banks and credit unions,
whereas the lower-income areas get a higher fraction of their loans from FinTechs
and nonbanks. We have created similar maps for other major metro areas and found

                                          15
similar patterns. Moreover, this relation between online/nonbank lending and ZIP
demographics is significant using linear regressions as well.
   One possible reason for local differences in online and nonbank PPP lending by
ZIP code is the variation in the location of traditional bank branches, a topic we now
turn to. ZIP codes with more bank branches are known to have more competitive
banking markets and hence better credit access. The relationship between bank
branches and online/nonbank lending is shown in Figure 5, which is a binscatter plot.
The left panel of this figure, labeled “National”, uses pooled ZIP code data from the
entire country. On the X axis, we show the average (log) bank branches per ZIP code,
where ZIP codes are grouped into vintiles and the logarithms are in base-10. The Y
axis shows the fraction of online and nonbank PPP loans for each vintile. Based on
the national patterns Figure 3, we should not be surprised to see that regions with
more bank branches also had a higher share of online and nonbank lending. Looking
across regions, relationship between bank branches and nonbank lending is generally
upward-sloping (although it is not perfectly linear).
   But when we look within-county, these patterns are reversed: counties with fewer
branches have a higher fraction online and nonbank loans. The right panel of Figure
5 conditions on county fixed effects and hence uses only within-county variation in
bank branches by ZIP code. Here, there is a clear negative relationship between
PPP lending and the fraction of nonbank and online loans. In other words, although
online banks and nonbank lenders have a larger presence in parts of the country with
more traditional banking, they disproportionately serve under-resourced areas when
we look within a county.
   We next turn to linear regressions to quantify this evidence and to distinguish
between the separate effects of bank branch location and demographic differences in
loan demand.

                                          16
5        Branch Distance and Nonbank/Online Lending

Do ZIP codes with fewer bank branches get more online and nonbank loans when we
control for local demographics? Table 3 shows how the PPP lending share varies -i.e.,
fraction of PPP lending by online banks, nonbanks, or banks- with the log number of
branches in each ZIP code. Columns 1-3 of this table show the relationship between
log bank branches with no controls other than county fixed effects.23 More bank
branches is, overall, associated with a lower online or nonbank share of PPP loans.
These coefficients decrease somewhat, but remain large, after controlling for local
demographic factors. We control for median income, the fraction of white population
in a ZIP code, and the fraction of population with a commute above 45 minutes. The
coefficients on these demographic variables also make sense given the findings so far.
Within a county, areas with lower incomes, longer commutes, and more non-white
people have a larger online and nonbank share of PPP loans.
       The distribution of firms may vary by ZIP code, leading to differences in firm
risk and potentially in demand for nonbank credit. To test how this might affect our
results, Table A1 in the Appendix shows results from similar specifications at the
loan level. Loan level specifications allow us to control for differences in borrower
characteristics. All the specifications in this table control for borrower industry, for
example. Since we use 6-digit NAICS industries, the NAICS industry likely proxies
for many types of borrower differences. We also add controls for average establishment
size and local demographics. Throughout, the effect of bank branches on the online
and nonbank share remains negative and statistically significant, and it does not
change much even after including NAICS6 fixed-effects.
       As also discussed above, the economic effects of the COVID-19 epidemic were
  23
    This variable is measured as log(1+bank branches) so that we can include ZIP codes with no
branches.


                                             17
unevenly distributed during the time period we study. As we show in Table 2 for two
phases separately, borrowers in areas with a worse shock are more likely to take PPP
loans. Next we explore whether the presence of local bank branches mediated the
shock. To answer this question, we again use data on the rise in unemployment at the
county level (between the months of March and April) and focus on its interaction
with the log bank branches.
       Table 4 starts with how unemployment affected total PPP lending and non-
bank/online lending over both phases of PPP together. In the average county, unem-
ployment claims per 100 people in the labor force grew by about 3 (from about 1 to
about 4), but the increase in the unemployment claims rate was unevenly distributed.
Counties where the unemployment rate grew by one point more had about 0.1 log
points higher PPP applications as well. These areas also had a higher share of PPP
coming from nonbanks and from online lenders, indicating that these types of lenders
effectively served areas with greater economic shocks.
       In Columns (2) and (4) of Table 4 we add county fixed effects to study how the
economic shocks differentially affected ZIP codes within counties, depending on how
many bank branches they had. Overall, in areas with fewer bank branches, the effect
of the shock on the fraction of nonbank and online lending was larger. Indeed, adding
the unemployment-by-branches interaction term drives out the main effect of bank
branches, indicating that having branches in itself does not lead to more online PPP
loans absent an economic shock.24
       The statistics so far have provided evidence that in lower-income areas and in
areas with fewer banks, more borrowers turned to online and nonbank loans for their
  24
    Appendix Table A2 repeats the findings in Table 4 using a different measure of the economic
shock — the average COVID-19 case rate during the month of March. The results in this table
confirm the findings in Table 4, but are somewhat noisier, and not all the estimates are statistically
significant.



                                                 18
PPP. But, we are also interested in directly answering the question of whether firms
with less ex ante exposure to the formal banking system were more likely to turn to
these types of lenders.
   To measure exposure to the formal banking system, we measure pre-COVID bank-
ing system access at the industry level. To do this, we use SBA data on the 7(a)
program from the years 2018 and 2019. The 7(a) program is the main lending pro-
gram that the SBA uses to support small businesses. Since it is administered through
the same types of institutions as the PPP program, firms in industries which previ-
ously used 7(a) loans are likely to have ex ante banking relationships. Therefore,
we measure which industries disproportionately got PPP loans relative to how many
SBA loans they previously used. Small businesses in industries which demanded
many PPP loans, but previously had few SBA 7(a) loans, are unlikely to have strong
relationships with banks. On the other hand, small businesses in industries where
SBA 7(a) loans are common are more likely to have a formal banking relationship.
Therefore, we measure the log ratio of PPP loans in the sample relative to SBA 7(a)
loans from the previous two years. We construct this measure at the 6-digit NAICS
industry level.
   These estimates are shown in Table 5. As shown in Columns (1) and (3) of this
table, businesses in industries with a higher PPP demand shock relative to the SBA
7(a) lending quantity were more likely to go online or turn to nonbanks. Differences in
industry exposure to COVID could potentially affect their demand for PPP loans. To
control for this, we add fixed effects at the NAICS 2-digit level and study differences
in loan demand within these category. NAICS 2-digit codes control for broad industry
groupings, such as retail stores, wholesale trade, etc., which partially control for direct
industry exposure to the COVID shock. When we add these controls, the coefficients
on the SBA loan access measure increase and remain highly statistically significant.

                                            19
   These results show that banks base their lending on past relationships and con-
strain themselves around their branches. FinTech lenders do not have geographic
constraints based on the presence of loan officers or physical bank branches. De-
spite this, there are a few reasons to think that relationships, or something akin to
relationships, might matter for FinTechs. First, borrowers might not know about
the possibility of getting a PPP loan through an online bank unless they have done
it before. Therefore, areas with many FinTech borrowers in the past might be dis-
proportinately served by FinTech lenders during the PPP program. Second, small
businesses might use online banks for other types of financial services, such as de-
posits or credit cards. Such borrowers might also trust the same firms to supply PPP
loans for them. In both cases, we would expect areas with a large historical FinTech
presence to have more PPP loans as well.
   To understand whether “relationships” matter for FinTechs, we measure how
many SBA 7(a) loans came from FinTechs in the years before the COVID crisis
and ask whether this is associated with borrowers getting PPP loans from FinTechs
as well. To do this, we match lender names from the 7(a) program to the classifica-
tion which we create for the PPP program. Less than 2% of 7(a) loans made from
2014-2018 come from lenders which did not make PPP loans, and which we therefore
do not classify. Among 7(a) loans we do classify, about 5% come from online banks
and about 1.5% come from nonbank lenders. Many of the most important nonbank
FinTech lenders, such as Kabbage, Inc., have no history of originating 7(a) loans at
all. There is substantial heterogeneity by ZIP code in terms of the share of loans
coming from FinTech lenders.
   The estimates in Table 6 show the relationship between the share of 7(a) loans
in each ZIP code coming from FinTech lenders and the share of PPP loans coming
from them. We find that geographic persistence matters for FinTech lenders, but

                                         20
it is not the only important factor. On the one hand, the estimated effect of 7(a)
lending from FinTechs on the online share of PPP loans is statistically significant
at the 1% level and the coefficient increases in magnitude in estimates that include
control variables. On the other hand, the point estimate is economically very small
– 0.018 without controls and 0.023 including controls. The coefficients on log bank
branches are not driven out when we include the FinTech fraction of 7(a) loans as
a control variable; the estimates here are only slightly smaller than the estimates in
Table 3. Finally, there is no estimated relationship between the share of 7(a) loans
from FinTech lenders and the share of PPP loans from nonbank lenders, probably
because nonbank lenders do not play an important role in the 7(a) program.
    Overall, we find that geography matters more for traditional banks than for Fin-
Tech lenders. While FinTech lenders do provide PPP loans in areas that they have
lent in the past, this effect is not strong. Rather, they focus on facilitating transac-
tions for any borrower.



6     Predicting Traditional Banks’ PPP Provision

What explains why areas with more bank branches have a lower share of online PPP
loans? We can think of at least two ways of explaining these findings. First, banks
might lend to borrowers only in the region where their branches are located, whereas
online and nonbank lenders might lend everywhere. Therefore, differences in where
banks are willing to lend could mechanically change the fraction of all loans coming
from online banks/nonbanks even as the level of PPP loans from online/nonbank
lenders is the same everywhere.
    Second, if banks are unwilling to lend far from their branches, borrowers could
substitute between banks and nonbanks or online banks. Moreover, banks’ unwilling-


                                          21
ness to lend to borrowers far away could have increased due to the COVID-19 shock.
As Granja, Leuz and Rajan (2018) find, lending distance for small business loans
is cyclical, with the distance decreasing significantly during crises. This substitution
would lead to a change in the number of PPP loans per business, as well as the change
in fraction, which we observed. On the other hand, if borrowers perfectly substitute
between banks and non-banks, then in principal it is possible that a reduction in bank
lending would not lead to an overall reduction in the provision of PPP loans.25
       According to widespread news reports around the time of Phase 1 of PPP, some
banks were able to handle the surge in PPP demand much better than others. We
exploit these differences and create a measure of predicted bank responsiveness that
will allow us to distinguish the possible explanations for our findings. The advantage
of measuring predicted responsiveness, rather than realized responsiveness, is that
the realized level of responsiveness of local banks may be a function of the magnitude
of the COVID shock in each region, which may also have direct effects on the types
of PPP loans that borrowers choose. By predicting banks’ responsiveness based on
their national lending patterns, we hope to create a measure of traditional bank PPP
lending that is independent of the number of COVID-19 cases.
       Our bank PPP lending measure is created in two steps. First, we measure PPP
loans per bank branch (PPP loans divided by the number of bank branches) at the
bank level nationally. We calculate this measure separately for each bank and each
county, dropping each county’s own branches and loans in order to create a “leave-one-
out” measure. In this way, we create a measure akin to a shift-share shock (Bartik,
1991), where we quantify the degree of responsiveness, at the bank level, to the PPP
  25
     A third possible reason is that borrower characteristics vary across regions. For example, maybe
high-tech firms are more likely to be located in areas far from bank branches. Since the estimates
did not change in Table A1 when borrower industry fixed effects were included, we do not believe
this explanation is as likely as the others.



                                                 22
program. In the second step, we calculate the average responsiveness by ZIP code
of banks located there. This yields a prediction for the amount of PPP lending that
will take place in each ZIP code. We take the log of this measure to calculate the log
predicted number of PPP loans by ZIP code.26
       As noted, the purpose of measuring PPP responsiveness using bank characteristics
is to predict PPP lending independent of the magnitude of the COVID-19 shock.
Table A3 in the Appendix verifies that the predicted lending measure is independent of
our two proxies for the size of the COVID shock — the increase in the unemployment
claims rate from March 15 to April 11, and the average COVID case rate in March.
Ideally, we would measure these variables at the ZIP code level and use specifications
with county fixed effects. Since these variables are only available at the county level,
this table uses Commuting Zone fixed effects instead. We also include specifications
which control for the number of bank branches per ZIP code, since the degree of bank
competition could be correlated with unemployment and also affect banks’ degree of
responsiveness.
       An implicit assumption of this approach is that banks are more likely to make
PPP loans in ZIP codes where their branches are located. Table A4 of the Appendix
shows that this is true. Column 1 shows the results of bank-by-ZIP code level speci-
fications for each ZIP code where banks have branches. We also show results from a
specification with ZIP code fixed effects in Column 2. The large positive coefficient
in this column means that, within ZIP code, banks with more branches originate
more PPP loans. Finally, Column 3 adds bank fixed effects, so the results are driven
by within-bank, cross-ZIP code variation. The coefficient does not vary much across
columns.
  26
    Since this variable is only available in ZIP codes with bank branches, estimates using predicted
loan amounts will have about half as many observations as the previous tables.



                                                23
       Next, we verify that in ZIP codes with more responsive banks, more PPP lending
is provided overall. These results are shown in Appendix Table A5. Throughout,
we control for the total number of bank branches. The variable of interest is labeled
“Predicted Loans” and it measures the log predicted number of PPP loans by ZIP
code. To reduce the influence on our measure of online lenders which have many loans
per branch, we include Winsorized versions of the measure. The coefficients on the
Winsorized measures are larger than the un-Winsorized ones, as we expect. Therefore,
we use the predicted PPP measure that is Winsorized at the 95th percentile.27
       If online banks and nonbank loans fully compensated for a lack of bank loans in
a ZIP code, then predicted bank PPP lending would not affect overall PPP lending.
The estimates in Table A5 show that predicted bank PPP lending does impact overall
PPP lending, however, so these online/nonbank loans are not perfect substitutes for
bank loans.
       Table 7 shows the effect of predicted PPP bank lending on the fraction of loans
from online and nonbank lenders. ZIP codes with more responsive banks have a
lower fraction of loans from online banks and nonbanks. This holds with and without
county fixed effects, and including ZIP code level demographic controls.
       As discussed at the beginning of this section, if a ZIP code has banks that do
more PPP lending, that would lead to a lower fraction of online and nonbank loans
even if the number of these loans is unchanged. To understand whether bank PPP
lending affects the number of nonbank/online PPP loans, we estimate regressions
with nonbank/online lending is the dependent variable. We scale PPP lending by the
number of establishments in each ZIP code.
  27
     Columns 2, 4 and 6 of Table A5 add county fixed effects. County fixed effects reduce the effect
of the shift share measure (predicted loans), although it still remains highly statistically significant.
A likely explanation for this decline in economic significance is that there are spillovers between ZIP
codes within county: If one ZIP code has banks that are more responsive, they might provide PPP
loans to a neighboring ZIP code with less responsive banks.


                                                   24
    These results are shown in Table 8. In ZIP codes where local banks are predicted
to make more PPP loans, there is less online/nonbank PPP lending per establishment.
Both online and nonbank lending respond to the predicted amount of traditional bank
PPP lending and the coefficients are of similar magnitude. This finding provides
evidence that borrowers partially substitute for nonbank and online lenders when
banks do not provide financial services they require.



7     Conclusion

This papers studies whether online and nonbank lenders provide access to financial
services for regions and borrowers that are not served by the traditional banking
system. When we compare different regions of the country, online banks and nonbank
lenders are concentrated in coastal areas and cities — regions that have better access
to banks and better access to financial services.
    Within counties, online banks and nonbanks disproportionately serve industries
and ZIP codes with less access to traditional finance. ZIP codes with fewer bank
branches and a lower median income get more of their PPP loans from these types of
new lenders. Across industries, firms in industry codes who previously got fewer SBA
loans were more likely to get their PPP loans from online banks and nonbank lenders.
Finally, we show that in ZIP codes where lenders did not do much PPP origination,
local small businesses turned to online banks and nonbanks instead.
    We have focused on online banks and nonbank lenders which do not engage in
traditional banking. But traditional banks may also use technology-enabled credit
scoring or loan application mechanisms. Whether they do so in a different way than
specialized FinTech lenders is a fruitful area for future research.




                                           25
References
Abrams, Eliot, “Assessing Bank Deposit Market Power Given Limited Consumer
 Consideration,” 2019. University of Chicago Working Paper.

Balyuk, Tetyana, Allen Berger, and John Hackney, “What is Fueling Fin-
 Tech Lending? The Role of Banking Market Structure,” 2020. Emory University
 Working Paper.

Banerjee, Abhijit and Esther Duflo, “Do Firms Want to Borrow More? Test-
 ing Credit Constraints Using a Directed Lending Program,” Review of Economic
 Studies, 2014, 81, 572–607.

Barrios, John, Michael Minnis, William Minnis, and Joost Sijthoff, “As-
 sessing the Payroll Protection Program: A Framework and Preliminary Results,”
 2020. University of Chicago Working paper.

Bartik, Alexander W, Marianne Bertrand, Zoë B Cullen, Edward L
 Glaeser, Michael Luca, and Christopher T Stanton, “How are small busi-
 nesses adjusting to covid-19? early evidence from a survey,” Technical Report,
 National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Bartik, Timothy J, “Who benefits from state and local economic development
 policies?,” 1991.

Berlin, Mitchell, Greg Nini, and Edison Yu, “Concentration of Control Rights
 in Leveraged Loan Syndicates,” 2018. Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Work-
 ing Paper.

Biswas, Swarnava, Neslihan Ozkan, and Junyang Yin, “Real Effects of Non-
  bank Lending,” 2018. University of Bristol Working Paper.

Buchak, Greg, Gregor Matvos, Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit Seru, “Fin-
 tech, regulatory arbitrage, and the rise of shadow banks,” Journal of Financial
 Economics, 2018, 130, 453–483.

Butler, Alexander, Jess Cornaggia, and Umit Gurun, “Do Local Capital Mar-
 ket Conditions Affect Consumers’ Borrowing Decisions?,” Management Science,
 2016, 63, 3999–4446.

Carlin, Bruce, Arna Olafsson, and Michaela Pagel, “FinTech and Consumer
 Well-Being in the Information Age,” 2020. UCLA Working Paper.

Chernenko, Sergey, Isil Erel, and Robert Prilmeier, “Nonbank Lending,” 2019.
 NBER Working Paper.


                                      26
Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, and Michael Stepner,
 “How did covid-19 and stabilization policies affect spending and employment? a
 new real-time economic tracker based on private sector data,” Technical Report,
 National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.
Claire, Lelarge, David Sraer, and David Thesmar, Entrepreneurship and Credit
  Constraints Evidence from a French Loan Guarantee Program 2010. NBER Working
  Paper.
Cole, Rebel, Douglas Cumming, and Jon Taylor, “Does FinTech Compete
 with or Complement Bank Finance?,” 2019. Working paper.
Cororaton, Anna and Samuel Rosen, “Public Firm Borrowers of the US Paycheck
 Protection Program,” 2020. SMU Working Paper.
Cortes, Kristle, Yuliya Demyanyk, Lei Li, Elena Loutskina, and Philip
 Strahan, “Stress Tests and Small Business Lending,” Journal of Financial Eco-
 nomics, 2020, 136, 260–279.
Davydiuk, Tetiana, Tatyana Marchuk, and Samuel Rosen, “Direct Lending
 in the U.S. Middle Market,” 2020. Carnegie Mellon University Working Paper.
de Roure, Calebe, Loriana Pelizzon, and Anjan Thakor, “P2P lenders ver-
  sus banks: Cream skimming or bottom fishing?,” 2018. Washington University
  Working Paper.
Fahlenbrach, Rüdiger, Kevin Rageth, and René M Stulz, “How valuable
  is financial flexibility when revenue stops? Evidence from the Covid-19 crisis,”
  Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.
Falato, Antonio, Itay Goldstein, and Ali Hortaçsu, “Financial Fragility in the
  COVID-19 Crisis: The Case of Investment Funds in Corporate Bond Markets,”
  Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.
Fuster, A., M. Plosser, P. Schnabl, and J. Vickery, “The role of technology in
  mortgage lending,” Review of Financial Studies, 2019, 32, 1854–1899.
Gopal, Manasa and Philipp Schnabl, “The Rise of Finance Companies and
 FinTech Lenders in Small Business Lending,” 2020. New York University Working
 Paper.
Granja, Joao, Christian Leuz, and Raghuram Rajan, “Going the Extra Mile:
 Distant Lending and Credit Cycles,” NBER Working Paper 2018.
  , Christos Makridis, Constantine Yannelis, and Eric Zwick, “Did the Pay-
  check Protection Program Hit the Target?,” 2020. University of Chicago Working
  Paper.

                                       27
Green, Daniel and Erik Loualiche, “Local Government Finances and Balanced
 Budgets in the COVID-19 Crisis,” Available at SSRN 3651605, 2020.
Halling, Michael, Jin Yu, and Josef Zechner, “How Did COVID-19 Affect
 Firms’ Access to Public Capital Markets?,” The Review of Corporate Finance Stud-
 ies, 2020.
Hamilton, Steven and Stan Veuger, “How to Help American Businesses En-
 dure and Jobs Survive,” Technical Report, George Washington University Working
 Paper 2020.
Hanson, Samuel G., Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy C. Stein, and Robert W.
 Vishny, “Banks as patient fixed-income investors,” Journal of Financial Eco-
 nomics, 2015, 117, 449–469.
Irani, Rustom, Rajkamal Iyer, Ralf Meisenzahl, and Jose-Luis Peydro,
  “The Rise of Shadow Banking: Evidence from Capital Regulation,” 2020. Working
  Paper.
Ivashina, Victoria and Zheng Sun, “Institutional demand pressure and the cost
  of corporate loans,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2011, 99, 500–522.
Jiang, Wei, Kai Li, and Pei Shao, “When shareholders are creditors: Effects of the
  simultaneous holding of equity and debt by non-commercial banking institutions,”
  Review of Financial Studies, 2010, 23, 3595–3637.
Li, Lei, Phil Strahan, and Song Zhang, “Banks as Lenders of First Resort:
  Evidence from the COVID-19 Crisis,” Review of Corporate Finance Studies, 2020.
  forthcoming.
Liebersohn, Jack, “Are Retail Banking Markets Still Local? Quasi-Experimental
  Evidence from Bank Mergers,” 2020. Ohio State University Working Paper.
Lim, Jongha, Bernadette A. Minton, and Michael S. Weisbach, “Syndi-
  cated loan spreads and the composition of the syndicate,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, 2014, pp. 45–69.
Maggio, Marco Di and Vincent Yao, “FinTech borrowers: Lax-Screening or
 cream-skimming?,” 2018. HBS Working Paper.
Manson, Steven, Jonathan Schroeder, David Van Riper, and Steven Rug-
 gles, “IPUMS National Historical Geographic Information System: Version 12.0
 [Database],” Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 2017, 39.
Massoud, Nadia, Debarshi Nandy, Anthony Saunders, and Keke Song, “Do
 hedge funds trade on private information? Evidence from syndicated lending and
 short-selling,” , Journal of Financial Economics, 2011, 99, 477–499.

                                       28
Morse, Adair, “Peer-to-Peer Crowdfunding: Information and the Potential for Dis-
 ruption in Consumer Lending,” Annual Review of Financial Economics, 2015, 7,
 463–482.

Nadauld, Taylor D. and Michael S. Weisbach, “Did securitization affect the
 cost of corporate debt?,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2012, 105, 332–352.

Pastor, Lubos and M Blair Vorsatz, “Mutual fund performance and flows during
 the COVID-19 crisis,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research
 2020.

Philippon, Thomas, “Has the US Finance Industry Become Less Efficient? On
 the Theory and Measurement of Financial Intermediation,” American Economic
 Review, 2015, 105, 1408–1438.

Stulz, Rene, “FinTech, BigTech, and the Future of Banks,” Journal of Applied
  Corporate Finance, 2019, 31, 86–97.

Tang, H., “Peer-to-Peer Lenders versus Banks: Substitutes or Complements?,” The
  Review of Financial Studies, 2019, 32, 1900–1938.

Vallee, B. and Y. Zeng, “Marketplace lending: A new banking paradigm?,” Review
 of Financial Studies, 2019, 32, 1939–1982.

Yanofsky, David, “Here’s what we know is wrong with the PPP data,” 2020.




                                      29
8                      Figures

                                   PPP Origination by Bank Type, Daily
    Number of PPP (100,000's)
       0 1 2 3 4 5




                01apr2020           08apr2020         15apr2020              22apr2020       29apr2020    06may2020
                                                                      date

                                                Small Banks (<20bn)                 Large Banks (>20bn)
                                                Nonbank                             Online Bank
    .05 .1 .15 .2
      Fraction
                0




                01apr2020           08apr2020         15apr2020              22apr2020       29apr2020    06may2020
                                                                      date

                                                          Nonbanks                 Online Banks




                                Figure 1: PPP Lending by Day and Type of Institution.




                                                                  30
                                  .15
Frac of PPP Loans Online in State
       .05        0 .1




                                        0                 20               40             60                       80              100
                                                                         Google Search Intensity
                                        Source: Google Trends. Searches for ''apply ppp loan online'' from 3/1/20 to 7/10/20.
                                        Each circle represents a state. Weighted by the total number of PPP loans in each state.



                                                Figure 2: Google Searches for Online PPP Loans.




                                                                                  31
             Online Bank




                                           11.9 − 100.0
                                           7.7 − 11.9
                                           5.2 − 7.7
                                           3.4 − 5.2
                                           1.6 − 3.4
                                           0.0 − 1.6
                                           No data

              Non-Bank




                                          11.93 − 66.67
                                          7.66 − 11.93
                                          5.15 − 7.66
                                          3.38 − 5.15
                                          1.63 − 3.38
                                          0.00 − 1.63
                                          No data


Figure 3: PPP Lending by Category, U.S.




                  32
               Median Income                                    Non-Bank




98,358 − 212,750                                26.40 − 50.00
80,282 − 98,358                                 19.64 − 26.40
65,590 − 80,282                                 16.67 − 19.64
56,239 − 65,590                                 13.68 − 16.67
44,150 − 56,239                                 10.23 − 13.68
20,991 − 44,150                                 0.00 − 10.23
                Online Bank                               Traditional Bank/CU




26.4 − 100.0                                    84.9 − 100.0
19.6 − 26.4                                     79.8 − 84.9
16.7 − 19.6                                     76.2 − 79.8
13.7 − 16.7                                     71.8 − 76.2
10.2 − 13.7                                     57.0 − 71.8
0.0 − 10.2                                      0.0 − 57.0


                              Figure 4: Lending in Chicago.


                                           33
                                                      PPP Loans and Log Bank Branches
                                                        National                                                                         Within-County
                    .18




                                                                                                           .18
 Fraction Nonbank and Online Bk PPP Loans




                                                                                        Fraction Nonbank and Online Bk PPP Loans
                                  .17




                                                                                                                         .17
                        .16




                                                                                                               .16
               .15




                                                                                                      .15
     .14




                                                                                            .14
                    .13




                                                                                                           .13




                                            0         .5           1         1.5                                                   0       .5           1         1.5
                                                  Log Bank Branches in ZIP                                                             Log Bank Branches in ZIP

Source: Calculated from FDIC Summary of Deposits and SBA PPP Database.
Weighted by PPP loans per Zip code.



                                                Figure 5: Lending Share and Log Bank Branches.




                                                                                   34
9    Tables

                        Table 1: Summary Statistics by ZIP Code


                          Mean      St. Dev    5th Pctile   Median      95th Pctile   Count
 Frac Nonbank           0.04          0.10        0.00         0.00         0.17      35,703
 Frac Online Bk         0.08          0.13        0.00         0.04         0.28      35,703
 Frac Bk/CU             0.88          0.17        0.57         0.92         1.00      35,703
 Num. PPP Lns          133.66        246.54      1.00         25.00       638.00      36,552
 Median Income       59,480.96     25,251.78   30,231.00    54,301.00   106,842.00    29,949
 Frac. 45m+ Commute     0.17          0.12       0.02          0.15        0.40       31,115
 Frac. White            0.83          0.20        0.38         0.92         0.99      31,423
 Total Pop            4,569.32      6,747.11     50.00       1,313.00    19,268.00    31,487
 Num. Bk Branches       4.53          4.90        1.00         3.00        15.00      19,398
 Avg COVID Case Rate    0.01          0.02        0.00         0.00         0.02      35,628
 Unemp. Growth          2.94          1.78        1.14         2.63         5.98      17,111
 Num. Estabs           230.62        404.12       4.00        45.00      1,072.00     33,883
 Bank branches are for ZIP codes that have at least one branch. Unemployment data is not
available for all regions. Source: Calculated from SBA PPP database, FDIC SOD, Decennial
Census/ACS, County Business Patterns.




                                      35
                Table 2: Geographic Correlates of PPP Provision

                                (1)             (2)         (3)           (4)
                             Log PPP        Log PPP       Log PPP      Log PPP
                             Trad. Bk     Online/Non-bk   Trad. Bk   Online/Non-bk
                             Phase 1         Phase 1      Phase 2       Phase 2

 Avg Case Rate                -3.18∗∗∗          -0.40     1.02∗∗∗       4.52∗∗∗
                               (0.21)          (0.25)     (0.085)       (0.17)
 Change in Unemployment      -0.075∗∗∗        0.078∗∗∗    0.041∗∗∗      0.12∗∗∗
                             (0.0060)         (0.0084)    (0.0031)     (0.0082)
 Log Establishments           0.92∗∗∗         1.03∗∗∗      1.03∗∗∗      1.07∗∗∗
                             (0.0068)         (0.014)     (0.0038)     (0.0076)
 Constant                     -1.28∗∗∗        -4.88∗∗∗    -1.62∗∗∗     -3.68∗∗∗
                              (0.042)         (0.091)     (0.023)      (0.047)
 Observations                 14113            7039        15154        10760
 R2                           0.737            0.552       0.887        0.746
 ZIP code level specifications showing the relationship between COVID-19 shock
and the degree of PPP origination, for traditional banks and for nonbank/online
lenders. Robust standard errors. Estimates are weighted by PPP loans per ZIP
code. Data calculated from Chetty et al. (2020) and SBA PPP loan data.




                                         36
                 Table 3: Number of Branches in the ZIP Code and PPP Lending Shares

                                (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)
                               Online      Nonbank       Bank       Online      Nonbank       Bank
                                PPP          PPP          PPP        PPP          PPP          PPP
                              Fraction     Fraction     Fraction   Fraction     Fraction     Fraction

      Log Branches           -0.0042∗∗∗   -0.0075∗∗∗    0.012∗∗∗ -0.0028∗∗∗    -0.0053∗∗∗   0.0082∗∗∗
                             (0.00047)    (0.00038)    (0.00075) (0.00048)     (0.00035)    (0.00072)
      Log Med. Inc                                                 -0.0036∗    -0.00069      0.0043
                                                                   (0.0020)    (0.0014)     (0.0031)
      Frac Commute 45+m                                            0.064∗∗∗    0.068∗∗∗     -0.13∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.0081)    (0.0055)     (0.012)
37




      Frac White                                                   -0.053∗∗∗   -0.071∗∗∗     0.12∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.0047)    (0.0036)     (0.0076)
      Constant                0.11∗∗∗      0.068∗∗∗     0.82∗∗∗    0.18∗∗∗      0.11∗∗∗      0.71∗∗∗
                             (0.00095)    (0.00081)    (0.0016)    (0.020)      (0.013)      (0.030)
      Observations             34999        34999       34999       29456        29456       29456
      R2                       0.641        0.572       0.662       0.669        0.648       0.712
      County FEs                 X            X           X           X            X           X
      ZIP code level specifications showing the relationship between the share of online/nonbank
     PPP lendincg and ZIP code level statistics, including the log number of bank branches. Robust
     standard errors. Estimates are weighted by PPP loans per ZIP code. Data calculated from
     Chetty et al. (2020) and SBA PPP loan data.
     Table 4: Increases in County Unemployment and PPP Origination

                                    (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)
                                 Nonbank     Nonbank      Online      Online
                                   PPP         PPP         PPP         PPP
                                 Fraction    Fraction    Fraction    Fraction

 Unemp. Chg                      0.0069∗∗∗               0.012∗∗∗
                                 (0.0015)                (0.0019)
 Log Branches                                -0.00075                0.0047
                                             (0.0054)               (0.0054)
 Unemp. Chg × Log Branches                   -0.0046∗∗              -0.0047∗∗∗
                                             (0.0018)                (0.0015)
 Constant                        0.034∗∗∗    0.071∗∗∗    0.079∗∗∗    0.13∗∗∗
                                 (0.0047)    (0.0021)    (0.0063)   (0.0024)
 Observations                     16743       16743       16743       16743
 R2                               0.075       0.581       0.087       0.660
 County FEs                                     X                       X
 ZIP code level specifications showing the relationship between the share of
online/nonbank PPP lendincg and ZIP code level statistics interacted with the
change in unemployment. Robust standard errors. Estimates are weighted by
PPP loans per ZIP code. Data calculated from the FDIC Summary of Deposits
database and SBA PPP loan data.




                                     38
            Table 5: Industry Differences in 7(a) Lending

                          (1)            (2)        (3)         (4)
                         Online         Online   Nonbank     Nonbank
                          PPP            PPP      PPP         PPP
                         Loan           Loan      Loan        Loan

 Log(PPP/SBA 7a)        0.011∗∗∗     0.016∗∗∗    0.0045∗∗∗   0.0064∗∗∗
                       (0.00028)    (0.00033)    (0.00020)   (0.00024)
 Constant              0.063∗∗∗     0.045∗∗∗      0.040∗∗∗    0.032∗∗∗
                       (0.0011)     (0.0014)     (0.00081)   (0.00097)
 Observations          3929813      3929813      3929813     3929813
 R2                     0.056        0.066        0.043       0.058
 Zip FEs                  X            X            X           X
 NAICS2 FEs                            X                        X
 Industry-level specification showing the relationship between the on-
line share of PPP lending and overall industry use of PPP relative
to ex ante industry SBA 7(a) loans. Data calculated from SBA 7(a)
and PPP data.




                                   39
Table 6: Online/Nonbank PPP Lending and Previous Nonbank/Online
7(a) Lending

                            (1)             (2)         (3)          (4)
                           Online         Nonbank      Online      Nonbank
                            PPP             PPP         PPP          PPP
                          Fraction        Fraction    Fraction     Fraction

 7(a) Share               0.018∗∗∗         -0.0023   0.023∗∗∗      0.0028
                          (0.0046)        (0.0034)   (0.0045)     (0.0030)
 Log Med. Inc                                        -0.0039∗     -0.00062
                                                     (0.0022)     (0.0014)
 Frac Commute 45+m                                   0.069∗∗∗     0.073∗∗∗
                                                     (0.0090)     (0.0061)
 Frac White                                          -0.052∗∗∗    -0.071∗∗∗
                                                     (0.0049)     (0.0038)
 Log Branches                                        -0.0032∗∗∗   -0.0056∗∗∗
                                                     (0.00052)    (0.00039)
 Constant                 0.10∗∗∗      0.055∗∗∗       0.18∗∗∗      0.11∗∗∗
                         (0.00052)    (0.00040)       (0.021)      (0.014)
 Observations              20394           20394       19346        19346
 R2                        0.701           0.597       0.726        0.684
 County FEs                  X               X           X            X
 ZIP-level specification showing the relationship between the fraction of
loans from nonbank and online bank lenders, and the fraction of 7(a)
loans from such lenders between 2014-2018. Data calculated from SBA
7(a) and PPP data.




                                     40
Table 7: Effect of Predicted Bank PPP on Online/Nonbank PPP Shares

                            (1)               (2)         (3)          (4)
                           Online            Online     Nonbank      Nonbank
                            PPP               PPP         PPP          PPP
                          Fraction          Fraction    Fraction     Fraction

 Predicted PPP           -0.016∗∗∗     -0.0078∗∗∗      -0.014∗∗∗    -0.0066∗∗∗
                         (0.0019)       (0.0017)       (0.0012)      (0.0013)
 Log Med. Inc.            0.020∗∗∗         -0.0049∗∗   -0.0031∗∗     -0.0013
                          (0.0020)         (0.0021)    (0.0012)     (0.0015)
 Frac Commute 45+m         0.14∗∗∗         0.056∗∗∗     0.10∗∗∗     0.064∗∗∗
                          (0.0079)         (0.0094)    (0.0045)     (0.0063)
 Frac White               -0.11∗∗∗         -0.041∗∗∗   -0.064∗∗∗    -0.063∗∗∗
                          (0.0043)         (0.0051)    (0.0033)     (0.0040)
 Bk Branches             -0.0065∗∗∗    -0.0088∗∗∗      -0.0067∗∗∗   -0.0099∗∗∗
                          (0.0011)     (0.00079)       (0.00075)    (0.00064)
 Log Pop                  0.019∗∗∗          0.013∗∗∗    0.012∗∗∗    0.0086∗∗∗
                         (0.00091)         (0.00066)   (0.00060)    (0.00060)
 Constant                 -0.17∗∗∗          0.11∗∗∗    0.069∗∗∗     0.070∗∗∗
                          (0.020)           (0.023)    (0.012)      (0.015)
 Observations              15479            15479        15479        15479
 R2                        0.311            0.763        0.295        0.725
 County FEs                                   X                         X
 ZIP code level specifications showing the relationship between the share
of PPP lending from online banks/nonbanks, and the predicted level of
PPP lending based on banks’ overall degree of PPP lending. Robust
standard errors. Estimates are weighted by PPP loans per ZIP code.
Data calculated from the ZIP business patterns and SBA PPP loan data.




                                      41
      Table 8: Effect of Predicted Bank PPP on Total PPP Per Establishment

                             (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)
                         Online PPP/      Online PPP/     Nonbank PPP/     Nonbank PPP/
                        Establishments   Establishments   Establishments   Establishments

 Predicted PPP             -0.0021        -0.0043∗∗∗       -0.0038∗∗∗       -0.0038∗∗∗
                          (0.0013)         (0.0015)        (0.00089)         (0.0011)
 Log Med. Inc.            0.018∗∗∗         0.012∗∗∗          0.00037         0.0074∗∗∗
                          (0.0014)         (0.0018)         (0.00086)        (0.0012)
 Frac Commute 45+m         0.10∗∗∗         0.063∗∗∗         0.076∗∗∗         0.057∗∗∗
                          (0.0055)         (0.0085)         (0.0032)         (0.0054)
 Frac White               -0.061∗∗∗        -0.031∗∗∗        -0.037∗∗∗        -0.045∗∗∗
                          (0.0030)         (0.0048)         (0.0023)         (0.0036)
 Bk Branches             -0.0076∗∗∗       -0.010∗∗∗        -0.0061∗∗∗       -0.0087∗∗∗
                         (0.00079)        (0.00071)        (0.00053)        (0.00052)
 Log Pop                   0.013∗∗∗       0.0099∗∗∗         0.0084∗∗∗        0.0065∗∗∗
                          (0.00062)       (0.00060)         (0.00041)        (0.00044)
 Constant                  -0.21∗∗∗        -0.11∗∗∗          -0.0064         -0.052∗∗∗
                           (0.014)         (0.019)          (0.0079)          (0.012)
 Observations              15370              15370          15370            15370
 R2                        0.266              0.662          0.237            0.633
 County FEs                                     X                               X
 ZIP code level specifications showing the relationship between the share of PPP
lending per establishment and the predicted level of PPP lending based on banks’
overall degree of PPP lending. Robust standard errors. Estimates are weighted
by establishments per ZIP code. Weighting by PPP loans per ZIP code or using
log(PPP/Establishments) as a dependent variable yields similar results. Data calcu-
lated from ZIP business patterns and SBA PPP loan data.




                                         42
A   Appendix


              15
     mean of jobsretained
     5        0       10




                            Traditional Bank/CU   Non-bank          Online Bank


                            Figure 6: Average PPP Jobs by Institution Type.




                                                  43
     Table A1: Bank Branch Density and Fraction of Online/Nonbank Loans, Loan Level Estimates

                                (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
                              Nonbank      Nonbank       Online       Online     Trad. Bk    Trad. Bk
                               PPP          PPP           PPP          PPP         PPP         PPP
                               Loan         Loan         Loan         Loan         Loan        Loan

      Log Bk Branches        -0.0084∗∗∗   -0.0073∗∗∗   -0.0071∗∗∗   -0.0066∗∗∗    0.016∗∗∗    0.014∗∗∗
                             (0.00049)    (0.00046)    (0.00059)    (0.00051)    (0.00095)   (0.00082)
      Frac White              -0.073∗∗∗   -0.065∗∗∗    -0.057∗∗∗    -0.047∗∗∗     0.13∗∗∗     0.11∗∗∗
                              (0.0028)    (0.0026)     (0.0033)     (0.0027)     (0.0055)    (0.0046)
      Frac Commute 45+m       0.050∗∗∗    0.047∗∗∗     0.039∗∗∗     0.031∗∗∗     -0.089∗∗∗   -0.078∗∗∗
                              (0.0051)    (0.0049)     (0.0077)     (0.0069)      (0.011)    (0.0099)
      Log Pop                0.0080∗∗∗    0.0061∗∗∗     0.011∗∗∗    0.0076∗∗∗    -0.019∗∗∗   -0.014∗∗∗
44




                             (0.00043)    (0.00040)    (0.00050)    (0.00044)    (0.00076)   (0.00067)
      Log Est Size           -0.0083∗∗∗   -0.0065∗∗∗   -0.010∗∗∗    -0.0057∗∗∗   0.019∗∗∗    0.012∗∗∗
                             (0.00073)    (0.00068)    (0.00093)    (0.00082)    (0.0014)    (0.0012)
      Constant                0.066∗∗∗    0.072∗∗∗     0.085∗∗∗     0.095∗∗∗      0.85∗∗∗     0.83∗∗∗
                              (0.0047)    (0.0045)     (0.0057)     (0.0050)     (0.0088)    (0.0076)
      Observations            4168489     4041610      4168489      4041610      4168489     4041610
      R2                       0.026       0.086        0.034        0.104        0.052       0.134
      County FEs                 X           X            X            X            X           X
      NAICS FEs                              X                         X                        X
      Loan level specifications showing the relationship between the likelihood that a PPP loan is
     from an online bank/nonbank, and ZIP code level statistics, including the log number of bank
     branches. Robust standard errors. Data calculated from the SBA PPP Loan Database, ZIP
     Business Patterns, the 2014/2018 ACS and the 2010 Decennial Census.
             Table A2: PPP Lending and COVID-19 Case Rate

                                     (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)
                                  Nonbank    Nonbank      Online      Online
                                    PPP        PPP         PPP         PPP
                                  Fraction   Fraction    Fraction    Fraction

 Avg Case Rate                     0.33∗∗∗               0.49∗∗∗
                                   (0.054)               (0.089)
 Log Branches                                -0.016∗∗∗              -0.0087∗∗∗
                                             (0.0022)                (0.0023)
 Avg Case Rate × Log Branches                -0.081∗∗                 -0.069
                                             (0.033)                 (0.048)
 Constant                         0.049∗∗∗   0.069∗∗∗    0.098∗∗∗    0.11∗∗∗
                                  (0.0019)   (0.0018)    (0.0039)   (0.0020)
 Observations                      34813      34813       34813       34813
 R2                                0.075      0.568       0.067       0.635
 County FEs                                     X                       X
 ZIP code level specifications showing the relationship between the share of
online/nonbank PPP lending and ZIP code level statistics interacted with the
average COVID-19 case rate in March. Robust standard errors. Estimates
are weighted by PPP loans per ZIP code. Data calculated from the FDIC
Summary of Deposits database and SBA PPP loan data.




                                    45
         Table A3: Predicted Bank Lending and the Economic Shock

                            (1)            (2)        (3)            (4)
                          Average     Average     Unemployment   Unemployment
                         Case Rate   Case Rate       Growth         Growth

 Predicted PPP            -0.00051    -0.00078      -0.0035         0.012
                         (0.00056)   (0.00059)      (0.041)        (0.041)
 Bk Branches                         0.00066∗∗∗                    -0.042∗∗
                                     (0.00024)                     (0.019)
 Constant                 0.018∗∗∗    0.017∗∗∗      3.36∗∗∗         3.40∗∗∗
                          (0.0021)    (0.0021)      (0.15)          (0.15)
 Observations              15800       15800         7768           7768
 R2                        0.875       0.875         0.844          0.844
 Commuting Zone FEs                      X                            X
ZIP code-by-bank level specifications showing the relationship between the pre-
dicted number of bank PPP loans, and the magnitude of the COVID-19 eco-
nomic shock. Robust standard errors. Estimates are weighted by PPP loans
per ZIP code. Data calculated from the FDIC Summary of Deposits database,
SBA PPP loan data, and data from Chetty et al. (2020).




                                      46
Table A4: PPP Lending and Bank’s Own
Branch Locations

                  (1)       (2)       (3)
                Log PPP   Log PPP   Log PPP
                 Loans     Loans     Loans

 Bk Branches    2.09∗∗∗   1.83∗∗∗   1.96∗∗∗
                (0.075)   (0.11)    (0.046)
 Constant       1.37∗∗∗   1.66∗∗∗   1.47∗∗∗
                (0.093)   (0.10)    (0.037)
 Observations    52529     46860     52389
 R2              0.146     0.409     0.430
 Bank FEs                              X
 Zip FEs                     X
 ZIP code-by-bank level specifications show-
ing the relationship between the number of
PPP loans from a given bank, and the num-
ber of branches that that bank has in the ZIP
code. Robust standard errors. Estimates are
weighted by PPP loans per ZIP code. Data
calculated from the FDIC Summary of De-
posits database and SBA PPP loan data.




                     47
                Table A5: Effect of Predicted Bank Lending on Overall Lending

                                   (1)            (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)
                                 Log PPP        Log PPP   Log PPP   Log PPP    Log PPP   Log PPP
                                  Loans          Loans     Loans     Loans      Loans     Loans

 Bk Branches                     0.89∗∗∗     0.76∗∗∗      0.89∗∗∗    0.76∗∗∗   0.89∗∗∗    0.76∗∗∗
                                 (0.011)    (0.0094)      (0.011)   (0.0095)   (0.011)   (0.0095)
 Predicted Loans (Winsor 90)     0.66∗∗∗        0.12∗∗∗
                                 (0.026)        (0.029)
 Predicted Loans (Winsor 95)                              0.52∗∗∗   0.094∗∗∗
                                                          (0.023)   (0.024)
 Predicted Loans (No Winsor)                                                   0.38∗∗∗   0.058∗∗∗
                                                                               (0.021)   (0.018)
 Constant                        1.76∗∗∗        4.03∗∗∗   2.26∗∗∗   4.14∗∗∗    2.81∗∗∗   4.28∗∗∗
                                 (0.096)        (0.11)    (0.086)   (0.091)    (0.081)   (0.069)
 Observations                     15930         15930     15930      15930     15930      15930
 R2                               0.564         0.800     0.561      0.800     0.553      0.800
 County FEs                                       X                    X                    X
ZIP code-by-bank level specifications showing the relationship between the predicted number
of bank PPP loans, and the total overall number of PPP loans. Robust standard errors.
Estimates are weighted by PPP loans per ZIP code. Data calculated from the FDIC Summary
of Deposits database and SBA PPP loan data.




                                           48
