                         NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             PRODUCTION, SALES, AND THE CHANGE IN INVENTORIES:
                      AN IDENTITY THAT DOESN'T ADD UP




                              Jeffrey A. Miron

                             Stephen P. Zeldes




                           Working Paper No. 2765




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Maaaachuaetta Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                November 1988




We are grateful to Joe Beaulieu, Edward Gold and Amy Lipton for research
asaistance. We thank Joe Altonji, Larry Chriatiano, Frank de Leeuw, Jim
Kahn, Zoltan Keneaaey, Craig MacKinlay, Rirhard Raddock, Chriatina Roast,
David Romer, Ruth Runyon, Chria Sims, David Wilcox, a referee, members of the
Penn Macro Lunch Croup and workahop participants at Brown, Harvard, Michigan,
UT Austin, and the Federal Reserve Board for helpful comments and
discussions.   Support from the Olin Foundation ia acknowledged.  This
research is part of NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations.   Any
opinions' expressed are those of the authors not those of the National tureen
of Economic Research.
                                         NEER Working Paper #2765
                                         November 1988


                                                 IN INVENTORIES:
               PRODUCTION, SALES, AND THE CHANCE
                        AN IDENTITY THAT DOESN'T ADD UP


                                    ABSTRACT




       We examine two meaaurea of monthly manufacturing production.   The first


is the index of industrial production; the second is constructed from the

                                       sales plus the change in inventories.
accouncing idencicy that output equals

We show that rhe means, variances, and serial correlation coefficients of

the log growth races differ aubscantially between the two series, and the

cross-correlations    between the two seasonally adjusted series are in most

cases less than .4.     A model of classical measurement error indicates chat in

15 of 20 2-digit industries measurement error accounts for over 35% of the

variation   in the monthly growth rates of seasonally adjusted industrial

production.




Jeffrey A. Miron                          Stephen P. Zeldes
NBER                                      NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138                       Cambridge, MA 02138
I. Introduction

     In this paper we examine two measures of monthly production that have

been used by economists.     The first measure, which we refer to as IF, is

the index of industrial production constructedby the Board of Governors of

the Federal Reserve.    This measure is used extensively in empirical work on

the business cycle, as well as by policymakers and others to assess the

current state of the economy.     The second measure,      which we refer to as Y4,

ia constructed from the accounting identity that output equals sales plus

the change in inventoriea.     Sales and inventory data are reported by the

Department of Commerce.      This measure of output is frequently used to

estimate models of inventory accumulation.      Theoretically, these two series

measure the same underlying economic variable     -   -   the production of    goods by

manufacturing firms during the month.

     We show here that the time series properties of these two series are

radically different.    We examine means, variances,       and aerial correlation

coefficients of the log growth rates and show that these statistics differ

substantially between the two series.      Generally,      IF is a less volatile and

more persistent series than is    '14.   In addition, the cross-correlations

between the two seasonally adjusted series range from .6 to           .0   and are in

most cases leaa than .4)      We then demonstrate the significance of these

differences   in two ways.   First, we show that the variance bounds results

of Blinder's (1986) study of inventory behavior are partially reversed when

the IF rather than the '14 output measure is used.         Second,   we examine two

specific models of the measurement error in the series.           The estimates

under one of them (classical measurement error) indicate that in 15 out of

20 2-digit industries measurement error accounts for over 35% of the



     1The correlationa between the growth rates of the raw seasonally
unadjusted series are always higher, ranging from .4 to .9.
                                         2

variation in the monthly growth rates of seasonally adjusted industrial

production data.

      These results are important for all those who use the IP or Y4 data.

This includes particularly researchers on inventories,     since some studies

use the IP measure while others use the Y4 measure.2 More generally, many

studies of the business cycle employ IF as a measure of economic activity.

Our results supplement the work of Lichtenberg and Griliches (1986) who

show that substantial measurement error exists in industry level price

indexes.

      The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.    Section IT

describes    how the two data aeries are constructed.   Section ITT presents

summary statistics that demonstrate the differencea between the two series,

and section IV gives an example of the economic significance of the

discrepancies.     In section V we model the measurement error and estimste

its importance    under alternative sets of assumptions.   Section VI concludes

the paper.


II. Data Constructiom

      In this section we describe how the data released by the relevant

government agencies are constructed, and how we use these data to construct

Y4.

      A. Construction of IP

      The Federal Reserve Board's (FRB) index of industrial production is

available monthly, both seasonally adjusted (SA) and seasonally unadjusted


     2Blinder (1986) and West (1986) use the Y4 measure, while Maccini and
Rossana (1984) and Reagan and Sheehan (1985) use the IF measure.  Miron and
Zeldes (1988) report two sets of results: one using IF and the other using
Y4. West points out in his footnote 13 that he estimated his equations for
a few of the industries using the IP measure as well. He found that the
parameters were uniformly non-sensical and therefore did not report them.
                                        3

(NSA), at the 2-digit level, from 1959 to the present.    The series sre

published in the Survey of Current Business and the Federal Reserve

Bulletin.   The 2-digit series and the more aggregated series are constructed

from disaggregated data using value-added weights.

     The disaggregated IP indexes are constructed from three types of data:

physical product measures,   kilowatt-hours of electrical power input, and

man-hours of labor input.    Each of these is collected at either the

establishment (plant) level or at the more specific product level.      The

input measures are used in cases where the physical product numbers are not

available or would not make sense because of heterogeneity in the product.

For the physical product measures,   the FRB uses series from the Department

of Energy, the Bureau of the Census and other public and private sources.

Most of these are counts of output goods, although occasionally (e.g.,

steel) they are constructed as the sum of sales and inventory changes.3

For the kilowatt-hour data, the FRB asks utility companies their sales of

kilowatt hours of electric power to firms in manufacturing.4'5'6 For the

man-hours series, the Bureau of Labor Statistics provides data from its


     3The physical product numbers are divided by the number of working
days in the reporting period in order to put each series on a per-working-
day basis.

     4unfortunately, the reports do not measure electricity use on a
calendar month basis, because billing dates fall throughout the month and
thus cover different month long periods for different customers (Federal
Reserve Board, 1986, p. 42).

     5Monthly movements in the data are reviewed to eliminate "abrupt
movements that cannot be accounted for by such developments as work
stoppages, power shortages, or cyclical movements," and are presumed due to
inappropriate reports (FRB, 1986, p.42).

     6The FRB also asks "self-generators" of electricity in the
manufacturing industry to report power used in manufacturing.
at the 2-digit level.     We adjust the finished goods and work in progress

inventory series from cost to market by multiplying each by an industry-

specific constant,   as described in West (1983) and Holtz-Eakin and Blinder

(1983), respectively.

     To arrive at the constant dollar inventory series, the BEA begins with

data on the book value of inventories collected by the Bureau of the Census

at the Commerce Department and adjusts these for differences between book

and current dollar values and also for differences between current and

constant dollar values.    This complicated procedure incorporates

information about whether firms use LIFD or non-LIFO accounting methods and

involves estimating the accounting age structure of the existing stock of

goods.    The conversion procedures are described in detail in Hinrichs and
                                           12
Eckman (1981) and in Foss, et al.(l98D).

     The book value data are collected by the Census through three surveys:

the monthly M3 (Manufacturers'   Shipments,     Inventories,   and Drders), the



     12
        The book value data measure the value of the goods currently in
inventory, at acquisition cost. For example, when prices are rising over
time, an item in inventory that is three years "old" in accounting terms
will have a lower book vslue than an identical item that is one year
"old," because it is on the books as having been acquired in different
years at different costs. The accounting age of goods in inventory very
much depends on the method of inventory accounting used.
     When a firm uses LIFO accounting, positive changes in book value
inventory levels accurately measure current dollar increases.  These
changes are deflated into constant dollars, and then cumulated to get a
constant dollar stock. Negative changes in book value numbers imply that
goods from previous LIFO layers were sold, and an estimate must be made of
the acquisition date and cost.
     When a firm uses non-LIFO accounting, the procedure is more
complicated. Even if the number of goods in inventory does not change in a
month, the book value of inventories may still change, because "old" lower
cost inventories were replaced on the books with "new" higher cost
inventories (again assuming prices are rising). The SEA must estimate the
entire age structure of inventories (based on turnover ratios), and then
the book value of the goods of each age must be divided by an estimate of
the acquisition cost of the goods of that age. See Foss, et al (1980, pp.
47-49).
                                         7

Annual Survey of Manufactures, and the quinquennial Census of Manufactures.

The M3 is a voluntary survey of large companies. There are a total of only

4500 reporting units, made up of 3400 companies and 1100 divisions of 450

companies.   Reporting units often produce more than one type of good, and

sometimes    these goods fall into different   industry classifications.   In

this case, all of the inventories and shipments of the reporting unit are

lumped into the primary industry classification.       Units report total hook

value inventories,    and then a breakdown into three stages of fabrication:

materials and supplies,    goods in process,   and finished goods.13 On each

monthly survey, units are given the opportunity to revise the previous two

months'   information.

     The SEA reports only SA data, and therefore the above procedure gives

seasonally adjusted Y4.     We create NSA shipments and inventories data using

the procedures in Reagan and Sheehan (1985), West (1986), and Miron and

Zeldea (1988).     For both the level of shipments and the level of

inventories,    the technique is to multiply the real seasonally adjusted

series produced by the SEA by a seasonal factor, equal to the ratio of the

seasonally unadjusted to the seasonally adjusted nominal (shipments)       or

book value (inventories)    data. This procedure is appropriate as long as

there is relatively little seasonality in prices or in the factors used to
                                14
convert from book to nominal.        In Table 51, we present information on the

sessonality of the log growth rate of the producer price index in seventeen


     13The reliability of the stage of fabrication data is lower than for
the totals:  some firms group work in process inventories in with either
materials or finished goods, and others double count because one stage in a
reporting unit may overlap another stage in another reporting unit for the
same firm (Foss, et al. (1980), p. 21).

     14The book/nominal distinction is only relevant for inventories (not
for shipments).
                                          8

of the twenty 2-digit industries examined here.15      The message conveyed is

that there is statistically significant seasonality in prices in most of

the industries considered here, but this seasonality is sufficiently small

relative to the seasonality in output that it is probably not an important

factor in the re-seasonalizationof the data.


III. The Time Series Properties of the Two Messures of Production

        The description of the construction of the two series makes it clear

that they are unlikely to be numerically identical.      In this section, we

quantify the extent to which the series diverge and show that the

differences are significant.

        The analysis is carried out for all twenty 2-digit manufacturing

industries,     as well as for three aggregates of these industries (durablea,

non-durables,     and total)J6   We consider first the seasonally adjusted

data,    since these are the ones most familiar to a majority of readers.      We

also present results for seasonally unadjusted data, however, and we

examine the seasonal movements themselves.      With the exception of the

variance bounds tests, the results presented below all focus on the


     15The prices used do not correspond exactly to the SIC classification
for output, although the correspondence is close. The first two columns
report results of tests of the hypothesis of no seasonality, while the
third column reports the standard deviation of the estimated seasonal
coefficients. To calculate the test statistics, we regressed the log growth
rate of prices on a constant and eleven seasonal dummies and tested the
hypothesis that the dummies were jointly zero (where the variance-
covariance matrix was computed using the ewey and West (1987) procedure.)
To calculate the standard deviation of the seasonal coefficients, we
regressed the log growth rate on twelve seasonal dummies and took the
standard deviation of the coefficients.Inthe fourth and fifth columns we
present the standard deviation in the estimated seasonal coefficients in
the log trowth rates of IP and Y4, along with the ratio of these standard
deviations to those in prices.

     16Plots of the log levels of the two series (with the levels in
1967.01 set equal) for a selected group of industries are included in
Appendix B.
                                         9

logarithmic growth rates of the relevant series.     We employ growth rates

because the resulting series are likely to be stationary whether the

secular growth is generated by a unit root or by a deterministic time

trend.     In the Appendix (Table B2), we present results of Dickey Fuller

tests of the hypothesis of no unit root in the autoregressive

representation of these series.     In almost all of the 2-digit industries,

we do not reject the null hypothesis of a unit root at the 95% level of

significance.

        A. Descriptive Statistics

        Table 2a presents the means, standard deviations,   and first order

autocorrelation coefficients of the log growth rates of the monthly

seasonally adjusted IF and Y4 series, as well as tests of the hypotheses
                                               17 The
that these statistics are equal for IF and Y4.        sample period is May

1967 through December 1984.18



     17We compute these test statistics as follows. For the means, we
regress the difference between the log growth rates of IF and Y4 on a
constant and test the hypothesis that the constant term is zero. For the
variances, we regress the log growth rate of IP on the difference between
the log growth rates of IF and Y4 and test the hypothesis that the
coefficient on the difference in growth rates is equal to .5. For the
autocorrelations, we stack the IF and Y4 observations and regress the
growth rate of output on the lagged growth rate, a dummy that is 1 for the
IF observations and 0 for the Y4 observations, and this dummy multiplied by
the lagged growth rate. The test statistic is the t-statistic on this last
variable. For the seasonal patterns, we regress the difference in log
growth rates on a constant and eleven seasonal dummies and test the
hypothesis that the coefficients on the eleven dummies are jointly equal to
zero.
     In all of these tests, we use the Hansen and Hodrick (1980) / Newey
and West (1987) procedure to estimate the standard errors (with the lag
length set to 12 and the damping factor set to 1.0). These test procedures
therefore allow for general serial correlation and/or heteroskedasticicy in
the log growth rates of IF and Y4.

     18We use only post-1967 data because there were changes in the
definitions of the SIC codes in 1967 that make the pre-1967 data not
completely compatible with post-1967 data.
                                                  10

       The results in the table indicate that the time series propertiesof

IP and     '14 are    substantially different.         Consider first the cross        -




correlations between           the growth rates of the two different measures of


production.          These correlations range from a low of        -   .02 for Printing to a

high of .64 for Primary Metals.               Eighteen of the twenty-three correlations
                                       1920
reported are less than           .4.          The correlations are higher for the

aggregates than for the individual series.

          Examination of the first order autocorrelationsreveals the

surprising result that in 13 out of 23 cases, the autocorrelation is

positive for IP but negative for Y4.               For example, for non-durables as a

whole, the first order serial correlation of growth rates equals .30 for IP

and   -   .25 for    '14,   The difference in the autocorrelation coefficients is

statistically significant in 17 of 23 cases.                These differences are

generally not eliminated over longer horizons; we find that the sum of the

first 24 autocorrelationsis almost always higher for IP than for

Thus the IP measure exhibits significantly                more persistence than does       '14.




     1'9Harrison and Stewart (1986) report similar results for the two
corresponding Canadian data series. They report correlation coefficients
between the detrended seasonally adjusted levels (rather than growth rates)
as low as .56, with the majority of industries between .7 and .8.
     Sims (1974, p. 704), using 13.5. manufacturing data, finds that labor
input is estimated as a one sided distributed lag of IP but a two sided
distributed lag of the SEA's measure of shipments or shipments plus the
change in finished goods inventories (see Sims' footnote 20). Sims
interprets this as evidence that shipments (as a proxy for output), or
shipments plus the change in inventories, may be measured with greater
error than IP.

     20The correlations between IP and shipments (unadjusted for inventory
changes) are actually greater than those between IP and '14 in 14 of 20
industries in the SA data (10 of 20 in the NSA data).

     2'Campbell and Mankiw (1988) explain why the sum of the
autocorrelations is a useful, non-parametricmeasure of persistence.
                                          11

     Turning to the standard deviations,       the results indicate that the IP

measure is much less volatile than the Y4 measure.       In all cases the

standard deviation is higher for the Y4 measure than for the IP measure,

and in 12 of the industries the point estimates      indicate it is more than

twice as large.     The differences are statistically significant in all but

one case.     Finally,   in a few cases the mean growth rate is twice as high

for one measure as for the other.      The differences in means, however, are

in most cases not statistically significant.22

     In Table 2b we present summary statistics and hypothesis tests for the

seasonally unadjusted data.      The correlations between the two series are in


every case higher than with adjusted data, reflecting the comovements due

to seasonality, but the correlations are nevertheless well below one in

most cases.     For 9 of the 23 series, the sign of the first order

autocorrelation coefficient is positive for one series and negative for the

other series.     The difference in the autocorrelation coefficient is

statistically significant in 13 of 23 cases.       The standard deviations of

the two series are in all but two cases statistically      different.

     Figures 1-23 plot the seasonal movements      in the log growth rates of

the two measures of production.23 In most of the industries,       the two

seasonal patterns are similar with respect to the timing of the peaks and

troughs.    In several industries, however, the timing of the seasonal


     22Dickey-Fuller tests on the difference in the logs of the two series
indicate that in almost all cases we cannot reject the hypothesis of a unit
root in this difference. The fact that the difference between the log
levels of the two series is positively autocorrelated explains why we
cannot usually reject the hypothesis that the growth rates are the same
even though plots of the log levels in some cases diverge substantially
over time.

     23The overall mean growth rate has been subtracted from each seasonal
dummy coefficient so that the plotted coefficients have mean zero.
                                         12

patterns is similar but the magnitude of the peaks and/or troughs is

substantially greater for Y4 than for IP.      Hypothesis tests indicate that

the seasonal coeffioients are statistically        different in all 23 cases.

     tables B3a and B3b in the Appendix present results analogous to those

in Table 2a for growth rates of quarterly and annual averages of monthly

data, respectively.     The cross correlations of the quarterly growth rates

are higher than those of the monthly data, but still less than .7 in half

of the industries. The correlations of annual growth rates are

                                                   in 15 out of 20 industries.
significantly higher, being greater than      .9


The generally high correlations of the annual growth rates is consistent

with the fact that the information in the Annual Survey of Manufactures and

the quinquennial Census of Manufactures is in most cases used to benchmark

both IF and    '14.


     The evidence presented above demonstrates that there are dramatic

differences    between the time series properties of the IP and     '14   measures of

production.      The standard deviations and autocorrelationa of the two series

differ systematically,     and the cross correlations between the two series

indicate that there is remarkably little variation that is common to both

series.   We have discussed the differences with researchers at the EtA and

FRB, and, while they are aware of the problem and of numerous differences

in the construction of the data, they are not able to offer a definitive
               24,25
explanation.


     24We presented an earlier version of this paper at the seminar at the
Federal Reserve Board, and sre appreciative of helpful discussions with
Zoltan Kenessey (head of the section that produces the industrial
production series), Richard Raddock, Dixon Tranum, and others at the FRB,
as well as with Frank de Leeuw and Robert Parker of the EtA.

     250ne possible source of discrepancy is that the FRE uses value added
weights to aggregate the individual series, while the BEA, by adding
constant dollar series, effectively uses gross value weights. As a check
                                            13

IV. The Variance of Production and the Variance of Sales

       In this section we underscore, by way of an example,       the economic


importance of the discrepancy between the two measures of production.            We

show that the results of Blinder's        (1986) widely cited study of firms'

inventory behavior are at least partially sensitive to the choice of output

measure.     Blinder (1986) emphasizes that, in the absence of cost shocks, the

production smoothing model implies that the variance of production should
                                                      26
be less than the variance of sales (shipments).            Using the Y4 measure of

output,      Blinder shows that the variance of production is greater than the

variance of shipments      for all but one of the industries examined,    and he

interprets this as strong evidence against the production smoothing model.

       In Table 3 we present the ratio of the variance of output to the

variance of shipments based on each of the two output measures. The saaple

period,      inventory definition,   and detrending techniques were all chosen to

correspond as closely as possible to Blinder (1986).          Thus, unlike the data

in the previous tables, these data are levels (not growth rates), detrended

with an exponential trend, and cover the period 1959:2 to 1981:7.27 We


against this possibility, we examine an alternate IP series calculated by
the FRB using gross value weights (this was available for seasonally
adjusted total manufacturing only, beginning in 1972). Over the period
72:3 to 84:12, we find that the correlation of growth rates between this
series and the standard IP is equal to .83. The correlation between this
series and Y4 is equal to .59, compared to a correlation of the standard It
and '14 of .65 over the same time period. Thus, the use of value added
weights does not appear to be a quantitatively important source of the
difference between IP and Y4.

     26Tf cost shocks are present, then this inequality need not hold
(Eichenbauni (1984), Blinder (1986)). Kahn (1987) argues that if production
for the period must be chosen before sales are known and if stockouts are
possible then this inequality can be violated even in the absence of cost
shocks.

     27Blinder's estimation procedure is the following.  For both shipments
and     the log level is regressed on a constant, time, a dummy variable
      '14,
that is one beginning in October 1973, and a dummy that is one beginning in
                                       14
                                                                           -

convert the IF measure from an index into a constant dollar figure by

multiplying it   by the ratio of average Y4 to average IF (in other words, we

set the average of the two series equal to each other).28

     The results for the Y4 measure match Blinder's results almost

exactly.29 For all but one industry, the variance of output is greater

than the variance of shipments.    The results for the IF measure,   however,

are quite different.    The variance ratio is in most cases less than the one

based on Y4, and for 11 industries the variance inequality is actually

reversed.30   It is especially noteworthy that reversals occur in five of

the six industries identified by Belsley (1969) as production to stock;

these are the industries for whith the production smoothing model is the

most plausible theoretically.31 Had Blinder originally chosen to use IP



1967 in order to account for a data revision that begins in January 1967.
                                                               but in
(Blinder's paper states that his dummy begins in January 1966,
private conversation he has informed us that his dummy begins in January
1967.) The coefficients are estimated by GLS, assuming a second order
autoregressive process for the error term. The antilogs of the fitted
values of this regression are then subtracted from the actual data, in
levels, to define the detrended data.

     28Because the ratio of average Y4 to average IF is different for
different averaging periods, the choice of base period for conversion of IF
sometimes affects the resulting variance bounds ratio for s few industries.
Results for different base periods consistently show, however, that the
variance ratio using IF data is less than the ratio using Y4 data in a
significant number of cases.

     29The minor differences between the Y4 results in our Table 3 and
Blinder's Table I are probably due to data revisions that were released
subsequent to Blinder's work but incorporated in our data.

     30This reversal of the variance bounds inequality was first pointed
out by West (1986, footnote 13).

     31These six industries are food, tobacco, apparel, chemicals,
petroleum, and rubber.
                                               15

instead of   '14,   he would have reached substantially different conclusions

about the empirical validity of the production smoothing model.32


V. The Sources and Importance of Measurement Error

        The fact that IF and    '14   differ means that at least one of them is

measured with error. Up until this point, none of our results has required

making aasumprions about the types of measurement error present in the

data.    In this section, we model the measurement error in the series. We

begin with a general model and then gauge the importance of different types

of measurement error in each series under alternative assumptions about the

type of measurement error present. We also attempt (only partially

successfully)       to determine which types    of measurement error are most likely

to be present.

        We consider two types of measurement error, as in Mankiw, Runkle, and

Shapiro    (1984) and Mankiw and Shapiro       (1986).   The first type (classical

measurement error) is uncorrelated with the true underlying series.                The

second type is correlated with the true series, but uncorrelated with the

observed series.        This second type of measurement error could arise for two

reasons.     If the announced series are rational forecasts        of the underlying

series,    then the measurement error will be a rational expectations forecast

error and thus uncorrelated with the forecast itself.            In addition,     if

there are productivity changes          (true productivity shocks or, e.g.   ,   changes

in productivity       due to labor hoarding)    that are not captured by the

measured series, then the measurement error will include the productivity



     32While this may be interpreted as support for the production
smoothing model, Miron and Zeldes (1988) present additional tests and find
that a generalized production smoothing model is rejected for both the 14
data and the IF data (although the rejections are not as strong based on IF
data).
                                                                  16

change, which will be correlated with the true output but may be

uncorrelated with the measured figures.

       We consider the following model:

               IF         IF           *            IF                          Y4               y4        *            y4
                    +u —y+e                                                    yt                         —y+e
             is the log of the true series;                                        and
where y                                                                y'                 y4 are           the logs of the two

measured series;                      and               are measurement errors that are uncorrelated
                          e?                 e4
with   y,   and
                   u      and
                                      u4        are measurement error: that are uncorrelated with

                    respectively.                                                                         and
    and   y    ,
                                                    The errors
                                                                      e e u                           ,
                                                                                                                u        are assumed

to be mutually orthogonal. The mod!l in first differences is:

                   IF             IF            *         jp                   y4                y4            *         '14
                        +Au            —Ay+e                           Ay +Au
       Ideally,     we would like to be able to answer the following questions.

First, how poorly do the two series measure true production,                                                            i.e. how large

is the variance of the measurement error relative to the variance of the

true series?            Second, which of the output measures is a better proxy for

output,     i.e. for which series is the variance of the measurement error

smaller?

    Each of the these questions could be answered if we could estimate the
                      IF       IF       Y4      Y4            *
population moments VAu ), V(Ae ), V(Au ), V(e ), and V(Ay ). Under
the assumptions given so far, these moments are related to the moments of

the measured series as follows:



                         IF                         *                 IF       -                  IF
                                  —                      ÷
             var(Ay           )
                                       var(Ay)               var(ae        )
                                                                                    var(Au
                         y4                         *
                                                         ÷            y4       -                  y4
             var(Ay           )
                                  —
                                       var(ay)               var(Ese       )
                                                                                    var(tu
                         IF            Y4                     *                     Y4                         IF
                                                —                 -                          -
              cov(Ay          ,
                                  Ay        )
                                                    var(Ay)           var(Au             )
                                                                                                  var(Au           ).
                                          17

Unfortunately, obtaining three sample moments does not enable us to

estimate five population moments (although we can estimate certain

combinations of the moments).

     As an example of the difficulties with inference, note that a large

variance of e type measurement error tends to increase the variance of

measured output, but a large variance of u type measurement error tends to

decrease the variance of measured output.       Thus,   observing (as we have)

that the log growth rate of IF has a smaller variance than Y4 could mean

that IF is a better series (smaller classical type measurement error) or

that IF is a worse series (larger artificial smoothing or larger rational

forecast error).33 Distinguishing between these possibilities and

estimating the relevant parameters requires either additional identifying

assumptions or additional information.

     In part    A   below, we calculate the importance of measurement error

under the assumption that all measurement error is of the e type.            In the

following sub-section,     we make the calculations under the other extreme

assumption that all measurement error is of the u type.            In each case, we

use the sample moments to estimate the fractions        (c11',   KY4) of the total

variance of each series that is due to measurement error in that series,

and the ratio    (A)     of the variance of the measurement error in IF to the

sum of the variances of the measurement error in IF and Y4.           Under the

assumptions in this paper, the optimal indicator of the true series based


     33As long as the serial correlation in the growth rate of the
measurement errors is less than that in the growth rate of the true series,
higher measurement error variance decreases the autocorrelation of the
growth rate of the measured series in a model with only e type measurement
error, while higher measurement error variance increases the
autocorrelation of the growth rate of the measured series with only u type
measurement error. Thus, the fact that the growth rate of Y4 has a lower
autocorrelation than IF could again be evidence of a large e type
measurement error in Y4 or a large u type measurement error in IF.
                                                         18


solely on the contemporaneous observations is a linear combination of the

two series, and the weight on I? is-equal to                       A.34      Finally, in part C we

attempt to use information about the differences in construction of IF

across industries to shed light on which type of measurement error is

likely to be most important.


          A.       Classical Measurement Error (e).

          Assume for the moment that            V(Au)           V(du'14) —   0   so that all

measurement error is the classical type.                        Under this assumption,         Cov(iy,
    'j4
      )       —
                      *35 In
                  V(Ay ).           the absence of measurement error, a regression of one
Ay

series on the other would yield a coefficient of unity. With e type

measurement error, the coefficient will be biased downward, and the bias
                                                        be a consistent
(the difference between unity and the coefficient) will

estimate of a for the right hand side variable.36 Thus, regressing IP on Y4


     34See de Leeuw and NcKelvey (1983) for the case of e type measurement
error. An analogous argument carries through for u type measurement error.
These each assume that the optimal weights sum to one, which might not be
the case if some weight is put on the unconditional mean.  Also, if the
first differences of the measurement error are serially correlated, a
superior indicator could be constructed using both contemporaneous and past
values of the two series.

     35Prescott (1986) makes this observation and estimates the variance of
true hours of employment based on household and firm measures of hours.
Lichtenberg and Griliches (1986) also assume that only classical
measurement error is present and estimate the same variance ratios as we do
in this subsection for two measures of output prices.  They examine long
run inflation rates and base their measurement error estimates on sample
moments computed across industries for a single time period, rather than
across time for a single industry as is done here.
     36
        Call
             A
                   the estimated coefficient when Ay
                                                     Y4.is ..
                                                           regressed on

y1                Then plim(l   -
                                    y4p)    —   1   -
                                                        cov(Ay1,   ay'14)/var(Ay)

— 1      var(Ay )/[(var(dy ) + var(Ae
          -                                              )J —   var(Ae   )/[(var(Ay ) +    var(te   )]

           IP        IP     IP
—    var(de )/var(Liy ) — a
                                            19

gives us information about the measurement error in Y4, and regressing Y4
                                                              37
on IP gives us information about the measurement error in IF.

      The results are presented in Table 4.         Looking at the seasonally

adjusted data, these estimates indicate that in all but one industry at

least 60% of the variation in the growth rate of Y4 is due to measurement

error, and in 16 out of 20 industries it is over 80%.            Looking at IF, we

find that in 15 out of 20 industries measurement error accounts for over

35% of the variation in the monthly growth rate.           The estimated standard

errors of the ratios indicate that in most cases they are estimated

precisely. When we turn to the seasonally unadjusted data, we find a

different set of results.      Relative to the seasonally adjusted data, the

measurement error shares are estimated to be smaller for Y4 and IF, and

often negative for IF.      The ratios would be expected to be smaller if

seasonality in the measurement error were small relative to the

seasonality in the true series.         However,   the negative estimates suggest a

misspecification,     to which we return in subsection C.38

      The seasonally adjusted results in Table 4 indicate that the optimal

weight    A1   (—V(4e4)/{V(e4) + V(Ae1')])         is in all but one case

                                    3940 This .

significantly greater than                                     that under the
                                    '
                                .5.                indicates



     37Using this simple regression technique has the advsntage of enabling
us to calculate in a straightforwardway the standard errors of these
variance ratios. We employ the Hansen and Hodrick (1980) procedure, as
modified by Newey and West (1987), to calculate standard errors that are
consistent given the serial correlation in the residuals.

     38We also calculated the tables using seasonal dummy adjusted data,
and the results were similar to the SA results in Table 4.

      39We again use a simple regression technique to calculate an estimate

of   A'   and its standard error.   The coefficient in the regression of        Ay'14


on   ay4   -
               Ay   is a consistent estimate of     A'.
                                            20

assumption that all measurement error is of the classical (e) type, IP is

the better measure of output:         the variance in its measurement error is

less, and an optimal indicator would place more weight on it.                However,

there is evidence of substantial measurement error in both series.


      B.   u Type Measurement Error

      In this section, we make the opposite polar assumption:             V(ie)     —

V(Ae4) —0,      so that all measurement error is orthogonal to the measured

series.    Here we define          as the variance of the measurement error as a
                                        .41
fraction of the veriance in the true series                and AIF.is defined as
                                                       ,




V(Au'14)/[V(tsu11')   + V(AJ4)].    These numbers are presented in Table          42
      Looking at the SA data, the as indicate that measurement error

continues to represent a substantial part of the variation in each series.

The numbers for IF are in all but three cases greater than 60%. The ratios

for Y4 are generally in the neighborhood of 10-20%.              Note that   A1   in this

table is exactly one minus the value of          A1   in Table   4.   In other words,

while the numbers in Table 4 indicate that Y4 contains more measurement

error than IF, the numbers in Table S calculated under the alternative



     40The seasonally unadjusted results indicate that the optimal weight
on I? is greater than one, again suggesting the possibility of
misspecification.

     41We scale by the variance of Ay* rather than tsy, so that the ratio
will be interpretable as a fraction between zero and one (recall that in
this model, V(Ay*) — V(Ay) + V(hu)).

      42We estimate SIP by estimating:

1-   [V(Ay)/(V(Ay) +   V(Ay'14)- Cov(Ay, Ey'14] which, under these
                             IF     *         .
assumptions, is equal to V(au )/V(Ay ). Reversing IF and Y4 gives us the

analogous ratio for Y4.
                                                              21

  assumption about the type of measurement error suggest the opposite

  conclusion:      that the measurement error in lP is worse than that in                                   '14.

         The seasonally unadjusted results are also in Table                                    5.


 Unfortunately the negative estimates for                                   and          again suggest a

 misspecification in the NSA data.



C. Including Both Types of Measurement Error and Attempting to Distinguish
       between them.

         What can be said if we are not willing to take as strong a stand as to

 which type of measurement error is present in the two series? We make two

 observations.           First, by combining sample moments we can estimate the                               jg
 of   the variances of e'14 and                Au     and also the sum of the variances of

 Ae11'   and u'14.       The ratio of the as in table 5 indicates that the former

 sum is dramatically greater than the latter.43                              Thus,       e'14   and   u   together

 appear to constitute the primary sources of measurement error. However, we

 cannot tie down the importance of                    e'14    relative to that of               ufl'.


         Second,   the fact that there is no issue                         in producing '14 about

 adjustments for missing productivity shocks suggests that                                            may be an

 unimportant source of measurement error. In this case, the estimates of the




         43Under the model with both e and u type errors,

                  IF                  IF        Y4                 IF       '14
              V(Ay           - Cov(Ay          5y         —
                                                              V(t5e ) + V(Au ),
                     t
                         )


                                      t         t                  t                t
                                           ,          )




                   Y4                 IF        '14               Y4                TF
              V(Ay       )
                             - Cov(Ay          ay    )        V(Ae         + V(Au       ).
                     t                t         t                  t                t
                                           ,                           )




 The ratio of a IF to a'14 in Table 5 .is equal to [V(Ae'14) + V(AuIF )]/[V(te                                     IF.
                                  .




 + V(Au'14)].
                                          22

size of e type    measurement error   in IP in Table 4 are accurate estimates,

whether or not there is    u   type measurement error in IP.

       While we have exhausted all of the information in the sample moments

within each induatry, we next consider using information about variations

in moments and construction of the IP data across industries.          An

important part of the measurement error in IF may be due to the fact that a

large number of the individual IF series are constructed from input data.

Theoretically, the use of input data could add either e type measurement

error because it involves added noise, or u type error because the use of

inputs to measure output may omit productivity changes.44 If the error

induced by the use of input data is primarily of the smoothing variety

(u11'),    then industries based most on input data should exhibit the most

smoothing,     and thus should have the lower variance (relative to that of

Y4).      However, if the use of input data simply causes more classical

measurement error (efl), the high input data industries should have

relatively high variance.       We estimate the Spearman rank correlation

between the use of input data (as reported in Table 1) and the difference

of the variances of IF and Y4 to be -.48 and      -   .78 for SA and NSA data

respectively,     each significant at the 5% level.45

       This negative correlation provides evidence that      u   type measurement

error is present in the IF data and is related to the use of inputs.            The

interpretation is that the use of inputs for IF serves to artificially

smooth the data and therefore that the relatively low standard deviation


     44As indicated previously, the FItS attempts to correct for this by
using cyclically adjusted PFCs. Here we allow for the possibility that
this adjustment does not fully capture productivity changes.

     45The Spesrman correlations between the      gjoof variances and the
use of input are even stronger: - .75 and - .82 for SA and NSA data respectively.
                                            23

of IF should not necessarily be taken to mean that it is a better measure

of true output.46

        One final point, suggested by the NSA results, concerns the

possibility that the true coefficients relating IF and 14 to y* are not

equal to one.     Recall that in the model above, the regreasion of IF on Y4

and the regression of Y4 on IF each give a coefficient that is biased

downward from the true coefficient of one. However, in the NSA results,          the

regression of    '14   on IP in many cases gave a coefficient greater than one,

causing the negative estimates of      tc   in Table 4 and     in Table   5.   When

the FRB does productivity adjustments       within the year, they assume

(approximately)    that the elasticity of output with respect to inputs is

equal    to one. They then modify this judgementally to account for cyclical

factors,   and make no adjustment for seasonal factors.      If the elasticity of

output with respect to inputs is in fact greater than one, due to either

labor hoarding or productivity shocks correlated with input use, then the

FRE   procedure would    bias upward the coefficient in the regression of Y4 on

IF. In fact, there is a strong positive rank correlation (.65) between the

use of inputs and the regression coefficient of Y4 on IF using NSA data.

Users of NSA data should thus be aware that in the industries based




        If an important source of both eIF and uIP.is the use of input data,
     46

then those industries that are based more on physical product data (and
thus less on input data) should have lower total measurement error. In the

general model, V(Ay - yY4) = V(AeTF) +           V(u)
                                                  + V(Ae4) + V(tu4).
Under the assumption that the measurement error in Y4 is unrelated to the
use of inputs in IF, the rank correlation between the use of inputs and

V(Ay11' - fy'14) should be positive. The Spearman correlations are equal to
.40 and .54 for SA and NSA data respectively.  Thus the signs of the
coefficients are consistent with the above hypothesis, but only the latter
is statistically significant at the 5% level.
                                         24

primarily on inputs, the seasonal movements           in IF appear to significantly

understate the true seasonal variation in output.

     The problem raised in the previous paragraph may be present in the SA

data as well, although the fact that the coefficients are almost never

greater than one in the SA data suggests that this may be less of a problem

in SA data. Even if it is present in the SA data, this will bias downward

the estimates   of e type measurement error in IF in Table        4,   i.e. even if

this is an issue, we can still conclude that measurement error is an

important part of industrial production under an e type model of

measurement error.


VI. Concluding Remarks

     In this paper we have documented the radically different time series

properties of two different measures of monthly manufacturing output.

Under specific assumptions about the nature of the measurement error, we

estimate that a large fraction of the variation in the observed growth rate

of both measures of output is due to measureaent error.           These results

suggest that empirical analyses that rely heavily on the time series

properties of the month to month variation in either of these measures may

give very misleading results.

     There are ample reasons for the presence of noise in both series. For

Y4, real monthly inventory changes are extremely difficult to estimate from

book value data. For IF, the use of inputs to proxy for output involves

strong assumptions about productivity.    In both cases, there is likely to be

standard sapling error.

     We find evidence that the error is concentrated in the sum of            e'14   and

u,   and that the use of inputs adds to       u11',    thus artificially smoothing

the data. Unfortunately, we are unable to estimate the importance of            u
                                          25

relative to   c"14,   so we cannot unambiguously recommend one measure over the

other.   The finding that most of the measurement error is in    u11'   or   et'4,


however, is likely to be useful in certain contexts in choosing between

these two measures of production.
                                       26

                                 References



Beisley, David A., 1969, Industrial productionbehavior:    The order-stock
     distinction (North-Holland, Amsterdsm).

Blinder, Alan, 1986, "Can the production smoothing model of inventory
     behavior be saved?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 101 (August),
     431-453.

Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw, 1988, "International evidence on the
     persistence of economic fluctuations," NBER Working Paper No. 2498.

de Leeuw, Frank and Michael J. McKelvey, 1983, "A 'true' time series and its
     indicators," Journal of the American Statistical Association 7 (March),
     37-46.

Eichenbaum, Martin S., 1984, "Rational expectations and the smoothing
     properties of inventories of finished goods," Journal of Monetary
     Economics 14, 71-96.

Federal Reserve Board, 1986, Industrial production   (Federal Reserve Board,
     Washington, D.C.).

Foss, Murray F., Gary Fromm and Irving Rottenberg, 1980, Measurement of
     business inventories (Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.).

Hansen, Lars P. and Robert J. Hodrick, 1980, "Forward rates as optimal
     predictors of future spot rates: An econometric analysis,"   Journal of
     Political Economy 88, 5 (October), 829-853.

Harrison, Alan and Mark Stewart, 1986, "Conditional strike-settlement
     probabilities and the cost of a strike," manuscript, McMaster
     University (May).

Hinrichs, John C. and Anthony 0. Eckman, 1981, "Constant dollar manufacturing
     inventories," Survey of Current Business 61 (November), 16-23.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas and Alan Blinder, 1983, "Constant dollar manufacturers'
     inventories:  A note," manuscript, Columbia University.

Kahn, James A., 1987, "Inventories and the volatility of production,"
     American Economic Review 77, 4 (September), 667-679.

Lichtenberg, Frank R. and Zvi Griliches, 1986, "Errors of measurement in
     output deflators," NBER Working Paper No. 2000 (August).

Maccini, Louis J. and Robert Roasana, 1984, "Joint production, quasi-fixed
     factors of production, and investment in finished goods inventories,"
     Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 16, 2 (May), 218-36.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, David E. Runkle, and Matthew 0. Shapiro, 1984, "Are
     preliminary announcements of the money stock rational forecasts?"
     Journal of Monetary Economics 14 (July), 15-27.
                                        27


                                                        or noise: An
Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Matthew D. Shapiro, 1986, "News
                                                   Business (May), 20-25.
     analysis of GNP revisions," Survey of Current
                                                             cost shocks, and
Miron, Jeffrey A. and Stephen P. Zeldes, 1988, "Seasonality,
     the production smoothing model of inventories," Econometrica, 56, 877-
     908.

                                             "A simple, positive semi
Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth 0. West, 1987,
                                      autocorrelation consistent covariance
     definite, heteroscedasticity and
     matrix," Econometrica 55, 703-708.

                                          of business cycle measurement,"
Prescott, Edward C., 1986, "Theory ahead
                                           25 (Autumn), 11-44.
     Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series
                                              "The stylized facts about the
Reagan, Patricia and Dennis P. Sheehan, 1985,
     behavior of manufacturers' inventories and backorders over the business
                                                          217-46.
     cycle:  1959-80," Journal of Monetary Economics 15,

                                                    in manufacturing,"
Sims, Christopher A., 1974, "Output and labor input
     Brooking Papers on Economic Activity 3, 695-735.
                                                           disturbances to
Stockman, Alan C. , 1988, "Sectoral and national aggregate
     industrial output in seven European countries," Journal of Monetary
     Economics 21, 387-409.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1983, "Census of
     manufactures, 1977, indexes of production," Washington:
                                                             GPO.

                                                   use of constant dollar
West, Kenneth 0. 1983, "A note on the econometric
                 ,




     inventory series," Economic Letters 13, 337-41.

                                            test of the linear quadratic
West, Kenneth 0., 1986, "A variance bounds
     inventory model," Journal of Political  Economy 94, 2 (April), 374-401.
                            Table   1:   Composition of IP, by Source
                       SIC Non-Durable/         Fraction of Index Based on
                       Code  Durable    Physical Kilowatt Prod. Work. Other
                                        Output      Hours        Hours     Data
      Food              20     N           .409       .390        .200      .000
      Tobacco           21     N           .903        .097        .000     .000
      Textiles          22     N           .671        .307        .022     .000
      Apparel           23     N           .000        .165       .835      .000
      Lumber            24     D           .539        .035       .313      .113
      Furniture         25     D           .000        .953       .047      .000
      Paper             26     N           .990       .000        .010      .000
      Printing          27     N           .297       .703        .000      .000
      Chemicals         28     N           .334       .376        .227      .062
      Petroleum         29     N           .924       .076        .000      .000
      Rubber            30     N           .234       .695        .000      .071
      Leather           31     N           .547       .151        .302     .000
      Stone,Clay,Glass 32      D          .255        .628        .117     .000
      Primary Metal     33     D          .908        .021        .071     .000
      Fab Metal         34     D          .000        .510        .490     .000
      Machinery         35     D          .005        .673        .240     .082
      Elec Machinery    36     D          .134        .271        .554     .041
      Trans Equip       37     D          .418        .005        .577     .000
      instruments      38      D          .000        .173        .711     .117
      Other            39      D          .000      1.000         .000     .000
      Non-Durables       -     N          .446        .363        .171     .020
      Durables           -     D          .242        .348        .375     .034
      Total              -     T          .328        .355        .289     .028

Notes:
 1. The entries in the last four columns are the fraction of the industrial production index of each
    industry that is based on physical output data, kilowatt hours data, production worker hours
    data, and other data, respectively.
 2. The Other category includes Federal Reserve estimates and combined kilowatt hour and pro-
    duction worker hour data.
 3. Source: Federal Reserve Board, Industrial Production, 1986.
                 Table 2a: Summary Statistics, Seasonally Adjusted Data
                               Mean              Standard Dev.          Autocorrelaiion Cross
                       IF       Y4    t-stat    IP Y4 t-stat          IF    Y4 t-stat Correl.
  Food                .0025  .0014   1.77      .009    .021   12.14   -.27 -.34    0.82  .18
  Tobacco             .0004  .0002   0.12      .046    .098   7.60 -.52       -.45   -0.64    .19
  Textiles            .0014  .0016 -0.16       .021    .035   3.54 .31        -.39    5.08    .25

  Apparel             .0010  .0010   0.03       .024   .057   8.28 -.23       -.35    1.10    .09
  Lumber              .0015  .0023 -0.55        .026   .051   8.28 .04        -.32   2.55     .32
  Furniture            .0030 .0031 -0.10        .020   .061   15.24     .05   -.51   4.96     .16
                       .0028 .0023   0.67       .019   .024    2.62   -.02    -.34    1.72    .38
  Paper
  Printing             .0030 .0021   1.04       .012   .033   13.14   -.13    -.51   3.58    -.02
  Chemicals            .0041 .0030   1.54       .015      8.42 .10
                                                       .026                   -.23   2.32     J7
  Petroleum            .0009 .0017 -0.60        .021      3.25 -.12 -.37
                                                       .031                           2.45    .08
  Rubber               .0054  .0023  2.29       .031.043  2.80 .09 -.27               3.61    .37
  Leather            -.0028 -.0032 0.21         .029.075 13.19 -.21 -.44              2.28    .09
                      .0022   .0009  1.71       .020.034  6.99 -.01 -.34              3.31    .33
  Stone,Clay,Glass
  Primary Metal      -.0007 -.0007 0.04         .041.042  0.10 .19 .10                0.86    .64
  Fab Metal           .0013   .0011  0.15      .014 .051 22.63   .41 -.44             779     .25

  Machinery           .0035   .0028  0.86      .015    .039   24.99    .30    -.35    5.39    .34
  Elec Machinery      .0049   .0045  0.40      .016    .040   16.03    .16    -.39    5.67    .29
  Trans Equip          .0016  .0016  0.05      .031    .058   1L95     .29    -.07    3.56    .61

  Instruments          .0048  .0041  0.48      .011    .066   50.41    .09    -.47    5.58    .25

  Other                .0014  .0013  0.03      .020    .057   13.46   -.23    -.38    1.52    .10

  Non-Durables         .0028  .0018  2.47      .009    .014    6.30     .30   -.25    3.28    .45
  Durables             .0024  .0021  0.64      .014    .025   14.51     .47   -.09    5.36    .59
  Total                .0026   .0019  1.88     .011    .017    8.49     .44   -.10    4.91    .61

                                                                                                -
Notes:
 1. The sample period is 1967:5-1984:12.
 2. The statistics in the table are computed for monthly logarithmic growth rates.
 3. The Y4 results are based on the finished goods plus work-in-progress definition of output.
 4. The t-statistics are for tests of the hypotheses that the relevant moments are the same.
                   Table 2b: Summary Statistics, Seasonally Unadjusted Data
                              Mean                Standard Dee.           Autocorrelation Seasonals Cross
                     IP        Y4       t-stat IP     Y4 t-stat         IP Y4 t-stat         X2     Correl.
Food                 .0025     .0013     1.55   .031   .047     8.58     .17 -.10     4.24   98.0     .73
             —

Tobacco             -.0009 -.0006 -0.09         .144   .150     0.48   -.44 -.37 -1.15       96.9     .61
Textiles             .0008 .00 11 -0.19         .082    .110    8.46   -.32 -.41 1.62       133.7     .87
Apparel              .0009 -.0004 0.51          .074   .124    13.50   -.32 -.27 -0.76      133.7     .63
Lumber               .0009 .0016 -0.45          .054   .086    11.77   -.01 -.16      2.35   75.3     .72
Furniture            .0030 .0027 0.16           .059   .115    11.04   -.39 -.39 0.19      403.6      .71

Paper                .0022 .0017 0.65           .063   .059     1.57   -.30 --39      1.67   94.1     .89
Printing             .0030 .0020 0.82           .038   .052     4.94     .44 -.29 11.88    656.4      .37
Chemicals            .0040 .0025    1.30        .027   .057    1333      .06 -.11     2.06 806.1      .52
Petroleum            .0011   .0015 -0.27        .032   .037     2.18     .13 -.33     4.38   72.8     .37
Rubber               .0051      .0015   2.33    .063   .084     5.78   -.10 -.25 2.10       113.4     .79
Leather             -.003 1   -.0035    0.19    .082   .110     4-53   --39 -.42      0.62   66.8     .62
Stone,Clay,Glass     .00 19    .0003    1.68    .043   .065    10.65      10 -.13     4.01 205.4      .74
Primary Metal       -.0014    -.0017    0.26    .064   .072     2.10     .15   .02 1.91      20.7     .85
Fab Metal            .0012     .0004    0.47    .026      45.34
                                                       .098            -.07 -.37 4.49      326.1      .63
Machinery            .0033     .0027    0.37    .029   .095
                                                          34.34         .00 -31       5.53 761.6      .65
Elec Machinery       .0049     .0043    0.46     032 .091 22.81         .03 -.28 4.30      375.5     .70
Trans Equip          .00 14    .0008    0.34     070 .120 20.62         .03 -.01      0.82 350.3     .84
Instruments          .0049     .0040    0.50    .020 .101 45.07        -.09 -.39 4.56      304.0     .45
Other                .0012     .0009    0.17    .049   .103    14.75   -.01 -.19      1.86 134.9     .62
Non-Durables         .0026     .0014    2.27    .035   .045     8.88   -.08 -.19      1.89 244.8     .91
Durables             .0022     .0016    0.61     032   .078    24.62    .01 -.14 3.08      766.4     .89
Total                .0024     .0015    1.25    .032   .060    21.52   -.05 -.16      2.07 819.7     .92

  Notes:
    1. The sample period is 1967:5-1984:12.
    2. The statistics in the table are computed for monthly logarithmic growth rates.
    3. The Y4 results are based on the finished goods plus work-in-progressdefinition of output.
    4. The t-statistics are for tests of the hypotheses that the relevant moments are the same. The
       x2 statistic is for the test of the hypothesis that the seasonal patterns in the log growth rates
       of IP and Y4 are the same. The 95% critical value of the x2(1l) is 19.61.
               Table 3: Variance of Productionover Variance of Sales,
                              Seasonally Adjusted Data
                                                    IP                      Y4
               Food                                  .62                    1.20
               Tobacco                               .54                    2.43
               Textiles                             1.17                    1.06
               Apparel                               .91                    1.38
               Lumber                                .94                    1.12
               Furniture                             .96                    1.24
                                                    1.42                    1.02
                Paper
                Printing                            1.15                    1.18
                Chemicals                            .82                    1.01
                Petroleum                            .59                    1.06
                Rubber                              1.12                    1.13
                Leather                             1.09                    1.36
                                                    1.08                    1.12
                Stone,Clay,Glass
                Primary Metal                        .98                     .96
                Fab Metal                            .59                    1.13

                Machinery                           1.28                    1.35
                Elec Machinery                      1.13                    1.26
                Trans Equip                          .84                    1.23
                Instruments                          .75                    1.81
                Other                                .81                    1.42
                Non-Durables                        1.52                    1.05
                Durables                            1.13                    1.19
                Total                               1.31                    1.14


Notes:
 1. The sample period is 1959:2 -1981:7.
 2. The statistics in the tables are computed    for deviations from exponential trend; see text for
    details.
 3. The Y4 results   are based on the   finished goods plus work-in-progressdefinition   of output.
                    Table 4: Estimatesof "e-type" Measurement Errors
                             Seasonally_Adjusted       Seasonally Unadjusted
                        ?jp se 1Y4 se A1p se Icp se Ky4 Se .jp                                           Se
       Food                .59 .16           .92 .03       .89  .03    -0.10 .09     .52   .04   1.09   .07
       Tobacco             .60    .15        .91    .04     .87 .05     0.37 .07     .42   .09    .55   .11
       Textiles            .59    .11        .84 .06        .79 .08    -0.17 .05     .35   .03   1.37 .10
       Apparel             .79    .21        .96    .03     .87 .04    -0.06 .07     .62   .06   1.03 .04
       Lumber              .38    .19        .83    .07     .89 .05    -0.15   .07   .55   .04   1.12 .05
       Furniture           .52    .22        .95    .02    .94 .03     -0.39 .14     .63   .02   1.19 .06
       Paper               .52    .10        .70.11        .68 .07       0.15 .03    .06   .04    .26   .15
       Printing           1.07    .25       1.01.03        .87 .03       0.51 .07    .73   .03    .72   .05
       Chemicals           .71    .10       .90 .04        .79 .03     -0.11 .14     .76   .02   1.03   .04
       Petroleum           .88    .09       .95 .04        .70 .06      0.58 .06     .68   .05    .60   .05
       Rubber              .49    .09       .74 .07        .75 .09     -0.06 .03     .41   .04   1.08
                                                                                                    .10
       Leather             .78    .21       .97 .03        .89 .03      0.17 .09     .54   .03    .85
                                                                                                    .08
       Stone,Clay,Glass     .43   .10       .81    .04     .85 .05     -0.13 .07     .51   .03 1.12 .06
       Primary Metals       .35   .10       .36    .10
                                                     .51         .13    0.05 .06     .24   .05 .85 .17
       Fab. Metals          .09   .25       .93    .02
                                                     .99         .02   -1.33 .26     .83   .02 1.13 .01
       Machinery            .12   .12       .87    .02
                                                     .98         .02   -1.10 .10     .80   .02 1.15 .02
       Elec Machinery       .32   .17       .88    .04
                                                     .94         .03    -.97 .13     .76   .02   1.19   .03
       Trans Equip        -.13 .10          .67 .07 1.06         .05   -0.44 .06     .51   .03   1.42   .04
       Instruments        -.54 .42          .96 .01 1.01         .01   -1.27 .28     .91   .01   1.06   .01
       Other               .72 .21          .96 .02 .91          .03   -0.32 .14     .71   .02   1.11   .04
       Non-Durables        .31 .07          .71    .08     .84   .05   -0.17 .05     .29   .03   1.55   .12
       Durables           -.07 .08          .68    .04    1.03   .04   -1.16 .08     .63   .02   1.46   .04
      Total                .02    .09   j   .63    .05     .99   .06   -0.75 .07     .52   .02   1.66   .05

Notes:
 1. The sample period is 1967:5-1984:12.
 2. The statistics in the table are computed for monthly logarithmic growth rates.

 4.   .\
 3. The Y4 results are based on the finished goods plus work-in-progressdefinition of output.
        is the weight on IP in an optimal forecast of the true series. We estimate A" =
                      —                             —
                                                         y").    Under the assumption      that Var(zu'4) =
      Var(iu") = 0, A' =                                         + Var(e")).
 5.     is the fraction of the variation in IF due to measurement error. We estimate    =
      1Cov(y",     y"4)/Var(y"').      Under the assumption that Var(zu'4) = Var(zn") = 0,
        =   Var(e')/(Var(y"').                     is defined similarly.
                  Table 5: Estimates of "u-type" Measurement Errors
                              Seasonally Adjusted    Seasonally Unadjusted
                             kjp    ?'4 ,\p se ?CJp ?Cy4 Ajp se
          Food                .83      .10      .11    .03   .54   -.05    -.09    .07
          Tobacco             .81      .12      .13    .04   .31     .25     .45   .11
          Textiles            .69      .18      .21    .06   .38   -.10    -.37    .10
          Apparel             .84      .12      .13    .03   .63   -.02    -.03    .04
          Lumber              .76      .09      .11    .07   .59   -.06    -.11    .05
          Furniture           .90      .05      .06    .02   .71   -.11    -.19    .06
          Paper               .53      .25      .32    .11   .05     .14    .74    .15
          Printing            .88      .13      .13    .03   .57     .22    .28    .05
          Chemicals           .73      .19      .21    .04   .78   -.02  -.03      .04
          Petroleum           .68      .29      .30    .04   .47     .31  .40      .05
          Rubber              .59      .20      .25    .07   .42   -.03 -.08       .10
          Leather             .86      .11      .11    .03   .49     .09  .15      .08
          Stone,Clay,Glass    .70       .13     .15    .04   .54   -.06 -.12       .06
          Primary Metals      .27      .26      .49    .10   .23     .04 .15       .17
          Fab. Metals         .92      .01      .01    .02   .92   -.11 -.13       .01
          Machinery           .86       .02      .02   .02   .89   -.12 -.15       .02
          Elec Machinery      .84       .05      .06   .04   .86   -.14 -.19       .03
          Trans Equip         .70     -.04     -.06    .07   .60   -.18 -.42       .04
          Instruments         .97     -.01     -.01    .01   .96   -.05 -.06       .01
          Other               .88       .08      .09   .02   .76   -.08 -.11       .04
          Non-Durables        .63       .12      .16   .08   .32   -.12 -.55       .12
          Durables            .69     -.02     -.03    .04   .79   -.25 -.46       .04
          Total               .62       .01      .01   .05   .65   -.26 -.66       .05


Notes:
 1. The sample period is 1967:5-1984:12.
 2. The statistics in the table are computed for monthly logarithmic growth rates.
 3. The Y4 results are based on the finished goods plus work-in-progressdefinition of output.
 4. A'° is the weight on IP in an optimal forecast of the true series. We estimate A" = 1 —
    Cov(Ly'4,iy'4 — y")/Var(y'4 —             y1).    Under the assumption that Var(e1'4) =
    Var(ze"') 0, =    A"'  =                         +
                             Var(iu'4)/(Var(iu'4) Var(u"')).
 5. ,çIP is the fraction of the variation in IF due to measurement error. We estimate
    1— Var(y')/(Var(y"')+ Var(zy'4) — Cov(zy"',y'4)). Under the assumption that
    Var(e'4)= Var(e") = 0, K" = Var(u")/(Var(y). is defined similarly.
                                                                            I                                                 I     I   I
                                                        I         I
                                       .—              CD         CD       .—                           CD    CD              CD I CD C PC)   J)   0)
           C         I
      CD   0) 1 C 1               (0   CD              CD         CCCCCC
           I         I                                                                                                   C-
C-                                               C-


                                                                                                                         2:
2:                                               2:
                                                                                                                         21
21                                               21
                                            ci                                                                           2:                                   0
2:                                          ci   2:
                                                 C-                                                                —H C-                                      ci
C-                                                                                                                                                            ci
                                            LU   CD
                                                                                                                   —' C-
C-                                                                                                                                -z:                         ci
                                            En                                                                           21
21                                               21
                                            ED                                                                     En
U)                                               U-C                                                               U)                                               0
                         -F                                                                                                                                         P.
                                                                                                                                                                    OQ
C                                                C                                                                       C                                          0
2:                                               2:                                                                      2:
                                                                                                                                            ;z:                     C,
                                                                                                                                                                    C,


C                                                0                                                                       C
                                                                                                                                                                    0'

                                                       C-.)           NJ        —                             NJ              C.)
                                                                                                                               NJ —                     C-I
      NJ       —              —   N)   U)
      CCC000                                           C00                                    ci        ci    C               CC  C C C— NJ
                                                                                                                                         CC
C-                                               C-                                                                      C-
                                                              -::
                                                              E                                       \ I//
2:
21

2:                                          ED 2:
                                                 2:
                                                 21                                  C
                                                                                         -F
                                                                                         -C
                                                                                                                   ED 21
                                                                                                                         2:


                                                                                                                         2:
                                                                                                                                    'III                      -ci
                                                                                                                                                              LU
C-                                                                                                                 ED C-                                      ED
C-                                          -H C-             H                                                    ED C-                                      ci
21                                          ci 21                                                                  Eli   21                                   ci
                                            ED                                                                           U)
                                                                                                                                                              ci
U-C
                                            ci   C                                            ,1 C-                      C
 C
                                                                                          //                             2:
 2:                                                                                 E'
 C)            ,-/       /                       CD                                                                      CD
                                         Figures   7—12


                     PAPEP                                                      PH    INTl NE
 12                                                       6

                                                           LI
  8
                                                           2
  H.
                                                           0
  0
                                                          —2

 -H                                                       —H


 -8                                                       —8

                                                          —8
-12
           JFMAMJJHSOND                                               J   F   M A    ti   J   J   H   5       0       N



             HEM TALE        I                                                  PETROLEUM
                                                           6

                                                           H


                                                           2

                                                              0

                                                          —2


                                                          —H


                                                          —6

           JFMAMJJRSONB                                               JFMAMJJASONO
                     RUBBER                                                         LEATHEP
 12                                                            20

      8
                                                                10
      H

      0.                                                          0
  -H
  -8                                                       —10

 -12
                                                           —20
 -16.                                                                                         J   J       5       0       N   N
                             J   J   A    5   0    N 0                    J F   N    H N              H
           J F   M   A   M
                                                                        N)                                        —                C)   0)        N)        IC)        0)   C)
      C)   in    C)   in   C)            in       in                    C)   Ci)    C)   in        in   in   C)   in
                                                                                                                             in                                                   U)
in                                                                 in                                                                                                             -H
0                                                                                                                            0                                                    U)
                                                                                                                       -n    in
in                                                          [Ti    in                                                                                                             z
in                                                          U) in                                                      ED    in                                                   P1
                                                            U)                                                               in
in                                                                 in                                                                                                             C-)
                                                                                                                       U)
in                                                          —1 in                                                            in
in                                                                in                                                         in
in                                                                                                                     P1
                                                            ED                                                         -H
in                                                          U) I))                                                     ED    I))                                                 Cl
in                                                                C,                                                   1     C)                                                  1 •'i
in                                                                in                                                   U)    in                                                   ID
C,                                                                C,                                                         C,


      in    N)        —                       —        N)               N)                    I
      000 000                                                           in         CR         in                  01               C C,      0)        N)         N)   0)   C,

in                                   N                                                                                       in
                                                            -H
-Il                             Ii        N>t.O                                                                              11
in                                                          ED in                                                                                                                -U
                                                                                                   -—                  ED
TI                                                          ED
                                                            U)                                                         ED                                                        1
in                                                          —U                                                               in
in                                                          C) in                                                      ED
                                                                                                                             in
in                                                          ED                                                                                                                   ED
                                                                                                                             in                                                  C-i
                                                            -H
in                                                                                                                     C-i   in                                                  -H
                                                            ED
in                                                          -H    CO                                                                                                             T11

                                                                  C)
                                                                                                                                                                                 U)
                                                                                                                                                                                 c-i-)


                                                                  lii
                                   Figures   19—23

               I   NETRU MENlO                                             OTHER
 10                                                  20

  S                   A        i                     15

  0

 —S
          f/       I\/(            :—                1   0



                                                         0
-10                        1

                               -                     -s
-15                                              -10
—20                                              —15
          JFMHMJJHSOND                                       J F   M   H   Ni   J J     H   5   0   N   0

           NON -DURHALES                                               DUPABLEO
                                                     10

                                                         5

                                                         0

                                                     —5


                                                 —10

                                                 -15

                                                 —20
      J    FMAMJJASONB                                       J   F M   A   Ni   J   J   A   5   0   N   0

                   TOTAL       MEG
  8

  H


  0

 -H                                     NN




          JFMAMJJHSOND
                            APPENDIX A
       RESULTS BASED ON FINISHED GOODS ONLY DEFINITION OF Y4




                Table A2a: SummaryStatistics, Seasonally Adjusted Data
                                Mean                Standard Dev.         Autocorrelation      Cross
                        IP       Y4       t-stat   IP   Y4 t-stat        IP    Y4 t-stat       Correl.
  Food                  .0025   .0014      1.78    .009   .021   12.21   -.27   -.34     .79    .16
  Tobacco               .0004 -.0004        .49 .046 .081        4.77 -.52 -.49         -.19    .21
  Textiles              .0014   .0017      -.23 .021 .032        2.70 .31 -.38          4.93     .27

  Apparel               .0010   .0010       .04    .024 .048      6.29 -.23     -.27     .41     .05

  Lumber                .0015 .0025        -.72    .026 .045      6.63   .04    -.28    2.24     .33

  Furniture             .0030 .0032        -.24    .020 .045     11.11 .05      -.44    4.97     .18

  Paper                 .0028 .0023         .64    .019 .022      1.61 -.02     -.31    1.54     .37

  Printing              .0030   .0019      1.40    .012   .029   15.52 -.13     -.51    3.62     .01

  Chemicals             .0041 .0030        1.57    .015   .023    6.27   .10    -.20    2.08     .19

  Petroleum              .0009 .0018       -.69    .021   .030    3.03 -.12     -.38    2.43     .07
  Rubber                 .0054 .0023       2.35    .031   .038    1.72    .09   -.23    3.10     .37
  Leather              -.0028 -.0030         .13   .029   .069   11.84   -.21   -.46    2.41     .04
                        .0022  .0010       1.78    .020   .031    5.59   -.01   -.25    2.26     .39
  Stone,Clay,Glass
  Primary Metal        -.0007 -.0005       -.15    .041   .044     .51    .19     .03   1.32     .55
  Fab Metal             .0013   .0012        .05   .014   .034   12.83    .41   -.26    5.12     .34
  Machinery             .0035 .0030         .76 .015 .029        16.33  .30     -.27    4.80     .36
  Elec Machinery        .0049   .0046       .46 .016 .026        10.20  .16     -.16    3.46     .37
  Trans Equip           .0016   .0017      -.03 .031 .052        10.70  .29     -.00    3.30     .69
  Instruments           .0048   .0041       .75 .011 .039        29.25  .09     -.41    4.64     .23
  Other                  .0014  .0013       .03 .020 .049         9.50 -.23     -.40    1.45     .07
  Non-Durables           .0028  .0018      2.48 .009 .014         5.23 .30      -.25    3.26     .44
  Durables              .0024    .0022      .44 .014 .022        11.25    .47   -.02    4.52     .63
  Total                 .0026     .0020     1.67   .011   .016    6.38    .44   -.06    4.00     .61


Notes:
 1.   The sample period is 1967:5-1984:12.
 2.   The statistics in the table are computed for monthly logarithmic growth rates.
 3.   The Y4 results are based on the finished goods only definition of output.
 4.   The t-statistics are for tests of the hypotheses that the relevant moments are the same.
                 Table A2b: Summary Statistics, Seasonally Unadjusted Data
                         Mean          Sta'2dard Dev.     Autocorre!ation Sea300ais                  Cro.s
                    IP     Y4  t-stat IP Y4 t-stat IP Y4 t-stat              X2                     Correl.
Food                .0025    .0013    1.54   .031    .047    8.84    .17    -.12 4.69      108.4      .72
Tobacco            -.0009 '-.0005     -.14   .144    .127    1.17  -.44     -.51  1.23    217.1       .51
Textiles            .0008 .0013       -.28   .082    .112    9.69  -.32     -.40  1.54     128.0      .86
                    .0009 -.0003       .48   .074     .122   14.20 -.32     -.24 -1.30     151.2      .68
Apparel
Lumber              .0009    .0018    -.57   .054    .081    10.62 -.01     -.17  2.22     102.3      .73
Furniture           .0030    .0029     .05   .059    .112    15.60 -.39     -.38  -.04    390.9       .78
                    .0022    .0017     .52   .063    .057     2.60 -.30     -.37  1.27     184.1      .88
Paper
                    .0030     .0018    .99   .038    .052     5.58   .44    -.17  9.37    1018.7      .46
Printing
                    .0040     .0025   1.26   .027    .056    12.82   .06    -.12 2.18      798.5      .52
Chemicals
Petroleum           .0011     .0017   -.40   .032    .036     1.77   .13    -.28 3.75       37.4      .42

Rubber              .0051     .0015   2.40   .063    .081     4.17 -.10     -.19 1.27      131.5      .81

Leather          -.0031     -.0033     .11   .082    .108     3.92 -.39     -.39    .02     70.8      .65
                                              .043   .066    12.32 .10      -.01 1.93      316.5      .81
Stone,Clay,Glass .0019        .0003   1.80
                            -.0013    -.03   .064    .075     3.37    .15    .01   1.80     42.4      .83
Primary Metal    -.0014
Fab Metal          .0012      .0007    .36   .026    .081    46.83 -.07     -.33   3.96    194.2      .73
                   .0033      .0030    .15   .029    .101    37.47 .00      -.36   6.70   1058.5      .63
Machinery
                   .0049      .0045    .34   .032    .085    17.32 .03      -.30   4.92    954.5      .70
Elec Machinery
                   .0014     .0010     .21   .070    .124    16.81 .03      -.04   1.57    463.1      .89
Trans Equip
Instruments        .0049     .0042     .48   .020     .082   48.82 -.09     -.35   3.72    482.8      .57
                    .0012    .0008     .20   .049     .106   21.46 -.07     -.18   1.84    206.4      .68
Other
                    .0026    .0015    2.13   .035    .046     9.65 -.08     -.22   2.47    263.5      .91
Non-Durables
Durables            .0022    .0018     .36   .032    .081    20.67 .01      -.18   4.05    736.6      .90
                    .0024    .0017     .99   .032    .062    18.27 -.05     -.21   2.91    537.4      .91
Total

   Notes:
    1. The sample period is 1967:5-1984:12.
    2. The statistics in the table are computed for monthly logarithmic growth rates.
    3. The Y4 results are based on the finished goods only definition of output.
    4. The t-statisticsare for tests of the hypotheses that the relevant moments are the same. The
                                                                                                   rates
       x2 statistic is for the test of the hypothesis that the seasonal patterns in the log growth
       of IP and Y4 are the same. The 95% critical value of the 2(11) is 19.67.
                    Table A4: Estimates of "e-type" MeasurementErrors
                            Seasonally Adjusted         Seasonally Unadjusted
                              se #y4 se ,\Ip     se  kjp se Ky4 se Ajp                               se
      Food                 .65 .15     .93 .03            .88 .03     -.09 .08     .52   .04 1.08    .07
      Tobacco              .63   .16   .88 .05            .81 .07      .55   .05   .42   .12 .37     .11
      Textiles             .60   .10   .82 .06            .76 .10     -.18 .05     .37   .03 1.35    .09

      Apparel              .90   .20   .98     .05        .81 .05     -.11 .07     .59   .06 1.07    .04
      Lumber               .45 .14     .81     .07        .84 .05     -.10 .07     .52   .04 1.09    .06
      Furniture            .61 .14     .92     .03        .88 .03     -.49 .11     .59   .02 1.30    .05

      Paper                .56 .10     .68     .13        .63   .08     .19 .03    .04   .04   .13   .14
      Printing             .99 .18 1.00        .03        .85   .02     .37 .07    .66   .03   .77   .05
      Chemicals            .70 .09 .88         .04        .75   .04   -.09 .13     .75   .02 1.03    .04
      Petroleum            .90 .09 .95         .04        .69   .06     .54 .05    .63   .06 .60     .05
      Rubber               .54 .09 .71         .08        .67   .10   -.05 .08     .37   .04 1.08    .14
      Leather              .91 .19 .98         .03        .86   .03     .15 .09    .51   .04 .86     .09
                           .39 .10  .75        .05        .83   .06   -.24   .06   .47   .03 1.27    .06
      Stone,Clay,Glass
      Primary Metal        .42 .13  .49        .10        .57   .13   .04    .05   .29   .05 .91     .12
      Fab Metal            .18 .15  .86        .03     .97      .04 -1.22    .20   .76   .02 1.21    .02
      Machinery            .29 .10   .82       .04     .92      .03 -1.18    .11   .82   .01 1.14    .02
      Elec Machinery    .41 .11        .77     .06     .83      .03 -.87     .11   .74   .03 1.20    .04
      Trans Equip      -.13 .09        .58     .08    1.09      .06 -.58     .06   .50    .03 1.60   .07
      Instruments       .19 .21        .94     .02        .99   .02 -1.33    .21   .86    .01 1.10   .01
      Other             .83 .18        .97     .03        .87   .04 -.46     .12   .69    .02 1.17   .03
      Non-Durables      .35 .07        .71 .08            .82   .06 -.19     .05   .31    .03 1.54   .11
      Durables         -.03 .08        .62 .05 1.02             .05 -1.24    .09   .64    .02 1.45   .05
      Total             .09 .09        .59 .06      .07   4j          78     .07   .53    .02 L62    .06

Notes:
 1. The sample period is 1967:5-1984:12.
 2. The statistics in the table are computed for monthly logarithmic growth rates.
 3. The Y4 results are based on the finished goods only definition of output.
 4.   )°is the weight on IP in an optimal forecast of the true series. We estimate                   A'    =
                       —                   —
                                                     IP).
                                                      Under the assumption that Var(.u'4)                  =
      Var(Au") = 0,     A' = Var(e"4)/(Var(e1'4)                + Var(ie'1')).
                                                                                                           =
 5.   c1' is   the fraction of the variation   in.   IF
                                                      due to measurement error. We estimate ,çnl'
      1—Cov(y'', Y4 )/Var(y'').              Under the assumption that Vsr(u'4) = Var(zu'') =              0,
      ,cIP = Var(eW)/(Var(yW). ic'             is defined similarly.
                  Table A5: Estimates of "u-type" MeasurementErrors
                              Seasonally Adjusted Seasonally Unadjusted
                              Ic1p       A1p   se k'p ?y Ap        se
              Food               .82   .12   .12   .03   .55   -.04 -.08        .07
              Tobacco            .73   .17   .19   .07   .25    .42 .63         .11
              Textiles           .65   .21   .24   .10   .41   -.11 -.35        .09
              Apparel            .80   .18   .19   .05   .61   -.04 -.07        .04
              Lumber             .70   .14   .16   .05   .54   -.05 -.09        .06
              Furniture          .82   .11   .12   .03   .68   -.16 -.30        .05
              Paper              .49   .29   .37   .08   .03    .18     .87     .14
                                 .85   .15   .15   .02   .55     .17    .23     .05
              Printing
              Chemicals          .68   .22   .25   .04   .77   -.02 -.03        .04
              Petroleum          .67   .30   .31   .06   .44     .30 .40        .05
              Rubber             .53   .26   .33   .10   .38   -.03 -.08        .14
              Leather            .85   .14   .14   .03   .47    .08  .14        .09
              Stone,Clay,Glass   .65   .14   .17   .06   .53   -.11    -.27     .06
              Primary Metals     .35   .27   .43   .13   .28     .03     .09    .12
              Fab. Metals      .83     .03   .04   .04   .88   -.15    -.21     .02
              Machinery          .76    .07  .08   .03   .91   -.11    -.14     .02
              Elec Machinery     .66    .14 .17    .03   .84   -.14    -.20     .04
              Trans Equip        .61   -.05 -.09   .06   .61   -.23    -.60     .07
              Instruments        .92    .01  .02   .02   .94   -.09    -.10      .01
              Other              .85    .13 .13    .04   .76   -.11    -.17      .03
              Non-Durables       .61    .14 .18    .06   .35   -.12    -.54      .11
              Durables           .62   -.01 -.02   .05   .80   -.25    -.45      .05
              Total              .57    .04 .06    .07   .67   -.26    -.62      .06


Notes:
 1.   The sample period is 1967:5-1984:12.
 2.   The statistics in the table are computed for monthly logarithmic growth rates.
 3.   The Y4 results are based on the finished goods only definition of output.
 4.   A' is the weight on IP in an optimal—forecast of the true series. We estimate = 1 —=
                         —                      ay"). Under the assumption that Var(e1'4)
      Var(e"°) = 0, A' =                             + Var(u")).
                                                                                                     =
 5.   ic' is the fraction of the variation in IP due to measurement error.     We estimate   Pc11'
                                                                       Under the assumption     that
      1—Var(y')/(Var(y") + Var(Ly'4) Cov(y'1', zy'4)). is defined similarly.
                                               —

      Var(Ae'4)= Var(Ae'1') = 0, ic" = Var(u')/(Var(y').
                                           APPENDIX B
                                ADDITIONAL TABLES AND FIGURES




                                   Table Bi: Seasoalityof Prices
                           x2     Signif. Std.Dev. of Std.Dev. of Ratio Std.Dev. of Ratio
                          Stat.   Level Seasonals,P Seasonals,IP IP/P Seasonals,Y4 Y4/P
  Food                    37.9     .000       .004        .029      7.4     .040    10.3
  Tobacco                 43.9     .000       .003        .134    42.2      .095    29.7
  Textiles                20.7     .037       .001        .079    69.5      .103    91.0
  Apparel                 93.9     .000       .002        .061     30.2     .107    52.8
  Lumber                  57.2     .000       .008        .046      5.6     .066      8.0
  Furniture               38.6     .000       .002        .054     35.9     .095     63.2
  Paper                   47.1     .000       .003        .059    22.4      .053     20.2
  Printing                  —       —        —           .035         —         .034          —


  Chemicals        27.4            .004     .003         .021         8.3       .049        19.1
  Petroleum        26.8            .005     .003         .023         7.1       .016         5.1
  Rubber           29.4            .002     .002         .054        31.0       .071        40.6
  Leather          61.4            .000     .004         .076        17.8       .076        17.8
  Stone,Clay,Glass 62.2            .000     .004         .037         8.6       .055        12.8
  Primary Metal    73.7            .000     .003         .049        15.8       .054        17.5
  Fab Metal        68.7            .000     .003         .022         8.0        .081       29.9
  Machinery        37.3            .000     .001         .024        23.2        .085       82.6
  Elec Machinery   38.1            .000     .001         .026        25.4        .080       76.9
  Trans Equip      88.0            .000     .009         .056         6.1        .100       10.9
  Instruments       —               —        —           .015         —          .076         —

                                    —        —                        —          .082         —
  Other             —                                     .042
                            —       —        —            .034        —          .043
  Non-Durables
  Durables                  —       —        —            .028        —          .072
  Total                     —       —        —
                                                          .029        —          .057


Notes:
 1.   The sample period is 1967:5—1984:12, except for the price series for Transportation,for which
      it is   1969:2-1984:12.
 2.   The ratios reported are for the standarddevation of the seasonals in IP or Y4 over the standard
      deviationof the seasonals in prices.
                  Table B2: DickeyFullerTests on Production Series
                                Finished Goods Only          Finished Goods plus WIP
                              Seasonally Seasonally          Seasonally    Seasonally
                        .     Adjusted     Unadjusted         Adjusted    Unadjusted
                              IP     Y4     IP    Y4          IP    Y4     1P 1 Y4
           Food             -2.32 -2.54 -2.36 -2.42         -2.32 -2.44 -2.36 -2.37
           Tobacco          -2.38 -1.71 -1.62 -1.56         -2.38 -1.83 -1.62 -1.38
           Textiles         -3.06 -2.19 -3.05 -2.10         -3.06 -2.31 -3.05 -2.17

           Apparel          -2.91 -2.84 -2.64 -2.86         -2.91 -3.00 -2.64 -2.96
           Lumber           -2.87 -2.67 -3.01 -2.69         -2.87 -2.66 -3.01 -2.58
           Furniture        -3.63 -2.76 -3.70 -2.58         -3.63 -2.88 -3.70 -2.60
           Paper            -3.50 -3.54 -3.49 -3.78         -3.50 -3.57 -3.49 -3.78
           Printing         -1.71 -2.64 -1.81 -2.36         -1.71 -2.58 -1.81 -2.28
           Chemicals        -2.39 -2.97 -2.43 -2.91         -2.39 -2.98 -2.43 -2.83
           Petroleum         -1.16 -1.93 -1.06 -1.84         -1.16 -1.97 -1.06 -1.84
           Rubber            -2.86 -2.81 -2.76 -2.59         -2.86 -2.85 -2.76 -2.62
           Leather           -3.44 -1.51 -3.50 -1.56         -3.44 -1.41 -3.50 -1.41
           Stone,Clay,Glass -3.25 -2.37 -3.32 -2.36          -3.25 -2.45 -3.32 -2.36
           Primary Metal -2.84 -3.02 -2.75 -2.87             -2.84 -2.96 -2.75 -3.00
           Fab Metal         -3.34 -2.48 -3.19 -2.65         -3.34 -2.91 -3.19 -2.81
           Machinery         -3.57 -3.14 -4.37 -3.29         -3.57 -3.53 -4.37 -3.64
           Elec Machinery    -3.37 -2.55 -3.57 -2.71         -3.37 -2.95 -3.57 -2.82
           Trans Equip       -2.97 -3.15 -3.04 -3.16         -2.97 -3.43 -3.04 -3.34
           Instruments       -2.56 -2.12 -2.63 -2.00         -2.56 -2.10 -2.63 -1.98
           Other             -2.79 -3.53 -2.82 -3.28         -2.79 -3.68 -2.82 -3.26
           Non-Durables      -3.26 -2.43 -3.50 -2.45         -3.26 -2.42 -3.50 -2.46
           Durables          -3.71 -3.91 -4.12 -4.05         -3.71 -4.47 -4.12 -4.35
           Total             -3.57 -38 -406 -332             -37 -87 -4M6 -3.89
Notes:
 1. The sample period is 1968:3-1984:12.
 2. The entries in the table are the t-statistics on the lagged log level of output from a regression
    of the log growth rate on a constant, a time trend, the lagged log level of the series, and lags
    one through twelve of the log growth rate of the series. A value of -3.43 is required to reject
    the null at the 95% level.
 3. The Y4 resmits in columns 2 and 4 are based on the finished goods only definition of output. The
    Y4 results in columns 6 and 8 are based on the finished goods plus work-in-progess definition
    of output.
               Table B3a: Summary Statistics, Seasonally Adjusted Data
                          Quarterly averages of monthly data
                                   Mean        Standard Dev. Autocorrelation     Cross
                              IP        Y4      IP     Y4     IP       Y4       Contl.
         Food                 .0079    .0045    .010   .021 -.03      -.07         .49
         Tobacco              .0018   -.0016    .031   .061 -.38      -.51         .46
         Textile              .0048    .0043   .042     .031    .42      .32       .59
         Apparel              .0033    .0031   .032     .049    .36      .08       .52
         Lumber               .0046    .0070   .045     .056    .24      .02       .71
         Furniture            .0092    .0094   .034     .043    .47      .31       .70
         Paper                .0084    .0066   .031     .026    .35      .29       .76
         Printing             .0094    .0061   .017     .023    .52      .04       .41
          Chemicals           .0124    .0091   .026     .029    .51      .34       .74
         Petroleum            .0026    .0051   .028     .031   -.10      .11       .57
         Rubber               .0161    .0069   .045     .050    .31      .01       .72
         Leather             -.0090   -.0095   .036     .061    .15     -.03       .58
          Stone,Clay,Glass    .0061    .0026   .031     .037    .42      .13       .79
         Primary Metal       -.0018   -.0013   .073     .068    .20      .23       .87
         Fab Metal            .0036    .0030   .030     .047    .63      .09       .61
          Machinery           .0110    .0099   .031     .038    .70      .50       .77
          Elec Machinery      .0151    .0125   .030     .039    .58      .33       .74
         Trans Equip          .0051    .0044   .054     .074    .03     -.07       .87
         Instruments          .0146    .0116   .019     .043    .56      .06       .49
         Other                .0042    .0043   .026     .055    .43     -.16       .40
          Non-Durables        .0086    .0053   .019     .018    .49      .33       .78
         Durables             .0073    .0063   .030     .036    .50      .29       .91
         Total                .0079    .0059   .024     .026    .54      .32       .90

Notes:
 1. The sample period is 1967:4-1984:4.
 2. The statistics in the table are computed for quarterly logarithmic growth rates.
 3. The Y4 results are based on the finished goods plus work-in-progress definition of output.
              Table B3b: Summary Statistics, Seasonally Adjusted Data
                   Annual data, Annual Average of monthly data
                                   Mean        Standard Dev. Autocorrelation    Cross
                              IP          Y4           Y4       IP      Y4      Correl.
         Food                 .0312 .0181      .018    .023     .03    -.53       .53
         Tobacco              .0059 -.0078     .033    .041    -.30      .17      .71
         Textile              .0171  .0184     .066    .062     .02      .11      .93
         Apparel              .0135 .0134      .070    .056     .04    -.08       .72
         Lumber               .0182 .0271      .087    .088     .14      .04       .96
         Furniture            .0361 .0339      .093    .097     .18      .15       .98
         Paper                .0323 .0246      .062    .060    -.17    -.22        .95
         Printing             .0381 .0239      .050    .046     .24      .19       .93
         Chemicals            .0446 .0345      .064    .065    -.15    -.04        .97
         Petroleum            .0100 .0183      .047    .057     .53    -.09        .44
         Rubber               .0581 .0226      .097    .099     .02      .15       .90
         Leather             -.0361 -.0350     .044    .066    -.29     -.25       .74
         Stone,Clay,Glass     .0231   .0078    .082    .079     .12      .16       .98
         Primary Metal       -.0086 -.0063     .144    .133    -.23     -.18       .98
         Fab Metal            .0105   .0041    .090    .086     .07      .12       .98
         Machinery            .0447   .0404    .096    .104     .07      .06      1.00
         Elec Machinery       .0581   .0489    .089    .092     .17      .15       .98
         Trans Equip          .0144   .0118    .101    .131     .05      .06       .98
         Instruments          .0552   .0493    .055    .066     .17      .09       .97
         Other                .0153   .0181    .068    .080     .01     -.01       .96
         Non-Durables         .0327   .0207    .046    .038     .01     -.05       .96
                                                                                       -
         Durables             .0269   .0224    .083    .091     .07      .08       .99
         Total                .0293   .0217    .067    .065     .05      .06       .99

Notes:
 1. The sample period is 1969-1984.
 2. The statistics in the table are computed for annual logarithmic growth rates.
 3. The Y4 results are based on the finished goods plus work-in-progress definition of output.
                Table B4: Variance of Production over Variance of Sales,
                               Seasonally Adjusted Data
                                            IP                   Y4
                Food                              .57                     1.17
                Tobacco                           .46                     1.37
                Textiles                         1.09                     1.00
                Apparel                          1.27                     1.43
                Lumber                            .98                     1.08
                 Furniture                        1.02                    1.10

                 Paper                            1.28                    1.03
                 Printing                         3.31                    1.17
                 Chemicals                         .85                    1.06
                 Petroleum                         .63                    1.02
                 Rubber                            .91                    1.12
                 Leather                            .44                   1.28
                 Stone,Clay,Glass                 1.13                    1.13
                 Primary Metal                    1.09                    1.00
                 Fab Metal                        1.08                    1.24
                 Machinery                        1.18                    1.22
                 Elec Machinery                   1.85                    1.41
                 Trans Equip                       .58                    1.15
                 Instruments                       .93                    1.59
                 Other                             .79                    1.40
                 Non-Durables                     1.35                    1.08
                 Durables                          .95                    1.29
                 Total                            1.11                    1.21

Notes:
 1.   The sample period is 1967:5-1984:12.
 2.   The statistics in the tables are computed for deviations from exponential trend; see text for
      details.
 3.   The Y4 results are based on the finished goods plus work-in-progress definition of output.
                                                        GD
                                             GD    GD
                                             GD    N
                                                        >-
                                             GD
                                             N-
                                             GD


                                             N-
                                             N
                                             GD



               --=-rr-r.-       -
                                             N-
                                             CD



                                             N
                                             GD




                                             N-
                                             CD


                                             CD
                                             ID
          —                                  CD


                                             N
                                             (U
                                             CD


                                             Lfl
                                             ID
                                             CT)



                                             GD
                                             cc
                                             GD




C)   GD   (U                        N   C)

GD   N    N                 N       N   N
      LU   0)   0)         0)          0)
      o    LU              0)          0)   0)   N)
           I               I
LU
0)
LU
0)
LU
LU
0)
Ci)                                                   -m
LU
U)                                                    -
N)
                                -                     —
LU
0)
LU                              —
                                                      rn
LU
N)
LU
N)                                                    cn
LU
LU
N)                   —--
U)
                               __9__
LU
—1
N)                                                    D
LU
N)
CD
LU
LU
LU
LU
LU
       gi
       9I
  £8[ t9GT GLt L.LgT 9LI £LGT ILGt GGGI L9t 9G £96t T9T
                                                          —D L
                                -
                                                          —kL
                                                          —9 L
                                                          —9 L
                '
(_ i
'V/f   -
  2
                rim um         - 9dUJ
                          CD   On   CD
                0)   CD   CD   N)        ON
          CD
          0)
          CD
          0)
          C.)
          CD
          0)                                  -U
          CO
                                              CU
                                              CU
          CD
          0)                                  CU
          -.1
          CD
          0)
          CD
                                              CU
          CD
          CD
          —J                                  LU
          CD
          CD                                  LU
          CO                                  En
                                              CU
          CD
                                              CU
          .)                                  CU
                                              CU
          CD
          CD
C C.)     CD
C.)   £   CD
-c
          CD
          CD
          C.)
L—
I          NOkA
            NdI
     £961 1861 6L61 LL6T SLGT £L61 TL6I 6961 L961 5961 £961 1961
                                                                     0 0
                                                                   —9 01
                  PITh O9          1UflO- NON
                          UUHHBLES SER HL]J
i()




:     z



          1961 1353 1365 1367 1369 1371 1973 1575 1977 137S 1961   183
                                                           IPO
                                                           YHJD
          /
