                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            COVID-19 AND CRIME:
           EFFECTS OF STAY-AT-HOME ORDERS ON DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

                                     Lindsey Rose Bullinger
                                         Jillian B. Carr
                                        Analisa Packham

                                      Working Paper 27667
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27667


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




We thank SafeGraph, Inc. for making their data available for research. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Lindsey Rose Bullinger, Jillian B. Carr, and Analisa Packham. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
COVID-19 and Crime: Effects of Stay-at-Home Orders on Domestic Violence
Lindsey Rose Bullinger, Jillian B. Carr, and Analisa Packham
NBER Working Paper No. 27667
August 2020
JEL No. I18,J12,K42

                                          ABSTRACT

COVID-19 has led to an abrupt change in time spent at home, with many cities and states
implementing official stay-at-home (SAH), or “lockdown” policies. Using cell phone block-level
activity data and administrative 911 and crime data from the city of Chicago, we estimate the
effects of the Illinois governor's SAH order on calls for police service, crimes recorded by police,
and arrests made relating to domestic violence. We find that the SAH order announcement
increased time spent at home, leading to a decrease in total calls for police service, but a
subsequent increase in domestic violence-related calls for police service. Effects are larger in
areas with a high proportion of renters. These effects for domestic violence calls, however, are at
odds with reported domestic-related crimes and arrests by police officers; we find that official
reports and arrests for domestic violence crimes fell by 8.7 percent and 26.3 percent, respectively.
Trends in reported domestic violence crimes mirror drops in total reported crimes; however,
declines for domestic violence crimes are an order of magnitude smaller than the decline in other
non-violent crime rates. Overall, we estimate that nearly 1,000 cases of domestic violence crimes
went underreported between March and April.

Lindsey Rose Bullinger                           Analisa Packham
School of Public Policy                          Department of Economics
Georgia Institute of Technology                  Vanderbilt University
685 Cherry St.                                   2301 Vanderbilt Place
Atlanta, GA 30332                                Nashville, TN 37235
lrbullin@gatech.edu                              and NBER
                                                 analisa.packham@vanderbilt.edu
Jillian B. Carr
Department of Economics
Krannert School of Management
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
carr56@purdue.edu
1    Introduction

In an effort to contain the spread of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-

CoV-2, or COVID-19), there have been abrupt and widespread changes in the amount of time

people spend at home. Many cities implemented official stay-at-home (SAH), or “lockdown" policies

in 2020, as cases continued to rise (Dave, Friedson, Matsuzawa, and Sabia, 2020; Gupta, Nguyen,

Raman, Lee, Rojas, Bento, Simon, and Wing, 2020). Such policies have created new concern over

domestic violence victims spending more time with their abusers (Sandler, 2020; Andrew, 2020),

and corresponding increases in fear, stress, and financial constraints during the ongoing pandemic

could lead to even more frequent and/or severe incidents of domestic violence as perpetrators lash

out. Furthermore, spiking unemployment rates and uncertain financial times may reduce potential

victims’ capacity to leave, creating a persistent unsafe environment.

    Because victims are interacting with fewer potential reporters, SAH orders may also result in

this type of crime going undetected. This is especially true for children, as teachers, counselors,

and administrators are the primary reporters for child maltreatment (Fitzpatrick, Benson, and

Bondurant, 2020). Moreover, police officers may answer fewer domestic-related calls for service in

person, or spend less time on these calls, in an attempt to implement social distancing. In this

project, we estimate the extent to which time spent at home due to the COVID-19 pandemic affects

calls for service, reports, and arrests for intimate partner violence and child maltreatment to better

understand the costs and benefits of lockdown policies.

    Specifically, in this paper, we focus on the effects of the SAH policy in Chicago, IL, which was

announced March 9, 2020 and was officially implemented on March 21, 2020. We estimate effects

of prolonged stays at home on domestic-related calls for police service (i.e. 911 calls), coupled with

reported crimes and arrests, and present evidence that SAH policies increased domestic violence

between March and April 2020, compared to the previous year. To measure the extent to which

individuals complied with the SAH orders and to identify areas of the city most affected by SAH

orders, we first analyze block-level cell phone activity data from SafeGraph, along with other mea-

sures of mobility throughout the city, including public transit entrances and traffic data. We then

use detailed case-level administrative data on calls for police service, officer-initiated crime reports,

and arrests to comprehensively assess the potential changes in crime reporting over this time period.


                                                   1
   Importantly, these data allow us to disentangle some of the reasons that domestic violence is

going undetected to create a more accurate measure of underlying violence and to suggest policy

prescriptions to protect vulnerable groups. These data serve as an improvement on current existing

research, which uses multi-city approaches to estimate effects of lockdown policies to study only

calls for police service (Leslie and Wilson, 2020; McCrary and Sanga, 2020). In using several

different measures of both crime and economic activity, and by estimating effects within a large,

demographically diverse city, we are able to shed new light on the scope of underlying changes in

domestic abuse and the impacts of SAH orders on reporting processes. As a result, we will be able

to speak to effects of stay-at-home policies on a number of different measures of domestic crimes

and offer new evidence on victim reporting behavior. Moreover, in using comprehensive data on

reported crimes, we are able to speak to how the changes in domestic crimes compare to other crime

types, like drug and property crimes, to estimate the extent to which time spent at home affects

criminal behavior more broadly.

   Using a difference-in-differences approach that compares weekly 911 call rates in 2019 and 2020

before and after the SAH order announcement in Chicago, we find that policies leading to more

time spent at home increased domestic-related police calls for service by 7.5 percent. These effects

correspond to 1,875 additional domestic calls than would have been expected over a 12-week window.

The effects are largest in areas with more households that are married with children, areas with

relatively high rates of rental residences, and areas that experienced the largest changes in staying

at home.

   Although these administrative call-level data include reports of domestic violence even if no

official report or arrest is made–which is a substantial improvement on survey data–domestic vio-

lence is widely known to experience nonrandom underreporting (Ellsberg, Heise, Pena, Agurto, and

Winkvist, 2001). We expect that during the COVID-19 lockdown this underreporting persisted,

and possibly even increased. Nonetheless, although considerable underreporting likely remains, we

are able to compare incident reports over time to get a sense for how official reports and arrests for

these types of crimes changed throughout the city, before and after the SAH orders.

   Importantly, we find that while the first-line reporting channel for domestic violence reporting,

calls for police service, increased as a result of the lockdown, the more formal channel, official

reported crime and police arrests for domestic crimes, did not. We estimate a 13 percent decrease

                                                  2
in reports of domestic violence in March-April 2020, as compared to 2019, despite the increase in

911 calls for the same incidents.

   Together, these results provide evidence to suggest that the wedge between domestic violence

incidents and police reporting expanded when Chicagoans increased their time spent at home in

March and April and generate support for three ideas: (i) COVID-19 reduced interactions between

civilians and police, in an attempt to maintain social distancing (ii) third parties and/or neighbors

were more likely to report domestic crimes as a result of increased time spent at home, while victims

themselves were less likely to follow through with a police report, and/or (iii) the nature and severity

of calls were different during this period, such that they did not reach the level of an arrest. In

particular, we find that calls for domestic battery, the most severe domestic crime, did not change

over this time period, although reported cases and arrests fell.

   Notably, we do not find significant effects for domestic crimes against children, as measured by

physical child abuse. This result may indicate that although domestic crimes rose in March-April

2020, calls for child abuse fell, potentially due to lessened visibility of child victims and limitations

of various reporting channels for child maltreatment crimes. In particular, child protective services

agencies are responsible for the majority of child maltreatment calls, and, like many states, the

Illinois Department of Child and Family Services (DCFS) has seen a substantial drop in calls to the

hotline (Jackson, 2020; Bullinger, Feely, Raissian, and Schneider, 2020).

   As a whole, our findings build on recent evidence of the effects of lockdown policies on domestic

violence. Previous work shows that these policies across a number of cities increased police calls for

service for domestic-related offenses by 10.2–12 percent, and that increases in domestic crimes were

concentrated during weekdays (Leslie and Wilson, 2020; McCrary and Sanga, 2020). We contribute

to this literature by painting a more comprehensive picture of the effects of SAH orders by focusing

on one city–Chicago–and extending our analysis beyond 911 calls to estimate effects on reported

crimes, arrests and other types of domestic crimes. We also compare calls for service, reports,

and arrests for domestic crimes to those for non-domestic crimes. Finally, we further expand this

evidence base by examining heterogenity by the timing and location of crimes and by block-group

characteristics, including economic vulnerability, family structure, and living conditions, to better

understand potential mechanisms. We note that although we are not able to directly test the extent

to which all possible mechanisms contribute to the findings we present, we investigate plausible

                                                   3
explanations to determine potential drivers. Throughout Section 4 we discuss the set of potential

mechanisms for each outcome in detail coupled with supporting evidence, where possible.

        These findings have important implications for policy. Our findings offer evidence on the health

tradeoffs of SAH policies and the direct costs that they impose on domestic abuse victims. These

results also highlight the potential need to protect domestic violence victims in the circumstance

of future outbreaks, and suggest that there is a need to strengthen the role that healthcare and

law enforcement professionals play in detecting abuse, given that SAH orders have changed and

disrupted the traditional abuse detection process. And, given the evidence on the large external

costs of intimate partner violence on the health and well-being of children (Aizer, 2010; Carrell,

Hoekstra, and Kuka, 2018), addressing the increase in calls reporting intimate partner abuse in

policymaking is relevant for improving total social welfare.



2        Data

2.1        Activity Tracking

We use GPS-tracking data to determine how and when the lockdown policy in Chicago affected

time spent at home. Specifically, on March 9, 2020, Governor J.B. Pritzker implemented COVID-

19 executive order number 8, ordering Illinois residents not defined as “essential workers" or other

exempt personnel to remain at home. The order also dictated that individuals maintain social

distancing of at least six feet from any other person when possible. The order was set to be effective

March 21, 2020.1 However, because SAH order announcements in other cities led to individuals

sheltering-in-place immediately (Leslie and Wilson, 2020; Dave, Friedson, Matsuzawa, and Sabia,

2020; Gupta, Nguyen, Raman, Lee, Rojas, Bento, Simon, and Wing, 2020), we focus primarily on

the SAH order announcement date, rather than the effective date, in the corresponding analyses.

        In particular, we use SafeGraph cell phone activity tracking to more directly test how the Chicago

SAH order announcement changed time spent at home. These data are generated using a panel

of GPS pings from anonymous mobile devices. SafeGraph aggregates device data by Census block

group and day, based on a device’s home location. For a location to qualify as a user’s “home",
    1
        For the full order, see https://www2.illinois.gov/IISNews/21288-Gov._Pritzker_Stay_at_Home_Order.pdf.




                                                        4
SafeGraph considers a common nighttime location of each mobile device over a 6-week period.2

      We consider changes in time spent at home corresponding with the SAH order announcement

using two main variables: the percent of devices that did not leave home in a particular day, and the

percent of the day all devices spent at home during a given day. In some instances, we additionally

consider the number of devices that spent more than 6 hours at a non-home location between 8am-

6pm, and those that spent between 4–6 hours at a non-home location between these hours to get a

sense of the number of individuals continuing to work full-time and part-time out-of-home during

lockdown.

      We present summary statistics for SafeGraph data in Table 1 Panel (a). In Column 1, we

present the overall means for data from the first 15 weeks of 2020, while Column 2 shows the

standard deviation. In an average block group, SafeGraph tracks 54 devices per week. SafeGraph

calculates that devices stay home for approximately 82 percent of the day. Of these devices, over

32 percent report staying entirely at home between January-April 2020.

      To supplement this analysis we consider two measures of mobility related to transportation -

public transit use (“L-Train" ridership) and vehicular traffic. We use data on daily entries per

station to measure the former and traffic counts at designated locations for the latter. Both of these

datasets are reported by the City of Chicago on their public data portal.3


2.2     Police Calls for Service

Our primary analyses use administrative case-level data on police service calls, or 911 calls, for

the city of Chicago from January 1, 2019-April 14, 2020. These data contain information on the

timing and location (e.g. latitude and longitude) of the call as well as a detailed description code

referring to the nature of the call. We focus primarily on all calls that are flagged as “domestic

disturbance" and “domestic battery", and consider the sum of these calls to be domestic violence-

related calls for police service.4 We additionally consider calls flagged for child abuse. For our

preferred specifications, we construct call rates per 1,000 total population.

      One advantage in using police calls for one city is that the procedure used to classify calls
  2
     The SafeGraph methodology uses a 7-geohash granularity ( 153m x 153m) to determine “home" locations.
  3
     https://data.cityofchicago.org/
   4
     Specifically, domestic disturbances are considered an argument between partners that denote verbal abuse or
psychological abuse. Domestic battery includes calls for intimate partner physical violence.



                                                       5
does not vary across locations. Moreover, using calls allows us to better observe how reporting is

changing during lockdown. We note that domestic crimes are widely underreported, and that child

maltreatment may experience even further underreporting during lockdown, given school closures

and social isolation away from caregivers (Baron, Goldstein, and Wallace, 2020; Bullinger, Feely,

Raissian, and Schneider, 2020; Fitzpatrick, Benson, and Bondurant, 2020). Additionally, early in

the pandemic many domestic violence shelters closed due to the potential for spread of the disease,

leaving domestic violence advocates unable to help victims face-to-face (Ward, 2020). Therefore,

any effects we find on these types of calls could be in spite of reduced visibility, indicating that

estimates will likely understate the true effects of the policy. Conversely, if more residents are at

home to observe violence in neighboring households, third party reporting could rise.

       We present summary statistics for these data in Table 1 Panel (b). On average, a block group

calls for police service 25.7 times per week. This corresponds to approximately 54,000 calls per

week, or 7,700 calls per day, across the city of Chicago. Domestic violence-related calls make up

about 5 percent of total calls.


2.3      Crime Reports and Arrests

To get a better sense of police interactions, arrests, and reporting of domestic crimes more gen-

erally, we supplement police calls for service using administrative offense-level data from the City

of Chicago’s online data portal. These data contain information on the timing and location of the

reported crime, including latitude and longitude and location type (e.g. residence, street, store,

etc.) as well as a detailed offense description code. We focus on data from January 1-April 14 for

2019 and 2020, including offenses occurring 10 weeks prior to and 5 weeks during lockdown.5

       These data contain a flag if an offense is considered a domestic crime, which is critical for

our analyses. Notably, domestic violence and child maltreatment reports could be instigated by

individuals outside of the residence, and conflicts do not need to be contained in the home to be

flagged as domestic abuse.6 Moreover, offense-level data contain information on whether an arrest

was made, and victims do not need to press charges for a record to appear in the data.
   5
     Available for download at https://data.cityofchicago.org/Public-Safety/Crimes-2001-to-present/ijzp-q8t2.
   6
     Specifically, in the state of Illinois, domestic violence is considered any crime against family members related by
blood, current or ex-spouses, those living in the same dwelling, people who are dating or engaged or used to date,
including same sex couples; and people with disabilities and their personal assistants, according to state statutes
(Illinois Attorney General, 2018).


                                                           6
        We note that for a record to appear in these data, a police officer must file a report of the

incident. Because 911 calls may not lead to later police interaction, these data will therefore detect

a different measure of domestic crimes– those warranting police intervention. In our main analysis,

we select the set of crimes used in each category to reflect different mechanisms that can affect

family violence. For domestic abuse we consider all reports that are flagged for or indicate a

case of domestic violence between adults and extend this analysis to separately estimate effects

for domestic battery and assault. Battery, the most serious offense listed above, includes unlawful

physical contact with the intent to cause injury, while assault reflects the presence or threat of harm

to another individual. In our definition of child abuse, we include cases of non-accidental injury to

a child inflicted by a parent or caregiver, as described in the data.7 Notably, as shown in Table 1, of

the weekly domestic-related crime reports, 11 percent are for domestic assault and 55 percent are

for domestic battery.

        One of the primary advantages of these data is the ability to pinpoint the location, date, and

time that the crime was reported. For our main analyses, we use coordinates to geocode the location

of each crime and create a block group-by-week panel. For our preferred specifications, we construct

crime and arrest rates per 1,000 total population. We additionally match these block groups to the

calls for service data and household demographic and economic information from the 2018 American

Community Survey to get a sense of how calls and crimes during the pandemic change differentially

across block groups.8



3        Empirical Approach

Our primary approach for estimating the effects of the Chicago SAH order is a difference-in-

differences design that uses 2019 weekly block-level crime levels as the comparison group for weekly

block-level crimes in 2020. We estimate differences in these treatment and control weeks prior to

and after the March 9 SAH order announcement. In our preferred specifications, we consider all

block groups in Chicago to be treated, although we perform additional tests to compare areas with
    7
     Specifically, for counts of child abuse we include any cases from the city of Chicago data that indicate physical
abuse (e.g. battery or aggravated assault of a child) as these are cases that will be most likely to be reported during
lockdown.
   8
     For summary statistics of these variables, see Table A1. On average, block groups in Chicago are 49 percent
White, 33 percent Black, and 27 percent Hispanic. About 8 percent of households are married with children.



                                                          7
higher SAH compliance, as measured by time spent at home using cell phones, to those with lower

compliance. The identifying assumption underlying this approach is that the changes in reported

domestic violence in the comparison weeks provide a good counterfactual for the changes that would

have been observed in the absence of lockdown policies.

      We begin our analysis by estimating Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) models of the following

form:




                                    ybt = β0 + β1 SAHbt + πt + αb + ubt                              (1)


      where b and t represent the block group and week, respectively. y represents the main outcome

variables of interest: calls for police service rates, crime rates, and arrest rates for intimate partner

violence and physical child abuse, among other crime categories. πt represents week-by-year fixed

effects to account for seasonality, and αb represents block group fixed effects. We cluster standard

errors at the block level.

      We focus on estimates based on OLS models because they are sometimes more precise than

estimates based on weighted-least-squares models; however, when presenting our main findings we

also discuss results from an approach estimating WLS analogues that weight observations by the

2018 block-group population. Moreover, while we use call and crime rates as our preferred outcome,

because crimes are discrete by nature, we also estimate models using logged outcomes as well as the

inverse hyperbolic sine of calls and crimes, which, unlike a standard log transformation, accounts

for observations that have zero counts.9

      Additionally, we present week-by-week event study figures to consider how effects evolve over

time. These models are of the following form:



                                              5
                                              X
                                    ybt = (         θSAHbt ) + πt + αb + ubt                         (2)
                                            t=−9
                                             t6=0


where variables remain the same as described above, and θ represents the coefficients of interest.
                                                             √
  9
      This transformation takes on the form sinh−1
                                                z = ln(z +       1 + z 2 ).



                                                         8
These estimates are important in this context as individuals experience not only increases, but also

persistence in time spent at home throughout March and April. Therefore, event-study coefficients

allow us to track dynamic effects as partners and families spend more time with each other at home.

    As with any difference-in-differences design, the validity of our approach requires common trends

in the outcome over time for the treatment and control groups (weeks in 2020 and 2019, respectively).

We provide support for this assumption with evidence that outcomes for these groups are not

diverging from one another in the weeks prior to the increase in time spent at home.



4     Estimating Effects of Social Distancing Policies on

      Domestic Violence

4.1    Effects on Mobility

In this section, we discuss the extent to which SAH policies responding to the COVID-19 pandemic

affect domestic violence. Before presenting our estimated effects on police calls for service and

reported crimes, we first show that the Illinois SAH order announcement on March 9, 2020 affected

travel and economic activity in Chicago.

    In Figure 1 we present time spent at home and work metrics for the city of Chicago over time

during 2020. In particular, in the top panel we display mean weekly block-level averages of the

percent of the day devices spent at home and the percent of devices staying completely at home,

while the bottom panel presents the percent of devices that work full time and part time outside of

the home. Prior to week 10 (i.e. March 9), individuals spent approximately 70–80 percent of their

day at home. After the announced SAH order, the percent of the day spent at home spikes sharply

to nearly 100 percent by week 15. A similar rise occurs for those who spent the day completely at

home. At the same time, the percent of those working outside of the home drops sharply.

    This spike in time spent at home is mirrored by evidence in Figure 2, which displays weekly

block-level average L-train entries and red light camera violations for the first 15 weeks of 2019 and

2020.10 Notably, L-train entries dropped off after the March 9 announcement, then fell to nearly zero

on March 21, despite the L-trains remaining in operation. This follows similar documented trends
  10
     There is a noticeable drop in ridership in the 5th week of 2019 due to the polar vortex. That decrease is much
smaller than the SAH decrease and provides a comparison for scale.



                                                        9
in mobility, non-essential worker travel, and restaurant reservations across a number of other cities

(Leslie and Wilson, 2020; Dave, Friedson, Matsuzawa, and Sabia, 2020; Gupta, Nguyen, Raman,

Lee, Rojas, Bento, Simon, and Wing, 2020).

       We emphasize that any corresponding changes in crime will combine effects of time spent at

home along with financial stress, economic uncertainty, and school closures (which became effective

March 16).11 While we cannot disentangle these mechanisms to speak to the causal channel of

any single response to COVID-19, we note that following the SAH announcement in Illinois, more

devices stayed at home for extended periods of time, traffic fell substantially, and fewer individuals

took public transit. Therefore, we argue that time spent indoors, either by perpetrators, victims, or

witnesses, is a likely factor contributing to any observed changes in crime and reporting levels. Below

we present estimated reduced-form effects of the SAH announcement and additional social distancing

policies on domestic violence-related calls for police service and crimes ending with a police report

in an effort to contribute to the broader understanding of pandemic policies on domestic violence.


4.2      Effects on Calls for Police Service

Conditional on an incident of domestic abuse occurring, a call for police service represents the

first step in a crime intervention. These calls can be initiated by anyone witnessing the incident,

including the victim and/or the perpetrator. Calls for police service have distinct advantages over

other measures of domestic violence. For example, these data do not suffer from recall biases and

other biases present in survey data. They also contain many incidents that do not get reported to

police because often victims or witnesses are hesitant to push forward with more formal procedures.

       The COVID-19 pandemic may have altered calls for police service outside of the impact of the

changes in underlying violence in a number of ways. For example, as a result of lockdown, victims

may reduce their propensity to report instances of domestic violence as they spend more time at

home with their abusers and worry about future backlash. On the other hand, if lockdown creates

greater potential benefits of a perpetrator’s incapacitation for the victim, they may be more likely to

report. Or, if SAH orders induce perpetrators to use violence at the extensive margin, the volume of

calls may increase if new victims are more likely to report their abuse. Finally, for households with
  11
    As a result, a number of standard theoretical economic household bargaining models, including models of in-
strumental violence, and violence as limited by threat points, could explain our results (Manser and Brown, 1980;
McElroy and Horney, 1981; Farmer and Tiefenthaler, 1997; Pollak, 2005; Aizer, 2010; Anderberg and Rainer, 2011).


                                                       10
children, the added challenges of parenting during lockdown could escalate even otherwise regular

interactions among family members.

   Moreover, increased time spent at home has the potential to change reporting incentives for

neighbors, especially in tight living quarters. Neighbors are more likely to be at home and may be

more likely to witness evidence of abuse. Similarly, domestic disturbances might create negative

spillovers for those spending time at home, especially if they are recurring. In either case, third

parties may be more likely to report incidences of violence, if even to deter future disturbances.

   For calls relating to child abuse, mandated reporters typically receive training and are instructed

to report child abuse and neglect via the child abuse hotline or online reporting system (both which

go directly to DCFS). Therefore, 911 calls relating to child abuse are less likely to be mandated

reporters and more likely to be neighbors, friends, family, and others. Since children are spending

less time with mandated reporters and more time in their homes and neighborhoods, calls for

service relating to child abuse could increase. Alternatively, if children are less likely to interact

with members beyond their immediate household, overall surveillance of child abuse, even from

non-mandated reporters could decrease.

   In this section, we investigate the claim that more domestic-related police calls for service did

in fact occur during the early stages of lockdown in Chicago, and we explore subgroups of Census

block groups to support the above hypotheses. Figure 3 first shows the event study figures for

police calls for service. Importantly, in the weeks leading up to the SAH announcement, there

are no statistically significant differences in calls during 2020, compared to 2019, for any outcome.

Relative to trends in 2019, estimates indicate that the SAH announcement resulted in a decline

in total calls for police service. When looking specifically at most calls for domestic conflicts and

crimes, however, we present evidence that calls for domestic violence, domestic disturbance, and

domestic battery increase in the weeks following the SAH announcement. Calls related to child

abuse remain constant.

   In Table 2 we present our main estimates, based on Equation 1, which summarize the event

study figures presented in Figure 3. Column 1 presents estimates for all crime types, while Columns

2–4 and Column 5 present estimates for the listed domestic crimes (domestic violence, disturbance,

and battery) and child abuse, respectively. Echoing the event study figure, overall, we find that

COVID-19 social distancing policies reduced calls for police service in 2020, relative to the same

                                                 11
weeks of the year in 2019. However, this effect masks heterogeneity among call types. We find

that calls for domestic violence increased by 6.8–7.5 percent, with larger increases for domestic

disturbance calls. These figures correspond to approximately 200 more domestic-related calls across

the city of Chicago per week. Notably, we find no changes in calls for domestic battery, suggesting

that the influx of calls may be related to less severe types of domestic violence. Moreover, we find

reductions in calls related to child maltreatment, consistent with evidence suggesting that there are

fewer reports when children are not in school (Fitzpatrick, Benson, and Bondurant, 2020).12

       Because domestic-related calls are always flagged as top-priority (i.e. Level “1"), these estimates

should suggest an increase in calls with higher priority after March 9. We show this is indeed the

case in Figure 4. Notably, calls flagged as having the lowest level of priority, “Level 4", also increase

over time, indicating that call-takers are likely shifting calls from priority levels 2 and 3 to level 4

to diminish police interaction with civilians in non-emergency situations in an effort maintain social

distancing, when possible.

       To get a better sense of what types of households may be driving these results, in Table 3 we

analyze effects separately by block group characteristics. In particular, we present estimates for

block groups with an above-median number of households that report being white, black, Hispanic,

or married with children, according to 2018 ACS data. We find statistically significant increases

in domestic violence-related calls for police service across all of these subgroups, ranging from

6.1–14.1 percent.13 The largest estimates are for blocks with an above-median level of White and

Hispanic households and those with a large proportion of households that are married with children,

although we note these estimates are not statistically different across panels. As shown in Columns

3–5, estimates are also similar across block types when analyzing domestic disturbance, battery,

and child abuse, indicating that no one particular neighborhood or type of block group is driving

our baseline increase in calls for domestic violence.

       Using data from the ACS, we also analyze effects separately by block-group characteristics

related to renting a home, and present these estimates in the second-to-last panel of Table 3. We
  12
      These estimates are not sensitive to functional form. See Table A2. Estimates on domestic-related calls for police
service are positive and statistically significant, ranging from 3.4–4.8 percent.
   13
      Additionally, when we measure effects for block groups with a relatively high proportion of households above
the median income level, these estimates are statistically insignificant, further indicating that calls are concentrated
among block groups with a larger percent of lower-income households. This may be unsurprising, given that women
living in households with an annual income of $35,000 are four times more likely to be abused by a partner (Stith,
Liu, Davies, Boykin, Alder, Harris, Som, McPherson, and Dees, 2009; U.S. Department of Justice, 2014).


                                                          12
do so to further explore the notion that renters grouped together in tighter living quarters may

respond differently to SAH orders and/or be more likely to live next to a neighbor that can hear

and report a domestic-related offense. We find that increases in domestic violence-related calls for

police service are relatively large in areas with a majority of renters (10.5 percent). Furthermore,

the persistent reductions in calls for child abuse are not statistically different for this set of block

groups, adding further support for heterogenous effects based on proximity to potential reporters.

These findings are consistent with evidence that SAH orders are likely to increase domestic violence

reporting when there are more individuals living in the same building.

    Additionally, in the bottom panel of Table 3 we present estimates for one additional subgroup:

block groups that had no domestic-violence related 911 calls in 2020 prior to March 9. Estimates

indicate more than a twofold increase in domestic calls for households in for these first-time offending

groups. These findings provide some evidence that social distancing affected domestic violence at

both the intensive and extensive margins, and is consistent with recent literature on the topic (Leslie

and Wilson, 2020).

    Next, in Table 4 we estimate effects separately by block subgroups, based on quartiles of changes

in time spent at home and time spent at work between March and April. Overall, we find that

domestic-related calls for police service are consistently concentrated in areas that experienced the

largest changes in time spent at home and time spent completely at home. Moreover, in Table A3, we

show that the block groups with the largest increases in time spent at home have a larger percentage

of residents who are white, Hispanic, employed, own homes, and are married with children, largely

consistent with the largest results reported in Table 3.14

    Finally, to build off recent work from Leslie and Wilson (2020) and McCrary and Sanga (2020),

we estimate effects on police service calls by time of day and present results in Table A4. Consistent

with existing work estimating effects for police service calls in other cities, we find that estimates are

driven by calls made during the week. We also find that the increase in calls for domestic-related

police service is driven by nighttime calls, spanning 6pm-8am, when partners are more likely to

spend time together. Alternatively, domestic violence might happen more during the week and in
  14
     It is also possible that different demographics disproportionally call 911 for domestic violence in 2020 relative to
2019. For example, residents in black neighborhoods especially are less likely to report crime after high-profile police
violence cases (Desmond, Papachristos, and Kirk, 2016). We note that the end of our sample period occurs before
the murder of George Floyd in May 2020, which resulted in nationwide protests against police violence.



                                                           13
the evening during lockdown due to abrupt changes in routines and normalcy.


4.3      Effects on Reported Crimes and Arrests

In the above section, we present evidence that calls for police service increased after the SAH order

announcement in Chicago. In this section, we explore whether this increase in calls subsequently

corresponded with changes in crimes ending in a police report and/or arrest. To do do, we first

present visual evidence of changes in citywide reported crimes in 2020, as compared in 2019, based

on Equation 2.

       In Figure 5 we present event study trends for all crime reports, as well as domestic violence,

domestic disturbance, domestic battery and child abuse reports filed by a police officer. Notably,

the overall crime rate fell substantially in 2020, as compared to 2019. Despite domestic-related

calls for police service increasing in the weeks following the SAH announcement, reported domestic

crimes also fell over this period. Estimates do not indicate any divergence in reporting trends prior

to the March 9 announcement.

       Table 5 presents difference-in-differences estimates for crime reports. In particular, we find

statistically significant decreases between 8–23 percent in reported domestic violence crimes and

twice as few child abuse reports in the 5 weeks following the SAH announcement in Chicago.15

       Although on net these findings suggest that changes in time spent at home increase domestic-

related calls for police service but decrease domestic violence reporting, these effects may mask

important variation in reporting across households. In particular, one alternative possibility is that

homeowners socially distanced from other neighbors may be less likely to report domestic violence,

but families living in closer quarters (i.e., apartments) may be more likely to hear and report

domestic crimes during prolonged periods of time within their residences. Given that two-thirds of

domestic crimes happen at home, having more neighbors nearby may increase the likelihood of a

witness (U.S. Department of Justice, 2014).

       We investigate this possibility in Table 6. Indeed, we find that the drop in reported domestic

crimes is driven by individuals living in houses, rather than apartments, offering further support for
  15
    Unlike effects for calls for police service, which are concentrated only during weekday nights, the reduction
in crime reporting is represented in both weekday and weekend daytime effects (Table A5). Similarly, effects are
largest in block groups experiencing the largest changes in time spent at home (Table A6). However, we also see
largest reductions in reporting for those groups that are most likely to continue working outside the home during the
pandemic, offering further support that time spent at home may be a driver of domestic violence during lockdown.


                                                         14
the idea that proximity to other people during lockdown is an important driver of domestic violence

reporting. Estimates for domestic crimes reported in apartments are statistically insignificant and

precise enough to rule out more than a 4.4 percent reduction in crime. Moreover, we find no evidence

to suggest that these effects are driven by people living in public housing (Columns 4 and 5).16

       Taken together our findings thus far suggest that the social distancing efforts during COVID-19

resulted in substantial underfiling of official incident reports for domestic crimes, as shown by the

existing wedge between call for police service and incident reports. This underreporting could be

both due to a change in the victim’s threat point, causing the victim to be less likely to report their

abuser, the lack of visibility and reporting by a third party outside of the home, and/or shifts in

the nature of the police calls for service regarding domestic violence.

       We do not find any evidence that police are less likely to be dispatched to investigate domestic-

related calls, as these calls are flagged with the highest priority level. However, we note that police

have discretion over whether to file a report and whether to arrest, which may lead to gaps in

calls and reporting that change systematically over time as interactions with civilians become more

dangerous due to the pandemic. Moreover, on March 20, Chicago PD announced that they would

limit or halt prosecuting for some offenses, such as low-level, non-violent drug offenses, in an effort

to better protect police officers, jail staff, and first responders (Bauer, 2020). To explore whether

police are more likely to avoid filing a domestic violence report in the wake of social distancing

measures, in Table 7, we estimate effects on the ratio of reported crimes to calls for police service.

Estimates indicate a 13.1 percent decline in the ratio of reported crimes to calls for domestic violence.

These findings suggest that the increase in domestic-related calls for police service as a result of

increased time spent at home was likely substantially offset by a lack of police reports. These effects

correspond to 966 fewer domestic violence crimes reported than would be expected in the absence

of social distancing policies.

       To get a better sense of how SAH policies affect domestic violence reporting, we further in-

vestigate effects on reports that better measure the severity of violence: crimes ending in arrest.

This is because an arrest may occur even if the victim chooses not to press charges and is most

likely to occur when a victim has suffered more severe injuries. To the extent that SAH policies
  16
   Similarly, if we expand our analysis to look at arrests for assaults and batteries occurring within a residence,
more generally, estimates are statistically insignificant. See Figure A1.



                                                        15
change a victim’s incentives to report violence as well as an officer’s incentives to interact, arrest

rates could also better reflect the proportion of cases that warrant police intervention. Moreover,

changes in arrests may be especially important given that arrest can incapacitate a perpetrator, at

least temporarily, and provide potential deterrence effects, leading to lower violence in the future.

On the other hand, if more instances of domestic abuse are occurring but these crimes do not end

in arrest, it is likely that victims are experiencing more violence during lockdown, but are fearful of

potential backlash from sending a partner or spouse to jail.

      Figure 6 and Table 8 displays estimates for arrest rates in Chicago in 2020, as compared to

2019. Similar to our findings in Table 5, we find that time spent at home during COVID-19 shelter

in place provisions reduced arrests for domestic violence, assault, and battery. Specifically, we find

that arrest rates for domestic violence fell by 27.1 percent, which is smaller than the over 57 percent

decrease in arrest rates overall. These findings support two ideas: (i) overall crime fell during

this period, resulting in fewer reports and arrests, and/or (ii) that officers reduced interactions

with reported perpetrators in an attempt to relax resource constraints and comply with social

distancing.17 Additionally, the first cases of COVID-19 appeared in the Cook County jail (1,093

cases total) on March 19th, which may also have contributed to drops in the arrests if police avoided

booking the marginal individual for fear of further spreading the virus.


4.4      Effects on Non-Domestic Crimes

Our results thus far indicate that total calls for police service, reported crimes, and arrests all fell

after SAH orders went into place in Chicago. We also show that calls related to domestic violence

increased, while reported domestic violence and arrests for domestic crimes declined. In an effort to

better understand the relative nature of changes in domestic crimes during the COVID-19 pandemic,

in this section we measure difference-in-differences estimates for calls, reported crimes, and arrests

for other types of crime.

      First, in Table 9 we see reductions or no changes in calls for police service for drug-related crimes,

robberies, thefts, gun-related crimes, and traffic crimes. In contrast, calls for police increased only

for domestic-related crimes, as reported by our main results. These findings are in line with the

notion that, as measured by 911 calls, crime rates are on the decline but domestic related crimes are
 17
      The latter explanation seems most likely for drug crimes, as arrests dropped to zero in April.


                                                          16
increasing during lockdown. Next, in Figure 7 we present weekly block-level averages of crime rates

for domestic crimes, as well as theft, gun-related crimes, robbery, and drug crimes. While crime rates

for other types of crime fell after March 9, 2020, domestic violence crime rates remained relatively

flat in comparison.18 Table A7 shows average effects of SAH policies on domestic crimes, drug-

related crimes, gun-related crimes, and property crimes, including theft and robbery, as measured

by reported crimes, as well as crimes ending in arrest. For all crime types we see a downward

trend over time, with the most notable decline for theft. This is perhaps unsurprising, given that

SAH orders require retail stores to close temporarily, or because there are fewer potential victims

on the street and riding public transit once SAH orders are in place. Specifically, we find large

reductions in all reported crimes, totaling over 30.0 percent, with a 32.5 percent reduction in theft.

Notably, although reported domestic crimes fall, the 8 percent decline is relatively small compared

to other crimes, indicating that this is likely partially driven by changes in reporting. We also find

large reductions in arrest rates for theft, drug-related, and gun-related crimes, ranging from 40–84

percent, with arrests for domestic crimes falling by 27.1 percent in comparison.



5         Discussion

In this paper we estimate the effects of stay-at-home policies on domestic violence. In particular,

we analyze the causal effects of the March 9 Illinois SAH announcement on calls for police service,

crime reports, and arrests for domestic violence-related crimes in the city of Chicago. We first show

that the announcement increased time spent at home, reduced traffic, and nearly eliminated public

transportation use. We then present evidence that the SAH order increased domestic violence-

related calls for police service by 7.5 percent. We show that these effects are largest for block

groups that increased their time spent at home the most, and those with a relatively large proportion

of households that are married with children, renters, and did not experience a domestic-related

911 call prior to March 9. These subgroups highlight the differential role that lockdown plays for

various populations. Moreover, we find that the SAH order decreased reported domestic crimes by

8.2 percent and arrests for domestic crimes by 27.1 percent, indicating a gap between how lockdown

policies affected calls for service relative to reports and arrests, which require in-person interactions.
    18
         These trends are in contrast with crime rates in 2019, which increase slightly across weeks for all outcomes.



                                                              17
   Compared to other crimes such as drug and property crimes, calls for police service related to

domestic violence are the only type of calls that increased during our study period. Similarly, total

reported crimes dropped during the shelter-in-place period. However, declines for domestic violence

crimes are substantially smaller than both the decline in overall crimes and other non-violent crime

rates. Overall, we estimate that nearly 1,000 cases of domestic violence crimes went underreported

between March and April.

   Our findings speak to health tradeoffs inherent in policies to address the ongoing COVID-19

pandemic. In particular, state and local governments should consider the costs and benefits of

keeping first responders and the incarcerated population safe, while also taking into account the

large direct costs to domestic violence victims. As the pandemic continues, measuring the lasting

health effects of stay-at-home policies is an important avenue for future research.




                                                 18
References
Aizer, A. (2010): “The Gender Wage Gap and Domestic Violence,” American Economic Review,
  100(4), 1847–1859.

Anderberg, D., and H. Rainer (2011): “Domestic Abuse: Instrumental Violence and Economic
 Incentives,” CESifo Working Paper No. 3673, CESifo Group Munich, Retrieved from http://ww
 w.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/cesifo1_wp3673.pdf.

Andrew, S. (2020): “Domestic Violence Victims, Stuck at Home, are at Risk During Coronavirus
 Pandemic,” Available at https://www.cnn.com/2020/03/27/health/domestic-violence-coro
 navirus-wellness-trnd/index.html.

Baron, E. J., E. G. Goldstein, and C. T. Wallace (2020): “Suffering in Silence: How COVID-
  19 School Closures Inhibit the Reporting of Child Maltreatment,” Working Paper, Available at
  https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3601399.

Bauer, K. (2020): “Non-Violent, Low-Level Drug Crimes Won’t Be Prosecuted During Coronavirus
  Outbreak, Kim Foxx Says,” Available at https://blockclubchicago.org/2020/03/20/non-vi
  olent-low-level-drug-crimes-wont-be-prosecuted-during-coronavirus-outbreak-kim-f
  oxx-says/.

Bullinger, L. R., M. Feely, K. Raissian, and W. Schneider (2020): “The Neglected Ones: More Time
  Spent at Home During COVID-19 is Associated With More Child Maltreatment,” Working Paper.

Carrell, S. E., M. Hoekstra, and E. Kuka (2018): “The Long-Run Effects of Disruptive Peers,”
  American Economic Review, 108(11), 3377–3415.

Dave, D. M., A. I. Friedson, K. Matsuzawa, and J. J. Sabia (2020): “When Do Shelter-in-Place
  Orders Fight COVID-19 Best? Policy Heterogeneity Across States and Adoption Time,” Available
  at https://www.nber.org/papers/w27091.

Desmond, M., A. V. Papachristos, and D. S. Kirk (2016): “Police Violence and Citizen Crime
  Reporting in the Black Community,” American Sociological Review, 81(5), 857–876.

Ellsberg, M., L. Heise, R. Pena, S. Agurto, and A. Winkvist (2001): “Researching Domestic Violence
  against Women: Methodological and Ethical Considerations,” Studies in Family Planning, 32(1),
  1–16.

Farmer, A., and J. Tiefenthaler (1997): “An Economic Analysis of Domestic Violence,” Review of
  Social Economy, 55, 335–358.

Fitzpatrick, M. D., C. Benson, and S. R. Bondurant (2020): “Beyond Reading, Writing, and Arith-
  metic: The Role of Teachers and Schools in Reporting Child Maltreatment,” NBER Working
  Paper No. 27033, Available at https://www.nber.org/papers/w27033.

Gupta, S., T. Nguyen, S. Raman, B. Lee, F. L. Rojas, A. Bento, K. Simon, and C. Wing (2020):
 “Tracking Public and Private Responses to the COVID-19 Epidemic: Evidence from State and
 Local Government Actions,” Working Paper, Available at https://www.ehealthecon.org/pdfs
 /Simon_etal_2020.pdf.

Illinois Attorney General (2018): “Violence Against Women: Illinois Domestic Violence Act,” Ac-
   cessed 11-March-2018 at http://www.illinoisattorneygeneral.gov/women/idva.html.

                                               19
Jackson, D. (2020): “State’s Child Welfare Agency Scrambles to Protect Workers as it Braces for
  Spike in Child Abuse Reports,” Available at https://www.chicagotribune.com/coronavirus
  /ct-coronavirus-dcfs-response-20200330-z6llyq4w5jeoxgz2iuwbtdwq3y-story.html.

Leslie, E., and R. Wilson (2020): “Sheltering in Place and Domestic Violence: Evidence from Calls
  for Service during COVID-19,” Working Paper, Available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/p
  apers.cfm?abstract_id=3600646.

Manser, M., and M. Brown (1980): “Marriage and Household Decision-Making: A Bargaining Anal-
 ysis,” International Economic Review, 21(1), 31–44.

McCrary, J., and S. Sanga (2020): “The Impact of the Coronavirus Lockdown on Domestic Violence,”
 Available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3612491.

McElroy, M., and M. Horney (1981): “Nash-Bargained Household Decisions: Toward a Generaliza-
 tion of the Theory of Demand,” International Economic Review, 22(2), 333–349.

Pollak, R. A. (2005): “Bargaining Power in Marriage: Earnings, Wage Rates and Household Pro-
  duction,” NBER Working Paper No. 11239.

Sandler, R. (2020): “Domestic Violence Hotline Reports Surge In Coronavirus-Related Calls As
  Shelter-In-Place Leads To Isolation, Abuse,” Available at https://www.forbes.com/sites/rac
  helsandler/2020/04/06/domestic-violence-hotline-reports-surge-in-coronavirus-rel
  ated-calls-as-shelter-in-place-leads-to-isolation-abuse/#23ee1624793a.

Stith, S., T. Liu, L. Davies, E. Boykin, M. Alder, J. Harris, A. Som, M. McPherson, and J. Dees
  (2009): “Risk Factors in Child Maltreatment: A Meta-Analytic Review of the Literature,” Ag-
  gression and Violent Behavior, 14(1), 13–29.

U.S. Department of Justice (2014): “Household Poverty and Nonfatal Violent Victimization, 2008-
  2012,” Accessed 30-October-2017 at https://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/hpnvv0812.pdf.

Ward, J. (2020): “Domestic Violence Shelters Losing Beds For Social Distancing — But Demand Is
 Spiking,” Available at https://blockclubchicago.org/2020/05/15/domestic-violence-shel
 ters-losing-beds-for-social-distancing-but-demand-is-spiking/.




                                               20
        Figure 1: Effect of SAH Orders on the Percent of Time Spent at Home and at Work




Notes: Weekly block group-level data is from SafeGraph from January 1, 2020-April 14, 2020. “Percent of the Day
Spent at Home" measures the median dwell time at home. “Percent Time Spent Completely at Home" represents
the percent of devices which did not leave home. “Full-time" and “Part-time" work is calculated by the number of
devices that spent between 3 and 6 hours and greater than 6 hours at a location other than their home geohash-7
during the period of 8 am - 6 pm in local time, respectively. For a location to qualify as a user’s “home", SafeGraph
considers a common nighttime geohashed location of each mobile device over a 6-week period.


                                                         21
       Figure 2: Effect of SAH Orders on L-Train Entries and Red Light Camera Violations




Notes: Scatters represent weekly average block-level averages of l-train entries and red light camera violations. Data
is from city of Chicago from January 2020-April 2020.




                                                         22
                    Figure 3: Effect of SAH Orders on Calls for Police Service Rates




Notes: Each figure plots week-level coefficients of interest and their 95% confidence interval, from Equation 2, of each
of the listed call rates. The vertical line represents the March 9 Illinois SAH announcement. Rates are constructed
per 1,000 population, based on 2018 block-level ACS data. Call data is from the city of Chicago.




                                                          23
    Figure 4: Effect of SAH Orders on Calls for Police Service Rates in 2020, by Priority Level




Notes: Scatters represent weekly average block-level rates of police service call rates in 2020, by priority level. Priority
Level 1 represents the most urgent need, while Level 4 calls are the least urgent. All domestic-related calls are flagged
as Level 1 priority. Call data are from the city of Chicago.




                                                            24
                  Figure 5: Effect of SAH Orders on Reported Domestic Crime Rates




Notes: Each figure plots week-level coefficients of interest and their 95% confidence interval, from Equation 2, of each
of the listed crime rates. The vertical line represents the March 9 Illinois SAH announcement. Rates are constructed
per 1,000 population, based on 2018 block-level ACS data. Crime data from 2019–2020 are from the city of Chicago.




                                                          25
                  Figure 6: Effect of SAH Orders on Rates of Crimes Ending in Arrest




Notes: Each figure plots week-level coefficients of interest and their 95% confidence interval, from Equation 2, of each
of the listed crime rates. The vertical line represents the March 9 Illinois SAH announcement. Rates are constructed
per 1,000 population, based on 2018 block-level ACS data. Crime data from 2019–2020 are from the city of Chicago.




                                                          26
             Figure 7: Effect of SAH Orders on Weekly Reported Crime Rates in 2020




Notes: Crime data from 2020 are from the city of Chicago. The vertical line represents the March 9 Illinois SAH
announcement. Rates are constructed per 1,000 population, based on 2018 block-level ACS data.




                                                      27
                                            Table 1: Summary Statistics


                                                                        Mean       St. Dev.
                            (a) Activity Tracking
                            Number of Devices                            54.21        30.85
                            % Spent at Home                              81.65        14.76
                            % Spent Completely at Home                   32.58        10.77
                            Count Working Full Time                       3.81         2.77
                            (b) Calls for Police Service
                            All 911 Calls                                25.68        38.96
                            Domestic Violence 911 Calls                   1.33        2.22
                            Domestic Disturbance 911 Calls                1.03        1.81
                            Domestic Battery 911 Calls                   0.30         0.74
                            Child Abuse 911 Calls                         0.01         0.11
                            (c) Crime Reports
                            Any Reported Crime                            1.66         2.12
                            Domestic-Related Crimes                       0.31         0.66
                            Domestic Assaults                             0.04         0.20
                            Domestic Battery                              0.17         0.46
                            Child Abuse                                   0.01         0.08

Notes: Weekly block-level data are for the first 15 weeks of 2020 only. Data on devices and time spent at home are from
SafeGraph. Crime data and data on police service calls are from the city of Chicago. Column 1 presents the mean of the listed
variable. Column 2 shows standard deviation. N = 31, 410.




                                                             28
                 Table 2: Average Effects of SAH Orders on Call for Police Service Rates


                                                      All        Domestic        Domestic         Domestic        Child
                                                     Calls       Violence        Disturb.         Battery         Abuse
       OLS
       Effect of Stay at Home Order                 -1.388*       0.093***        0.083***          0.010       -0.005**
                                                    (0.777)        (0.030)         (0.026)         (0.013)       (0.002)
       Observations                                  62820          62820           62820           62820         62820
       Pre-Period Mean                              24.478          1.248           0.951           0.297         0.009
       WLS
       Effect of Stay at Home Order                -1.490**       0.085***        0.077***          0.007       -0.004***
                                                    (0.742)        (0.022)         (0.019)         (0.009)       (0.001)
       Observations                                  62820          62820           62820           62820         62820
       Pre-Period Mean                              24.478          1.248           0.951           0.297         0.009


Notes: Calls for police service data from 2019–2020 are from the city of Chicago. Estimates are based on Equation 1. Standard
errors are clustered at the block level. Police service call rates are constructed 1,000 population, based on block-level population
data from the 2018 ACS. Weights are constructed using total block-level population from the 2018 ACS.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 29
Table 3: Average Effects of SAH Orders on Call for Police Service Rates, by Block Characteristics


                                                       All        Domestic      Domestic      Domestic       Child
                                                      Calls       Violence      Disturb.      Battery        Abuse
             All Blocks
             Effect of Stay at Home Order            -1.388*      0.093***      0.083***         0.010      -0.005**
                                                     (0.777)       (0.030)       (0.026)        (0.013)      (0.002)
             Observations                             62820         62820         62820          62820        62820
             Pre-Period Mean                         24.478         1.248         0.951          0.297        0.009
             Above Median Percent White
             Effect of Stay at Home Order -2.607**                0.052***      0.054***         -0.001     -0.004**
                                           (1.217)                 (0.019)       (0.017)        (0.008)      (0.002)
             Observations                   31410                   31410         31410          31410        31410
             Pre-Period Mean               15.620                   0.376         0.285          0.090        0.005
             Above Median % Black
             Effect of Stay at Home Order             -0.002       0.129**       0.107**         0.021      -0.007**
                                                     (0.949)       (0.057)       (0.049)        (0.025)      (0.003)
             Observations                             31410         31410         31410          31410        31410
             Pre-Period Mean                         33.731         2.104         1.606          0.498        0.013
             Above Median % Hispanic
             Effect of Stay at Home Order             -1.402      0.101***      0.088***         0.013     -0.006***
                                                     (1.215)       (0.031)       (0.027)        (0.012)     (0.002)
             Observations                             31410         31410         31410          31410       31410
             Pre-Period Mean                         17.667         0.716         0.546          0.170       0.006
             Above Median % Married with Children
             Effect of Stay at Home Order  -1.695 0.118***                      0.094***        0.024*       -0.003
                                          (1.230)  (0.034)                       (0.030)        (0.013)     (0.002)
             Observations                  31410    31410                         31410          31410       31410
             Pre-Period Mean              19.244    0.851                         0.650          0.200       0.006
             Above Median % Renters
             Effect of Stay at Home Order             -0.209      0.025***      0.021***         0.004       -0.001
                                                     (0.168)       (0.007)       (0.006)        (0.003)     (0.000)
             Observations                            219870        219870        219870         219870      219870
             Pre-Period Mean                          4.257         0.239         0.181          0.057       0.002
             No Prior DV Calls
             Effect of Stay at Home Order           -2.440**      0.133***      0.108***       0.025***      0.003
                                                     (0.944)       (0.023)       (0.019)        (0.009)     (0.002)
             Observations                             7080          7080          7080           7080        7080
             Pre-Period Mean                          8.993         0.074         0.055          0.019       0.001

Notes: Calls for police service data from 2019–2020 are from the city of Chicago. Estimates are based on Equation 1. Standard
errors are clustered at the block level. Police service call rates are constructed 1,000 population, based on block-level population
data from the 2018 ACS. “White", “Black", and “Hispanic" block groups are defined as those with a percent of the white, Black
and Hispanic populations above the median level according to 2018 ACS block-level data. “No Prior DV Calls" block groups
are defined as those without a single domestic violence-related police call for service in the first nine weeks of 2020.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 30
                     Table 4: Effects on Domestic-Related Call for Police Service Rates,
                       by Changes in Time Spent at Home and Time Spent at Work


                                                   Quartile 1             Quartile 2         Quartile 3       Quartile 4
                                                  (Bottom 25th)            (25-50th)          (50-75th)       (Top 75th)
     Time at Home
     Effect of Stay at Home Order                        0.108               0.092*              0.038           0.144**
                                                        (0.069)              (0.053)            (0.055)          (0.063)
     Observations                                        15600                15630              15240            15390
     Pre-Period Mean                                     1.611                1.179              0.940            1.263

     Time Completely at Home
     Effect of Stay at Home Order                        0.108               0.099*             0.083*           0.066*
                                                        (0.086)              (0.057)            (0.050)          (0.035)
     Observations                                        15690                15690              15690            15690
     Pre-Period Mean                                     2.122                1.326              0.943            0.581

     Working Full Time
     Effect of Stay at Home Order                        0.052                0.030             0.156**          0.130*
                                                        (0.042)              (0.064)            (0.063)          (0.069)
     Observations                                        15690                15690              15690            15690
     Pre-Period Mean                                     0.649                1.155              1.387            1.803

     Working Part Time
     Effect of Stay at Home Order                        0.013               0.098*              0.053           0.208**
                                                        (0.038)              (0.050)            (0.063)          (0.082)
     Observations                                        15690                15690              15690            15690
     Pre-Period Mean                                     0.629                1.054              1.387            1.922

Notes: Calls for police service data from 2019–2020 are from the city of Chicago. Estimates are based on Equation 1. Standard
errors are clustered at the block level. Police service call rates are constructed 1,000 population, based on block-level population
data from the 2018 ACS. Column 1 presents estimates for the subgroup of blocks that had the smallest percent changes in the
listed outcome, i.e. the bottom quartile. Columns 2 and 3 presents estimates for the second and third quartiles, which represent
the 25th-50th percentile and 50th-75th percentile, respectively. Column 4 presents estimates for the quartile with the largest
changes in the listed outcome. Changes in time spent at home or time spent at work is measured by the changes in weekly
block-level averages between March and April of the listed outcome.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 31
          Table 5: Average Effects of SAH Orders on Police-Reported Domestic Crime Rates


                                                   All          Domestic         Domestic          Domestic      Child
                                                  Calls         Violence         Disturb.          Battery       Abuse
   OLS
   Effect of Stay at Home Order                -0.5096***       -0.0254**        -0.0363***       -0.0766***   -0.0069***
                                                (0.0316)         (0.0103)         (0.0072)         (0.0107)     (0.0015)
   Observations                                   62820           62820             62820            62820        62820
   Pre-Period Mean                                1.697           0.310             0.140            0.336        0.007
   WLS
   Effect of Stay at Home Order                -0.470***        -0.025***        -0.035***         -0.071***   -0.006***
                                                (0.025)          (0.008)          (0.005)           (0.008)     (0.001)
   Observations                                  62820            62820            62820             62820       62820
   Pre-Period Mean                               1.697            0.310            0.140             0.336       0.007


Notes: Crime data from 2019–2020 are from the city of Chicago. Estimates are based on Equation 1. Standard errors are
clustered at the block level. Crime rates are constructed per 1,000 population. Weights are constructed using total block-level
population from the 2018 ACS.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 32
                   Table 6: Average Effects of SAH Orders on Police-Reported Domestic
                                    Violence Crime Rates by Location


                                                   All DV        Apartment           House         Public      Public
                                                                                                  Apartment    Housing
      OLS
      Effect of Stay at Home Order               -0.0254**          0.0069           -0.0085         -0.0002    -0.0001
                                                  (0.0103)         (0.0061)         (0.0069)        (0.0008)   (0.0008)
      Observations                                 62820            62820             62820           62820      62820
      Pre-Period Mean                              0.310            0.115             0.125           0.002      0.002
      WLS
      Effect of Stay at Home Order               -0.025***           0.006          -0.011**          -0.001    -0.001
                                                  (0.008)           (0.005)          (0.005)         (0.001)   (0.001)
      Observations                                 62820             62820            62820           62820     62820
      Pre-Period Mean                              0.310             0.115            0.125            0.002    0.002


Notes: crime data from 2019–2020 are from the city of Chicago. Estimates are based on Equation 1. Standard errors are
clustered at the block level. Crime rates are constructed per 1,000 population. Weights are constructed using total block-level
population from the 2018 ACS.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 33
    Table 7: Average Effects of SAH Orders on the Ratio of Reported Crimes to Calls for Police
                            Service, Difference-in-Differences Estimates


                                                                      All           Domestic           Child
                                                                                    Violence           Abuse
                      Effect of Stay at Home Order               -0.0188***        -0.0149***         -0.0005
                                                                  (0.0028)          (0.0051)         (0.0004)
                      Observations                                  62820             62820            62820
                      Pre-Period Mean                              0.0960            0.1140            0.0000


Notes: Crime data and calls for police service data from 2019–2020 are from the city of Chicago. Estimates are based on
Equation 1. Standard errors are clustered at the block level. The outcome variables are calculated as the number of reported
crimes divided by the calls for police service of each listed crime type.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 34
       Table 8: Average Effects of SAH Orders on Rates of Domestic Crimes Ending in Arrest,
                                  Difference-in-Differences Estimates


                                                    All            Domestic         Domestic         Domestic    Child
                                                   Arrests         Violence          Assault         Battery     Abuse
     OLS
     Effect of Stay at Home Order               -0.2277***        -0.0149***          -0.0017        -0.0088**    -0.0005
                                                 (0.0151)          (0.0042)          (0.0015)         (0.0035)   (0.0005)
     Observations                                  62820             62820             62820           62820       62820
     Pre-Period Mean                               0.396             0.055             0.007            0.037      0.001
     WLS
     Effect of Stay at Home Order               -0.1929***        -0.0139***          -0.0009       -0.0106***    -0.0003
                                                 (0.0119)          (0.0032)          (0.0010)        (0.0025)    (0.0004)
     Observations                                  62820             62820             62820           62820       62820
     Pre-Period Mean                               0.396             0.055             0.007           0.037       0.001


Notes: crime data from 2019–2020 are from the city of Chicago. Estimates are based on Equation 1. Standard errors are
clustered at the block level. Arrest rates are constructed per 1,000 population, based on block-level population data from the
2018 ACS.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 35
 Table 9: Average Effects of SAH Orders on Call for Police Service Rates for Other Crime Types


                                             All          DV            Drug     Robbery         Theft        Gun       Traffic
  Effect of Stay at Home Order             -1.388*     0.093***        -0.017     -0.005       -0.015**     -0.012*     -0.000
                                          (0.7765)     (0.0302)       (0.0275)   (0.0057)      (0.0070)    (0.0067)    (0.0001)
  Observations                              62820        62820         62820      62820         62820        62820      62820
  Pre-Period Mean                           24.478       1.248          0.232      0.064         0.115       0.033      0.000


Notes: Calls for police service data from 2019–2020 are from the city of Chicago. Estimates are based on Equation 1. Standard
errors are clustered at the block level. Police service call rates are constructed 1,000 population, based on block-level population
data from the 2018 ACS. Weights are constructed using total block-level population from the 2018 ACS.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 36
Appendix




           37
    Figure A1: Effect of SAH Orders on Arrest Rates for Assaults and Batteries Occurring in a
                   Residence, Comparing 2019 to 2020 for the City of Chicago




Notes: Each figure plots week-level coefficients of interest and their 95% confidence interval, from Equation 2, of
the corresponding arrest rates. The vertical line represents the March 9 Illinois SAH announcement. Rates are
constructed per 1,000 population, based on 2018 block-level ACS data. Crime data, including indicators for location
type, are from the city of Chicago.




                                                        38
                        Table A1: Summary Statistics for Block-Level Characteristics


                                                                   Mean        St. Dev.
                             Percent White                          0.49          0.34
                             Percent Black                          0.33          0.40
                             Percent Hispanic                       0.27          0.30
                             Percent Married with Children          0.08          0.05
                             Workers Over 16                       598.40        361.13
                             Median Family Income                 55121.45      30418.51
                             Percent Renters                        0.49          0.25

Notes: Weekly block-level data on block characteristics are from the 2018 ACS. Column 1 presents the mean and Column 2
presents the standard deviation of each listed variable.




                                                           39
   Table A2: Average Effects of SAH Orders on Logged 911 Call Rates and Logged Crime Rates


                                                   All          Domestic         Domestic          Domestic      Child
                                                  Calls         Violence         Disturb.          Battery       Abuse
   Logged 911 Call Rates
   Effect of Stay at Home Order                -0.114***         0.048***         0.045***            -0.005     -0.078
                                                (0.009)           (0.014)          (0.015)           (0.018)    (0.080)
   Observations                                  60531             29704            26110             12467       217
   Pre-Period Mean                               4.990             2.891            2.786              2.456     2.157
   Logged Crime Rates
   Effect of Stay at Home Order                -0.2044***        -0.0243*        -0.0472***       -0.0556***     -0.0278
                                                (0.0122)         (0.0131)         (0.0148)         (0.0128)     (0.0363)
   Observations                                   41440           14631             7598             15784         154
   Pre-Period Mean                                2.895            2.371            2.233            2.365        2.127

   IHS 911 Call Rates
   Effect of Stay at Home Order                -0.115***         0.033***         0.035***            0.011     -0.004**
                                                (0.009)           (0.010)          (0.010)           (0.007)     (0.001)
   Observations                                  62820             62820            62820             62820       62820
   Pre-Period Mean                               3.266             0.669            0.549             0.212       0.007
   IHS Crime Rates
   Effect of Stay at Home Order                -0.2132***       -0.0169**        -0.0287***       -0.0511***   -0.0058***
                                                (0.0110)         (0.0069)         (0.0052)         (0.0070)     (0.0012)
   Observations                                   62820           62820             62820            62820        62820
   Pre-Period Mean                                0.955           0.235             0.114            0.253        0.006


Notes: The top two panels present estimates on logged rates, where call and crime rates are constructed per 10,000 population,
based on block-level population data from the 2018 ACS. The bottom two panels show estimates using the inverse hyperbolic
                                                                                             √
sine (IHS) of the crime or call count. This transformation takes on the form sinh−1
                                                                                 z  = ln(z + 1 + z 2 ). Crime data from
2019–2020 are from the city of Chicago. Estimates are based on Equation 1. Standard errors are clustered at the block level.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 40
                   Table A3: Summary Statistics, by Changes in Time Spent at Home


                                                Quartile 1           Quartile 1        Quartile 3        Quartile 4
                                               (Bottom 25th)          (25-50th)         (50-75th)        (Top 75th)
     Percent White                                   0.33                0.45             0.53              0.62
     Percent Black                                   0.54                0.37             0.26              0.15
     Percent Hispanic                                0.20                0.29             0.31              0.29
     Percent Married with Children                   0.07                0.07             0.08              0.09
     Workers Over 16                                476.07              599.07           661.79            653.95
     Median Family Income                          42614.31            51180.13         57472.05          68821.75
     Percent Renters                                 0.59                0.52             0.47              0.38

Notes: Data on block-level characteristics are from the 2018 ACS. Column 1 presents estimates for the subgroup of blocks that
had the smallest percent changes in the time spent at home, i.e. the bottom quartile. Columns 2 and 3 presents estimates
for the second and third quartiles, which represent the 25th-50th percentile and 50th-75th percentile, respectively. Column
4 presents estimates for the quartile with the largest changes in the time spent at home. Changes in time spent at home is
measured by the changes in weekly block-level averages between March and April of the listed outcome.




                                                             41
                  Table A4: Average Effects of SAH Orders on Calls for Police Service for
                                     Domestic Crime Rates by Time


                                                 All DV          Weekday         Weekend         Daytime        Nighttime
                                                                                                (8am-6pm)      (6pm-8am)
    OLS
    Effect of Stay at Home Order               0.0930***        0.0967***         -0.0037          0.0114       0.0817***
                                                (0.0302)         (0.0242)        (0.0165)         (0.0171)       (0.0242)
    Observations                                 62820            62820            62820           62820          62820
    Pre-Period Mean                              1.248            0.838            0.410            0.499         0.749
    WLS
    Effect of Stay at Home Order                0.085***         0.081***          0.003            0.004        0.081***
                                                 (0.022)          (0.018)         (0.012)          (0.012)        (0.017)
    Observations                                  62820            62820           62820            62820          62820
    Pre-Period Mean                               1.248            0.838           0.410            0.499          0.749


Notes: Crime data from 2019–2020 are from the city of Chicago. Estimates are based on Equation 1. Standard errors are
clustered at the block level. Police service call rates are constructed per 1,000 population, based on block-level population data
from the 2018 ACS.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 42
                  Table A5: Average Effects of SAH Orders on Police-Reported Domestic
                                     Violence Crime Rates by Time


                                                 All DV         Weekday         Weekend          Daytime      Nighttime
                                                                                                (8am-6pm)    (6pm-8am)
    OLS
    Effect of Stay at Home Order                -0.0254**         -0.0142       -0.0112*        -0.0195***     -0.0059
                                                 (0.0103)        (0.0087)       (0.0057)         (0.0073)     (0.0073)
    Observations                                  62820            62820         62820             62820        62820
    Pre-Period Mean                               0.310            0.213          0.097            0.157        0.153
    WLS
    Effect of Stay at Home Order                -0.025***       -0.013**        -0.012***        -0.019***     -0.006
                                                 (0.008)         (0.006)         (0.004)          (0.005)     (0.005)
    Observations                                  62820           62820           62820            62820       62820
    Pre-Period Mean                               0.310           0.213           0.097            0.157        0.153


Notes: Crime data from 2019–2020 are from the city of Chicago. Estimates are based on Equation 1. Standard errors are
clustered at the block level. Crime rates are constructed per 1,000 population, based on block-level population data from the
2018 ACS.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 43
 Table A6: Effects on Domestic-Related Crime Reports, by Changes in Time Spent at Home and
                                     Time Spent at Work


                                                          Quartile 1            Quartile 2         Quartile 3        Quartile 4
                                                         (Bottom 25th)           (25-50th)          (50-75th)        (Top 75th)
 Time Spent at Home
 Effect of Stay at Home Order                                  -0.012               -0.015              -0.027         -0.047**
                                                              (0.023)              (0.019)             (0.019)          (0.021)
 Observations                                                  15600                15630               15240            15390
 Pre-Period Mean                                               0.386                0.294                0.244           0.316

 Time Spent Completely at Home
 Effect of Stay at Home Order                                -0.062**               0.008               -0.017         -0.032**
                                                              (0.026)              (0.022)             (0.019)          (0.013)
 Observations                                                  15690                15690               15690            15690
 Pre-Period Mean                                               0.514                0.340                0.239           0.144

 Working Full Time
 Effect of Stay at Home Order                               -0.051***              -0.032*              0.009            -0.028
                                                             (0.014)               (0.019)             (0.022)          (0.025)
 Observations                                                 15690                 15690               15690            15690
 Pre-Period Mean                                              0.176                 0.292               0.337             0.437

 Working Part Time
 Effect of Stay at Home Order                                  -0.015              -0.031*              -0.024           -0.030
                                                              (0.014)              (0.018)             (0.021)          (0.027)
 Observations                                                  15690                15690               15690            15690
 Pre-Period Mean                                               0.164                0.271               0.342             0.463

Notes: Calls for police service data from 2019–2020 are from the city of Chicago. Estimates are based on Equation 1. Standard
errors are clustered at the block level. Police service call rates are constructed 1,000 population, based on block-level population
data from the 2018 ACS. Column 1 presents estimates for the subgroup of blocks that had the smallest percent changes in the
listed outcome, i.e. the bottom quartile. Columns 2 and 3 presents estimates for the second and third quartiles, which represent
the 25th-50th percentile and 50th-75th percentile, respectively. Column 4 presents estimates for the quartile with the largest
changes in the listed outcome. Changes in time spent at home or time spent at work is measured by the changes in weekly
block-level averages between March and April of the listed outcome.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 44
           Table A7: Average Effects of SAH Orders on Other Police-Reported Crime Rates


                                                All            DV           Drugs         Robbery           Theft        Gun
  Crime Rates
  Effect of Stay at Home Order             -0.510***        -0.025**      -0.087***       -0.010**         -0.115***   -0.016**
                                            (0.0316)        (0.0103)       (0.0085)       (0.0042)          (0.0153)   (0.0066)
  Observations                               62820           62820          62820          62820             62820      62820
  Pre-Period Mean                            1.697            0.310         0.104           0.054            0.353       0.101

  Arrest Rates
  Effect of Stay at Home Order             -0.228***       -0.015***      -0.087***       -0.003**         -0.022***   -0.017***
                                            (0.0151)        (0.0042)       (0.0085)       (0.0011)          (0.0044)    (0.0038)
  Observations                               62820           62820          62820          62820             62820       62820
  Pre-Period Mean                            0.396           0.055          0.104           0.005            0.038        0.042


Notes: Crime data from 2019–2020 are from the city of Chicago. Standard errors are clustered at the block level. Crime rates
are constructed per 1,000 population, based on block-level population data from the 2018 ACS. Weights are constructed using
total block-level population from the 2018 ACS.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 45
