                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 HOW DO FIXED-EXCHANGE-RATES REGIMES WORK:
       THE EVIDENCE FROM THE GOLD STANDARD BRETTON WOODS AND THE EMS




                            Alberto Giovannini




                           Working Paper   No, 2766




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1,050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                November, 1988




This research is part of NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.  Support from the Olin Foundation is
acknowledged.
                                       NBER Working Paper #2766
                                       November 1988


              HOW DO FIXED-EXCHANGE-RATES REGIMES WORK:
    THE EVIDENCE FROM THE GOLD STANDARD, BRETTON WOODS AND THE EMS


                                 ABSTRACT




    This paper defines two competing hypotheses on the working of fixed

exchange rates.    The "symmetry" hypothesis states that every country is

concerned with the good functioning of the system, and cannot afford to

deviate from world averages.    Every country is just left to follow the

 rules of the game," that is to avoid sterilizing balance of payments

flows.   The world price level is pegged down either by an external

numeraire like gold, or by cooperation among central banks, in a fiat

currency system.    The competing hypothesis states that fixed-exchange-

rates regimes are inherently asymmetric: they are characterized by a

'center country" which provides the nominal anchor for the others,

either by managing the gold parity in a centralized fashion, or by

arbitrarily setting some other nominal anchor.    I discuss the empirical


evidence to discriminate between the two hypotheses, by studying the

institutional features and the data on three experiences of fixed rates:

the International Gold Standard, the Bretton Woods regime, and the

European Monetary System.




                                       Alberto Giovannini
                                       622 Uris Hall
                                       Graduate School of Business
                                       Columbia University
                                       New York, NY 10027
1.   Introduction

      Few countries freely float their currencies: the International

Financial Statistics Supplement on Exchange Rates (1985) lists only 12

out of 147 members of the IMF as "independently floating". While this

list includes large countries like the United States, Japan and the

United Kingdom, as many as 34 countries, for example, peg their

currencies to the US dollar.    Even so, in the current open-economy

macroeconomics literature most theoretical and empirical papers deal

with aspects of flexible-exchange-rates regimes.

      There exist two competing hypotheses on the working of fixed

exchange rates.     The 'symmetry" hypothesis states that every country is

concerned with the good functioning of the system, and cannot afford to

deviate from world averages.     Every country is just left to follow the

"rules of the game," that is to avoid sterilizing balance of payments

flows.    This hypothesis is masterfully described by McCloskey and Zecher

[1976].

      If every country is just concerned with accomodating reserve flows

in order to maintain its exchange-rate parities, however, the

international monetary system as a whole suffers from an indeterminacy:

there is no system-wide nominal anchor.     According to the proponents of

the symmetry hypothesis, this nominal anchor is provided by an external

numeraire like gold, or is agreed upon by member countries through a

                                          Hence Helpman's [1981] labeling
process of international cooperation.

of this regime as a "cooperative peg".

      The competing hypothesis states that fixed-exchange-rates regimes
                                        4


       Under the Lrerton Wooos system, the IMF Articles of Agreement3

stipulated that each member country declare its par value in terms of

god4       The dollar grice of gold was 35$ an ounce, and it was never

changed,    untis the Sn'ichzcnien conference of December 197:.          The main

cifference between ch gold standard and the Bretton Woods system is
man in the fcruer regioe uonenry authortties -at least in those
countries
                  -
            on e toLl               ,-hri;u, Cernany and the uS)
                        go.5 stuncarc                                      5
                                                                               --were
rc-qutred by law to eacharse dares tic bankrot?s with gold coins           at    the
mar -nluu    plos or sinus tranact:uns cosn). uhereas after World War                   C
cenrnl nanc      used gold   in tmnnsctions   mnmng   thenseires and Irrerrtned
In the pri.rate bullion aerket at oneir own diocreton, Since the
private sacror had no rtghts of offitiel conversior of national
                      a
currenoier into gold, gold ass much less 'If a direct constraint on

  tcns arnetsry policies than in the        goio standard era]



  See 7ev    ¶197 for en aneifsfs of the      IMP   An; utes   o :grereene.
                 also declare their emci,onge
  Cmnntriuc rm'sld                                    ra:
                                                    "in tetrs of the Li
 zLller of thu weight and ihnerzess in effe' t on Jul' I, )9L' ," ohet
     the gold parity could he defined in terms of the US ool]at. Loan
 wCh rhC mechud, however, the ulnirsare nux'teraire is grIt.
  in   rtencr the conworsior A banknotes into coins       was   at the
 aurhor!ter' discretion,
 Tew [l97T' page 120.

 The ccntreI-'o opratcd through the inCuence on speculators'
 confidence  :eniee,d ": dev1r'tions between the official and free-
 narkot prine ef gold
                                        S


      With gold as an external numeraire, the gold standard and the

Bretton Woods system provide, in different degrees, an official nominal

anchor for all member countries.    In the EMS, by contrast, this official

nominal anchor is altogether absent.        Each EMS currency, and each

currency in the European Community, has a central rate determined in

terms of the European Currency Unit (ECU), a basket unit of account that

comprises a specified quantity of every currency in the European

Community.     The ratio of any two ECU central rates is used to obtain

bilateral central rates, which are the target rates for monetary

authorities.     Given that the ECU is just a weighted average of the

member countries' currencies, if    n   is the number of currencies in the

ECU, there are only n-i bilateral exchange rates to be pegged: for this

reason a nominal anchor is absent from the rules governing the EMS.3




2.2   Bands

      In the gold standard regime, individual currencies' gold parities,

and the costs of shipping gold internationally, jointly implied

bilateral bands within     which exchange rates could fluctuate without

requiring any action by monetary authorities.        Whenever bilateral




8
    Since some currencies like the pound and the drachma are not part of
    the EMS exchange-rate arrangements, the missing external numeraire is
    in practice provided by these currencies.
                                        8




2.3   Adlustment and Financing

      During the gold standard central banks were compelled to take

corrective actions by   a   combination of two mechanisms:   the

convertibility of banknotes into gold coins, which encouraged arbitrage

by the private sector whenever exchange rates exceeded bilateral
fluctuation limits, and the coverage of banknotes by gold, which forced

central banks to maintain    a   certain ratio of gold reserves to

circulating banknotes, thus reacting to fluctuations of their gold

reserve.12   Changes in the discount rate and open market operations

(Bloomfield [1959]) were the standard corrective actions.      Various

central banks also resorted to the so called "manipulation of gold

points" which I discuss below in section 3.

      No central-bank financing arrangement was part of the institutional

setup of the gold standard.       However, a number of instances are recorded

when central banks granted bilateral credit to each other.         Ford [1962]

notes that the Bank of France discounted Sterling bills to ease the




12 Few countries
                 specified a constant ratio of circulation to reserves.
   As Eichengreen [1985] notes, England, among others, was on a
   fiduciary system, requiring full backing of note issue after a
   certain limit (the fiduciary issue) was reached. In Germany the Bank
   Act required that note circulation could not exceed a limit above
   three times the value of gold reserves, and if it did, the Reichsbank
   had to pay a 5 percent tax on the excess circulation. See US
   National Monetary Commission [1911).
                                       9



strain on London   in   the Autumn of 1906, 1907,   1909,    1910.    Kindleberger

[1984] describes the cooperation between European central banks in the

crisis of 1890, when the Bank of England asked the Russian State Bank

not to draw on its deposits in London, obtained from the State 3ank a

800,000 sterling gold loan, and from the Bank of France a loan of

3,000,000 sterling in gold.13

      The Bretton Woods system and the EMS, by contrast, are

characterized by a complex structure of loans available to finance

balance-of-payments needs.       These financial resources support the

foreign exchange market intervention required to keep currencies within

their fluctuation bands.      Neither the IMF Articles of Agreement, nor the

rules governing the EMS, spell Out the actions that central banks have

to take when exchange rates reach bilateral fluctuation margins.              In

both systems the modality of adjustment to external disequilibria is

only specified through the rules governing the financing of central

banks' external imbalances, though there are some concessions to the

principle of symmetry (in the Bretton Woods regime through the clauses

on 'scarce' currencies, see Argy      [1981],   in the EMS   with    the divergence


indicator, and the Very Short Financing Facility, described below).

      Under the Bretton Woods regime member countries could draw on

various tranches of their IMF "quota". These tranches are characterized

by different degrees of "conditionality", that imposes progressively



13
     See also Bloomfield   [1959]..
                                       10


tighter constraints on monetary and fiscal policies: resources are made

available to the borrowers subject to their meeting certain prespecified
                          14
performance criteria.

      The EMS    rules   for balance-of-payments financing appear to be

designed to avoid crises: the central banks of the currencies reaching

bilateral intervention margins are supposed to grant each other

automatic credit (not subject to authorization) in unlimited amounts

under the Very Short Term Financing Facility.15        The Very Short Term

Financing Facility can also be used to support foreign exchange market

intervention within the marginal fluctuation bands, subject to the

authorization of the central bank whose currency is being drawn.          The

Short Term Monetary Support, another form a financial assistance

available to EMS central banks experiencing temporary balance-of-

payments difficulties, is instead governed by a "quota" system similar

to that used by the IMF.




14
     In the 1960s even the lowest conditionality resources, however, were
     not obtainable quickly enough to be usable to fend-off balance-of-
     payments crises.
15           .          . .
                 and Grilli
                                              .
     See Alesina            [1987] for an illustration of the
     effectiveness of these arrangements in avoiding speculative attacks.
     Credit lines for marginal intervention mature 75 days after the end
     of the month following the one in which the intervention has taken
     place.
                                   11


2.4   Is Asymmetry Induced by the Institutions?

      The very brief survey of institutional features of the three fixed-

exchange-rates regimes suggests two observations.   First, the basic

structure of internationa] monetary systems has not changed dramatically

in the last century.   In particular, despite the efforts of policymakers

to improve upon the IMF Articles of Agreement, the features of the

Bretton Woods system and the EMS are noticeably similar.    Both systems

are characterized by essentially a lack of an external   nominal anchor

(given the minor role played by gold during the Bretton Woods regime),

and by elaborate structures of balance of payments financing

arrangements, which stand in contrast to the absence of any explicit

rules for central banks to follow when bilateral fluctuations margins

are reached.   The added complications of the EMS, regarding the

divergence indicator, have proved impractical.16    In the gold standard,

instead, adjustment rules were provided by the market mechanism, and by

each country's coverage system.

      The second observation suggested by my survey is that the rules of

the gold standard, Bretton Woods and the EMS do not seem per se to

induce an asymmetric working of international adjustment.    Except in the

case of Bretton Woods- -where the bilateral fluctuation bands of the

dollar are narrower than those of the other currencies- -none of the

basic institutional features of the three fixed-exchange-rate regimes



16 See Giavazzi and Giovannini
                               [forthcomingl for a discussion.
                                   14


devices were used by the Bank of France and the Reichsbank (Bloomfield

[1959J),

      The use of regulatory controls as emergency measures is common also

in the Bretton Woods and EMS years.     Article VI of the IMF Articles of

Agreement even allows the Fund to request countries with balance of

payments problems to impose capital controls for a limited time, in

order to prevent the use of Fund resources.     In response to capital

account deficits, the Kennedy Administration proposed an investment tax

credit in 1961,   and passed the Interest Equalization Tax in 1963--a tax

on US residents' purchases of foreign securities--followed by the

Foreign Credit Restraint Program and the Foreign Direct Investment

Program--aimed at limiting foreign investments by commercial banks,

other financial institutions, and industrial companies.     French and

Italian authorities tightened various measures to prevent capital

outflows after the Summer of 1968 and the Fall of 1969.

      The practice of using capital controls as a fine-tuEiig device to

stem speculative flows has survived im the EMS.     Countries like France

and Italy, which until recently have prohibited the non-firm private

sector to trade on financial assets with the rest of the world, have

used restrictions on international trade credits to slow down or speed

up the response of short term capital flows.19



19
     In Giavazzi and Giovannini forthcoming] we show that the tightening
     and release of controls on international trade credits by France and
     Italy can be explained by the occurence of balance of payments
     difficulties, and is used very frequently by central banks. We also
                                      15


     Giavazzi and Giovannini [1986] argue that in the EMS countries like

France and Italy crucially rely on capital controls, witness the large

divergences between domestic and offshore interest rates on franc and

lira assets.     They see asyuunetries of capital controls as just a

reflection of the central role played by the Bundesbank, and capital

controls as instrumental for countries other than Germany to maintain

their exchange rate targets in the EMS,     without   having to surrender

completely their monetary sovereignty.      This observation raises two

related questions.      Are all fixed-exchange-rates regimes characterized

by asymmetries in the degree to which capital controls are used?           Is the

presence of these asymmetries an indication of the existence of        a

central country?

     A   broad overview of the usage of capital controls suggests      a

positive answer to the first question.      There is ample qualitative

evidence and opinion (see, for example, Bloomfield [1959], Ford (1962],

Scanimell   [1965])   that the Bank of England tended to use administrative

devices less frequently than its counterparts in the continent.         It is

well known that the convertibility of banknotes into gold was not

guaranteed by law in France, but was left to the central bank's

discretion.     The much less frequent changes of the discount rate by the

Bank of France, relative to the Bank of England and the Reichsbank,

tends to imply the effectiveness of the threat of inconvertibility,



   model the effects of controls on trade credits on the differentials
   between onshore and offshore rates.
                                   16


which was accompanied by numerous changes of the gold points.     In

Germany international shipments of gold were apparently discouraged by

moral suasion.   As Bloomfield [1959] reported, Reichsbsnk officials

questioned at the United States National Monetary Commission denied that

the central bank discouraged commercial banks to obtain gold for export

when the gold export point was reached, but admitted that at certain

times German banks refrained from shipping gold when it was profitable

to do so.   This phenomenon is independently confirmed by Birch [1887]

in his presidential address to the London Institute of Bankers:


     "I was raising the question, only a few days since, with some of
     the leading bankers in Berlin, whether the Bank of Germany would
     give large amounts of gold in exchange for its notes, and rhey
     explained to me that, if gold was required to use as currency, they
     had no difficulty in getting what they wanted, but that they were
     too Patriotic to think of going to the bank for gold with a view to
     making a profit on the export." (Birch [1887, p. 510])


     The evidence nn asymmetric use of capital controls during the

Bretton Woods years is, to some extent, less clearcut.   While in the

second postwar period as a whole the United States have regulated

international capital flows less than their European counterparts,

episodes like the Interest Equalization Tax were clearly motivated by

the concern of the external influence on domestic monetary management.

     The imposition of capital controls was not only resorted to by

deficit countries.   In the months preceding the revaluation of the

Deutsche mark of March 1961, the Bundesbank struggled with capital

inflows by imposing a series of discriminatory measures meant to
                                    17


discourage foreign residents' purchases of German assets,2°   These

measures included higher reserve requirements on foreign owned deposits

at German commercial banks, the prohibition to pay interest on foreign—

owned sight and time deposits, and the prohibition to sell money-market

paper to nonresidents.

       In summary, both the evidence on the gold standard and the EMS

suggest that countries other than England (during the gold standard) and

Germany (in the EMS) imposed regulations in order avoid compliance to

the "rules of the game": in an asymmetric system the rules of the game

consist in accomodating fully the center-country's monetary policies.21

Hence these regulations might have been suggesetd by a desire of

maintaining some degree of monetary sovereignty.   The evidence on the

Bretton Woods seems to indicate that capital controls were resorted to

more often outside of the US, although even the US experimented with

them in a number of cases.




20
     Yaeger [1966J.
21 This
        point is shown explicitly in the next section.
                                        18


4.    Symmetric and Asymmetric Fixed Exchange Rates Regimes: A Definition

       The alternative hypotheses about the working of fixed exchange

rates can be illustrated using the canonical model of the gold

standard.22        This model concentrates on the external influences on

domestic monetary policy, and on domestic aggregate variables.          It

relies on the assumption that monetary policy is powerless in affecting

real variables, so that real and nominal variables are determined

independently.       This assumption, which is probably not accurate in

practice, is not essential for the conclusions I will draw here, but is

quite helpful to sharpen the distinction between the alternative

hypotheses on the working of the international monetary system.

        There are two countries, a domestic and a foreign country--whose

variables are identified by an asterisk.          The rate of inflation in each

country is determined by the rate of money growth and a velocity shock,

that is independent of monetary factors:




                      pm+v              p
                                            *
                                                m* +v*                       (1)




where   in   is   the rate of growth of money, and p the rate of inflation.        v

represents the rate of growth of velocity.         The law of one price holds




z2
     See Dornbusch and Giovannini 11988), for example. Here I adopt the
     version of the model used by Barsky et al. [l988, who analyzed the
     international implications of the creation of the Federal Reserve
     System.
                                       19


in the goods market.23       Hence the rates of inflation at home and abroad

are the same in equilibrium.       Real rates of return on domestic and

foreign securities are equalized except for a variable, x, representing

international portfolio shifts.        x is independent of monetary
            24
policies:


                                   *
                              p—p                                         (2)

                              r—r+x
                               *
                                                                          (3)




     The balance sheets of the two central banks imply:



                     m—d-f                   *
                                            in
                                                  *
                                                 —d   f*                  (4)




In a fiat currency system, d could be interpreted as the change in

domestic credit relative to the initial stock of nominal money.       f is

the outflow of foreign exchange reserves, also measured in terms of the

initial stock of money.       Under the gold standard, d and f are the rate

of growth of the fiduciary issue and the outflow of gold, respectively.

     Since there are only two countries in the model, one country's gold



23 See Calomiris .
                 .
                   and Hubbard [1987] for a careful evaluation of the law
   of one price in goods and assets markets during the gold standard.
24 It can be shown that in this model a variable real
                                                      exchange rate, not
   affected by monetary policy, is equivalent to x. Hence x can be
   intepreted as a general idiosyncratic shock in goods and assets
   markets.
                                      20


or reserve outflows are the other country's inflows.                Assuming that the

two countries are of equal size, we have:



                           f.--   *
                                  f                                              (5)




    Equations (1) to (5) imply the following expressions for the world

rate of inflation, and the flow of international reserves:


                                    *                        *
                       p   05[(d + d ) + (v +               v )]                  (6)
                       f                                    v* )]
                                      *
                           0.5[(d - d      )   +   (v   -                         (7)


As equations (6) and (7) show, the world rate of inflation is a weighted

average of the domestic and foreign rates of growth of domestic credit

(adjusted for velocity shocks), while reserve flows are determined by

the deviations of the domestic and foreign monetary policies, and money

demand shocks.    Nominal interest rates are determined by the Fisher

equation:



                       i=r+p,          i
                                           *
                                               r* +p*                            (8)




     I define the symmetric fixed-exchange-rateange-rate regime as

follows.    Under a symmetric fixed-exchange-rates regime each central

bank attempts to control a domestic target and a foreign target,

represented by the nominal interest rate, and the rate of change of
                                                21


foreign exchange reserves: the two target variables have the same

weights and desired values in central banks' objectives.                  I borrow the


assumption that central bankers' objectives can be described by a

domestic target and a foreign target from Ciovannini [1986), Eichengreen

[1987].,   Giavazzi and Giovannini [forthcoming], and Barsky et al.                 [1988).

The specification of the domestic target in terms of the nominal rate of

interest is due to Barro [1988], and Barsky et al. [1988].                   In a

symmetric system, the objective (loss) functions are:



                         W       (i     -   )2 + bf2                                   (9)
                         *
                         W       (i
                                     .* -   ;2
                                            i) + bf*2                                  (10)




In a commodity-based system like the gold standard, the similarity of

the two objective functions would arise from the common rules on the

convertibility of banknotes into gold coins, and on the similarity of

the rules about specie coverage of banknote circulation.                   In a fiat

system like the EMS, the similarity of the two objective functions would

arise as a result of systematic international consultations among member

countries, whose objective is to define common guidelines for monetary

policy.

      When central banks maximize              (9) and (10)    world interest rates and

reserve flows are as follows:


                                                      *   -
                     i       i   -    0.5x           1    1   + 0.5x                   (11)
                                                  22


                               f      (0.5/b)x                                          (12)



International disturbances are equally shared by the two countries, and

international reserve flows are inversely proportional to the importance

of the external target in the two countries' objectives.

     By contrast, I define the asymmetric system as follows: the center

country targets the domestic interest rate, while the other country

minimizes the fluctuations of international reserves.                     Hence cointries

objective functions differ:



                        W    (j -    j)2                                                (9')

                        W—f *2
                         *
                                                                                        (10')



The reaction functions implied by (9') and (10') are:



                        d — 2(1 -                 d
                                                   *          *
                                     r)       -        -
                                                           (v+v   )                     (13)
                        *—                *
                        d    d +    (v-v      )                                         (14)


Equations (13) and (14) show that the center country accomodates world

money demand shocks, but--given the real rate of interest and money

demand- -   it offsets any changes of domestic credit policy in                the

periphery.     The country at the periphery accomodates the center

country's policy, and offsets differences in money demand shocks, which

tend to give rise to international reserve flows.                     The equilibrium
                                         23


interest rates and reserve flows are:



                 i—i         1
                                 *
                                     i+x
                                     -
                                                                         (15)

                         f   0                                           (16)




Equations (15) and (16) reveal most clearly the fundamental difference

between symmetric and asymmetric fixed-exchange-rates systemstes

systems: in an asymmetric system countries at the periphery give up

control of their domestic target to achieve stability of foreign reserve

flows.   In equilibrium all international portfolio shifts are fully

reflected in changes in the interest rates at the periphery, but do not

change the interest rate in the center country.

     The illustration of the symmetric and asymmetric regimes adopted in

this section--based on postulated asymmetries in the objectives of

central bankers--was preferred to an alternative specification, based on

the hypothesis that the center-country is a "Stackelberg leader".        That

model relies on the assumption that changes in monetary policies by

countries other than the leader cannot elicit the leader's reaction.       By

contrast, the model I use has in my opinion the virtue of being based on

a symmetric game structure, but is silent on what gives rise to the

asymmetries in the objective functions.       The asymmetries could be

generated by four different phenomena, which I briefly review below.

They include Mundell's [1968] "proper division of the burden of

international adjustment", the presence of a "reserve currency" country,
                                       24


liquidity constraints affecting differently surplus and deficit

countries, and the issue of "imported reputation".

      Robert Mundell [1968J demonstrates that the adjustment to country-

specific disturbances should be divided in inverse proportion to the

sizes of the countries involved.       In our problem, the adjustment to

relative interest-rate shocks is carried out by the small country: the

interest rate in the large country is unaffected.          This result can be

illustrated considering a world made up by two equally-sized regions:

one occupied by a single large country (the "domestic country"), and the
                                                                    *
other by a large nunber of small countries (denoted by an asterisk, ),
indexed by   j=l       N.25   In this world, the rate of inflation is:26



                   -      O.5[                   +   (v+(l/N)Ev)   ]     (17)
                                  (d+(l/N)Ed;)



Each small country's domestic credit policy has a negligible effect on

its own rate of inflation.        By contrast, the small countries' reserve

flows are:




25
     This subdivision of the world economy, suggested to me by David
     Beckus, facilitates the comparison with the symmetric case reported
     above.
26                           .   .               .
                              .
     From goods mareets equslibrium,  dL±vd*f.+v*.,      for all i's,
     Summing this conditions over  all i's, and using ihe condition that
     world resarve flows are zero, one can solve for f. To compute the
     world rate of inflation, substitute the expression for f into (4) and
     ci).
                                  25


              —   d+v     O.5[ (d÷(l/N)Zd)    +    (v+(1/N)v.)       (18)



In equilibrium, deviations of the two target variables from their

desired values are inversely related to the relative effectiveness of

the instrument: hence the small countries end up nearly pegging their

foreign exchange reserves, while the task of pegging the world interest

rate is left to the center country: this corresponds to the the

asymmetric regime postulated above.

    A   similar result would obtain if one of the two countries issues a

"reserve" currency: this case is discussed by Swoboda [1978] and Genberg

and Swoboda [1982].   An increase in high-powered money by the reserve-

currency country has a larger effect on world inflation than the same

increase from a non-reserve-currency country.      The foreign exchange

reserves of the other country increase by a multiple of the original

monetary expansion, equal to the money multiplier of the reserve

currency.   Hence the non-reserve-currency central bank would be

relatively ineffective at targeting the rate of interest, and, as above,

would end up targeting foreign exchange reserves.

     A third reason for the endogenous establishment of an asymmetric

regime is the presence of constraints on the size of balance-of-payments

deficits, justified, for example, by liquidity constraints.       With

identical objective functions, the equilibrium reserve outflow from the

domestic country is given by equation (12).       If the domestic country

faces systematically positive realizations of x, i.e. it is a "deficit
                                    26


country", and if the Costs of financing reserve outflows are large, the

domestic country would find it advantageous to forego interest rate

stability by accomodating fully the monetary policy of the center

country.

     Finally, asymmetric exchange rate regimes could arise in the

"imported credibility" models of Giavazzi and Giovannini [1987] and

Giavazzi and Pagano [1988].   These authors show that, when exchange-rate

targets are fully credible, inflation-prone central banks might find it

advantageous to accomodate fully to a central bank which has an

"inflation fighter" reputation.27




27 As
      Giavazzi and Giovannini [forthcoming] stress, however, these
   models do not provide a justification as to why the center-country
   would prefer such an arrangement over, for example, a flexible
   exchange rate regime.
                                   27


S.    Empirical Evidence

       In this section I discuss the empirical evidence on the hypothesis

that the three fixed-exchange-rates regimes worked asymmetrically.     I


first review the evidence on the timing of discount rate changes during

the gold standard.    Then I study the behavior of interest rates in

                                                               Woods and
correspondence of parity realignments, both during the Bretton

the EMS.    And finally I derive and test some stochastic implications of

the model of section 4.




5.1    The Timing of Discount-Rate Changes During the Gold Standard

                                                               considered
       During the gold standard, changes in the bank rate were

the main policy instruments used   by central banks to affect their gold

reserves and international capital flows.    Bloomfield [1959] and

Eichengreen   1987   argue that British rate changes immediately followed
                                                            of the
by changes changes in the continent are evidence suggestive

central role of the Bank of England in the gold standard.    To verify

this hypothesis, I have looked at the data published by the US National

Monetary Commission[l9lO],    reporting dates and amounts of discount rate

                                                                   1989
changes for Britain, France and Germany in the period from January

to December 1907.

       First, I have computed the number of occurrences when a change in

the British discount rate was followed (within 1 week) by   a   change in
                                     28


the discount rate in France or Germany.    During that period, the Bank of

England changed the discount rate 104 times, increasing it 59 times, and

decreasing it 45 times.    The Reichsbank followed the increases in the

British discount rate 11 times, and followed the rate decreases 14

times.    There are also 14 cases when the Reichsbank discount rate

changes preceded those of the Bank of England.28   France, by contrast,

followed changes of the bank rate much less frequently (a reflection of

the less intensive use of discount rate policy by the Bank of France).

Only three British rate changes were followed by France within a week (2

negative and 1 positive), while France's discount rate adjustments were

also followed by the Bank of England in three occasions (2 negative

changes 1 positive).    In the case of France, there are also three

instance of discount rate changes occurring the same day.29

      Table 2 contains statistical tests of the timing of discount rate

changes, using 992 weekly observations in the period mentioned above.     I

estimate a vector autoregression including 8 lags of the British, French

and German rates, and test   the joint significance of the coefficients of

each set of lagged rates in each regression.    The table shows no

evidence of temporal precedence in the changes in the British bank rate.

Instead, lagged values of the German discount rate are significantly




28
       times upwards, 7 downwards.
29
     January 10 and January 24, 1989.
                                      29


correlated with the Bank rate and the French discount rate.°        In

summary, there is very little evidence in support of the hypothesis that

Bank rate changes preceded changes in discount rates in the continent.

As I argue in Giovannini [1986], at least in the monthly data,      there is

a strong contemporaneous correlation between the British and the German

rate.3'      This correlation, however, is almost entirely due to the common

seasonal component in discount rate policies, and therefore cannot be

interpreted as supporting the hypothesis of the leadership of the Bank
            32
of England.

          How should we interpret these results?   The temporal pattern of

discount-rate changes being tested in this section is consistent with a

leader-follower structure, where the center country's central bank

always moves first, independently of the other central banks' actions,

and taking their reactions into account.      The empirical evidence



30                                                                     He
     This evidence contrasts with the findings of Eichengreen [1987]
     estimated morthly bivariate VARs which included the British discount
     rate and the German and French rate, respectively. He found that
                                                                     with
     lagged values of the British rate were significantly correlated
     both the French and the German rates. I was unable to reproduce
     these results, by reconstructing Eichengreen's sample. While my
     coefficient estimates are virtually identical to his, I found in the
     monthly data that lagged values of the British rate were not
                                                                        of
     significantly correlated with the German rate, while lagged values
     the French rate were significant in the Bank Rate regression.
31                                           .    .        .
     Since the French rate changes only few times in this period,      I left
      .




     it out of my analysis.
32
     See Andreades [1909], Keynes [1930] and Ford [1962] for a description
     of the "autumnal drains" that prompted these reactions by central
     bankers.
                                      30


presented here rejects this hypothesis.33     This evidence, however, has

no conclusive implications for the asymmetric model of the gold standard
                 34
in section 4.




5.2    The Asymmetric Behavior of Interest Rates

       A   rather general implication of the model in section 4 regards the

behavior of interest rates.     While in a symmetric regime international

portfolio shifts are reflected in both countries' interest rates, in an

asymmetric regime the center country's rate is unaffected, and

international portfolio disturbances perturb only the other countries'
         35
rates.

        This result suggests a simple test of the asymmetry hypothesis,



      Evidence on the timing structure of discount rates during the EMS is
      provided by Roubini [1988]. Using quarterly data, he finds that
      lagged values of the German discount rate are correlated with
      Italian, Belgian and Danish rates, which he inteprets as evidence of
      German leadership. Genberg Saidi and Swoboda [1982] test the
      temporal precedence of US monetary policies during the Bretton Woods
      years: their evidence does not consistently support the hypothesis
      that US monetary policy changes preceded those in the rest of the
      world.

      The limited use of Granger causality tests is argued in detail by
      Cooley and Leroy [1985].

      Giavazzi and Giovannini [1987] show that the asymmetric behavior of
      interest rates is also an implication of models where prices are
      sticky.
                                         31


based on the observation of countries' interest rates in correspondence

of observable international portfolio shifts.          The most natural choice

of episodes of shifts between countries' assets is the periods preceding

devaluations.      Both under the Bretton Woods regime and in the EMS there

have been several realignments of central parities, which have been

prompted by countries' inability to withstand balance-of-payments

difficulties, and have been anticipated--though to different degrees--by

financial markets.       In this section I analyze the behavior of interest

rates around the Bretton Woods realignments of March 1961 (Deutsche mark

revalued), November 196] (devaluation of sterling), August 1969 (French

franc devalued), and October 1969 (Deutsche mark revalued).

       Figures 1, 2 and 3 report monthly observations of the 1-month

eurodollar deposit rates, and of the differential between the eurodollar

rate and a domestic money market rate in the US, during an interval of

two years around the realignments of 1961,          1967 and   l969   Figures 4,

5, 6 and 7 report weekly data (taken on Fridays) on the US Treasury

Bills rate and the forward premium.           The sources are the Wall Street

Journal for the US interest rate, and the Economist for the forwarl

premium.    The    forward premium is   calculated using the bilateral rates of

sterling: it      is the ratio of the   1-month   forward rate (expressed in

units of the currency for 1 dollar) and the spot exchange rate,          less 1

(the result is multiplied by 1200 to express the implied interest rate



36
     These data are obtained from International Financial Statistics.
                                    32


differential   in percent per annum).

    Figures 1 and   4   illustrate the behavior of dollar interest rates

and the DM/dollar forward premium in correspondence of the revaluation

of the mark on March 6, 1961.     Figure 4 shows that the volatility of the

interest rate differential implied by the forward market much exceeds

the volatility of the US Treasury bills rate.      On January 13 the foreign

exchange market implies a negative DM-dollar differential of about I

percent.   That differential decreases to -6percent and -2.5 percent the
weeks following the realignment. These large fluctuations of the

interest rate differential implied by the forward rate are accompanied
by a much smaller increase of the eurodollar rate (shown in figure 1)
which reached 4.14 percent in December 1960, but fell to about 3.5

percent the February before the revaluation of the DM,

     Figures   2 and 5 report US rates and forward premia around the

devaluation of sterling on November 20, 1967.      Figure 2 shows a large

peak in the Eurodollar interest rate and the offshore-domestic

differential for the dollar in the month of November- - suggesting that

the sterling crisis had some repercussion on the dollar (evidence

against the asymmetry hypothesis).       Figure 5 shows wide swings in the

forward discount on sterling, especially after the date of the

devaluation, and a slight increase in the US TEill rate in the weeks

preceding the devaluation.

     Finally, figures 3, 6 and 7 illustrate the data for the August 11,

1969 devaluation of the franc, and the October 24 revaluation of the UN.
                                    33


As figure 3 shows, 1969 is a year of high and volatile Eurodollar

interest rates.    Figure 6 presents the data for the French devaluation.

It shows that the forward market implied a very high differential

between French and US interest rates at the end of June, without any

large swings in the US Thills rate.      The TBill rate, however, falls from

7.4 to 6.05 percent in the week preceding the devaluation.      Figure 7

contrasts the relative stability of the US Thills rate with a sharp

increase of the dollar-DM interest rate differential implied by the

forward premium, which reached 13 percent on September 19.

        Figures 8 and 9 report domestic and offshore interest rates for the

lira, the French franc and the Deutsche mark, in the weeks preceding and

immediately following the ENS realignment of April 7, 1986, when both

the lira and the French franc were devalued relative to the Deutsche

mark.    This episode was first studied by Giavazzi and Giovannini [1987].

The large swings of the offshore interest rates on the franc and the
lira occur despite of a strikingly stable pattern of the domestic and
offshore DM rates.
     In summary, the behavior of interest rates in correspondence to

devaluations strongly    suggests the presence of asymmetry   in the   two   EMS


episodes.     The sharp movements of dollar rates in correspondence of the

sterling devaluation in 1967 are in contrast to the hypothesis that the

US was the center country during the Bretton Woods years.       The Bretton

Woods data, however, should be interpreted with caution, since this

analysis cannot identify and control for portfolio shifts that did not
                                               34


involve    dollar assets: the maintained assumption is that the observed

international interest rate differentials reflect incipient portfolio

reallocations between dollar assets and the assets denominated in the

depreciating or appreciating currency.




5.3   yploring          the Stochastic Implications of the Asymmetric Model   of

dExchane                Rates
        Following the analysis of section 4, I assume that central banks
minimize     the following objective functions:


                         -
                             E 1lt+j       lt+       +
                                                         b(y2+1               (19)

               *         -
                                 *         *     2
                                                     +
                                                           *      -*     2
                    —
                             E                                    2t÷•        (l9)


Where        andare the home and external target variables, in both
        y1         y2
                                                  *
countries (foreign-country variables denoted by a )    This maximization
is performed subject to equations describing the dynamics of the target

variables:



                    —
                         A(L)Yi +     B(L)Y1     +
                                                 C(L)Z                        (20)


                                           (L)Yi + C (L)Z
                    — A              + B
                             (L)Y1                                            (21)




Where A(L), B(L) and C(L), and the corresponding starred variables are
                                       35


polynomials in the lag operator.       Y    and y* are the vectors of targets

for the domestic and the foreign country, and              Z   is a vector which


includes exogenous variables, stochastic disturbances, and the

instruments available to the two central bankers.

      The first-order condition for the domestic central bank is




                E(y1t
                        -
                            lt   —
                                     -bE(y2
                                                 -
                                                     '2t                           (22)




A   similar condition holds for the foreign central bank.

                                       if   b   equals zero,      deviations of the
       Equation (22) implies that,

domestic target variable from its desired value should be uncotrelated

with information at time     t, and in particular with past realizations of

the external target variable.        Under the alternative hypothesis, lagged

realizations of the external target variable- -presumably correlated with

the right-hand side of equation (22)--are correlated with the term on

left-hand side.    Intuitively, in the center country the deviations of

the domestic target from its desired value are white-noise errors.37

       In order to derive testable implications, I need identifying

                                                           It is plausible to assume
assumptions about the unobservable term              lt
that it is uncorrelated with lagged values of the external target, thus

                                                  be more clearly
allowing the domestic and the external targets to

isolated.    In this case, when a country's monetary authority targets a



     See Sargent and Wallace [1976] for derivations of similar tests in
     the context of linear-quadratic control models.
                                       36


domestic variable exclusively, lagged values of the external target

should be uncorrelated with the domestic target.      These tests are

apparently similar to those performed by Pippenger [1984] and Dutton

[1984]    who analyzed central bank policies under the gold standard.     As

I stress in Giovannini [1986]   ,   however, the interpretation of my test is

dramatically different.     While I concentrate on the reducedform

properties of the data,   implied by the alternative structures of the

international monetary system, Pippenger and Dutton intend to estimate

parameters of central banks' reaction functions.      These specifications,

however    are not linked to an underlying optimization problem of central

banks: hence the tests of the significance of individual parameters

proposed by these authors are difficult to interpret.

       Tables 3, 4 and 5 report the results of some exploratory tests of

the asymmetry hypothesis.     Table 3 contains the results for the gold

standard data (monthly). I assume that the domestic target variable for

each central bank is an index of coverage of the central bank's

liabilities:    the proportion of the gold reserve to total deposit

liabilities in the Banking Department of the Bank of England, the

proportion of cash to total demand liabilities in the Reichsbank,38 and

the ratio of the gold reserve to circulation in the Bank of France.       In

addition, I assume that the desired value of the target variable is




38
     Which equals the ratio of the sum of coin and Imperial treasury
     notes, divided by the sum of notes in circulation and other demand
     liabilities.
                                   37


constant (plausibly determined by national regulations on coverage, and

banking practice).   For all three countries, I test whether lagged

values of net imports of gold are significantly correlated with the

target variable (in first difference), beyond a set of seasonal

dummies.39   The table shows that the null hypothesis of no correlation

is rejected at the 5 percent level in the case of Germany and France

(the marginal significance level, the probability that the test

statistic exceeds the reported value when the null hypothesis is true,

is actually less than 1 percent in the case of Germany), but it is not

rejected for England.

      Table 4 contains the results for the Bretton Woods data

(quarterly).   The domestic target variable is assumed to be the domestic

money-market interest rate, while the foreign target variable is the

change in foreign exchange reserves relative to high-powered money.4°

As before, I include seasonal dummies in the regression.

I find that past balance of payments flows are highly significantly

correlated with the domestic money market rate in the United States and

in the United Kingdom.    This correlation is insignificant in France and




     Since the theory does not predict that the disturbances should be
     i.i.d. under the null hypothesis, the test statistics are computed
     using the White [1980] correction for heteroskedasticity.
40
     All the data is from International Financial Statistics. Valiation
     effects on foreign exchange reserves are subtracted by subtracting
     the "other items" line from net foreign reserves at the central bank
                                              38


west Germany.

        Table 5 contains the results for the EMS data.          The specification

of   the     regression equations is identical to that for the Bretton Woods

data,      The hypothesis that lagged values of foreign reserve flows         are
orthogonal to the domestic target (nominal interest rate) is rejected at

the 1 percent level in the case of France of Italy, but not in the case

of West Germany.          In summary,   the   test results agree with the 'center

country       hypothesis in the case of the gold standard and the EMS, but

cot in the case of Bretton Woods.




.    Concluding Observations
        The data seems to support the hypothesis of asymmetry            at least in

the case of the gold standard and the EMS.             Although the institutional

setup in both regimes is clearly not inducing asymmetry, there are

striking similarities in the use of capital controls.               Furthermore, the

evidence on interest rate behavior and the statistical tests both

support the asymmetric model,

        In    the   case of Bretton Woods, the statistical model rejects the

asymmetry hypothesis, and the evidence on interest rates is--at least in

some cases--not as clearcut as in the case of the            EMS.

        In this paper I have followed the strategy of trying to uncover

evidence of asymmetry without exploiting the implications of specific
                                   39


models of asymmetric international monetary systems, like those

mentioned in section 4.   None of the factors giving rise to asymmetries

described above, in my opinion, can alone fully explain all three

historical experiences studied in this paper.   I do believe, though,

that further empirical work should help to identify which of the

alternative models of an asymmetric international monetary system best

fit the individual historical experiences.
                                       40


                                     Table 1:

                          Bilateral Fluctuation Bands

Currency   (x-rate)     Parity           Lower Limit       Upper Limit


                                  Gold Standard

Sterling   ($/pound)    4.866               4.827             4890

Franc      (FF/$)       5,183                5.148            5.215

Mark       (DM/$)       4.198               4.168             4.218


                                  Bretron Woods

Sterling    ($/pound)   2.8                  2.772            2.828

Franc      (FF/$)       4.937               4.887             4.986

Mark       (DM/$)       4.2                 4.158             4.242




                              European Monetary System


Franc      (FF/DM)      2.310                2.258            2.362




Sources. Gold Standard: Morgenstern [1959]. Sterling points are computed for
gold trade from Britain to the US (in 1879). Franc and mark points are computed
for trade from Paris and Berlin (respectively) to New York (in 1901) . Bretron
W4T: International Financial Statistics. Data refers to the year 1960.       4:
European Economy. Data refers to March 1979.
                                        41


                                      Table 2:

                The Timing of Discount Rates During the Gold Standard


                                                 Dependent Variables:

                                         GB              GER            FRA




                                       0.434            0.956           0.982

DW                                     2.000            2.000           2.001



F-tests:   GB                          0.000            0.432           0.780

           GER                         0.000            0.000           0.038

           FRA                         0.117            0.574           0.000




Sample: Weekly froa January 1890 to December 1907. The entries denoted by F-
test are the marginal significance levels of the null hypothesis that the
coefficients of the lagged discount rates of the country of the corresponding
row are not significant in the regressions with dependent variable the country
of the corresponding colunmn.
                                        42


                                      Table 3:

                         Test Results: Gold Standard


                                                 Country:

                            Britain               Germany          France




Sample                  1889:12 1907:12      1892:12 1907:12   1900:10 1907:12

R2                          0.480                  0.915            0.515



F-tests:                    0.271                  0.004            0029



The entries denoted by F-test are the marginal significance levels of the null
hypothesis that the coefficients of the lagged net imports of gold are not
significant. The statistic is computed using the White [1980) correction of the
variance-covariance matrix of disturbances.
                                     43


                                   Table 4:

                         Test Results: Bretton Woods


                                               Country:

                           US             UK          Germany      France




                       62:2 71:4    64:2 71:4        62:2 71:4    62:2 71:4
Sample

                         0.516        0.594               0.185     0.163




F-tests:                 0.000        0000                0.518     0.400




The entries denoted by F-test are the marginal significance levels of the null
                                                                 flow relative
hypothesis that the coefficients of the lagged ratio of reserves
to high powered money are not significant. The statistic is computed using the
White [1980J correction of the variance-covariance matrix of disturbances.
                                         44


                                       Table 5:

                               Test Results: EMS



                                                  Country:

                             Germany               France         Italy




Sample                     80:3 88:1              80:3 88:1       80:3 87:4

R2                           0.079                   0.345         0.350



F-tests:                     0.690                  0.009          0.003




The entries denoted by F-test are the marginal significance levels of the nufl.
hypothesis that the coefficients of the lagged ratio of reserves flow relative
to high powered money are not significant. The statistic is computed using the
White [l980 correction of the variance-covariance matrix of disturbances.
                                           45


                                        References



Alesiria, A. and V. Grilli, "Avoiding Speculative Attacks on EMS
      Currencies: A Proposal," Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper
      No. 547, Yale University, 1987.

Andreades, A., History of the Bank of En1and, London: P.S. King & Son, 1909.

Argy, V.   The Postwar International Money Crisis, London: George Allen
            ,



      and Unwin, 1981,

Barro, R. "Interest-Rate Smoothing" mimeo, Harvard University, March 1988.

Earsky, R.5. , NC, Mankiw, J.A, Miron and O.K. Well, "The Worldwide Change
     in the BEhavior of Interest Rates and Prices in 1914," European Economic
     Review, 32, 1988, pp. 1123-1154.

Birch, W.J ,,"PresidentialAddress," Journal of the Institute of Bankers,
     1887, pp. 503-536.

Bloomfield, A. , Monetary Policy Under the International Cold Standard:
     1880-1914, New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 1959.

Calomiris, CV. and R,C. Hubbard, "International Adjustment Under the
     Classical Gold Standard; Evidence for the U.S. and Britain, 1879-
     1914," mimeo, Northwestern University, May 1.987.

Clark, T.A .,"Violations of the Gold Points, 1890-1908," Journal of
     Political Economy, 92, n. 5, October 1984, pp. 791-823.

Cooley, T.F. and and S.F. Leroy, "Atheoretical Macroeconomics,            A    Critique,"
     Journal of Monetary Economics, 16, 1985, pp. 283-308.

Dornbusch, F. and J. Frenkel, The Gold Standard Crisis of 1847,"
     Journal of International Economics, 16, ii. 1/2, pp. 1-27.

Dornbusch, F. and A. Ciovannini, "Monetary Policy in the Open Economy,"
     manuscript for the Handbook of Monetary Theory, ad. by F. Hahn and
     B. Friedman, February 1988.


Dutcon, J .,"The Bank of England and the Rules of the Game Under the
     International Gold Standard: New Evidence," in M.D. Bordo and
     A. Schwartz, eds. , A Retrospective on the Classical Gold Standard,
     1821-1931, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984.

Eichengreen,    B. "Editor's   Introduction"    in   B. Eichengreen   (ad.),
                                                 46


     The Cold Standard in     Theorvgnd      History, New York: Methuen,      1985.

Eichengreen, B. , 'Conducting the International Orchestra: Bank of England
     Leadership Under the Classical Gold Standard," Journal of international
     Mongy and Finance, 6, 1987, PP. 5-29.

Genberg, H. N. Saidi and AK. Swoboda, "American and European Interest Rates
     and Exchange Rates: US Hegemony or Interdependence?" mmcc,
     International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies, 1982.

Giavazzi,   F. and A. Giovannini,      Limiting Exchange Rate Flexibility: The
     oean Monetary System,            Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, forthcoming.

Giavazzi, F., and A. Giovannini, "The EMS and the Dollar,"              omicPo1ic',
     2, 1986, pp. 455-478.


Giavazzi, F. and A. Giovannini, "Models of the EMS: Is Europe a Greater
     Deutsche-Mark Area?" in R. Bryant and K. Portes (eds.), Global
                                          Coo eration, London: Macmillan,
     1987

Giavazzi, F. and M. Pagano, "The Advantage of Tying One's Hands: EMS
     Discipline and Central Bank Credibility," TRa..GonomicReview
     June 1988.

Giovannini, A., "'Rules of the Game' During the International Gold
     Standard: England and Germany," Journal of International Money and
     Finance, 5, 1986, pp. 467-483.

Helpman, E .,"An Exploration in the Theory of Exchange Rate P..egimes,"
     Journal of Political Economy, 89, 1981, pp. 865-890.

Keynes, J.M.   ,   A Treatise on   Money, London: Macmillan,       1930.

Kindleberger, C.P. A Financial
                       ,               History        of Western Europe, London: George
     Allen and Unwin, 1984.

MoCloskey, ON. and J.R. Zecher, "How the Gold Standard Worked, 1880-1913,"
     in J.A. Frenkel and H.G. Johnson (eds.), The Monetary Approach to the
     Balance of Payments, London: Allen & Unwin, 1976.

Monetary Committee, Compendium of Community Monetary Texts, Brussels:
     European Community, 1986.

Morgenstern, 0., International Financial Transactions and Business Cycles,
     Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1959.
                                       47


Mundell, R.A. International Economics, New York: MacMillan,   1968.

Officer, L.H ,"The Efficiency of the Dollar-Sterling Gold Standard,
     1890-1908," Journal of Political Economy, 94, n. 5, October 1986,
     pp. 1038-73.

Pippenger, J    'Bank of England Operations 1893-1913, "in M.D. Bordo and
     A. Schwartz, eda. , A Retrospective  on the Classical Gold Standard
     1821-1931, Chicago: University of Chicago Preas, 1984.

Rouhini, N.," Sterilization Policies, Offsetting Capital Movements and
     Exchange Rate Intervention Policies in the EMS," mimeo, Harvard
     University, 1988.

                                                         the Theory of
Sargent, T.J. and H. Wallace, "Rational Expectations and
             Economic Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, April 1976, pp
169-183.

Scammell, W.M. "The Working of the Gold Standard,' Yorkshire Bullettin
     of Economic and Social Research, May 1965, pp. 32-45. Reprinted in
     Eichengreen, ed. , The Gold Standard in Theory and History, New York:
     Methuen, 1985.

Spaventa, L .,"Algebraic Properties and Economic Improperties of the
     'Indicator of Divergence' in the European Monetary System," in R.
     Cooper et al. (eds.) The International Monetary System Under Flexible
     Exchanze Rates - Essays in Honor of Robert Triffin, Cambridge, MA:
     Ballinger, 1982.

Swoboda, AK.," Gold, Dollars, Euro-Dollars, and the World Money Stock
     under Fixed Exchange Rates," American Economic Review, 68, 1978,
     pp. 625-642.

Spiller, P.T. and R.O. Wood, "Arbitrage During the Dollar-Sterling    Gold
     Standard, 1899-1908: An Econometric Approach," Journal of
     Political Ecppp   , 96, n. 4, August 1988, pp. 882-892.

Stockman, AC., "Real Exchange Rate Variability under Pegged and Floating
     Nominal Exchange Rate Systems: An Equilibrium Theory," mimeo,
     University of Rochester, October 1987.

Tew, B., The Evolution of the International Monetary System 1945-77,
     New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1977.

US National Monetary Commission, The Reichsbank 1876-1900, Doc. 507,
     Washington,   DC: Government Printing Office, 1911,
                                      48


US National Monetary Commission Statistios for Great Britain. Germany and
     France, Washington, DC: Government Printing Offioe, 1910.

White, H., "A Heteroskedastioity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and
     Direct Test for Heteroskedasticicy," Econometrics 48, 1980, pp. 81.7838.

Yaeger,                                       New
          LB., ftLinfY.ionaLMonf.taiyEelacions,     York: Harper & Row, 1966.
                                      1orith and Year
 623            6111         617               613          6011           607       603
                                                                                      —    0
                                                                                           0.5
        ,1,s,          '\—
                         \      ','
                                    ——
                                      —
                                          ',                    I,I
                                                                      —*
                                                                                      —
                                                                                           :   1
                                                                                                   IL
                                                                                                   I)
                               II
                                               I            S
                                                            S                                      o
                                                                                      —    2       -
                                                     Differentiol Offshore—Onshore                 <
                                                                                           2.5
Realignment 961 1 the Around Rates Interest DoHar 1: Fig.
     Fig. 2: Dollar Interest Rqtes Around the 1 967 Realignment
      8


      7


      £


      5
F
C
<C    4
U
a
C)
I-
aU
      2




      U


     —1
          6611   673    677       6711         683   687   6811

                              Year and Month
                         Month and Year
  708     704     6912        698         694   6812   688
                                                             0
                                                             2
                                                             3
                                                                  a.
                                                             4    4)
                                                                  I-
                                                                  1)
                                                                  4)
                                                                  C
                                                             5
                                                                  0-
                                                                  4)
                                                                  I.-
                                                             6    'C
                                                                  C
                                                                  C
                                                             7
                                                             8
                                                             9
                                                             10
                                                             11
                                                             12
Realignments 1969 the Around Rates Interest Dollar 3: Fig.
       Fig. 4: Forward Premia Around the 1961 Rea'ignment
      3


      2 -                                                                                 ——
                               —-—-——  US TBIII Rote




      0

F
c
                   Premium over DoUar Rate
I,   —2 -
0
I:
4)
U
4)
     —3 -
IL

     —4 -


     —5 -                                                            I                $
                                                                      I           j
                                                                       I
                                                                        I        II
     —6 -                                                                   II
                                                                            I,

     —7 -                I      I      I
          1.13   1.20   1.27   2.03   2.10   2.17      2.24   3.03   3.10                 3i7   3.24   3.31

                                               Dote
                                                         rj
                                           Dote
1.19   1.12   1.05 12.29 12.22 12.15 12.Q 12.1 11.24
              I-                                                   j
                                                       1,17 11.10 11.03 1027 i02O 1013
                                                                        y
                     Rote Dollar over Premium
                                                                                    2
                                                                                     :
                                                                   Rote IBill US
                                     /
                                    /                                               5—   E
ReaNgnment 967 1 the Around Premia Forward 5: Fig.
Fig. 6: Forward Premia Around the August 1969 Realignment




           \ Premium over DoUar Rote
                                                      i. 'H
     6.2
           IITFTTITTJ
           6.27   7.04   7,11   7.18   7.25    8.01   8.08   8.15
                                                              H     8.22   8.29   9.05

                                        Date
                                                  Dote
  11.21   11.14   11.07   10.31   10.24   10.17    10.10   10.03           9.26              9i9     9.12      9.05
                                           F                   F                                      I        +—      4   —1
                                                                                                                  —13H
                                                                                              /\                  — --—12
                                                                                                                           —
                                                                                         ,/     '\                — 1 1
                                                                                         /                        H —10
                                                                                                                       ——9
                                                                                                                  —I
                                                                                     /                            —i   —8
                                      Rote Dottor over Premium                  ,"                                     —7
                                                                          III                               ———   — —6          a-
                                                                                                                                V
                                                     5/                                               —— — —
                                                                                                                       —5       L
                                                                                                                                0CU
                                                                                                                                0a-
                                                                                                                       —2
                                                                                                                       —1       C
                                                                                                                  0-            E
                                                                                                                  2—
                                                                                                                  3—
                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                       5
                                                  Rote TBiII   US
                                                                                                                  6—
                                                                                                                       7
                                     —-     —-----         —       —--—     —--              ---------
Realignment 1969 October the Around Premia Forward 7: Fig.
Fig. 8: Onshore and Offshore Interest Rates: lira and DM
                                   3—Month Deposits
       20
       19
       18
       17
.4-h
 C
 a)
 Li
 C-
 a'
a-                                     - '"-
       14
       13
                                                 DOM   LII
       12
       11
       10
       9
       8
       7
       6
       5
       4
       3
       2
        I

       0
        85:9   85:10   85:11   85:12    86:1          86:2   86:3   86:4
                    2         21   H :g   Q   5,
                                               2
                                               C
                                               L
                                               01
                                                n
                                               21
                                               Cl
                                               91
                                               51
                                               02
ra pu   3U0J4   :saDH S3JU JOSfl(3 PUD JOqSUQ :3 LJ
