NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOVEREIGN DEBT BUYBACKS CAN LOWER BARGAINING COSTS

Julio J. Rotemberg

Working Paper No. 2767

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge. NA 02138
November 1988

I wish to thank David Scharfstein and Ken Froot for helpful conversations and
the National Science Foundation and Sloan Foundations for research support.
This research is part of NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2767
November 1988

SOVEREIGN DEBT BtJYBACKS CAN LOWER BARGAINING COSTS

ABSTRACT

I develop two models in which debt repurchases by highly indebted sovereign
nations are advantageous for all parties. The models are based on the idea that
when sovereign debts are large, bargaining costs are large. Creditors spend more

resources convincing the debtor that they are tough when they have more at
stake. Also, the sanctions which are sometimes triggered when bargaining fails to

produce an agreement are larger when debts are larger. For both these reasons
buybacks, which reduce the face value of the outstanding debt, can be beneficial.

The resulting equilibria are constrained Pareto Optima. But, donors who subsidize buybacks increase overall welfare more than donors who make direct gifts.

I also argue that Bulow and Rogoff (1988)'s empirical evidence on buybacks is
consistent with my models.

Julio J. Rotemberg
Alfred P. Sloan School
50 Memorial Drive
M.I.T.

Cambridge, MA 02139

of Management

Sovereign Debt Buybacks Can
Lower Bargaining Costs
Julio J. Rotemberg
Sloan School of Management,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
and
NBER

Highly indebted countries and their creditor banks have experimented with numerous

approaches to ameliorate the "LDC Debt Crisis". One rather popular approach is to have
the country repurchase its debt at its current market price. Since the debt currently trades

below par, countries pay less than they would if they actually honored their debts. The
repurchase, or "buyback", recognizes that the debts axe very unlikely to be paid in full.
Several authors (Huizinga and Sachs (1987), Bulow and Rogoff (1988), Froot (1988),

Krugman (1988)) have noted that other schemes are closely related to buybacks. For
example, "debt/equity swaps" allow investors to purchase local currency with foreign debt

that they obtain in the secondary market. This is equivalent to letting investors pay for
their local currency in hard currency and use the hard currency to buy back the debt.
We would obviously like to know why these schemes arise and who benefits from them.

An additional reason for studying these schemes is that we now have some data on their
effect. These data can help disentangle the empirical validity of various theoretical models

of the debt crisis. In a thought provoking paper, Bulow and Rogoff (1988) show that the

March 1988 debt repurchase of Bolivia raised the secondary market's price of Bolivia's
debt substantially. It rose so much that the secondary market's valuation of outstanding
debt was almost unchanged by the buyback. Why then did Bolivian officials do this?

Bulow and Rogoff (1988)'s explanation is that Bolivian officials were misguided or
unpatriotic. Stated differently, there exist models of rational optimizing governments which

are inconsistent with the facts. To make this point with some generality, consider situations

1

where buybacks affect only the flows of payments between countries.1 They do not affect

real activity in either, If borrowers and lenders apply the same discount factor to future
cash flows, these purely redistributive (or financial) buybacks cannot benefit all concerned.

The sum of the welfare effects on all parties sums to zero. So, these models imply that the
lenders welfare improvement is matched by a reduction in borrower welfare.

Borrower countries are probably constrained in the amount they can borrow. Thus,
their discount rates presumably exceed those of their lenders. Such a difference in discount

rates would imply that the lenders' benefit from purely financial buybacks is more than
offset by borrower losses. This occurs because buyba.cks increase current payments from

the borrower while, at best, reducing future payments.
Bulow and Rogoff (1988) argue that, in the case of sovereign debts, we should expect

only the lenders to benefit from purely financial buybacks. Sovereign debts are those
whose repayment depends only on the ability to threaten the debtor with reprisals and not

on borrower net worth.2 Therefore, buyback induced reductions in the face value of the
outstanding debt have a very small effect on future repayments. This makes them a bad

deal for borrowers. By contrast, in the case of corporate debts the creditor can dissolve
the debtor and keep the net worth. Thus, buybacks are financed with cash which really
belongs to creditors. In this case, creditors lose from repurchases.
Both of these stories assume that buybacks take place in the open market. If buybacks
are negotiated and if, as in Bulow and Rogoff (1986), negotiation is costless, purely financial

buybacks change nobody's welfare. The evidence that buybacks make lenders better off

is thus inconsistent with Bulow and Rogoff (1986). It is n unrealistic to maintain, as
they do, that countries are rational pursuers of their self interest and that debts have only
redistributive effects.

For buybacks to improve everybody's welfare, they must have real consequences.
Achazya and Diwan (1988), Froot (1988), Helpman (1987), Krugman (1988) and Sachs
(1988) have formally studied one particular real effect of buybacks. Their effect relies on

'Dooley (1988) pruvidn sa example of .uch • model.
25 Eflon, Genoyits tad Sti1Iits (1986) sad the Iit.rature cited therein.

2

moral hazard.3 They argue that the fall in nominal debt outstanding induced by buybacks

raises the country's incentive to invest. This occurs because the country gets to keep a
larger fraction of the investment's return. The investments available to the debtor have
very large rates of return but there is no mechanism, other than debt reduction, to induce

the country to undertake them. Once they are undertaken however, their high returns

make it possible for the country to pay more per unit of outstanding debt. Therefore,
reductions in the face value of debt tend to increase payments on the debt that remains
outstanding. Lenders get more money, borrowers get some of the surplus from the valuable

investments and everybody benefits.
In this paper I model a second real effect of buybacks. As Sachs and Huizinga (1986)

argue informally, debt repurchases can lower bargaining costs. They do so in my models
because smaller debts lead to less wasteful bargaining between country and banks. There

are many ways in which bargaining is wasteful. They stem from the imperfection of
information. With perfect information (as in Rubinstein (1982)) bargaining simply leads
to some division of the total pie. There are no resources spent on the dividing itself. If

such bargaining were in fact typical, one would not expect protracted debt crisis. There
would only be capital gains and losses as, over time, bargaining positions change.
By contrast, we see very valuable resources spent as the countries and the banks seek
agreements. First, individuals with important responsibilities such as running countries or
banks devote much time to LDC debt negotiations. Second, individuals engage in actions

which are costly to the coalition of country and banks as a whole to demonstrate their
bargaining power. Third, the failure to reach agreement as the participants act tough
sometimes leads to costly sanctions.

These bargaining costs are closely related to those explored in Fudenberg and Tirole
(1983), Sobel and Takahashi (1983) and Admati and Perry (1987). This theoretical lit-

erature has principally focused on model with alternating offers where temporary failure
to reach agreement is costly because the future is discounted. Delay to reach agreement
Aikeson (1958) for an inftnit. borison rather tan a finite boson model of sov,reir debt with moral buad. Atbesons snaly.is is conducted at such . lewt of g,neality that ides. such — Thuybackf hav, no simpl, analytical co,mt.tpart.
Non.thdsu. buybacks could well be oin( on behind the payment flow, predicted by his moth!.

Ss,

3

emerges in equilibrium and constitutes the only coat of bargaining.4 In practice, bargain-

ing parties also employ tools other than delay to demonstrate their resolve. Moreover,
the cost of failing to reach agreement at any given time is often more severe than the
simple postponement of agreement. Failure to reach agreement often triggers aggressive
retaliation. For added realism I thus focus on these other costs of bargaining.5
The empirical relevance of these bargaining costs is readily apparent.6 For example,

the trade of Brazil was severely disrupted during its 1987 debt moratorium. Balks tried
hard to demonstrate how expensive it would be for Brazil not to repay.7 This disruption
certainly cost Brazil and its bankers some resources.

In the models presented below I argue that the costs of bargaining increase as the
level of debt increases. This is true for two reasons. The first is that ministers and bank
presidents are less likely to spend as many resources demonstrating how tough they are
when they are splitting a smaller pie. Chest-beating loses some of its appeal. I have in mind

situations where bargaining is accompanied by costly negotiations. In these negotiations

the actors spend resources to demonstrate how committed they are to a good outcome.
Such negotiation and posturing (which is socially unproductive) then becomes privately
less attractive as the level of debt fails.
The second reason is that the sanctions which are often triggered by imperfect information may depend on the level of the debt. For instance, many debt contracts with highly

indebted nations are subject to US laws. This means that US courts will enforce seizures

on foreign assets. The level of these seizures could depend on the level of debt. Another
form of sanction is the disruption of a country's access to trade credit. This disruption is

actually not easy for banks to enforce. Individual banks would like to deviate from this
sanction and offer trade credit unilaterally for a fee. Banks will presumably try harder to
keep each other in check when they have more at stake, i.e when the debt is bigger.
When the bargaining costs increase as the level of debt increases, there is an obvious
'Not all model, of flu, type exhibit coetly delay. Compare Gui sad Sonn.rcbsij. (1985) to Mrnati and Peny (1987).
One paper which show, how bargaining coet, can take ,iae,pect.d gum. I. S.lone (19$?). He show, that predatory sctiona
by Anna can be und to demonstrate that one is willing to pay litti. for the pinch.., of on., competitor. Tb. rationalizes
predation in situaUon. where lbs two patties are negotiating the term, of a horirontal merflr.

e5 sscb. and Hulsing. (1917).

'Na, York Timee Februuy 22, 1988.
4

benefit to reducing the extant debt. Buybacks are a mechanism which allows these reduc-

tions. Under plausible conditions the social benefits from the debt reduction are shared
by both banks and debtor countries. Therefore both find some buybacks in their interest.

The debtor gains because there is Less costly posturing and because the disagreements,
when they arise, are less costly. The creditor gains because posturing is costly for him as

well and because he receives some money up front. The key result of the paper is that
it is perfectly consistent for both to benefit even though buybacks increase the secondary
market price of debt substantially.
I also show that, unless they are able to modify the institutions of bargaining, governments cannot generally produce Pareto improvements. Nonetheless, governments who

wish to help the parties involved have a role in debt repurchases. Buying up the debt and

tearing it up produces a higher amount of recipient welfare per unit spent than do lump
sum transfers. This intervention is desirable because it reduces bargaining costs.
Of course, buybacks are far from the only mechanism of debt reduction. One alterna-

tive is to forgive some of the debt. In this regard it is worth pointing out that, in moral
hazard models, buybacks are often worthwhile for lenders only if outright debt forgiveness is worthwhile as well.8 By contrast, in my models, lenders always lose from outright
forgiveness.

On the other hand, perhaps only certain special features of the model make buybacks
the mechanism of choice. The key feature of buybacks that I want to emphasize is that they
require little coordination and bargaining. The countries can enter a market where debt

is traded anonymously. Therefore, the costs of bargaining and negotiation are avoided. In
other words, buyba.cks are attractive exactly where other methods for reaching agreement
are costly. If it were possible to bargain coetlessly, buybacks would be dominated.

The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 1, I present a model of negotiation and
posturing. In Section 2, I extend this model while in Section 3 I study costly sanctions.
Section 4 concludes with a comparison of these models to the moral hazard models of
equilibrium buybacks.
buybs.ck is financed — in
'See Krugm.n (1981) for the circuntenca unde hith thi. equivalence hoIth. When the
Ftcot (1988) with funds not previously recoveabl. by cndita,, the equivalence bnsb down. Creditors can then benefit from
buybeck. even where forçvenns would be detrimental to their Interests.

1. Costly Negotiation
I consider a collection of lenders and a sovereign borrower. The sovereignty of the

borrower implies that, as in much of the literature surveyed in Eaton, Gersovitz and
Stiglitz (1986), repayments depend only on the creditors ability to punish the debtor.
Repayments do not depend at all on the borrowers' resources. Problem debtors rarely
have debts exceeding even one year's GNP. It is thus reasonable to suppose as I do that,
if they wished, they could easily repay their entire obligation.
The borrower has previously incurred a debt whose face value has a present discounted

value of D. This means that there is an outside agent which prevents the lenders from
collecting more than D. More precisely, the lenders have some ability to inflict pain on the

borrower and this is the reason the borrower pays back. However, the US courts condone

this giving of pain only if the borrower has not paid D in full. Otherwise they do not
permit the lender to inflict pain.9
The relationship between lender and borrower has three stages. At the beginning
of' period 1 the borrower decides whether to engage in buybacks at all. I thus give the
borrower the option of not engaging in any buyback if he so desires, If he does decide to

buyback some debt, this becomes public knowledge at the beginning of period 1. After
this, a secondary market for the debtor's claims opens. The price q for the debt generally
depends on whether buybacks will take place. By using this timing convention, I explicitly

consider the losses to debtors from buybacks considered by Dooley (1988) and Bulow and
Rogoff (1988).b0

Bargaining starts in the second period. Bargaining involves negotiations between the
lenders as well as negotiations between the lenders and the borrower. As these negotiations

get under way the lenders discover how tough they are. There are several reasons for
this relatively late resolution of uncertainty. One reason is that there are many lenders.
Therefore, individual creditors cannot know how tough lenders are collectively until they
start trying to coordinate their actions. The second reason the toughness of each individual
We would otherwise have . model of extorUon. Pun exton,orSts an limited only by the aniliNe resoirces or the victim
or by the desir, to induce the victim to keep producing resources.
151f, by contraet, the debta wen thawed to make eecret, uaforeeeen, buybeck, he would obtain the debi at a lower price.

Such eecni buybacks would lad to a r,djtflbution of income froen lend., to borrowese. Of course, for eecret buybeck. to
have this feature they must not alw.ye occur in equilibnum.

6

lender evolves randomly over time. If the date of bargaining is set in advance, the actual
bargaining strength of the lenders cannot be known with certainty before this date.
In the second period the lenders have the opportunity to convince the borrower that
they are tough. To act tough one must spend resources harassing the borrower. In practice,

some trade and credit flows must be disrupted. This aggressive behavior is tolerated by
the US courts because, at this stage the borrower is not in full compliance with the terms
of the loan.

In period 2 lenders can be of one of two types. Tough lenders need to spend less resources than soft lenders to instill a given degree of pain. Therefore the level of harassment

is a useful signal of the lender's true ability. As a result, in equilibrium, the tough lenders

harass more than the soft lenders.
Bargaining continues in the third period. To keep the analysis simple I assume that,

at this point, lenders collectively issue a take-it-or-leave- it offer to the borrower. If the

borrower does not pay the amount demanded the lenders unleash their collective punishment power. For this theory to make sense, the lenders must be willing to mete out
these punishments ex post. Subgame perfection of this type is guaranteed if, as in Bulow

and Rogoff (1986), these punishments are simple trade seizures. Such trade seizures are

worthwhile for the lenders even if the seized goods are worth much more to the debtor

than to the creditor.

While the punishments I consider here can be interpreted as seizures, it is likely
that in practice other forms of punishment are employed as well. I expect lenders who

are punishing a debtor to disrupt its trade and financial relations as much as possible.
There are two reasons for this. The first is that the commitment to sanctions helps the
lenders." This commitment tends to soften the position of this particular borrower. Such
a commitment can probably be ensured by hiring individuals who become very angry when

the debtor pays little.
The second reason is that lenders often have other debtors. There is some benefit
in having a reputation for toughness with these other borrowers. Penalizing a particular

Juit like commitment to jail crimin.!. help. the innocent.
7

borrower may help establish this reputation with others. Of course, lenders differ in their
exposures to different debtors. Also the conditions of debtors vary. As a result, reputation

is not perfectly transferable. This is the reason why period two harassment is helpful to
the lenders.
Whether the punishments are seizures of tradeable goods or whether they are more
extensive, borrowers are unlikely to know initially how much damage lenders can inflict. To

inflict much damage, lenders must know a great deal about the country's vulnerabilities.

To cripple a country, it is helpful to impede its access to trade credit. This requires that

lenders be able to prevent other financial institutions from transacting with the debtor.

Tough lenders have both the requisite knowledge and resolve. It is for this reason that
the disruption of trade and financial flows required by period two harassment is relatively
costless for these lenders.

The utility of the borrower has four components. The first is the buyback payment B

which they make in the first period. The second is the present discounted value of third

period payments P. The third is the disutility from the pain N suffered in period 2. The
fourth is the loss from the punishment after period 3 if the borrower does not accept the
lenders offer. This loss equals L1 where r equals a or t depending on whether the lenders
are soft or tough. Tough lenders find it easier to retaliate so L exceeds L,. Total borrower

utility can be written as:

U=-E(B+P+N+L)

(1)

where the expectation E is taken over the subjective distribution of types. In equation (1),

I assume that the borrower is indifferent between paying one dollar in period one and one
dollar of present discounted value in period 3. This is standard if payments are discounted

at the borrower's opportunity cost of funds.

The pain N is a function of the effort A and the type of the lenders. It is convenient
to define the functions which give the level of effort needed by type r to obtain the level
of pain N. This is given by:

r=s,t.

A=f(N)

(2)

The function j is strictly increasing in the harassment N. For any given N, b is larger
8

when r is equal to s than when it is equal to t. More importantly, the derivative
(which I write as.f,) is strictly higher when r equals a. This captures the idea that those
lenders who are tough from period 3 on are likely to find harassment in period 2 relatively

inexpensive. These are the lenders who find it easy to coordinate and police each other.

In the period 1 secondary market, q is the price of any debt instrument whose dis—

counted face value equals one. The buyback, if it occurs, takes place at this price. This
means that the outstanding nominal debt after the buyback, Li, is given by:
q

(3)

Lenders act competitively in this market. They perceive that it is impossible to change

this price through their individual actions. As a result they must be indifferent between
selling at q and keeping the debt.

By selling his claim on a single unit of present value, a lender gets a utility equals

to q. If he keeps the debt, he shares in the payments from the debtor as well as in the

harassment costs. I assume that his share of both is equal to his share of the claims
outstanding. Thus, the claim on a unit of present value gives a tender who chooses not to
sell his claim a period 2 utility equal to:

()
where E takes expectations over types. In equilibrium, W must equal q.

One important feature of (4) is that lenders and borrowers use the same discount rate.

The future payments which equal one dollar of present discounted value when discounted
at the borrower's opportunity cost of funds also equal one dollar when discounted at the

lender's discount rate.12 My notation, where everything is denominated in discounted
units, is actually easiest to understand if one pretends that the future isn't discounted at
all.
"This simplifin the aaaiysi without affecting the qualitative conclusions. Since borrowers have limited accs to capitsil
market, we expect them to discount the future more heavily. This would imply that future payments which rye a disutility
borrower reduces
of P to the borrower give a ,m.ller utility to the lenders. This large discounting of future paymenth by thefor
which buyb.cks
buybacks
from
his
point
of
view.
Nonetheless,
there
are
still
p.rwnet.r
configuration'
the attractiveeas of
beneAt all parties
Equal di.counting by both partim rstionali.es my assumption that the debts an fully settled after one round of bargsuungWith equal discounting there i. no reason to defer payinenW further. If borrowers discount the future more heavily, eqrnliluiuin
paymenS to lenders might well accrue more slowly over time. This would rationaliae the protracted natur, of debt crass.

9

To analyze this game, I start with the last period. Suppose that, in period 3, the
borrower believes that the lender is soft with probability a. This means that the borrower
expects to lose aL3 + (1 — o)L if he turns down the lenders' offer. As a result he accepts

any offer which involves a payment such that

F<aL,+(1—c)4.

(5)

The lenders, knowing this, will ask for the amount which makes (5) hold with equality.

In period 2, there is now a classic signaling game.13 In this game the level of harassment acts as a signal of the lenders type. If neither type harasses the borrower, the
borrower will pay at most jtL3 + (1 — p)L where p is the prior probability that the lender

is soft. There are now two cases to consider depending on whether 1) is smaller than or
equal to pL3 + (1 — p)L. In the former case, neither type gains by signaling since they

recoup the entire face value of the debt in any event. Thus, in this case, the equilibrium
has no harassment and the period 3 payments equal 5.
Suppose instead that S exceeds 4uL, + (1 — p)Lt. Then, once dominated strategies
have been deleted,14 lack of harassment cannot be an equilibrium. Tough lenders would

deviate by inflicting an N such that:
min(b, Lt) — f3(N) = j&L3 + (1 — ,z)Lt —
where e is a small positive number. After deviating in this manner they would demand a

payment equal to min(D, Lt). if the borrower recognizes these deviators as tough, he will

accede to their request. As a result, tough lenders gain from the deviation since fg (N)
is smaller than f,(N). Moreover, borrowers would rationally recognize these deviators as
tough. After all, soft lenders would lose from this deviation even if it led the borrower to
subsequently view them as tough and pay them min(D, L1).

As shown by Cho and Kreps (1987) arguments of this type establish that there is a
unique equilibrium and that it separates the types. At this equilibrium the tough lenders

inflict N such that:
min(b,Lg) — f3(N)
"5.. Spent. (1971).

See Cho .nd Knp. (1W).

10

L3.

(6)

Equasion (6) implies that soft lenders are indifferent between harassing and not harassing
the borrower. I assume they leave him alone. Tough lenders strictly gain by harassing and

receiving min(D, L) instead of L3.
At this equilibrium, changes in the extant face value of the debt matter as long as .5
is smatter than or equal than L. In this case:
dPJ

1

-r77.

(7)

Equation (7) captures the basic reason for buybacks in this model. A reduction in the

outstanding debt lowers the amount the tough can collect without affecting the amount
the soft can collect. This makes imitation of the tough's behavior by the soft less attractive.

The equilibrium level of harassment is such that it just deters the soft from imitating the
tough. Therefore, reductions in the attractiveness of imitation reduce the equilibrium level

of harassment. Equation (7) is derived under the strong assumption that tough lenders
collect the face value of the debt in full. In the next section, 1 show how this can be relaxed.

All that is necessary is that there exist some states of nature in which tough lenders collect

the entire face value of the debt.

The advantage of debt reductions given in (7) is reflected in the secondary market
price of debt. Using (4), the secondary value of the debt is:

qb =

— fj(N')] + (1— p)L3

(8)

where I have substituted 12 for payments to tough lenders and L3 for those to the soft.
The simplest way of understanding how the secondary market responds to changes in 1)
is

to compute the change in qL), the total market value of secondary debt:

dD
Since

both u and

dl)

(9)

are positive and less than one, the total secondary market

value of debt increases although it increases by less than the face value. The increase in
value implies that lenders would lose from unilaterally destroying some of their claims on

the borrower. Such forgiveness amounts to a reduction in 515

Thi. mull di.tingui.hn thu model from Knigm.n (iNs) where lender, benefit from buyb.cki only when they .I. benefit
from forgiven..,. Forgivene. ii potentially veluable in hi. model beau., it alleviate, moral heard. On the other hand,
boyback. are more nluabte in my model because I wum. that the debtor's ability to pay is not tmpatred by the buybsck.

11.

That the increase in market value is smaller than the increase in face value is not
very surprising since the face value is only paid off with probability p. What is perhaps
more surprising is that the total market value may well respond very little to changes in 1).

This possibility arises because f can be arbitrarily close to f. Then, marginal increases in

harassment are almost equally costly to both types. As a result, even tough lenders must
waste most of the increased collections in the form of increased harassment. Through this

mechanism, the model can easily account for the rather small reduction in the market's
valuation of Bolivian debt in the wake of the buyback.

Having determined how the total market value of debt responds, I now compute the
change in q. Using (8) and (9):

dq1((1—u)L,pf($Af'\
.b

dD

Ek

1

.51

(to)
(11)

where the inequality is obtained from (6) and the properties of the function f. There are
two reasons for qto fall when .i5 rises. These two reasons are represented by the first two
terms of (10). The first reason is that soft lenders always collect the same, so payments to

the soft per unit of outstanding debt fall. The second is that the increase in debt increases
equilibrium harassment and this is costly. On the other hand, the third term in (10) gives
a reason for q to rise. The increased debt spreads the costs of harassment over more units

thereby making them less important.
While the overall effect on q is ambiguous, it follows from (11) that a sufficient con-

dition for q to fall is that:
(12)

It is worth reiterating that this analysis only applies when .15 is smaller than L.
Otherwise, small increases in .5 do not raise the amount collected by the tough. This
means that the equilibrium harassment does not change. In turn, this implies that the
secondary market price of the existing debt remains the same.
We now come to the first stage of the game. I assume for the moment that Dis smaller

than or equal to L2. If the country decides to abstain from buybacks, (8) with Dequal to
12

D gives the secondary market value of the debt. I denote this value by .7. Equation (6)
gives the equilibrium level of harassment.

Suppose the country does decide to repurchase some debt. Then, the outstanding
value of debt falls, If (12) is met, the secondary price of debt rises so the lenders are better

off. I now focus on the borrower. One issue which arises is whether the borrower can act

monopsonistically in the market for his own debt. If he acts competitively, he perceives
thesecondary price of debt as independent of the buyback's size.
Whether competitive or monopsonistic behavior is more realistic depends on the in-

stitutional arrangements of the secondary market. Suppose the borrower cannot commit

himself to the amount of resources B he spends on repurchasing debt. Suppose further
that lenders simultaneously announce a price at which they are willing to sell their claims

on the secondary market. In equilibrium, all lenders announce a q which is equal to W in
(4). Since they all announce this price, the borrower can indeed purchase as much debt as

he wants at this price. He thus acts as if:
I

dD

(13)

Suppose instead that, before the lenders announce the price for their claims, the borrower
can commit himself to an expenditure B. This commitment induces monopsonistic behav-

ior. Now the borrower realizes that the change in the outstanding face value of the debt
when B changes is given by differentiating (3):
dD
dB

-'

(14)

For very small buybacks, D is essentially equal to .5 so there is no difference between
(13) and (14). Whether small buybacks are worthwhile reduces to the question of whether

the borrower gains by buying a small amount of his debt at the price 4. To compute the
answer to this question I first rewrite (1) as:

U=—B—.u(b+N) —(1—p)Ls.

(15)

Differentiating this expression with respect to B at D = .5:
(16)
13

The expression * gives the amount of pain the borrower suffers when soft lenders
increase their effort by one unit. This amount can be arbitrarily large. It can easily be
large enough that the expression (16) is positive.

One can interpret bargaining under full information as occurring when f is infinite.

Here the costs of harassment are so large for the soft that essentially no harassment is
needed by the tough to separate themselves. In this full information case N' is essentially
zero so, from (8), q exceeds z. As a result the expression in (16) is always negative when
bargaining occurs under full information. This simply reproduces the result of Bulow and
Rogoff (1988) and helps highlight the importance of imperfect information for my results.
When small buybaàks are worthwhile, borrowers often choose interior solutions where

the debt outstanding continues to trade at a discount. The interior optima tend to exist
because higher levels of B correspond to higher secondary market prices. Whether (13) or
(14) applies, higher values of q make additional debt repurchases less attractive. Assuming

an interior solution, the best buyback for the borrower is such that
dD

/

dN'\

0th + —r) = 1.

(17)

The LHS of (17) gives the borrower's benefit from an additional unit spent on the outstanding debt. That benefit must, at an optimum equal the cost. The benefit consists of
less with probability p. . Second, the reduction
in D reduces harassment. The second order conditions for this optimum require that the

two parts. First, the borrower pays

LHS of (17) fall when B increases. This condition is met because the resulting increase in

q lowers the absolute value of both the expressions (13) and (14).
For any positive level of B, —

is

smaller when the borrower acts monopsonistically

as in (14) than when he acts competitively. This implies that the equilibrium level of B

is bigger in the latter case. When the borrower acts monopsonistically, he reduces his
secondary market purchases so that he benefits from a lower price.

Equation (17) applies when the borrower chooses an interior solution. Extremal so-

lutions are also possible. These arise when the borrower chooses to buyback so much
debt that the outstanding debt is paid with probability one. if buybacks are so large that

D L8 the borrower pays .1) to both types in period 3. So, no signaling is necessary and
14

there is no equilibrium haiassment. As a result, q is one. Reduction in buybacks from this

point increase equilibrium harassment and so might be strictly undesirable. On the other
hand, further increases in buybacks have no effect on harassment.
To gain further insight into these extremal points, I study the conditions under which
a borrower who acts competitively would choose to lower Li until q is one. Using (7) and
(13) in (17) extremal values of B are worthwhile if:

f

__

or

1/2.

fUO)

(18)

If (IS) is not satisfied, borrowers shy away from these extrema.

Until now, I have studied buyba.cks assuming that D is smaller than or equal to
Lt. For larger values of the debt, small buybacks do not change the amount paid in the
third period and so leave harassment unaffected. Thus, small buybacks do not benefit the
borrower. Nonetheless, even for such large debts, it may be worth having a large buyback

and jumping to a point which is either extremal or satisfies (17).
The level of B which satisfies (17) or, in the extremal case, that which equates b and
L3, is an equilibrium when borrowers buy debt freely. The remaining question is whether
this equilibrium is desirable. At the monopsonistic equilibrium the borrower is indifferent

to purchasing an additional unit of debt while the lenders are strictly better off. So, at the
monopsonistic equilibrium a very small increase in repurchases is Pareto improving. Yet,
for even slightly larger buybacks, simply mandating a change in repurchases does not lead

to Pareto improvements. Further buybacks raise q thereby benefitting lenders and hurting

the borrower. Thus the equilibrium is constrained Pareto optimal in a certain sense. This

optimality obtains as long as we do not consider changes in institutions and ask simply
whether all could be made better off by using the existing institutions differently.
By contrast, unconstrained Pareto optimality allows lump sum redistributions across
agents. If such redistributions are possible, optimality reigns when harassment disappears.

The reasons is that both lenders and borrowers care equally about money and they both
15

lose from harassment. Unconstrained Pareto optimality thus requires that the debt be
written down until harassment ceases being worthwhile. Yet, unless (18) holds, the equi-

librium level of harassment is positive. Hence, buybacks are usually smaller than those
dictated by unconstrained Pareto optimality.
While this argument suggests that buybacks beyond the equilibrium level are worth-

while, its practical implications are unclear. This argument relies on costless lump-sum

transfers. However, the actors will presumably bargain over these redistributions. The
essence of my analysis is that, as they bargain, they find socially costly actions in their
private self interest. It may simply be impossible to orchestrate a solution to the bargaining

problem at negligible cost.
Of course, if outsiders wish to transfer resources to the lenders and the borrower, they
can improve the welfare of both. Moreover, by subsidizing buybacks outsiders can improve

borrower and lender welfare by more than by simply giving them resources. To take an

extreme example, suppose a donor pays the face value of the debt in full to the lenders.

The donor then annuls the claims on the borrower. The cost of this intervention is D.
Lenders gain D(1 —4). Borrowers gain their expected payments as well as the punishment

costs. Using (8) this sum equals:

Dq + ,4N + ft(N)).
Therefore, this intervention nets borrowers and lenders put together:

D + p(N ÷ fg(N')).
By contrast, if the donor had simply distributed D, and this didn't affect bargaining ability

neither side would deviate from the original equilibrium. So borrower and lenders put
together would only gain D. Giving the donation through intervention in the secondary

loan market thus produces an extra gain of p[N + ft(N)].
One difficulty with this analysis is that it treats borrower and lender welfare symmet-

rically. Many donors would like to help borrowing nations for political reasons. If these

donors do not care about lender welfare, it is hard to see why they should intervene in
16

the secondary debt market. Perhaps, such interventions are warranted if there are other
mechanisms for taxing the lenders. Such an analysis is beyond the scope of this paper.
While the model of this section is a model of buybacks, it can also be interpreted as a
model of the size of sovereign debts. The equilibrium his then the amount that banks loan
to sovereign borrowers. This interpretation raises a puzzle.would
Why the equilibrium b
exceeds

L5 given that both sides have the same discount rates and that such debts create

bargaining costs?
The answer is, once again, that the equilibrium is not unconstrained Pareto optimal.
Even when the borrowers take q as given, they may have a socially inefficient incentive

to pile up debts. They realize that increased indebtedness does not raise payments to the
soft. On average, the payments on an additional unit of debt tend to be smaller than q.
From a purely financial viewpoint, additional debt is thus attractive. This must of course
be weighted against the additional bargaining costs. However, since the lenders bear some
of the bargaining costs, the borrower may accumulate socially excessive debts.

In any event, my assumption on borrowers' opportunities for changing b are more
appropriate for buybacks than for debt accumulation. I assume that there is an anonymous
market for this debt and that borrowers are allowed to participate. This seems realistic for

buybacks. In the case of loan origination, on the other hand, the institutions are rather
different. Loans to nations tends to originate through large consortia. These consortia
have numerous mechanisms for preventing borrowers from excessive increases in debt.
They can pressure potential new lenders, they can pressure the borrowers themselves..

Loan origination is best understood as a different bargaining game which occurs before
the one studied here.
One peculiar feature of the loans to nations who are highly indebted today is the
optimism surrounding their origination. Lenders seemed unaware that the possibility of
default loomed in the horizon.16 Perhaps the lenders were irrational. A different possibility
is that the debts would have been manageable without the world recession, low commodity

prices and high interest rates of the early 1980's. In other words, the level of debt was
"Sn Guttflttg and H.ning (1985).
17

such that no bargaining was anticipated. When resistance to payments by the countries
rose, it became obvious that lenders known to be soft would collect little. The bargaining
considered here ensued.

2. An Extension: Random Repayments
The model of section 1 has the advantage of simplicity. It has two weaknesses which I
correct in this section. The first weakness is that third period payments depend only on the

coordinating capabilities of the lender. They do not depend on the random characteristics

of the borrower. The second weakness is that the range of initial debts D for which
buybacks are desirable appears somewhat restricted. For debts below L3 buybacks are
unnecessary. For debts above L they are not locally useful.

In this section I assume that the ability of the borrower to tolerate third period
reprisals is unknown in period 2. For instance, the borrower's ability to do well under
autarky is initially random.. This bargaining position of the borrower is revealed at the

beginning of period 3. It becomes known just before the lenders make their take-it-orleave-it offer. Therefore, if the borrower would suffer a loss of L from the reprisals, the
offer entails a payment P such that:

P = min(L, 5)
As of period 2, this level L is unknown. What is known is that the density function 14(L)

gives the probability that L is below .t if the lender's type is r. This density function has

support [L,Z]. To capture the idea that soft lenders are less capable of punishment, I
assume that:
L3
L3 C

and that, wherever the supports overlap:

Ha(L) >

H(L).

As a result of these assumptions the lenders in period 2, who know their own type,

do not know the payment they will receive. Their welfare continues to be given by the
18

expected value of payments. Similarly the borrowers, who never incur the penalties given

by L in equilibrium, care about the expected value of their payments.

With these provisos, equations (1)-(4) remain valid in this modified model. The
principal difference is that pooling of types without harassment is now ruled out whenever:
(19)

If the debt exceeds the smallest amount that a soft lender can ever expect to get then
tough lenders find signaling worthwhile.

If the debt supports an equilibrium with signaling, small buybacks are worthwhile

as long as two additional conditions are met. The first is that borrowers find increased
harassment very costly. The second is that reductions in the face value of the debt reduce

the payments to the tough. Only in the presence of such payment reductions will the
soft find imitation of the tough less worthwhile. Whereas before such payment reductions

applied only if L exceeded D, they now apply whenever:

D L.

(20)

In other words, payments fall if there is any state of nature in which the tough collect less

than the value of their reprisal. Conditions (19) and (20) appear substantially weaker and
more plausible than the corresponding conditions of the original model.

3. Costly Reprisals
In sections 1 and 2 I have assumed that the lenders can discover the borrower's
relevant characteristics costlessly. As a result, their take-it- or-leave-it offers extracted all
the surplus at no further social cost. In practical situations, it is unlikely that the borrowers
can learn so much so easily. Ascertaining the borrower's ability to sustain punishment is

probably no easier than ascertaining the lenders ability to mete it out.

One way of capturing these difficulties is to consider borrower posturing as well.
Borrower governments would then show how tough they are by ruining their countries
with resolve. Theft electorate would show how tough they are by choosing obstinate and
19

otherwise undesirable rulers. I do not pursue such models here because they would add
little to those of sections 1 and 2.
Instead, I look at a different consequence of uncertainty about the borrower's charac-

ter. This uncertainty leads to costly reprisals when the borrower turns out to be tougher

than expected. Formally, I allow the tenders to issue a take-it-or-leave-it offer Tough
borrowers decline this offer. Such declines trigger sanctions. Unlike harassment, sanctions

are not meant to extract concessions from this particular borrower.

As discussed in Section 1, these sanctions have three roles. When they consist of
seizures of tradeables, the sanctions help the lenders recoup some of their losses. Commit-

ment to further disruption of trade and financial flows also serves to soften the borrower.
Finally, these additional disruptions enhance the lenders reputation with other borrowers.
Whether punishments follow from commitment ability, from the desire to collect some-

thing or from reputational concerns they are likely to increase when the outstanding debt
is higher. Tough punishments probably convey a stronger reputation when people regard

them as fair. Also, gaining a reputation for punishing large debtors probably promotes a
cutback in large borrowing. This is precisely what the banks desire. Finally, the US Courts

may well allow lenders who hold larger unpaid debts to seize more assets and punish the
borrower more severely.

My model of costly punishments is very similar to that of sections 1 and 2. As in
both sections the utility of the borrower is given by (1). Unlike earlier sections I simply
rule out the harassment costs N. This harassment is unnecessary because there is now no
uncertainty about lender's ability to punish. In period 1, as before, borrowers can buyback

debt at the market price q. In period 2, lenders make a take-it-or-leave it offer. This offer

specifies a payment P. In period 3, the offer is either accepted or it is rejected and the
borrower is punished.

I assume that, from the perspective of all agents in periods 1 and 2, the punishment
L is a random variable related to the level of debt. In period three, however, the borrower

knows L. The assumption of symmetric information about L in the early stages of the
game considerably simplifies the analysis. Without such late revelation of the true L one
20

would have to worry about borrowers signaling their L via the buybacks they engage in.17
As of periods 1 and 2, let H(LI.5) be the density function of L with associated
p.d.f. h(L,.5). The support of this distribution is [L,LJ. Because increases in .5 raise

punishments, ¶ is negative.
When crafting their period 2 offers, lenders know that borrowers will turn down offers

whose payment P exceeds L. Any offer P is thus turned down with probability 1 —H.
Their optimal offer thus maximizes expected period 3 revenue It:
R = P11 — H(P,.5)].

(21)

Assuming an interior solution, the equilibrium offer satisfies:
1— H(P, .5) — Ph(P,D) = o.

(22)

Expected borrower welfare from period 2 on is:
—R —

f

(23)

Lh(L, .5)dL.

I now consider changes in b. From application of the envelope theorem to (21) the

change in R from an increase mb is;

dD

dD
Since

this expression is positive, revenues increase when creditors acquire a tool which

raises penalties.
Differentiation of (22) gives the change in F:

(2h+P4dP÷(4!!i+P..db=o.
dD/
\dD
dLj
The term multiplying dP must be positive for the second

(24)

order conditions to hold. This

condition is met as long as the density does not increase dramaticallywith L. If one ignores
tisuci, .inahng could never be .ufltcient to induct full sepanon of types. It lenden could perfectly inter L

From the

repurtheae of debt, they would extract payments equal to L. There would be no punihmenS in .quilibriuni. The trouble ii
that iii borrowers would then prete.d to be that type whos. total pqm.nb a,. lowest. For a rather dil.r%t model where the
exteth of buyb..cki does produce complete separation at typ see Achseys

and Diw.n (1988). They focus on a moral limed

model where the atutt of buybschi can di,tin1uislt borrow' with diferit diacourd rate.

21

the derivative of the density it with respect to 5, the term multiplying dl) is negative. In
this case, as seems plausible, the offered payment P rises as the threat increases.

Ignoring j the only consequence of an increase in D is that it the probability of
agreement goes up for any given P. This raises the benefit from a small increase in F. By
contrast, increases in it induced by increases in .5 have the opposite effect. They make the
lenders more concerned about the decline in agreements induced by rises in P. Reasonable

large increases in it as .5 rises are needed for this second effect to dominate. Is a positive
even reasonable?

Increases in D lower H. This means that they tend to lower it for small L's and raise
it for big L's. The question of whether it tends to rise or fall with .5 thus depends whether
equilibrium P is high or small. It is difficult to make an a priori judgment on this question.

Given Bulow and Rogoff (1988)'s evidence, a relevant question is how q responds.
Since lenders must be indifferent between keeping and selling their claims at the price q,

the market value of the debt qD must equal expected revenues IL Therefore the change
in q is given by:

D DdD

dD

(25)

The first expression in (25) is negative while the second is positive. On the one hand the

price of the claims tends to fall because a given revenue must be distributed over more
claims. On the other hand the increased threat from the larger.5 increases revenues. For
small

the first effect dominates because the increase in revenues is minor.

I now come to first period buybacks. In the presence of buybacks period 1 lender
welfare is simply:

.B+R.

(26)

Period I borrower welfare is instead:
—B — R

—

(F

I Lh(L,D}dL.

(27)

The expression under the integral sign captures the cost of equilibrium punishments. In
other words it captures the social cost of disagreement. Ignoring this expression, (26) and
22

(27) are symmetric and buybacks have only redistributive consequences. Buybacks can
make all agents better off only by reducing the social cost of disagreement.
A small buyback raises B from zero to dB. Equations (13) and (14) demonstrate that

small buybacks reduce the outstanding debt by f. The change in B + R is therefore:

PdH

d(B+R)

dB =1-qTh

(28)

Expression (28) is proportional to expression (25). More generally, the only effect of
buybacks from the perspective of the lenders is that 1) falls. Lenders therefore gain, and
B + R rises, if q rises. As I discussed above, these increases in q occur as long as the effect

of 13 on the distribution of L is not too pronounced.
The derivative of (27) with respect to B gives the benefits to borrowers. Thesebenefits
include two terms. The first is the fall in B + R given by (28). The second is:

Ph(P,D)dP+ 1PLdh(Lb)
q

dl) it q

dl)

(29

The first term is positive in the normal case. An increase in B tends to lower the offer
made by lenders and thereby reduce the costs of disagreements. The second term has an
ambiguous sign because it depends on dh(L2D) However, since increases in .5 lower H, it
seems reasonable to suppose that they lower It for small values of L. Since the integral is
only over these small values of L, it is likely to fall as well. The economic interpretation of
this is the following. Reductions in outstanding debt reduce the typical punishment. This

means that the probability associated with punishments below the cutoff P tends to rise.
This raises the costs of potential disagreement.
Only if the expression (29) is positive, which remains a distinct possibility, and is also
larger than (28), are small buybacks worthwhile. Even when (29) is positive so that small

buybacks are socially worthwhile, they may not occur in equilibrium.
It is tempting to interpret this result as well as the related one in Section 1 as suggesting that outside agents should promote buybacks. This does not follow if these outside
agents are purely self interested. As before, it is probably impossible to implement the
transfers which are necessary to make everybody better off without also incurring bar-

gaining costs. On the other hand buyback subsidies remain a tool of choice for donors. A
23

donor who destroys the whole debt after purchasing it at face value produces a gain equal

to the integral in (27) over and above the cost of the program.

4. Conclusions
Economists find it tempting to attribute human and institutional behavior to self-

interest. It is therefore important to understand whether the currently popular debt
repurchases can be attributed to rational motives. This paper has emphasized that repurchases can help lower bargaining cost. This benefit is complementary to the saving in

agency costs emphasized by Acharya and Diwan (1988), Froot (1988), Helpman (1987),
Krugman (1988) and Sachs (1988). Both these savings accrue because there is imperfect
information. Perhaps it would be more accurate to say that they accrue because contracts
are imperfect.

In the moral hazard context, for instance, it doesn't really matter whether lenders
observe the investments of the borrowers. What is essential is that borrower and lender be
unable to write enforceable contracts which stipulate payments as a function of investment.

Similarly, in my model of section 1, it is essential that borrower and lenders are unable to

write contracts with payments as a function of the level of hara.ment

One difficulty with the agency-theoretic approach is that contracts contingent on
macroeconomic variables such as investment do seem feasible. The IMF makes very specific

demands on the macroeconomic policies of borrowers. Overall, the IMP requirements
probably curtail investment since tight monetary policies and cutbacks in public investment

are standard. This presents a challenge to agency based models if one believes the IMF is

trying to improve the debt crisis.
Perhaps the bargaining models presented here suffer from the same problem. Perhaps

contracts contingent on harassment are feasible. However, it appears difficult to specify
contractually what sorts of behavior constitute costly harassment.
The main difference between the moral hazard models and the bargaining models is
in the role they leave for outside donors. In my bargaining models, it makes sense for the

donors to spend their resources pushing buybacks. This rationalizes the actual behavior
of governments. By contrast, with costless bargaining it seems difficult to understand why
24

governments should interfere in what are basically agency relationships.18

5. References
Acharya, Sankarshan and Ishac Diwan: "Debt Conversion Schemes as a Signal of
, mimeo, June 1988
Creditworthiness: Theory and
Atkeson, Andrew:"International Lending with moral Hasard and Risk of Repudiation", Ph.D. Thesis, Stanford Business School, May 1988
Bulow, Jeremy and Kenneth Rogoff: "A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign
Debt", Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming, 1986

—"Sovereign Debt Restructurings: Panacea or Pangloss", mimeo, June 1988
Cho, In-Koo and David M. Kreps: "Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria", Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 102, May 1987, 179-222

Dooley, Michael P.: "Buy-Backs and Market Valuation of External Debt", International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 35, June 1988, 215-29

Eaton, Jonathan, MarK Gersovitz and Joseph Stiglitz:"The Pure Theory of Country
Risk", European Economic Review, 30, 1986, 465-67
Froot, Kenneth A.: "Buybacks, Exit Bonds and the Optimality of Debt and Liquidity
Relief" forthcoming in International Economic Review, 1988

Fudenberg, Drew and Jean Tirole: "Sequential Bargaining with Incomplete Information", Review of Economic Studies, 50, 1983, 221-47
GuI, Faruk and Hugo Sonnenschein: "Bargaining with One-Sided Uncertainty", Working Paper, 1985

Guttentag, Jack M. and Richard Herring: "Commercial Bank Lending to Developing
Countries: From Overlending to Underlending to Structural Reform" in Smith
and Cuddington eds.: International Debt and the Developing Countries, The
World bank, Washington DC, 1985
Helpman, Elhanan:"The Simple Analytics of Debt-Equity Swaps and Debt Forgiveness", Working Paper 1987
Krugman, Paul R.: "Market-Based Debt Reduction Schemes" forthcoming là the IMF
Staff Papers, May 1988

84t Prescott and Townsend (1984) for. proof that moral haurd atone doe, not w.innt government intervention.
25

Prescott, Edward C. and Robert M. Townsend:"Pareto Optimal and Competitive
Equilibria with Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard", Econometrica, 52, January
1984, 21-46

Rubinstein, Ariel:"Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model", Econometrica, 50,
1982, 97-110

Sachs, Jeffrey and Harry Huizinga: "US Commercial Banks and the Developing Country Debt Crisis", Brookings Paper8 on Economic Activity 2, 1987, 555-606

Sachs, Jeffrey: "The Debt Overhang of Developing Countries" in De Macedo and
Findlay eds. Diaz Memorial Volume, Wider Institute, Helsinki, 1988
Saloner, Garth: "Predation, Mergers and Incomplete Information", Rand Journal of
Economics, 18, Summer 1987, 165-86

Sobel, Joel and I. Takahashi: "A Multi-Stage Model of Bargaining", Review of Economic Studies, 50, 1983, 411-26
Spence,

Michael: Market Signaling, Harvard University Press, 1974.

26

