                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         SOCIAL LEARNING ALONG INTERNATIONAL MIGRANT NETWORKS

                                            Yuan Tian
                                      Maria Esther Caballero
                                        Brian K. Kovak

                                       Working Paper 27679
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27679


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




We thank Edith Soto Ramírez at the Instituto de los Mexicanos en el Exterior for providing the MCAS
data, UNACAST for sharing mobility data in the U.S., and Facebook’s Data for Good initiative for
sharing Facebook mobility data in the U.S. and in Mexico. Thanks to Brian Cadena, Michael Poyker,
and participants in the 2020 NBER Summer Institute Development Economics meeting for helpful
comments and to Treb Allen, Cauê Dobbin, and Melanie Morten for helpful discussions regarding
the MCAS data. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Yuan Tian, Maria Esther Caballero, and Brian K. Kovak. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Learning along International Migrant Networks
Yuan Tian, Maria Esther Caballero, and Brian K. Kovak
NBER Working Paper No. 27679
August 2020
JEL No. D83,F22,I12,J61,O15

                                         ABSTRACT

We document the transmission of social distancing practices from the United States to Mexico
along migrant networks during the early 2020 Covid-19 pandemic. Using data on pre-existing
migrant connections between Mexican and U.S. locations and mobile-phone tracking data
revealing social distancing behavior, we find larger declines in mobility in Mexican regions
whose emigrants live in U.S. locations with stronger social distancing practices. We rule out
confounding pre-trends and use a variety of controls and an instrumental variables strategy based
on U.S. stay-at-home orders to rule out the potential influence of disease transmission and
migrant sorting between similar locations. Given this evidence, we conclude that our findings
represent the effect of information transmission between Mexican migrants living in the U.S. and
residents of their home locations in Mexico. Our results demonstrate the importance of personal
connections when policymakers seek to change fundamental social behaviors.

Yuan Tian                                       Brian K. Kovak
H. John Heinz III College                       H. John Heinz III College
Carnegie Mellon University                      Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                            4800 Forbes Avenue, HBH 3012
ytian2@andrew.cmu.edu                           Pittsburgh, PA 15213
                                                and NBER
Maria Esther Caballero                          bkovak@cmu.edu
H. John Heinz III College
Carnegie Mellon University
4800 Forbes Avenue, HBH 3012
Pittsburgh, Penn 15213
mcaballe@cmu.edu
1       Introduction
Social networks are a critical source of new information. By interacting with family, friends, and
acquaintances, individuals learn new facts, observe the implications of others’ decisions, and en-
counter new social norms. This type of social learning can be valuable when facing uncertainty
about the nature of the choices one faces or the eﬃcacy of one choice in comparison to others. Such
uncertainty is particularly acute when one faces a novel set of choices and when the stakes are high.
For example, in a time of pandemic when people must quickly learn about the nature of a disease
and the appropriate actions to take in response, social learning can play an especially important
role.
    We document the transmission of social distancing practices from the United States to Mexico
along migrant networks during the early 2020 Covid-19 pandemic. Social distancing is considered
eﬀective in reducing the spread of the novel coronavirus that causes Covid-19 and has been encour-
aged by public health organizations and most national and local governments.1 The outbreak of
Covid-19 in the United States emerged about two weeks earlier than in Mexico, and in the United
States there was substantial spatial variation in timing of and compliance with social distancing
policies. Using data on pre-existing migrant connections between Mexican and U.S. locations and
mobile-phone tracking data revealing social distancing behavior, we find larger declines in mobility
in Mexican regions whose emigrants live in U.S. locations with stronger social distancing practices.
After ruling out confounding pre-trends and the potential influence of disease transmission and mi-
grant sorting between similar locations (e.g. urban vs. rural areas), we conclude that our findings
represent the eﬀect of information transmission between Mexican migrants living in the U.S. and
residents of their home locations in Mexico.
    Key to our analysis is the ability to observe pre-existing migrant connections between Mexican
source regions (municipios) and U.S. counties. We do so using administrative data from the Ma-
trícula Consular de Alta Seguridad (MCAS) program, which provides identity cards to Mexicans
living in the U.S. Prior work has confirmed the quality and representativeness of these data, which
allow us to measure the extent to which each Mexican municipio was exposed to each U.S. county
through the migrant network.2 We combine these data with observed social distancing measures
derived from smartphone geolocation data collected by Facebook and Unacast for the U.S. and
Facebook for Mexico.3 The Facebook data report the reduction in the number of 0.6 km-square
    1
      Examples include the World Health Organization (WHO 2020), the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion (CDC 2020), and the Mexican Health Ministry (Secretaría de Salud 2020).
    2
      Caballero et al. [2018] confirm the quality and representativeness of the MCAS data by comparing it against gold-
standard household survey data. Other papers using data derived from the same underlying source include Albert
and Monras [2019]; Allen et al. [2019]; and Caballero et al. [2020]. These papers and Caballero et al. [2018] each use
slightly diﬀerent extracts from the same underlying data source. As in Caballero [2020], we use the most detailed
geographic information available (municipio by county) and use a version of the 2008 data that were cleaned and
matched to valid municipio and county names by the Instituto de los Mexicanos en el Exterior.
    3
      Similar data have been used to study migration (Blumenstock et al. 2019), segregation (Athey et al. 2019),
commuting (Kreindler and Miyauchi 2019), friendship (Kreindler and Miyauchi 2019), and the spreading of disease
(Kuchler et al. 2020), and are used in many of the papers cited below that focus on social distancing in response to
Covid-19.



                                                          2
tiles visited each day, while Unacast reports the reduction in daily distance traveled. These data
sources allow us to directly observe the behavior of interest (social distancing) and to do so with
high frequency and fine geographic granularity. For each municipio, we calculate the migration-
network-weighted average of social distancing across U.S. counties. Because social distancing varied
substantially across U.S. counties, and migrants from diﬀerent municipios go to very diﬀerent sets
of U.S. destinations, there is significant variation in exposure to U.S. social distancing across mu-
nicipios.
       Our empirical analysis examines how observed reductions in movement among people living
in Mexico relate to this variation in migrants’ exposure to U.S. social distancing. We find that
municipios with a one-standard-deviation larger exposure to U.S. social distancing had a 0.47-
standard-deviation larger decline in mobility. This finding is not driven by pre-existing trends
and is robust to controlling flexibly for the number of local Covid-19 cases; the number of cases
in migrant-connected U.S. counties; and baseline local characteristics including population density,
urban status, age distribution, education, income, and the employment rate. The eﬀect estimate also
remains nearly unchanged when using U.S. state government stay-at-home orders as an instrument
for U.S. social distancing behavior and when controlling for Mexican state government stay-at-home
orders. When investigating heterogeneity in this eﬀect, we find it is stronger in municipios with
initially higher education levels, higher population density, and higher urbanization rate, but does
not diﬀer significantly with the characteristics of migrant-connected U.S. counties.
       How should one interpret these results? There are several mechanisms that might generate an
observed relationship between social distancing behavior in a Mexican municipio and in migrant-
connected U.S. counties. First, migrants in the U.S. may observe the importance of social distancing
during the U.S. outbreak, and may communicate that information back to people in their home re-
gion in Mexico, leading to more social distancing there as well. We refer to this as the “information”
channel. Second, return migrants or others may have moved between the U.S. and Mexico, trans-
mitting the disease and leading to correlated outbreaks in the two locations, which may in turn
lead to correlated social distancing. We refer to this as the “disease transmission” channel. Third,
migrants from locations with a higher likelihood of Covid-19 outbreak or with a higher likelihood of
compliance with public health orders may choose similar locations in the U.S. If this is the case, then
observed correlations between migrant-connected locations simply result from migrants’ selection of
destinations rather than reflecting a causal eﬀect. We refer to this as the “migrant sorting” channel.4
       Our empirical findings strongly reject the disease transmission and migrant sorting channels. The
   4
    Another hypothetical channel would involve changes in remittances. If U.S. regions facing larger increases in
social distancing also experience larger declines in economic activities, migrants living in those regions may reduce
their remittance payments, leading to less economic activity and perhaps less mobility in their source regions in
Mexico. While plausible in theory, this mechanism is unlikely to be relevant in our context. First, there was no
substantial decline in remittances. In fact, according to remittance data collected by the Bank of Mexico, aggregate
remittances in March 2020 surged, exceeding those of March 2019 by 35%, while remittances in April and May 2020
were within ±3% of the values in the same months of 2019 (authors’ calculations). Also, Mexican social distancing
responds very quickly to declines in U.S. mobility, within one to two weeks. In contrast, the vast majority (68%) of
Mexicans who send home remittances from the U.S. do so at monthly or longer frequencies, while only 15.3% send
home remittances weekly (Serrano Herrera and Jiménez Uribe 2019).



                                                         3
observed relationship between U.S. and Mexican social distancing is barely aﬀected when controlling
flexibly for the number of cases in either location, implying that disease transmission is not driving
our results. We address the possibility of migrant sorting first by controlling for pre-pandemic
characteristics in the relevant municipio, including population density, urban status, age distribution,
education, income, and the employment rate. As discussed below, these features are relevant for
disease transmission and compliance with social distancing, but controlling flexibly for them has
minimal eﬀect on our results. We also use government stay-at-home orders as an instrument for
U.S. social distancing behavior and again find nearly identical results. Together, these findings reject
the disease transmission and migrant sorting channels, leaving the information channel as the most
likely explanation for the observed relationship between U.S. and Mexican social distancing.
    Our analysis relates to the large literature examining how social network connections reduce
information frictions and facilitate learning. Papers in this literature cover a wide range of topics
including technology adoption, labor markets, international trade, and many others.5 A minority of
these papers implements randomized controlled field trials, which include baseline network measures,
randomized information interventions, and follow-up surveys measuring information transmission.6
In contrast, the majority of this literature infers the presence of social learning based on equilibrium
outcomes in the absence of a well-defined information shock. We contribute a clear example of social
learning in an observational setting where we have a well-defined and credibly exogenous information
shock, a high-quality measure of spatial network connections, and observed changes in behavior that
are closely linked to the new information.
    As in our setting, a number of papers in this broader literature focus on situations where im-
migrants transmit information across international borders. Examples include studies finding that
immigrants increase trade with their source countries (Gould 1994, Head and Ries 1998, Rauch and
Trinidade 2002), transfer knowledge through co-ethnic patent citations (Kerr 2008), influence source
country political preferences (Barsbai et al. 2017, Karadja and Prawitz 2019) or fertility norms
(Beine et al. 2013), and facilitate FDI and venture capital funding relationships with the source
country (Dimmock et al. 2019, Kugler and Rapoport 2005, Li 2020, Pandya and Leblang 2017).
We introduce a new example of cross-country information transmission through migrant networks,
documenting migrants’ role in spreading public-health information with potential life-and-death
consequences. Moreover, we show that these responses can arise very quickly, with migrant source
regions benefiting from destination-country information nearly in real time.
    Our paper also contributes to the emerging literature examining the determinants of compliance
with public health recommendations in the midst of Covid-19 outbreaks. Contemporaneous work
shows that social distancing compliance varies with civic capital (Barrios et al. 2020), trust in
   5
     BenYishay and Mobarak [2019] and Miller and Mobarak [2015] study information transmission in agricultural
technology adoption; Barwick et al. [2019], Beaman [2012], Dustmann et al. [2016], Edin et al. [2003], and Munshi
[2003] study the role of social networks and immigrant enclaves in job referrals and labor market outcomes; Büchel
et al. [2019] examine how networks aﬀect spatial mobility; Burchardi and Hassan [2013] show how social ties aﬀect
entrepreneurial activity and firm investment.
   6
     Prominent examples include Beaman et al. [2018]; Banerjee et al. [2019]; BenYishay and Mobarak [2019]. See
Breza et al. [2019] for a survey of the literature on networks in economic development.



                                                        4
science (Brzezinski et al. 2020), education and income (Brzezinski et al. 2020, Wright et al. 2020),
partisanship (Allcott et al. 2020, Fan et al. 2020), media consumption (Ananyev et al. 2020, Simonov
et al. 2020), political leaders’ speech (Ajzenman et al. 2020), and whether workers can telework
(Mongey et al. 2020). Additional work finds that many of these factors can impact the realized
number of Covid-19 cases and resulting deaths (Bursztyn et al. 2020, Desmet and Wacziarg 2020).
Our work shows how migrants’ experiences with U.S. Covid-19 outbreaks aﬀect the social distancing
behavior of those remaining in Mexico. This cross-country context is (to our knowledge) novel in
this literature, and it helps avoid a number of potential pitfalls present in single-country designs.
        For example, in a closely related paper Holtz et al. [2020] examine spillover eﬀects of social
distancing policies across U.S. counties, based on pre-existing mobility patterns and social-network
friendship connections. Although we address similar questions, Holtz et al. [2020] face a much more
challenging causal identification problem, because they examine spillovers between U.S. counties. It
is quite likely that a U.S. county’s choice of social-distancing policy is aﬀected by those of neighboring
counties, both for public health and political reasons, so reverse causality is a substantial concern.
In our context, it is far less likely that U.S. social distancing practices or policies were influenced by
Mexican practices or policies, mitigating concerns about reverse causality. The primary remaining
threat to causal inference is the possibility of migrant sorting. As discussed above, we are able
to allay these concerns using flexible controls for regional characteristics that may be relevant for
sorting and an instrumental variables strategy. Thus, our setting provides a relatively clean test
of the importance of social connections in driving compliance with public health recommendations
during the pandemic.
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the institutional background
on the Covid-19 epidemic and the U.S.-Mexico ties. Section 3 discusses the data on mobility and
migrant networks. Section 4 shows the main empirical results on the eﬀect of exposure to U.S. social
distancing, and Section 5 investigates heterogeneous eﬀects by origin and destination characteristics.
The last section concludes.


2        Institutional background
2.1       The Covid-19 epidemic and the situations in the United States and in Mex-
          ico
Covid-19 is a respiratory disease caused by a novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2). After the first case
was reported in Wuhan, China on December 31, 2019, it spread across the world rapidly, despite
containment eﬀorts by various governments and organizations.7 The World Health Organization
(WHO) characterized Covid-19 as a pandemic on March 11, 2020, and by June 12, 2020, there
were 7,533,182 cases, 423,349 confirmed deaths, and 216 countries, areas, or territories with cases
worldwide.8
    7
    See the detailed WHO timeline at https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/27-04-2020-who-timeline---covid-19.
    8
    The following declaration was accessed on June 13, 2020: https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-
coronavirus-2019/events-as-they-happen.


                                                     5
    The epicenter of the outbreak has been shifting over time. After China’s initial outbreak and
lockdown measures in January and February, the epicenter shifted to Europe in mid March, followed
by the United States starting from late March, and by June, further shifted to Latin American
countries. In the United States, the first case was reported on January 22, 2020, and President
Trump declared a national emergency on March 13 (in the 11th week of 2020, shown in Figure 1
with a red vertical line).9 As of June 12, 2020, the total number of U.S. cases was 2,016,027 and the
number of deaths was 113,914.10 Figure 1 Panel (a) shows the number of cases (solid circles) and
number of deaths (hollow diamonds) from Week 4 of 2020 (Jan 20–26) to Week 21 (May 18–24).
The numbers of U.S. cases and deaths began increasing rapidly after Week 13. The outbreak in
Mexico emerged slightly later. The first case was confirmed on February 28, 2020, and the increase
in the number of cases and number of deaths accelerated after Week 15 (Figure 1 Panel b). By the
end of Week 22, there were 47.7 cases and 2.9 deaths per 10,000 U.S. population, and there were 8.2
cases and 0.9 deaths per 10,000 Mexican population.11

                                             [Figure 1 about here.]

    The Covid-19 outbreak was unexpected, and in many ways unprecedented, meaning that govern-
ments and public health organizations had much to learn regarding how to appropriately respond.12
As an example, Italy declared a state of emergency on Jan 31, 2020 and subsequently halted air
traﬃc to and from China.13 However, the disease continued to spread, and a national lockdown
was imposed on March 9, 2020, when Italy became the epicenter of the pandemic. Strict travel re-
strictions were in place, only essential businesses were allowed to open, and people were required to
maintain at least one meter of distance from one another in public spaces.14 In the case of the U.S.,
although international travel restrictions with China were in place relatively early, the eﬀectiveness
of this and other policies has been debated. After one week of the outbreak in the State of Washing-
ton, the White House issued social-distancing guidelines on March 16; recommendations regarding
the use of cloth face coverings were issued by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
on April 3.15
   9
     Declaration of a national emergency: https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/proclamation-declaring-
national-emergency-concerning-novel-coronavirus-disease-covid-19-outbreak/.
  10
     The following source was accessed on June 13, 2020: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/cases-
updates/cases-in-us.html.
  11
     Note that observed cases and deaths are subject to testing capacity and reporting er-
rors.      In the case of Mexico, for example, there are concerns about the hidden death toll:
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/08/world/americas/mexico-coronavirus-count.html.
  12
     In WHO’s announcement of the pandemic, the WHO Director-General said that “we have never before seen a
pandemic sparked by a coronavirus. This is the first pandemic caused by a coronavirus. And we have never before
seen a pandemic that can be controlled, at the same time.” (https://www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/who-director-
general-s-opening-remarks-at-the-media-briefing-on-covid-19---11-march-2020)
  13
     https://www.reuters.com/article/china-health-italy/italy-govt-agrees-state-of-emergency-after-confirmed-
coronavirus-cases-govt-source-idUSR1N282044
  14
     See    details   of    the    timeline   and     measures     at:        https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COVID-
19_pandemic_lockdown_in_Italy.
  15
     The details and timeline of the Washington outbreak:                     https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COVID-
19_pandemic_in_Washington_(state)#March_1%E2%80%935.                            Social     distancing     guidelines:



                                                         6
    Individuals also report learning from the experiences of others in their social networks. In Prato,
Italy, where a quarter of the population is ethnic Chinese, residents voluntarily quarantined and
practiced social distancing much earlier than those in the rest of the country, after learning about
the success of similar measures in China, leading to very low rates of infection and transmission.16
Similarly, restaurants owned by Chinese immigrants in the U.S. began scaling up takeout and delivery
operations prior to the U.S. outbreak, based on information from similar businesses in China.17 Holtz
et al. [2020] find that social distancing in U.S. regions significantly influenced policies and behaviors
in other parts of the country.

2.2    Mexico-U.S. migration
The U.S. and Mexico have long been closely linked in terms of trade and migration. The U.S. is
Mexico’s most important trading partner, accounting for 76% of Mexican exports in 2018, and 96%
of those who reported living abroad five years prior to the 2010 Mexican Census.18 Mexican migrants
in the U.S. maintain close ties with their friends and family in Mexico. According to data from the
Mexican Migration Project (MMP), an average Mexican migrant sends 27% of income earned in the
U.S. back to Mexico, a much higher share than saving (20%), food budget (19%), or rent (18%).19
During their first trip to the U.S., 61% of migrants received financial help from people in their home
community. Such close ties do not deteriorate much along repeated migration trips; even in their
last trip to the U.S., 51% received financial help. It is therefore entirely plausible that information
regarding pandemic response would be transmitted from U.S. migrants to contacts in their home
communities.
    During a pandemic, the intensive flow of goods and people between the U.S. and Mexico can
transmit both disease and information.20 However, due to the travel restrictions imposed early in
the pandemic, the number of trips across the U.S.-Mexico border fell substantially, as shown in
Figure 2, which reports the number of trips between the two countries as recorded among Facebook
mobile app users. Initially there were more than 134,000 trips per day from Mexico to the U.S., and
more than 137,000 trips from the U.S. to Mexico, but the numbers declined sharply after Week 11
when the U.S. declared a national emergency and imposed more strict travel restrictions. By Week
15, the number of trips declined to 40,000 per day on both sides, with a slight increase afterwards.
Although cross-border flows have fallen by about two-thirds since early March, many people still
https://www.whitehouse.gov/articles/president-trump-actions-to-confront-pandemic/.          Face covering recommen-
dations: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/cloth-face-cover.html.
   16
      Source:    https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-italy-chinese/from-zero-to-hero-italys-chinese-
help-beat-coronavirus-idUSKBN21I3I8
   17
      https://www.npr.org/2020/05/13/855791740/episode-999-the-restaurant-from-the-future
   18
      Sources: trade data: https://wits.worldbank.org/countrysnapshot/en/MEX; 2010 Mexican Census: IPUMS In-
ternational (Minnesota Population Center 2020).
   19
      The Mexican Migration Project is a collaborative research project based at Princeton University and the University
of Guadalajara. The data are publicly available at: https://mmp.opr.princeton.edu/. The figures here were calculated
using a sample of 8,823 individuals who had a previous trip to the U.S., using survey years from 1982 to 2018.
   20
      For example, Kuchler et al. [2020] use Facebook friendship data between U.S. counties to show that the outbreak
followed these connections.




                                                           7
cross the border each day. Our empirical analysis will therefore address the possibility of physical
disease transmission along with potential information flows through migrant networks.

                                                [Figure 2 about here.]


3         Data and measurement
3.1         Migrant network between Mexico and the U.S.
We use administrative information from the Matrícula Consular de Alta Seguridad (MCAS) program
to measure migration networks between the U.S. and Mexico at the sub-national level. The MCAS
card, which acts as an oﬃcial form of identification for banking purposes and other transactions,
is issued by Mexican consulates to Mexican citizens living in the U.S.21 The MCAS administrative
dataset contains annual counts of newly issued MCAS cards by place of birth in Mexico and place
of residence in the U.S.
         Caballero et al. [2018] validate the migration network measures obtained from the MCAS data
by showing that although they likely over-represent unauthorized Mexican-born migrants, who have
the strongest incentive to obtain a matrícula, they have strong agreement with the source and
destination distributions of Mexican-born migrants obtained from high quality household surveys
both from Mexico and the U.S. In this paper, we construct the migration network measure as the
share of matrículas issued in 2008 to Mexican-born migrants from each Mexican municipio living in
each U.S. county. Summary statistics appear in Table 1. There are 174,281 municipio-county pairs,
with 2,412 origin municipios and 2,468 destination U.S. counties in the 2008 MCAS dataset. The
average number of migrants per link is 5.5, but it varies substantially, ranging from 1 to 5,253.

                                                 [Table 1 about here.]

         Our empirical analysis relies on the fact that migrants from diﬀerent municipios choose quite
diﬀerent destinations in the U.S. and therefore are exposed to diﬀerent social distancing practices
in diﬀerent parts of the country. Figure 3 shows the destination distribution for two diﬀerent
municipios in the state of Michoacán: Huandacareo and Puruándiro. Despite these two sources
being located very close to each other (less than an hour apart by car) and thus roughly equal
distances from particular U.S. labor markets, there are large diﬀerences in the U.S. destinations
selected by migrants from these two municipios. The vast majority of migrants from Huandacareo
live in Chicago (Cook County), while the most common destination for migrants from Puruándiro
is Tulare county in California’s Central valley. Because social distancing behavior diﬀered across
these U.S. destinations (shown in Figure 4 below), migrants from Huandacareo and Puruándiro will
be exposed to diﬀerent degrees of social distancing in the U.S. This example is representative in
the sense that migrants from otherwise similar municipios often exhibit quite diﬀerent destination
distributions in the U.S. (Caballero et al. 2018), leading to variation in exposure to U.S. social
distancing across municipios.
    21
         See Caballero et al. [2018] for more detail on the MCAS program and data.


                                                            8
                                               [Figure 3 about here.]

3.2      Unacast and Facebook data on local mobility
We use two data sources to measure changes in mobility. Due to the nature of Covid-19 transmission,
scientists have identified social distancing as one of the key measures to combat the pandemic (Hsiang
et al. 2020 and Anderson et al. 2020).22 One way to measure the extent of social distancing behaviors
is to use the reduction in geographic mobility. Our first mobility measure is from Unacast, a New
York based technology company (Unacast 2020). The dataset uses location information from 15-17
million smartphones to calculate the average distance travelled each day. We measure the county-
level mobility reduction as the percentage reduction in the average distance traveled compared to
the same day of the week during the four weeks before March 8, 2020 (prior to the outbreak). As
shown in Table 2, the measure covers 3,054 counties in the U.S., with an average decline in mobility
of 19% during the period of Week 9 to Week 21.23
       Our second mobility measure is from Facebook’s Data for Good program.24 The dataset uses
the location information of users who enable location services on their mobile Facebook app. The
mobility metric is the proportional change in the average number of 0.6 km by 0.6 km tiles visited
during a 24 hour period compared to same day of the week in February 2020 (excluding President’s
day).25 The data cover 2,691 counties in the U.S. and 1,084 municipios in Mexico, since only regions
with more than 300 unique users are included. During the period of Week 9 to Week 21, the average
decline in mobility in the U.S. is 13%, and the decline in Mexico is 21%. (Table 2)

                                                [Table 2 about here.]

       Places in the U.S. vary in the extent of social distancing. We measure social distancing based on
the observed mobility reduction, with more positive values corresponding to larger larger declines
in mobility. Figure 4 uses Cook County in Illinois (solid circles) and Tulare County in California
(hollow diamonds) as an example. The reduction in mobility is more pronounced and persistent in
Cook County than in Tulare County. In the Unacast data (Panel a) both counties started around
zero in Week 10, and by Week 12, the decline in mobility was 37% in Cook County and 23% in
Tulare County. In Week 21, Cook County’s mobility reduction declined to 30%, while in Tulare
County it fell just below zero, indicating no reduction in mobility compared to the pre-pandemic
period. Although the diﬀerences are less extreme in the Facebook data (Panel b), mobility in Cook
County clearly decreased far more than in Tulare County in each week. Appendix Figure 10 maps
  22
     See CDC recommendation at:               https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/social-
distancing.html
  23
     There are two filters applied to the sample to ensure data reliability. Unacast define a “dwell” as a set of location
records observed within 80 meters of eachother within an 8-minute to 4-hour time period. Only devices with at least
two dwells per day or one dwell longer than three hours in duration are included in the analysis. The data also exclude
counties with population less than 1,000 or that did not have at least 100 devices on at least 70% of the days during
the pre-outbreak period.
  24
     Source: https://dataforgood.fb.com/docs/covid19/.
  25
     Details of the tile system are available at: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/bingmaps/articles/bing-maps-tile-
system.


                                                            9
the increase in social distancing from Week 9 to Week 21 for all U.S. counties in the Unacast and
Facebook datasets, documenting substantial variation in social distancing behavior across counties.

                                          [Figure 4 about here.]

   Our Facebook data also cover mobility in Mexican municipios. Figure 5 shows the trends in
social distancing (solid circles, left y-axis) in Huandacareo (Panel a) and Puruándiro (Panel b), the
two municipios in Michoacán considered in Figure 3. Social distancing in Mexico lagged that of
the U.S. by a few weeks, consistent with the somewhat later emergence of the pandemic in Mexico.
Both Huandacareo and Puruándiro exhibit substantial reductions in mobility by Weeks 13 and 14,
although Huandacareo exhibits more social distancing than Puruándiro. As we will discuss below,
this is consistent with the fact that migrants from Huandacareo, who tend to migrate to Chicago,
were exposed to more social distancing in the U.S. than migrants from Puruándiro, who tend to
migrate to California’s Central Valley.

                                          [Figure 5 about here.]

3.3   Mexican exposure to U.S. social distancing
Intuitively, if a municipio happened to have more migrants residing in a U.S. county where more
social distancing measures were taken, the migrants’ relatives and friends remaining in that municipio
may have received more information about the severity of Covid-19 and the importance of social
distancing, and may have further transmitted this information to other residents of the municipio.
Thus, we measure a Mexican municipio’s exposure to U.S. social distancing practices as follows:

                                                 X         mij
                                exposuresit =         P              socdistsjt ,                 (1)
                                                  j        j 0 mij 0

where mij is number of MCAS cards issued to migrants from municipio i living in county j
in 2008, socdistsjt is the social distancing measure in county j week t using data sources s 2
{Facebook,Unacast}. In our main analysis, we reduce noise by using the principal component of the
two social distancing measures, denoted as exposurepc
                                                   it , but our results are robust to using either
data source individually.
   Figure 6 maps the change in the exposure measure in (1) for each Mexican municipio from
Week 9 to Week 21, using the Unacast data. This exposure measure ranges from –0.02 to 0.47, and
the mean is 0.2, indicating that migrants lived in U.S. counties with a 20 percentage-point average
decline in mobility from Week 9 to Week 21. Variation in exposure derives from a combination of the
variation in social distancing across U.S. counties, shown in Figure 4 and Appendix Figure 10, and
the variation in the migrant destination distribution across municipios, shown in Figure 3. These
two sources of variation lead to significant diﬀerences in exposure to U.S. social distancing across
municipios, and our empirical analysis will examine how this exposure influenced social distancing
behavior in Mexico.


                                                      10
                                                  [Figure 6 about here.]

      Returning to Figure 5, we plot the exposure measure (hollow diamonds, right y-axis) for Huan-
dacareo (Panel a) and Puruándiro (Panel b). Because Huandacareo’s migrants concentrate in Cook
County (Chicago), which had a large increase in social distancing, and Puruándiro’s migrants con-
centrate in Tulare County (CA Central Valley), which had much less social distancing, Huandacareo
was exposed to a larger U.S. mobility decline throughout the pandemic period. A municipio’ s mix
of migrant destinations combines with variation in social distancing behavior across U.S. counties to
create variation in exposure to U.S. social distancing, as measured in (1). After being more exposed
to more U.S. social distancing through its migrant network, Huandacareo exhibited larger declines in
mobility than Puruándiro. As we will document below, this relationship between U.S. and Mexican
social distancing holds on average across municipios.

3.4      Other datasets
We use various data sources to measure characteristics of U.S. counties and Mexican municipios
that may have aﬀected disease or information transmission. The number of weekly Covid-19 cases
and deaths by U.S. county come from John Hopkins University, and the corresponding information
for Mexico come from the Mexican Ministry of Health.26 Paralleling our measure of exposure to
U.S. social distancing, we also construct municipio i’s exposure to U.S. Covid-19 cases as follows.

                                                 X        mij
                             exposurecase
                                     it   =           P             sinh   1
                                                                               (cumulative casesjt ),   (2)
                                                  j       j 0 mij 0

                 1
where sinh           (cumulative casesjt ) is the inverse-hyperbolic-sine transformation of the cumulative
number of cases in county j and week t. We use the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation to
include the counties with zero cases, and in the remaining text, we use “log cumulative cases” or
“log new cases” as a shorthand, given the close correspondence between the natural log and inverse
hyperbolic sine, particularly for large numbers.
      U.S. county characteristics are from the 2010 Census and 2005–2009 American Community Sur-
veys (ACS). Specifically, we use the 2010 Census to calculate the county-level Hispanic or Latino
share of the population, the Mexican population share, total population, and information on the land
area (used to calculate population density). We use the 2005–2009 ACS to calculate the county-level
(1) number of Hispanic and Latino individuals aged 25 and over by educational attainment, and
similar numbers for the overall population; (2) number of Hispanic and Latino families by income
group; (3) mean and median household income in the entire population; (4) number of employed
persons by industry (NAICS); and (5) mode of transportation to work.
      Mexican municipio characteristics are from the 2015 Intercensal Count (Coneto), including the
share of working age population (aged 16 to 65), schooling attainment, share employed, and in-
come earned in the working age population.27 We obtain population density and percent of urban
 26
      Sources: https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/ and https://coronavirus.gob.mx/, respectively.
 27
      Source: IPUMS International [Minnesota Population Center, 2020].


                                                                11
population from Mexican Statistical Oﬃce (INEGI) tabulations.
    The timing of issuing and lifting stay-at-home orders by U.S. states are obtained from Raifman
et al. [2020], and similar data for Mexican states were collected from Mexican states’ oﬃcial decrees
(see Appendix B).


4     Social learning across borders: main empirical results
4.1    Empirical specification
Our empirical analysis examines the impact of exposure to U.S. social distancing practices on social
distancing in Mexican municipios, and seeks to isolate the portion of that impact driven by social
learning. Our baseline estimation equation is as follows:


                          socdistit = ↵ + exposurepc
                                                  it + zit + Ii + It + ✏it                          (3)

where socdistit is the mobility reduction in municipio i week t using the Facebook data, and
exposureit measures exposure to U.S. social distancing in the same week. We include a variety
of municipio-week-specific controls zit to take into account time-varying region-specific factors that
could aﬀect people’s social distancing behavior, such as the severity of the local disease outbreak.
Municipio fixed eﬀects Ii are included to control for municpio-specific factors such as population
density, income level, education level, and means of transportation to work. Week fixed eﬀects It
are used to account for national policies that aﬀect social distancing behaviors across all regions in
a week. We present robust standard errors, but clustering at the municipio level gives very similar
results.
    The parameter    captures the relationship between U.S. social distancing behaviors and network-
connected Mexican municipios’ social distancing practices. A positive value of           indicates that
muncipios connected to U.S. counties practicing more social distancing experienced on average
larger reductions in mobility. In order to interpret     as the causal eﬀect of U.S. social distancing
on Mexican social distancing, the key identification assumption is that changes in social distancing
behaviors across Mexican municipios with similar observable characteristics would not have diﬀered
systematically in the absence of diﬀerential exposure to U.S. social distancing practices.
    This identification assumption may be violated if, for example, Mexican regions with higher
population density tend to send more migrants to U.S. counties with higher population density.
Since the probability of infection is higher in denser areas, people in both regions may practice more
social distancing even in the absence of information transmission. A similar issue may arise if migrant
origins and destinations are selected along other dimensions that aﬀect the severity of the local Covid-
19 outbreak. We refer to this as the “migrant sorting” channel and rule out its eﬀects on our estimates
by including extensive controls flexibly capturing the eﬀects of relevant regional characteristics over
time. Another threat to causal interpretation would arise if more exposed municipios had diﬀerent
trends in mobility even before the outbreak. However, as seen in Figures 4 and 5, both U.S. and
Mexican mobility reductions were very close to zero in Week 9 compared to the pre-Covid period.

                                                  12
This is not particular to the regions examined in those figures; the mean mobility reduction across
municipios was 0.01 in Week 9 (standard deviation 0.05). Thus, pre-Covid social distancing trends
were nearly identical and approximately equal to zero across municipios.
    A final concern is that a positive estimate of            may reflect the eﬀects of disease transmission
rather than information transfer along migrant networks. If disease transmission operates along
the migration network, then migrant-connected locations in the U.S. and Mexico will have similar
severity and timing of outbreaks and may have similar degrees of social distancing as a result.
Although a result driven by this “disease transmission” channel could potentially be interpreted as a
causal eﬀect of exposure to the U.S. outbreak, it would not reflect the information channel of interest.
In order to rule out this disease transmission channel, we include flexible controls for the severity
of the local outbreak in the municipio and in network-connected U.S. counties (following (2)). In
addition, we address a variety of these causal inference concerns using government stay-at-home
order as an instrument for U.S. social distancing behavior.28

4.2    Main results
Before reviewing the main estimation results from Equation (3), we present visual evidence on the
relationship between Mexican social distancing and declines in mobility in migrant-connected U.S.
counties. For each municipio i, we calculate the long-diﬀerence change in local social distanc-
ing (socdisti21     socdisti11 ) and the change in the municipio’s exposure to U.S. social distancing
(exposurepc
         i21      exposurepc
                          i11 ) from Week 11 to Week 21. Figure 7 shows a scatter plot relating these
two measures, where each point represents a municipio. The fitted line has a slope of 0.1 (significant
at the 1% level), indicating that a one-standard-deviation larger exposure to U.S. social distancing
is associated with a 0.2-standard-deviation larger decrease in Mexican’ mobility.

                                              [Figure 7 about here.]

    We now turn to the main specification in equation (3) to investigate cross-border learning about
social distancing. Table 3 shows the estimation results. Columns (1)–(4) only include municip-
ios with at least one case by Week 21 and Columns (5)–(8) include all municipios.29 In Column
(1), we regress social distancing in Mexican municipios on the exposure to U.S. social distancing
(exposurepc
         it ), controlling for municipio fixed eﬀects and week fixed eﬀects. The coeﬃcient is 0.05
(statistically significant at the 1% level), indicating that a one-standard-deviation larger exposure
to U.S. social distancing (1.4) led to a 0.47-standard deviation larger increase in social distancing in
Mexico. Column (5) uses the same specification for all municipios. The coeﬃcient is 0.03, smaller
than the Column (1) estimate, suggesting that the learning eﬀect might be weaker in areas with no
active Covid-19 cases.30
 28
    See footnote 4 for a discussion ruling out the role of remittances in driving correlated social distancing between
migrant-connected regions in Mexico and the U.S.
 29
    For details on the sample restrictions, see Appendix 11.
 30
    These numbers are smaller than the slope coeﬃcient in Figure 7, since the previous estimate only uses data from
Week 11 and Week 21. It is evident from Figure 4 that the U.S. social distancing was the strongest around Week 15


                                                         13
    In Columns (2)–(5) and (6)–(8), we introduce controls for the cumulative numbers of cases in
the relevant muncipio or in the U.S. destinations to which it is connected via the migrant network,
using the measure in equation (2). As expected, when the local outbreak is more severe, people in
Mexico practice more social distancing.31 In contrast, the U.S. case-exposure variable consistently
has a negative coeﬃcient, suggesting that observing more cases in U.S. destination regions actually
decreased people’s incentive to practice social distancing in Mexico. One potential explanation is
that, conditional on the realized level of U.S. social distancing, an increase in the number of U.S.
cases sends the signal that social distancing is not very eﬀective in stopping the spread of the
disease.32 That said, the most important conclusion for this portion of the analysis is that the
estimated eﬀect of exposure to U.S. social distancing is essentially unchanged when including these
controls for the number of cases. This finding rules out the disease transmission channel discussed
in the prior subsection. If the observed correlation between U.S. and Mexican social distancing
were the result of disease transmission along the migrant network, the inclusion of these controls
would absorb the variation driving the observed correlation, and our results would disappear. In
Appendix Table 17, we further reinforce this conclusion by controlling for flexible functional forms
of the number of cases, with nearly identical results.

                                                  [Table 3 about here.]

    Although disease transmission is not an important mechanism driving the relationship between
U.S. and Mexican social distancing behavior, it remains possible that correlated social distancing
behavior results from underlying similarities in migrants’ source and destination regions – what we
have called the “migrant sorting” channel. For example, concurrent research finds that individuals
and regions with higher education levels and higher incomes are more likely to practice social dis-
tancing (Brzezinski et al. 2020, Wright et al. 2020, Mongey et al. 2020, and Fan et al. 2020, among
others). If migrants from higher income areas of Mexico are more likely to choose higher income des-
tinations in the U.S., then one might observe correlated social distancing even without information
transmission. Although our inclusion of municipio fixed eﬀects addresses level diﬀerences in social
distancing, it does not capture the likelihood that higher income locations (for example) increasingly
practicing social distancing as the pandemic evolves.
    We address this migrant sorting concern in Table 4. First, we measure municipio features
that the literature has shown are correlated with baseline social distancing behavior, including
population density, urban share, working-age share, average years of education, mean log income,
and declined afterwards due to reopening. In the meantime, Mexican social distancing had not declined by the end
of the study period (Week 21). Thus, when we use the full panel of Week 9 to Week 21 instead of restricting to the
starting and the ending weeks alone, the changes in U.S. social distancing are larger, and as a result, the coeﬃcient
estimate on exposure is smaller.
   31
      Similarly, Brzezinski et al. [2020] find that in the United States, people engage in social distancing even in the
absence of lockdown policies, once the virus occurs in their area.
   32
      Briscese et al. [2020] present a related finding, showing that Italian residents were less likely to follow self-isolation
policies when the policies are kept in place longer than expected. In our context, Mexican residents may also be
discouraged by the observation that U.S. cases kept increasing despite the social distancing policies, and were less
likely to follow suit.


                                                              14
and the employment to population rate. Then, we control for each feature interacted with separate
indicators for each week of our sample, allowing for the eﬀect of the relevant feature to vary arbitrarily
over time. As an example, Column (1) interacts the initial population density with week indicators,
controlling for the possibility that migrants from more densely populated municipios choose to live in
more densely populated counties. Across the columns of Table 4, it is apparent that the six regional
features generally drive larger gaps in Mexican social distancing between Week 9 and Week 12, after
which the eﬀects are largely stable. Most importantly for our purposes, the eﬀect of exposure to U.S.
social distancing is very stable when comparing the estimates in Table 4 to those in Columns (1)–(4)
of Table 3.33 This rules out the eﬀects of migrant sorting based on the characteristics investigated
in Table 4.
       Another potentially important regional characteristic is the share of jobs that facilitate working
from home. In Appendix Section C.6, we use the industry-level measure of the ability to work from
home constructed by Dingel and Neiman [2020], and the industry mix of local employment in the
2015 Intercensal Count to construct the share of jobs in each Mexican municipio that facilitate
working from home. We repeat the analysis in Table 4 by using the interaction of this share with
week fixed eﬀects, finding that the eﬀect of exposure to U.S. social distancing remain unchanged.
Thus, as with the characteristics examined in 4, this regional characteristic is not likely to drive the
relationship between U.S. and Mexican social distancing through migrant sorting.

                                              [Table 4 about here.]

       In the Appendix, we present a wide variety of robustness tests, including analyses using the
Unacast and Facebook measures of U.S. social distancing separately, introducing flexible controls
for realized cases in the U.S. and Mexico, introducing leads and lags of exposure to U.S. cases,
and controlling for Mexican state-level stay-at-home orders. In all cases, the results presented here
are confirmed, and all specification checks yield favorable results.34 Using estimates with Facebook
exposures directly (Table 14), a 14-percentage-point larger decline in average mobility faced by
migrants to the U.S. leads to a 4-percentage-point larger decline in mobility in the municipio.
       To further reinforce our interpretation that U.S. social distancing causes changes in Mexican so-
cial distancing, we implement an instrumental variables analysis using U.S. stay-at-home orders as
an instrument for observed U.S. social distancing. State-level stay-at-home orders were first imposed
in the third week of March and started to be phased out in the last week of April (see Appendix
Figure 14). In order for stay-at-home orders to serve as a valid instrument for U.S. social distancing,
the orders must drive substantial increases in social distancing in the relevant counties (confirmed
shortly in the first-stage analysis), must not be subject to confounding from reverse causality or
omitted variables, and must aﬀect Mexican social distancing only through U.S. social distancing.
  33
      Table 4 uses only municipios with a positive case count, but we find similar agreement when using all municipios
- see Appendix Table 22.
   34
      In the main analysis, since some counties are not covered in the Facebook data, the migrant shares do not sum
to 1 in Equation 1 when using the Facebook mobility measure in the U.S. In Appendix Section C.4, we show that the
results are very similar when we rescale the shares to sum to 1. Out of the 959,089 migrants in the MCAS data, only
1,536 are not in counties covered by the Facebook data (less than 0.2%).


                                                         15
The latter two conditions are likely satisfied in our context, since U.S. policies are unlikely to be
influenced by Mexican social distancing behavior and are likely to aﬀect Mexican behavior only
through information transmission. Migrant sorting could still pose a concern if migrants from mu-
nicipios that are more likely to comply with social distancing recommendations are more likely to
choose destinations that impose stay-at-home orders. While possible, we do not find this concern
compelling, as migrants’ destinations are primarily driven by enclave locations and economic con-
siderations, and few would have anticipated the emergence of the pandemic or how diﬀerent states
would respond to it.
    We begin by constructing each municipio’s exposure to U.S. stay-at-home orders as the share of
its migrant network in U.S. states with a stay-at-home order in week t.
                                                     X          mij
                               stayhome_IVit =             P              1(stayhomejt )                         (4)
                                                       j        j 0 mij 0


Appendix Figure 15 shows that there is substantial variation in exposure to U.S. stay-at-home
orders across municipios, even in mid April, when a majority of states had active stay-at-home
orders in place. Table 5 shows the first-stage regression relating exposure to U.S. social distancing
(Equation 1) to the stay-at-home exposure instrument (Equation 4) and controls for cumulative
U.S. and Mexican case counts. In all cases, the coeﬃcient on the instrument is positive and highly
statistically significant, yielding first-stage F-statistics of at least 596 and ruling our weak-instrument
concerns. The magnitude of the coeﬃcient on the stay-at-home instrument is 0.271, implying that
even after controlling for the actual numbers of cases, a one-standard-deviation larger increase in
exposure to U.S. stay-at-home order led to a 0.07-standard-deviation larger increase in exposure to
U.S. social distancing.35

                                              [Table 5 about here.]

    The instrumental variable results appear in Table 6. We restrict attention to municipios with
a positive number of cases by Week 21, corresponding to the OLS regressions in Columns (1)–(4)
of Table 3.36 The estimates are quite similar to those in Table 3, confirming our main findings and
further ruling out concerns regarding potential migrant sorting in driving the observed relationship
between U.S. and Mexican social distancing behaviors.

                                              [Table 6 about here.]

    Together, the various results and robustness tests in this section document a strong and robust
relationship between social distancing behavior in the U.S. and reductions in mobility in migrant-
connected regions in Mexico. This appears to be a causal relationship that was not driven by
disease transmission or migrant sorting between similar regions in the U.S. and Mexico. Instead, the
  35
     Appendix Figure 16 shows a first-stage residual plot corresponding to Column (1) of Table 5, and Appendix Table
25 performs a similar analysis at the U.S. county level showing the determinants of social distancing behavior in the
U.S.
  36
     See Appendix Table 26 for the corresponding reduced-form regressions.


                                                           16
results support the conclusion that receiving information about social distancing from acquaintances,
friends, and family living in the U.S. led to increased social distancing in Mexico.


5     Heterogeneous eﬀects by origin and destination characteristics
Information transmission and social learning depend not only on the information content itself, but
also crucially on how the information is spread and who communicates with whom. For example,
BenYishay and Mobarak [2019] show that the social standing of the communicators matters in the
process of promoting agricultural technology adoption, and that people who share the same group
identity and face comparable agricultural conditions are especially influential. Büchel et al. [2019]
show that in migrant networks, local contacts who migrated recently or are more central in the
social network have larger impacts on reducing information frictions. In the context of the Covid-
19 pandemic, Fan et al. [2020] find that there are substantial gaps in behaviors and beliefs across
gender, income, and partisanship lines. These gaps may also influence the eﬀects of information
transmission. In this section, we therefore investigate heterogeneity in the eﬀect of exposure to U.S.
social distancing based on the characteristics of Mexican municipios and of connected U.S. counties
in the following sections.

5.1    Origin characteristics
We first focus on origin characteristics. As an example, even when facing the same exposure to
U.S. social distancing, people living in a municipio with higher average educational attainment may
react diﬀerently than those in a less educated area. For example, people with more education may
have more trust in science, which facilitates the adoption of social distancing (Brzezinski et al.
2020). We test for heterogeneity along this and other dimensions by interacting various municipio
characteristics with the exposure measure in equation (1). The regression is as follows.


                    socdistit = ↵ +      exposurepc
                                                 it +         exposurepc
                                                                      it ⇥ Ci + Ii + It + ✏it ,                   (5)

where Ci is a time-invariant baseline characteristic of municipio i, including population density,
urban share of population, share of working age population, average years of education, log earnings
per person, and share employed. Note that the municipio fixed eﬀects, Ii , capture the level eﬀect of
the characteristic Ci . To interpret the size of the heterogeneous eﬀects, we first evaluate the impact
of the exposure to U.S. social distancing (exposurepc ) at the mean value of Ci and call it ˆ1 . Then we
                                                           it
evaluate the eﬀect at the mean plus one-standard deviation of Ci and call it ˆ2 . Finally, we compare
the two by calculating ˆ = ˆ2 / ˆ1 1. A more positive value of ˆ indicates that more positive values
of Ci drive more positive eﬀects of U.S. social distancing on Mexican social distancing.37
    Generally, we find that municipios with more favorable socio-economic conditions responded
more strongly to U.S social distancing. Table 7 Column (1) evaluates the heterogeneous eﬀect by
  37
     The expressions for ˆ1 and ˆ2 are as follows: ˆ1 = ˆ + ˆ C̄, and ˆ2 = ˆ + ˆ (C̄ + sd(C)), where C̄ is the mean of
Ci , and sd(C) is the standard deviation of Ci .


                                                         17
the population density. Compared to the eﬀect on a municipio with average population density, the
eﬀect is 8% larger when the population density is one-standard deviation larger. We find similar
heterogeneity when considering the urban population share (7%), working age population share
(12%), average years of schooling (10%), log average earnings (7%), and employment share (9%). In
Appendix C.6, we also show the heterogeneous eﬀect for the ability to work from home. The results
are similar to those in Table 7, and this is consistent with Dingel and Neiman [2020]’s finding that
regions with higher incomes also have higher shares of jobs in which working home is feasible.

                                        [Table 7 about here.]

5.2   Destination characteristics
Migrant destination characteristics may also influence the information transmission process. In addi-
tion to the examples mentioned above, Kerr [2008] shows that ethnic ties to home countries among
scientific and entrepreneurial communities in the U.S. facilitate international knowledge transfer.
Mexican migrants in the United States may be more likely to learn from people with a similar back-
ground. For example, if a destination region has a larger Hispanic community or has a higher share of
residents of Mexican descent, the connected municipios may learn from them more easily. Learning
about social distancing may also be more eﬀective if the destination regions’ Hispanic population
has higher socio-economic status. If Mexican migrants learn from the general population, then the
average education and income level of U.S. counties may also be important.
   In Table 8, we evaluate how the eﬀect of exposure to U.S. social distancing diﬀers by the average
characteristics of migrant-connected destination regions. For a destination county characteristic xj ,
we calculate the average value faced by migrants from municipio i as follows.

                                               X        mij
                                        xi =       P              xj
                                               j        j 0 mij 0


We then estimate specifications paralleling equation (5), using xi as the interaction variable. We
find that the eﬀect of exposure is not significantly influenced by the share of Hispanics, the share
of population of Mexican descent, the log Hispanic household income, or the log average income
(Columns (1), (2), (5), and (6)). In contrast, we do find significant heterogeneity based on the
overall education level in the destination regions and by the education level of Hispanic individuals
in the destinations (Columns (3) and (4)). However, the extent of heterogeneity is quite small; using
the same ˆ measure described in the previous subsection, compared to the eﬀect of exposure of a
municipio with average education level at the destination, the eﬀect is only 3-4% larger when the
destination’s education level is one-standard deviation larger.

                                        [Table 8 about here.]

   In sum, we primarily find heterogeneity in learning based on origin characteristics. More aﬄuent
Mexican municipios responded more strongly to exposure to U.S. social distancing, while the eﬀects

                                                   18
do not diﬀer much by observable destination characteristics. One potential explanation is that
Mexican residents may not distinguish much between diﬀerent types of U.S. counties, which is
consistent with the fact that U.S. counties are much more homogeneous than Mexican municipios.38


6         Conclusion
People are social entities who learn about information and form beliefs through their social connec-
tions. Among various sources of information, friends and family can be especially important when
forming beliefs, particularly when there is considerable uncertainty and the stakes are high. In the
context of the early-2020 Covid-19 pandemic, we study the eﬀects of migrants’ exposure to U.S.
social distancing practices on social distancing behavior in Mexico.
         Using detailed municipio-to-county migrant network data and observed social distancing behav-
ior in U.S. counties based on smartphone tracking data, we construct the exposure to U.S. social
distancing for the residents of each Mexican municipio. We find that this exposure had a positive
impact on the Mexican residents’ social distancing behavior, and that this eﬀect was likely driven
by learning, rather than assortative matching between origin places and destination places, or the
possibility of disease transmission along the network. Mexican regions with more favorable socio-
economic conditions responded more strongly to U.S. social distancing exposure, but the eﬀect did
not diﬀer significantly based on the characteristics of migrants’ locations in the U.S.
         Together, these findings highlight the importance of social networks in influencing individuals’
compliance with or rejection of public health recommendations in the context of an emerging pan-
demic. We chose to examine this kind of social learning in the international context because it
resolves diﬃcult identification issues that arise in other contexts, since events in Mexico were un-
likely to have a significant influence on U.S. social distancing behaviors or policies. However, our
conclusions are nonetheless informative regarding the broader importance of personal connections
when policy makers seek to change fundamental social behaviors, such as social distancing or wearing
masks during a disease outbreak.




    38
    For example, as shown in Table 7 and Table 8, the standard deviation of years of schooling across Mexican
municipios is 1.4, and the standard deviation of years of schooling across connected U.S. counties is 0.28. The
standard deviation of years of schooling across 3,195 U.S. counties is 0.73.


                                                      19
References
Nicolás Ajzenman, Tiago Cavalcanti, and Daniel Da Mata. More than words: Leaders’ speech and risky
  behavior during a pandemic. Working paper, 2020.
Christoph Albert and Joan Monras. Immigration and spatial equilibrium: the role of expenditures in the
  country of origin. working paper, 2019.
Hunt Allcott, Levi Boxell, Jacob Conway, Matthew Gentzkow, Michael Thaler, and David Y Yang. Po-
  larization and public health: Partisan diﬀerences in social distancing during the coronavirus pandemic.
  Technical Report w26946, 2020.
Treb Allen, Cauê de Castro Dobbin, and Melanie Morten. Border walls. NBER Working Paper, (25267),
  2019.
Maxim Ananyev, Mikhail Poyker, and Tian Yuan. The safest time to fly: Pandemic response in the era of
  fox news. Technical report, May 2020.
Roy M Anderson, Hans Heesterbeek, Don Klinkenberg, and T Déirdre Hollingsworth. How will country-based
  mitigation measures influence the course of the covid-19 epidemic? The Lancet, 395(10228):931–934, 2020.
Susan Athey, Billy Ferguson, Matthew Gentzkow, and Tobias Schmidt. Experienced segregation. Technical
  report, Technical Report, Stanford University Working Paper, 2019.
Abhijit Banerjee, Arun G. Changrasekhar, Esther Duflo, and Matthew O. Jackson. Using gossips to spread
  information: Theory and evidence from two randomized controlled trials. Review of Economic Studies, 86:
  2453–2490, 2019.
John M Barrios, Efraim Benmelech, Yael V Hochberg, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. Civic capital
  and social distancing during the covid-19 pandemic. Working Paper 27320, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, June 2020. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w27320.
Toman Barsbai, Hillel Rapoport, Andreas Steinmayr, and Christoph Trebesch. The eﬀect of labor migration
  on the diﬀusion of democracy: evidence from a former soviet republic. American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, 9(3):36–69, 2017.
Panle Jia Barwick, Yanyan Liu, Eleonora Patacchini, and Qi Wu. Information, mobile communication,
  and referral eﬀects. Working Paper 25873, National Bureau of Economic Research, May 2019. URL
  http://www.nber.org/papers/w25873.
Lori Beaman, Ariel BenYishay, Jeremy Magruder, and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak. Can network theory-based
  targeting increase technology adoption? NBER Working Paper, (24912), 2018.
Lori A. Beaman. Social networks and the dynamics of labour market outcomes: Evidence from refugees
  resettled in the u.s. Review of Economic Studies, 79:128–161, 2012.
Michel Beine, Frédéric Docquier, and Maurice Schiﬀ. International migration, transfer of norms and home
  country fertility. Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue canadienne d’économique, 46(4):1406–1430, 2013.
Ariel BenYishay and A Mushfiq Mobarak. Social learning and incentives for experimentation and communi-
  cation. The Review of Economic Studies, 86(3):976–1009, 2019.
Joshua Evan Blumenstock, Guanghua Chi, and Xu Tan. Migration and the value of social networks. 2019.
Emily Breza, Arun Chandrasekhar, Benjamin Golub, and Aneesha Parvathaneni. Networks in economic
  development. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 35(4):678–721, 2019.
Guglielmo Briscese, Nicola Lacetera, Mario Macis, and Mirco Tonin. Compliance with covid-19 social-
  distancing measures in italy: The role of expectations and duration. Working Paper 26916, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, March 2020. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w26916.
Adam Brzezinski, Guido Deiana, Valentin Kecht, and David Van Dijcke. The covid-19 pandemic: Government
  vs. community action across the united states. 2020.


                                                   20
Konstantin Büchel, Diego Puga, Elisabet Viladecans-Marsal, and Maximilian von Ehrlich. Calling from the
  outside: The role of networks in residential mobility. 2019.
Konrad B Burchardi and Tarek A Hassan. The economic impact of social ties: Evidence from german
  reunification. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(3):1219–1271, 2013.
Leonardo Bursztyn, Aakaash Rao, Christopher Roth, and David Yanagizawa-Drott. Misinformation during
  a pandemic. Technical Report 2020-44, 2020.
Maria Esther Caballero. Origin-country education choices and destination immigration policies. Working
  paper, 2020.
Maria Esther Caballero, Brian C Cadena, and Brian K Kovak. Measuring geographic migration patterns
  using matrículas consulares. Demography, 55(3):1119–1145, 2018.
Maria Esther Caballero, Brian C. Cadena, and Brian K. Kovak. The international transmission of local
  shocks through migration networks. working paper, 2020.
CDC. Social distancing, 2020. URL https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/social-dista
Klaus Desmet and Romain Wacziarg. Understanding spatial variation in covid-19 across the united
  states.     Working Paper 27329, National Bureau of Economic Research, June 2020.                    URL
  http://www.nber.org/papers/w27329.
Stephen G. Dimmock, Jiekun Huang, and Scott J. Weisbenner. Give me your tired, your poor, your high-
  skilled labor: H-1b lottery outcomes and entrepreneurial success. NBER Working Paper, (26392), 2019.
Jonathan I Dingel and Brent Neiman. How many jobs can be done at home? Working paper, 2020.
Christian Dustmann, Albrecht Glitz, Uta Schönberg, and Herbert Brücker. Referral-based job search net-
  works. Review of Economic Studies, 83:514–546, 2016.
Per-Anders Edin, Peter Frederiksson, and Olof Aslund. Ethnic enclaves and the economic success of immi-
  grants - evidence from a natural experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1):329–357, 2003.
Ying Fan, A. Yesim Orhun, and Dana Turjeman. Heterogeneous actions, beliefs, constraints and risk tolerance
  during the covid-19 pandemic. Working Paper 27211, National Bureau of Economic Research, May 2020.
  URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w27211.
David M Gould. Immigrant links to the home country: empirical implications for us bilateral trade flows.
  The Review of Economics and Statistics, pages 302–316, 1994.
Keith Head and John Ries. Immigration and trade creation: Econometric evidence from canada. Canadian
  Journal of Economics, 31(1):47–62, 1998.
David Holtz, Michael Zhao, Seth G Benzell, Cathy Y Cao, M Amin Rahimian, Jeremy Yang, Jennifer
  Nancy Lee Allen, Avinash Collis, Alex Vernon Moehring, Tara Sowrirajan, et al. Interdependence and the
  cost of uncoordinated responses to covid-19. 2020.
Solomon Hsiang, Daniel Allen, Sebastien Annan-Phan, Kendon Bell, Ian Bolliger, Trinetta Chong, Hannah
  Druckenmiller, Andrew Hultgren, Luna Yue Huang, Emma Krasovich, et al. The eﬀect of large-scale
  anti-contagion policies on the coronavirus (covid-19) pandemic. medRxiv, 2020.
Mounir Karadja and Erik Prawitz. Exit, voice, and political change: Evidence from swedish mass migration
  to the united states. Journal of Political Economy, 127(4):1864–1925, 2019.
William R Kerr. Ethnic scientific communities and international technology diﬀusion. The Review of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics, 90(3):518–537, 2008.
Gabriel E Kreindler and Yuhei Miyauchi. Measuring commuting and economic activity inside cities with cell
  phone records. 2019.
Theresa Kuchler, Dominic Russel, and Johannes Stroebel. The geographic spread of covid-19 correlates with
  structure of social networks as measured by facebook. Working Paper 26990, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, April 2020.


                                             21
Maurice Kugler and Hillel Rapoport. Skilled emigration, business networks, and foreign direct investment.
  CESifo Working Paper, (1455), 2005.
Shan Li. High-skilled immigrant workers and u.s.firms’ access to foreign venture capital. working paper, 2020.
Grant Miller and A Mushfiq Mobarak. Learning about new technologies through social networks: experi-
  mental evidence on nontraditional stoves in bangladesh. Marketing Science, 34(4):480–499, 2015.
Minnesota Population Center.        Integrated public use microdata series, international: Version 7.2.
  https://doi.org/10.18128/D020.V7.2, 2020.
Simon Mongey, Laura Pilossoph, and Alex Weinberg. Which workers bear the burden of social dis-
  tancing policies? Working Paper 27085, National Bureau of Economic Research, May 2020. URL
  http://www.nber.org/papers/w27085.
Kaivan Munshi. Networks in the modern economy: Mexican migrants in the us labor market. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 118(2):549–599, 2003.
Sonal Pandya and David Leblang. Risky business: Institutions vs. social networks in fdi. Economics and
  Politics, 29(2):91–117, 2017.
J Raifman, K Nocka, D Jones, J Bor, S Lipson, J Jay, and P Chan. Covid-19 us state policy database.
  Technical Report Available at: www.tinyurl.com/statepolicies, 2020.
James E. Rauch and Vitor Trinidade. Ethnic chinese networks in international trade. Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 84(1):116–130, 2002.
Gobierno     de    México    Secretaría    de    Salud.          Social    distancing,     2020.         URL
  https://www.gob.mx/salud/documentos/sana-distancia.
Carlos Serrano Herrera and Rodrigo Jiménez Uribe. Yearbook of migration and remittances: Mexico 2019.
  Mexico, July 2019.
Andrey Simonov, Szymon K Sacher, Jean-Pierre H Dubé, and Shirsho Biswas. The persuasive eﬀect of
  fox news: Non-compliance with social distancing during the covid-19 pandemic. Working Paper 27237,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, May 2020. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w27237.
Unacast. Unacast social distancing dataset. Technical Report https://www.unacast.com/data-for-good.
  Version from 18 April 2020., 2020.
WHO.            Coronavirus     disease   (covid-19)    advice    for    the    public,    2020.         URL
  https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/advice-for-public.
Austin L Wright, Konstantin Sonin, Jesse Driscoll, and Jarnickae Wilson. Poverty and economic dislocation
  reduce compliance with covid-19 shelter-in-place protocols. Technical Report 2020-40, 2020.




                                                     22
    Figure 1: U.S. outbreak began earlier and was more severe than that of Mexico by Week 21.
                    (a) United States                                                 (b) Mexico




Note: The number of cases and deaths in the United States are from Johns Hopkins University: https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/.
The corresponding information in Mexico is from the Mexican Ministry of Health: https://coronavirus.gob.mx/. The horizontal
axis represents the week of the year in 2020. For example, Week 4 is the Week of Jan 20 to Jan 26, and Week 21 is the week
of May 18 to May 24. The vertical line at Week 11 denotes the week when a national emergency was declared in the United
States.




                                                            23
            Figure 2: Number of trips between the U.S. and Mexico declined after Week 11




Note: The trip counts are calculated using Facebook mobile app users who opt into location services. The horizontal axis is the
week of the year, and the vertical axis is the average number of trips per day during the week. The vertical line at Week 11
denotes the week when the national emergency was declared in the United States.




                                                              24
                             Figure 3: Diﬀerences in migrant destination distributions




25
     Note: 2008 MCAS data. The left panel shows the distribution across U.S. counties for migrants from Huandacareeo, and the
                                     right panel shows the same for migrants from Puruándiro.
Figure 4: Larger and more persistent mobility reduction in Cook County than in Tulare County,
Week 9–21.
                    (a) Unacast data                                              (b) Facebook data




Note: The solid vertical line is at Week 11, when a national emergency was announced in the U.S.




                                                            26
Figure 5: Trends in social distancing in Huandacareo and Puruándiro, Mexico and their exposure
to U.S. mobility declines
                    (a) Huandacareo                                                 (b) Puruándiro




Note: The solid vertical line is at Week 11, when a national emergency was announced in the U.S.




                                                            27
              Figure 6: Change in exposure to U.S. social distancing, Week 9 to Week 21




Note: The change in exposure to U.S. social distancing is calculated as exposureU
                                                                                21
                                                                                  nacast exposureU
                                                                                                 9
                                                                                                   nacast , using the Unacast

data. See Appendix Figure 9 for versions using Facebook or the principal component of the Unacast and Facebook measures
together.




                                                             28
Figure 7: Positive correlation between changes in social distancing in Mexico and the U.S. (Week
11 to Week 21)




Note: This figure includes all Mexican municipios with at least one Covid-19 case in Week 21, and each point represents a
municipio. The horizontal axis is the exposure to U.S. social distancing in Week 21 minus that in Week 11 (exposurepc  i21
exposurepci11 ), and the vertical axis is the change in social distancing in a Mexican municipio between Week 21 and Week 11
(socdisti21 socdisti11 ). The mean (s.d.) of the x-axis is 0.8 (0.2), and the mean (s.d.) of the y-axis is 0.3 (0.1).




                                                            29
  Table 1: Summary of statistics for Mexico-U.S. migration networks using the 2008 MCAS data
                               Variable                                            Value
                               Number of Mexican municipios                        2,412
                               Number of U.S. counties                             2,468
                               Number of county-municipio pairs (links)           174,281
                               Mean (s.d.) # of migrants per link                5.5 (28)
                               Min (max) # of migrants per link                  1 (5,253)
Note: 2008 MCAS data. A link is a municipio-county pair, and the number of migrants per link is the number of Mexicans from
the origin municipio who reside in the corresponding destination county in the U.S.




                                                            30
                                  Table 2: Mobility data summary statistics
             Source        Country     Moment                                                   Value
             Unacast       U.S.        # of counties                                            3,054
                                       Mean (s.d.) of decline in mobility, Week 9–21         –0.19 (0.17)

             Facebook      U.S.        # of counties                                            2,691
                                       Mean (s.d.) of decline in mobility, Week 9–21         –0.13 (0.14)
                           Mexico      # of municipios                                          1,084
                                       with exposure to US measure                              1,014
                                       Mean (s.d.) of decline in mobility, Week 9–21         –0.21 (0.15)
Sources: Unacast and Facebook Data for Good. Unacast data covers 3,054 U.S. counties, while the coverage of the Facebook
data varies by week (see Appendix Table 10 for details).




                                                          31
Table 3: Larger exposure to U.S. social distancing led to more social distancing in Mexico, Week 9
to Week 21
 Outcome:                                  (1)          (2)          (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
 Mexico social dist.                               Municipios with cases>0                            All municipios


 Exposure to U.S. social dist.          0.05***      0.05***     0.04***    0.05***     0.03***     0.03***     0.03***     0.03***
                                         (0.005)      (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)
 Exposure to log U.S. cum. cases                     -0.01***               -0.01***                -0.01***                -0.01***
                                                      (0.003)                (0.003)                (0.002)                 (0.002)
 Log cum. cases in Mexico muni.                                  0.02***    0.02***                             0.01***     0.02***
                                                                 (0.001)     (0.001)                            (0.001)     (0.001)
 Constant                               0.22***      0.28***     0.19***    0.28***     0.21***     0.26***     0.19***     0.26***
                                         (0.000)      (0.015)    (0.001)     (0.015)    (0.000)     (0.013)     (0.001)     (0.013)


 Observations                            10,051       10,051     10,051      10,051      13,036      13,036      13,036      13,036
 R-squared                                0.91         0.91          0.92     0.92        0.91        0.91        0.91        0.91
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Week fixed eﬀects and municipio fixed eﬀects
are controlled in all columns. Columns (1)–(4) include the municipios with at least one Covid-19 case at the end of Week 21,
and Columns (5)–(8) include all municipios. The mean (s.d.) of Mexican social distancing in the first four columns is 0.21
(0.15), and the mean (s.d.) of the exposure to U.S. social distancing is -0.02 (1.4). The mean (s.d.) of the log cumulative cases
in Mexico is 1.4 (1.8), and the mean (s.d.) of the exposure to U.S. cases is 5.1 (2.7). The corresponding numbers for the last
four columns are: 0.21 (0.15), -0.1 (1.4), 1.1 (1.7), and 5.1 (2.7).




                                                                32
Table 4: The main results are robust to controlling for diﬀerential eﬀects of socio-economic conditions
across weeks
 Variable for                       (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)
 interaction                    pop. density     % urban       % age 16–65      years edu.     log income      % employed

 Exposure to U.S. social           0.04***        0.04***         0.04***         0.04***        0.05***          0.04***
   distancing                      (0.005)         (0.005)         (0.005)        (0.005)         (0.005)         (0.005)
 Week 10 Interaction                0.002           0.01            0.13           0.002           0.01             0.05
                                   (0.001)         (0.01)          (0.10)         (0.003)         (0.01)           (0.05)
 Week 11 Interaction               0.003**         0.02**         0.22**          0.006**        0.03***           0.10**
                                   (0.001)         (0.01)          (0.09)         (0.003)         (0.01)           (0.05)
 Week 12 Interaction               0.01***        0.06***         0.53***         0.01***        0.06***          0.22***
                                   (0.001)         (0.01)          (0.09)         (0.002)         (0.01)           (0.04)
 Week 13 Interaction               0.01***        0.04***         0.64***         0.01***        0.05***          0.21***
                                   (0.001)         (0.01)          (0.08)         (0.002)         (0.01)           (0.04)
 Week 14 Interaction               0.01***        0.04***         0.65***         0.01***        0.04***          0.23***
                                   (0.001)         (0.01)          (0.08)         (0.002)         (0.01)           (0.04)
 Week 15 Interaction               0.01***        0.05***         0.69***         0.02***        0.06***          0.24***
                                   (0.001)         (0.01)          (0.08)         (0.002)         (0.01)           (0.04)
 Week 16 Interaction               0.01***        0.05***         0.70***         0.02***        0.05***          0.24***
                                   (0.001)         (0.01)          (0.08)         (0.002)         (0.01)           (0.04)
 Week 17 Interaction               0.01***        0.05***         0.73***         0.02***        0.05***          0.23***
                                   (0.001)         (0.01)          (0.08)         (0.002)         (0.01)           (0.04)
 Week 18 Interaction               0.01***        0.04***         0.73***         0.02***        0.05***          0.22***
                                   (0.001)         (0.01)          (0.08)         (0.002)         (0.01)           (0.04)
 Week 19 Interaction               0.01***        0.04***         0.89***         0.02***        0.05***          0.26***
                                   (0.001)         (0.01)          (0.09)         (0.002)         (0.01)           (0.04)
 Week 20 Interaction               0.01***        0.05***         0.90***         0.02***        0.05***          0.25***
                                   (0.001)         (0.01)          (0.08)         (0.002)         (0.01)           (0.04)
 Week 21 Interaction               0.01***        0.04***         0.89***         0.02***        0.04***          0.23***
                                   (0.001)         (0.01)          (0.09)         (0.002)         (0.01)           (0.04)

 Observations                      10,051          9,882          10,051           10,025         10,025          10,051
 R-squared                          0.92            0.91           0.92             0.92           0.91            0.92
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Municipio fixed eﬀects are controlled in all
columns. Each column replicates the regression in Table 3 and adds the interaction of a city characteristic with week fixed
eﬀects. Week 9 is the baseline week. The sample is the Week-9-to-21 panel of municipios with at least one Covid-19 case by the
end of Week 21.




                                                             33
Table 5: First stage: municipios with larger exposure to U.S. stay-at-home policies were also more
exposed to U.S. social distancing
    Outcome: Exposure to U.S. social distancing                       (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)

    Exposure to U.S. stay-at-home orders                           0.271***     0.271***        0.271***      0.271***
                                                                    (0.017)      (0.016)         (0.017)        (0.016)
    Exposure to log U.S. cumulative cases                                       0.045***                      0.045***
                                                                                 (0.014)                        (0.014)
    Log cum. cases Mexican muni.                                                                0.005***       0.005***
                                                                                                 (0.002)        (0.002)
    Constant                                                       -0.163***    -0.425***      -0.170***      -0.427***
                                                                    (0.009)      (0.078)         (0.009)        (0.078)

    Observations                                                    10,051        10,051         10,051         10,051
    R-squared                                                        0.993        0.993           0.993          0.993
    First-stage F-statistic                                           597          602             596            600
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All columns include controls for week fixed
eﬀects and municipio fixed eﬀects. The mean (s.d.) of exposure to U.S. social distancing is -0.02 (1.4), and the mean (s.d.) of
the exposure to U.S. stay-at-home orders is 0.54 (0.36). The sample is the Week-9-to-21 panel of municipios with at least one
Covid-19 case by the end of Week 21.




                                                              34
                             Table 6: IV results confirm main findings in Table 3.
           Outcome: Mexican social distancing                  (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)

           Exposure to U.S. social distancing               0.046**      0.046**        0.042**       0.042**
                                                            (0.019)      (0.019)        (0.019)        (0.019)
           Exposure to log U.S. cum. cases                              -0.012***                    -0.014***
                                                                         (0.003)                       (0.003)
           Log cum. cases Mexican muni.                                                0.015***       0.016***
                                                                                        (0.001)        (0.001)

           Observations                                     10,051        10,051         10,051        10,051
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Week fixed eﬀects and municipio fixed eﬀects
are included in all columns. The sample is the Week-9-to-21 panel of municipios with at least one Covid-19 case by the end of
Week 21. The exposure to U.S. social distancing is instrumented with the exposure to U.S. stay-at-home orders in all columns.




                                                             35
Table 7: Municipios with more favorable socio-economic conditions responded more strongly to U.S.
social distancing
 Outcome: Mexico social dist.              (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)

 Exposure to US social dist.           0.04***         0.03***        -0.04***       0.02***      -0.04***       0.02***
                                        (0.005)        (0.005)         (0.008)       (0.006)       (0.013)       (0.006)
 Interact: population density          0.002***
                                        (0.000)
 Interact: share urban                                 0.01***
                                                       (0.002)
 Interact: aged 16-65 share                                           0.15***
                                                                      (0.012)
 Interact: yrs of schooling                                                         0.003***
                                                                                     (0.000)
 Interact: log income                                                                             0.01***
                                                                                                  (0.001)
 Interact: % employed                                                                                            0.05***
                                                                                                                 (0.006)
 Constant                               0.22***        0.21***        0.22***        0.22***      0.22***        0.22***
                                        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)        (0.000)

 Mean (s.d.) of the interaction        0.56 (1.8)    0.59 (0.27)    0.62 (0.04)     8.6 (1.4)    8.4 (0.34)    0.51 (0.08)
 ˆ                                        8%             7%            12%            10%           7%             9%
 Observations                            10,051         9,882         10,051         10,025        10,025        10,051
 R-squared                                0.92           0.91          0.92           0.92          0.91          0.92
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Week fixed eﬀects and municipio fixed eﬀects
are included in all columns. Each column replicates the regressions in Column (1) of Table 3 and adds the interaction of a
municipio characteristic with the exposure to U.S. social distancing. The sample is the Week-9-to-21 panel of municipios with
at least one Covid-19 case by the end of Week 21.




                                                             36
Table 8: The eﬀect of exposure to U.S. social distancing is not significantly diﬀerent across municipios
that are connected to diﬀerent types of U.S. counties
 Outcome: Mexico soc dist.                 (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)

 Exposure to U.S. soc dist.             0.05***         0.05***         -0.03           -0.01          -0.004          0.005
                                        (0.005)         (0.005)        (0.026)         (0.019)        (0.077)         (0.056)
 Interact: % Hispanic                    -0.001
                                        (0.005)
 Interact: % Mexican                                     0.007
                                                        (0.004)
 Interact: Hispanic education                                         0.006***
                                                                       (0.002)
 Interact: education                                                                  0.004***
                                                                                       (0.001)
 Interact: log Hispanic income                                                                         0.005
                                                                                                      (0.007)
 Interact: log income                                                                                                 0.004
                                                                                                                     (0.005)
 Constant                               0.22***         0.22***        0.22***         0.22***        0.22***        0.22***
                                        (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)

 Mean (s.d.) of the interaction       0.29 (0.08)     0.22 (0.08)    10.3 (0.21)     13.1 (0.28)    10.9 (0.06)    11.2 (0.08)
 ˆ                                                                      3.5%             3%
 Observations                            10,051         10,051         10,051          10,051          10,051         10,051
 R-squared                                0.91           0.91           0.91            0.91            0.91           0.91
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Week fixed eﬀects and municipio fixed eﬀects
are included in all columns. Each column replicates the regression in Table 3 and adds the interaction of the average U.S.
destination characteristic faced by migrants from each municipio characteristic with the municipio’s exposure to U.S. social
distancing. The sample is the Week-9-to-21 panel of municipios with at least one Covid-19 case by the end of Week 21.




                                                            37
Appendix

A     Data
This section presents additional summary statistics on the geographic variation in exposure to social
distancing behavior across U.S. counties for each Mexican source region (municipio).

A.1    Weeks of the year in 2020
Table 9 shows the dates for each week of the year covered in both Facebook and Unacast datasets
used to measure local mobility, as explained in section 3.

                               Table 9: Week of the year table, 2020
                              Week Number      From Date     To date
                              Week   9        February 24    March 1
                              Week   10         March 2      March 8
                              Week   11         March 9      March 15
                              Week   12        March 16      March 22
                              Week   13        March 23      March 29
                              Week   14        March 30       April 5
                              Week   15         April 6      April 12
                              Week   16         April 13     April 19
                              Week   17         April 20     April 26
                              Week   18         April 27      May 3
                              Week   19          May 4       May 10
                              Week   20         May 11       May 17
                              Week   21         May 18       May 24




                                                 1
A.2     Additional mobility data summary statistics
Table 10 shows the Facebook data coverage by week in Mexico and in the United States. The
coverage varies by week since the number of unique active users may change from week to week.

         Table 10: Geographic coverage of Facebook mobility data in the U.S. and in Mexico
                               Week         Num. US counties        Num. MX municipios
                                  9              2,656                    1,050
                                 10              2,662                    1,060
                                 11              2,662                    1,066
                                 12              2,655                    1,068
                                 13              2,656                    1,074
                                 14              2,658                    1,078
                                 15              2,658                    1,083
                                 16              2,653                    1,081
                                 17              2,650                    1,078
                                 18              2,644                    1,081
                                 19              2,641                    1,081
                                 20              2,637                    1,079
                                 21              2,645                    1,076
                              Any week           2,691                    1,084
Note: This table presents the number of U.S. counties and Mexican municipios covered by the Facebook mobility data. The
number of regions covered vary by week due to the constraint that only regions with more than 300 unique users are included.
In the Unacast data, 3,054 US counties are covered for all weeks (9–21).


    As discussed in section 3, Figure 8 maps the change in the social distancing measure from the
Facebook dataset across Mexican municipios, used as our main dependent variable in equation
3. There was substantial geographic variation in the increase in social distancing across Mexican
municipios from Week 9 to Week 21, with Mexican regions in dark blue representing places with
larger declines in mobility.




                                                             2
         Figure 8: Distribution of changes in social distancing in Mexico, Week 9 to Week 21




Note: The changes in social distancing in Mexico are calculated as socdist21 socdist9 , using the Facebook data. There are
989 municipios with non-missing values of social distancing in Week 9, and 1,010 municipios in Week 21.


    Panel (a) of Figure 9 maps the change in exposure faced by each Mexican municipio to U.S.
social distancing from the Facebook dataset, while Panel (b) maps the principal component of
the Unacast and Facebook social distancing measures as defined in 1. These measures combined
geographic variation in U.S. social distancing behavior with geographic variation in the destination
distribution of Mexican source regions. This creates the geographic diﬀerences in exposure for each
Mexican region to diﬀerent social distancing practices in the U.S. observed in Figure 9.




                                                            3
Figure 9: Distribution of changes in exposure to social distancing in the United States, Week 9 to
Week 21




                                                (a) Facebook measure




                        (b) Principal component of Unacast and Facebook measures




Note: The changes in exposure to social distancing in the United States are calculated as exposures21 exposures9 , where s =
Facebook in Panel (a) and s = pc in Panel (b). There are 46 municipios with no data, and 2,415 municipios with data.




                                                             4
    Panel (a) of Figure 10 maps the change in the social distancing measure from the Facebook
dataset across U.S. counties, while panel (b) of Figure 10 shows the same measure using data from
Unacast. There was a great deal of geographic variation in the increase in social distancing across
U.S. counties from Week 9 to Week 21, with counties in dark blue representing places with larger
mobility declines. These maps show part of the geographic variation in social distancing behavior
that we use to construct our exposure measure as defined in equation 1.

 Figure 10: Distribution of changes in social distancing in the United States, Week 9 to Week 21




                                                 (a) Facebook measure




                                                 (b) Unacast measure




Note: The changes in social distancing in the United States are calculated as socdist21 socdist9 . Panel (a) uses the Facebook
data and includes 2,531 counties, and Panel (b) uses the Unacast data and includes 3,033 counties. Hawaii and Alaska are not
included.




                                                              5
A.3     Sample restrictions
Table 11 shows the sample size restrictions yielding the 13,036 observations in Table 3 Columns
(5)–(8). There are 2,411 municipios from the MCAS dataset, after excluding Yaxkukul in the State
of Yucatan with only one migrant in one U.S. county. There are 1,083 municipios with Facebook
mobility measures. There are 1,013 municipios and 13,037 municipio-week observations satisfying
both conditions. One municipio, San Miguel De Horcasitas in the State of Sonora, only has the
mobility measure in Week 21 and is excluded in the panel regression as a singleton.

                                Table 11: How we arrive at the final sample size
                           Week                                      Num. MX municipios
                                                                     (1)    (2)     (3)
                           9                                        2,411  1,049   984
                           10                                       2,411  1,059   991
                           11                                       2,411  1,065   997
                           12                                       2,411  1,067   998
                           13                                       2,411  1,073  1,002
                           14                                       2,411  1,077  1,007
                           15                                       2,411  1,082  1,012
                           16                                       2,411  1,080  1,009
                           17                                       2,411  1,077  1,006
                           18                                       2,411  1,080  1,009
                           19                                       2,411  1,080  1,009
                           20                                       2,411  1,078  1,008
                           21                                       2,411  1,075  1,005

                           Any week                                 2,411     1,083     1,013
                           With mobility exposure measure            Yes                 Yes
                           With mobility measure                               Yes       Yes
                           Total number of obs.                    31,343     13,942    13,037
Note: This table presents sample size for Mexican municipios covered in the analysis. Yaxkukul in the State of Yucatan is
dropped since the population size is very small (2,868 in 2010) and it is only has one destination county with one migrant
count in the MCAS dataset, Horry in South Carolina. MCAS data includes 2412 municipios. Thus, 2,411 municipios have the
measure of exposure to U.S. social distancing after dropping Yaxkukul (Column 1). In Column (2), there are 1,083 municipios
with Facebook mobility measure. When we restrict to the municipio-weeks with both the Facebook mobility measure and the
exposure to U.S. social distancing, we have 1,013 municipios. The panel regression in the main analysis with all municipios
includes 13,036 observations instead of 13,037 in Column (3) since San Miguel De Horcasitas in the State of Sonora only has
mobility measure in Week 21 and is excluded in the panel regression as a singleton.




                                                            6
B      Mexican state-level stay-at-home orders
Figure 11 and Table 12 describe state-level stay-at-home orders across Mexican states, based on
Mexican States’ oﬃcial decrees. Table 12 provides details on the specific measures imposed by each
state, along with the date of the relevant decree, and Figure 11 depicts the decrees graphically, with
blue bars showing weeks in which relevant decrees were in place. States without specific stay-at-
home orders are omitted from Figure 11 and Table 12 (see the note to Table 12 for a list). These
states declared states of emergency and closure of nonessential businesses in the first week of April
following the federal government order.

                        Figure 11: Mexico State-level Stay-at-home Orders, by week




Note: This figure shows the Mexican states imposing mandatory staty-at-home orders or mobility restrictions in the weeks under
study (see Table 12 for details) based on Mexican States’ Oﬃcial decrees. The blue bars represent the week in which a state
had an active staty-at-home order.




                                                              7
                                       Table 12: Mexico State-level Stay-at-home Orders



                         State                                          Measures                                      Date

                                                  Imposed measures to restrict mobility within the state.
                   Baja California Sur             Lowered public transportation capacity and limit the       Friday, April 24, 2020
                                                 number of persons who could travel in personal vehicles.

                       Chihuahua                    Installed check points in main highways and roads.        Sunday, April 19, 2020
                                                  Imposed measures to restrict mobility within the state.
                        Coahuila                   Lowered public transportation capacity and limit the     Wednesday, April 22, 2020
                                                 number of persons who could travel in personal vehicles.

                                                  Imposed measures to restrict mobility within the state.
                         Colima                    Lowered public transportation capacity and limit the      Thursday, April 9, 2020
                                                 number of persons who could travel in personal vehicles.

                                                  Imposed measures to restrict mobility within the state.
                    Distrito Federal               Lowered public transportation capacity and limit the     Wednesday, April 22, 2020
                                                 number of persons who could travel in personal vehicles.

                                                  Imposed measures to restrict mobility within the state.
                        Durango                    Lowered public transportation capacity and limit the       Sunday, April 26, 2020
                                                 number of persons who could travel in personal vehicles.

                                                     Mandatory stay-at-home measures were imposed.
                         Jalisco                                                                             Monday, April 20, 2020
                                                                Penalties included fines.

                                                  Imposed measures to restrict mobility within the state.
                         México                    Lowered public transportation capacity and limit the     Wednesday, April 22, 2020
                                                 number of persons who could travel in personal vehicles.

                                                     Mandatory stay-at-home measures were imposed.
                       Michoacán                                                                             Monday, April 20, 2020
                                                         Penalties included fines and jail time.

                                                  Imposed measures to restrict mobility within the state.
                        Nayarit                    Lowered public transportation capacity and limit the      Saturday, April 18, 2020
                                                  number of persons who could travel in personal vehicles

                                                  Following the federal government announcement, the
                                                   state of emergency was extended and the closure of
                                                 nonessential businesses continued. In addition, measures
                        Sinaloa                                                                             Wednesday, April 22, 2020
                                                    to restrict mobility within the state were imposed.
                                                  Lowered public transportation capacity. and limit the
                                                 number of persons who could travel in personal vehicles.

                                                    State of emergency was declared and nonessential
                                                       businesses were ordered to close, before the         Wednesday, March 25, 2020
                        Sonora                    announcement from the federal government was made.

                                                     Mandatory stay-at-home measures were imposed.
                                                                                                             Monday, April 13, 2020
                                                         Penalties included fines and jail time.

                                                  Following the federal government announcement, the
                                                   state of emergency was extended and the closure of
                                                 nonessential businesses continued. In addition, measures
                        Tabasco                                                                              Tuesday, April 21, 2020
                                                    to restrict mobility within the state were imposed.
                                                  Lowered public transportation capacity and limit the
                                                 number of persons who could travel in personal vehicles.
                                                  Following the federal government announcement, the
                                                   state of emergency was extended and the closure of
                                                 nonessential businesses continued. In addition, measures
                      Tamaulipas                                                                             Thursday, April 23, 2020
                                                    to restrict mobility within the state were imposed.
                                                  Lowered public transportation capacity and limit the
                                                 number of persons who could travel in personal vehicles.

                                                  Following the federal government announcement, the
                                                   state of emergency was extended and the closure of
                                                 nonessential businesses continued. In addition, measures
                        Yucatán                                                                              Thursday, April 23, 2020
                                                    to restrict mobility within the state were imposed.
                                                  Lowered public transportation capacity and limit the
                                                 number of persons who could travel in personal vehicles.

                                                  Following the federal government announcement, the
                                                   state of emergency was extended and the closure of
                                                 nonessential businesses continued. In addition, measures
                       Zacatecas                                                                             Wednesday, April 8, 2020
                                                    to restrict mobility within the state were imposed.
                                                  Lowered public transportation capacity and limit the
                                                 number of persons who could travel in personal vehicles.




Note: This table presents a description of the mandatory stay-at-home orders or mobility restrictions imposed by each Mexican
state government as well as the dates for each mandate, based on Mexican States’ Oﬃcial decrees. The following states declared
states of emergency and closure of nonessential businesses on the first week of April along with the federal government order:
Aguascalientes, Baja California, Hidalgo, Morelos, Nuevo León, Oaxaca, and Tlaxcala. Between the third and fourth week
of April the following states extended the state of emergency and maintained closure of nonessential businesses: Campeche,
Chiapas, Guanajuato, Guerrero, Puebla, Querétaro, Quintana Roo, San Luis Potosí, and Veracruz.

                                                                           8
C      Additional empirical results
This section outlines several robustness checks to support the validity of our main results presented
in section 4. Our main results are robust to 1) including controls for Mexican state-level stay-at-
home orders, 2) dropping outlier regions in Mexico, 3) introducing lagged exposure measures, 4)
using the exposure measure constructed from Facebook and Unacast data separately instead the
principal component exposure measure, 5) flexibly controlling for the local cases and the exposure
to U.S. cases, and 6) including Mexican municipios with no cases.

C.1      Robustness of of the main results after controlling for Mexican state-level
         stay-at-home orders
Table 13 replicates Table 3 in our main analysis with an additional control for stay-at-home orders
imposed in Mexican states that diﬀer from those imposed by the federal government (as described
in Appendix B). The results are nearly identical to those of Table 3.


Table 13: Larger exposure to U.S. social distancing led to more social distancing in Mexico, Week
9 to Week 21
 Outcome:                                      (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)             (8)
 Mexico social dist.                                    Municipios with cases>0                             All municipios


 Exposure to U.S. social dist.               0.05***       0.05***     0.04***    0.05***    0.03***     0.03***      0.03***        0.03***
                                             (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)         (0.004)
 Exposure to log U.S. cum. cases                          -0.01***                -0.01***               -0.01***                    -0.01***
                                                           (0.003)                (0.003)                 (0.002)                     (0.002)
 Log cum. cases in Mexico muni.                                        0.02***    0.02***                             0.01***        0.02***
                                                                       (0.001)    (0.001)                             (0.001)         (0.001)
 Mexico state-level stay-at-home orders       0.003        0.004**     -0.000      0.001     -0.006***   -0.005***   -0.009***       -0.008***
                                             (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.001)         (0.001)
 Constant                                    0.21***       0.29***     0.19***    0.28***    0.21***     0.26***      0.20***        0.26***
                                             (0.0001)      (0.015)     (0.001)    (0.015)     (0.001)     (0.013)     (0.001)         (0.013)


 Observations                                 10,051       10,051      10,051     10,051      13,036      13,036      13,036          13,036
 R-squared                                     0.91         0.91        0.92        0.92       0.91        0.91        0.91            0.91

Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. This table replicates Table 4 by including
controls for Mexican state-level stay-at-home orders. Week fixed eﬀects and municipio fixed eﬀects are included in all columns.
Columns (1)–(4) include the municipios with at least one Covid-19 case at the end of Week 21, and Columns (5)–(8) include
all municipios. The mean (s.d.) of Mexican social distancing in the first four columns is 0.21 (0.15), and the mean (s.d.) of
the exposure to U.S. social distancing is -0.02 (1.4). The mean (s.d.) of the log cumulative cases in Mexico is 1.4 (1.8), and the
mean (s.d.) of the exposure to U.S. cases is 5.1 (2.7). The corresponding numbers for the last four columns are: 0.21 (0.15),
-0.1 (1.4), 1.1 (1.7), and 5.1 (2.7).



C.2      Robustness of the correlations
Figure 12 Panel (a) replicates Figure 7 by dropping an outlier municipio, San José Miahuatlán in
Puebla State. This figure relates the long-diﬀerence change in local social distancing to the change


                                                                   9
in the municipio’s exposure to U.S. social distancing. It shows that the strong positive correlation
between changes in social distancing in Mexico and the U.S. remains after dropping out the outlier
municipio, suggesting that the results are not driven by outliers.
    Panel (b) shows the corresponding relationship between changes in the log cumulative cases in
Mexican municipios and changes in the exposure to cumulative U.S. cases. The horizontal axis is
the change in exposure to U.S. cumulative cases (exposurecases
                                                         i21                                    i11 ), and the vertical
                                                                                        exposurecases
axis is the change in the log cumulative cases in Mexico (ln(cum cases)i21                           ln(cum cases)i11 ). The
fitted line has slope of 0.18, statistically insignificant.

Figure 12: A strong positive correlation between changes in social distancing in Mexico and the
U.S., replicating Figure 7 by dropping an outlier, San José Miahuatlán in Puebla State.
                         (a) Mobility                                                (b) Cumulative cases




Note: This figure includes 769 Mexican municipios with at least one Covid-19 case in Week 21, and each dot is a municipio.
It replicates Figure 7 by dropping an outlier, San José Miahuatlán in Puebla State. Panel (a) shows the mobility result, where
the horizontal axis is the exposure to U.S. social distancing in Week 21 minus that in Week 11 (exposurepc      i21  exposurepc
                                                                                                                             i11 ),
and the vertical axis is the change in social distancing in a Mexican municipio between Week 21 and Week 11 (socdisti21
socdisti11 ). The mean (s.d.) of the x-axis is 0.8 (0.2), and the mean (s.d.) of the y-axis is 0.3 (0.1). Panel (b) shows the
cumulative case result, where the horizontal axis is the change in exposure to log U.S. cumulative cases from Week 11 to Week
21 (exposurecases
              i21                i11 ), and the vertical axis is the change in the log of cumulative cases in a Mexican municipio
                       exposurecases
between Week 21 and Week 11 (ln(cum cases)i21 ln(cum cases)i11 ). The mean (s.d.) of the x-axis is 6.1 (0.5), and the mean
(s.d.) of the y-axis is 2.9 (1.4).




                                                               10
    Figure 13 replicates Figure 7 Panel (b), but using one-week and two-week lagged values of the
change in exposure to U.S. social distancing to allow for potential delays in information transmission.
These figures show that the relationship between the number of cases in Mexican municipios and
the exposure to U.S. cases remains unchanged.

Figure 13: The relationship between the number of cases in Mexican municipios and the exposure
to U.S. cases does not change if we use lagged exposure.
      Exposure to U.S. cases, one week lagged                         Exposure to U.S. cases, two weeks lagged




Note: This figure includes 770 Mexican municipios with at least one Covid-19 case in Week 21, and each dot is a municipio.
It replicates Figure 7 Panel (b) by using the one-week and two-week lagged exposure to U.S. cases as the horizontal axis. The
horizontal axis in Panel (a) is the change in exposure to log U.S. cumulative cases from Week 10 to Week 20 (exposurecases
                                                                                                                        i20
          i10 ), and the vertical axis is the change in the log of cumulative cases in a Mexican municipio between Week 21 and
exposurecases
Week 11 (ln(cum cases)i21 ln(cum cases)i11 ). The horizontal axis in Panel (b) is the change in exposure to log U.S. cumulative
cases from Week 9 to Week 19 (exposurecases i19    exposurecases
                                                             i9   ).




                                                              11
C.3      Robustness of the main results using the Facebook and Unacast measures
         separately
Tables 14 and 15 replicate Table 3 in our main analysis, but separately use the exposure to U.S.
social distancing constructed with the Facebook and Unacast data, respectively. The tables show
that the results are robust to constructing the exposure to social distancing practices in the U.S.
separately for each dataset as opposed to constructing it as the principal component of the two social
distancing measures together.

Table 14: Larger exposure to U.S. social distancing led to more social distancing in Mexico, Week
9 to Week 21, Facebook measure as the outcome
 Outcome:                                  (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)           (8)
 Mexico social dist.                              Municipios with cases>0                                 All municipios


 Exposure to U.S. social dist.          0.27***      0.29***        0.25***   0.26***      0.12***      0.12***     0.10***        0.11***
 (Facebook measure)                      (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.04)     (0.04)       (0.04)      (0.04)       (0.04)         (0.04)
 Exposure to log U.S. cum. cases                    -0.01***                  -0.01***                 -0.01***                    -0.01***
                                                      (0.00)                   (0.00)                   (0.00)                      (0.00)
 Log cum. cases in Mexico muni.                                     0.02***   0.02***                               0.01***        0.01***
                                                                    (0.00)     (0.00)                                (0.00)         (0.00)
 Constant                               0.15***      0.21***        0.13***   0.21***      0.18***      0.22***     0.17***        0.23***
                                         (0.01)       (0.02)        (0.01)     (0.02)       (0.01)      (0.02)       (0.01)         (0.02)


 Observations                            10,051      10,051         10,051     10,051      13,036       13,036       13,036        13,036
 R-squared                                0.91         0.91          0.92       0.92         0.91        0.91         0.91           0.91
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. This table replicates Table 4 by using the
exposure to U.S. social distancing that is measured using the Facebook data. Week fixed eﬀects and Municipio fixed eﬀects are
controlled in all columns. Columns (1)–(4) include the municipios with at least one Covid-19 case at the end of Week 21, and
Columns (5)–(8) include all municipios. The mean (s.d.) of Mexican social distancing in the first four columns is 0.21 (0.15),
and the mean (s.d.) of the exposure to U.S. social distancing is 0.24 (0.14). The mean (s.d.) of the log cumulative cases in
Mexico is 1.4 (1.8), and the mean (s.d.) of the exposure to U.S. cases is 5.1 (2.7). The corresponding numbers for the last four
columns are: 0.21 (0.15), 0.24 (0.14), 1.1 (1.7), and 5.1 (2.7).




                                                               12
Table 15: Larger exposure to U.S. social distancing led to more social distancing in Mexico, Week
9 to Week 21, Unacast measure as the outcome
 Outcome:                                  (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)           (8)
 Mexico social dist.                              Municipios with cases>0                                 All municipios


 Exposure to U.S. social dist.          0.41***      0.43***        0.38***   0.40***      0.32***      0.34***     0.29***        0.31***
 (Unacast measure)                       (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.04)     (0.04)       (0.03)      (0.03)       (0.03)         (0.03)
 Exposure to log U.S. cum. cases                    -0.01***                  -0.02***                 -0.01***                    -0.01***
                                                      (0.00)                   (0.00)                   (0.00)                      (0.00)
 Log cum. cases in Mexico muni.                                     0.02***   0.02***                               0.01***        0.01***
                                                                    (0.00)     (0.00)                                (0.00)         (0.00)
 Constant                               0.09***      0.16***        0.08***   0.16***      0.11***      0.17***     0.11***        0.17***
                                         (0.01)       (0.02)        (0.01)     (0.02)       (0.01)      (0.02)       (0.01)         (0.02)


 Observations                            10,051      10,051         10,051     10,051      13,036       13,036       13,036        13,036
 R-squared                                0.91         0.91          0.92       0.92         0.91        0.91         0.91           0.91
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. This table replicates Table 3 by using the
exposure to U.S. social distancing that is measured using the Unacast data. Week fixed eﬀects and Municipio fixed eﬀects are
controlled in all columns. Columns (1)–(4) include the municipios with at least one Covid-19 case at the end of Week 21, and
Columns (5)–(8) include all municipios. The mean (s.d.) of Mexican social distancing in the first four columns is 0.21 (0.15),
and the mean (s.d.) of the exposure to U.S. social distancing is 0.29 (0.16). The mean (s.d.) of the log cumulative cases in
Mexico is 1.4 (1.8), and the mean (s.d.) of the exposure to U.S. cases is 5.1 (2.7). The corresponding numbers for the last four
columns are: 0.21 (0.15), 0.29 (0.16), 1.1 (1.7), and 5.1 (2.7).




                                                               13
C.4      Robustness of the main results using rescaled Facebook exposure measure
Since the Facebook data for the United States do not cover all U.S. counties, it is possible that
counties covered in the MCAS data are not included in the Facebook data. When this is the case,
the shares in equation (1) do not sum to 1.
    Out of the 959,089 migrants in the MCAS data, 1,536 are in counties not covered by the Facebook
data (less than 0.2%). We construct the share of migrants in MCAS data covered in Facebook
counties for each municipio, and rescale the exposure to U.S. social distancing using Facebook data
to make the shares to sum to 1. Then we construct the exposure to U.S. social distancing using the
principal component of the rescaled Facebook exposure and the Unacast measure.
    Table 16 presents the results using the rescaled measures, where Columns (1)–(4) replicate Table
3 Columns (1)–(4) with the principal component exposure measure, and Columns (5)–(8) replicate
Table 14 Columns (1)–(4) with the Facebook exposure measure. The results are very similar. This
is not surprising since in the sample used in Table 16, the mean (s.d.) of the share of migrants in
counties covered by the Facebook data is 0.998 (0.007), with a minimum of 0.86 and the maximum
of 1.

                 Table 16: Results robust to using rescaled Facebook exposure measures
                                       (1)           (2)        (3)           (4)       (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
 Outcome: Mexico social dist.                  Principal component measure                         Facebook measure


 Exposure to U.S. social dist.      0.046***      0.048***    0.042***   0.045***     0.272***   0.281***    0.243***    0.253***
                                     (0.005)       (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.045)     (0.045)     (0.044)     (0.044)
 Log cum. cases in Mexico muni.                   -0.012***              -0.014***               -0.010***               -0.013***
                                                   (0.003)                (0.003)                 (0.003)                 (0.003)
 Exposure to log U.S. cum. cases                              0.015***   0.016***                            0.015***    0.016***
                                                              (0.001)     (0.001)                             (0.001)     (0.001)
 Constant                           0.215***      0.283***    0.194***   0.276***     0.149***   0.207***    0.135***    0.207***
                                     (0.000)       (0.015)    (0.001)     (0.015)     (0.011)     (0.019)     (0.011)     (0.019)


 Observations                         10,051       10,051      10,051        10,051    10,051     10,051      10,051       10,051
 R-squared                            0.913         0.913      0.919         0.919     0.912       0.913       0.918       0.918

Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. This table replicates Table 4 Columns (1)–(4) and
Table 14 (1)–(4) by using the exposure to U.S. social distancing using rescale Facebook exposure measure. Since the Facebook
data in the U.S. does not cover all counties, the migrant shares in the migration network data does not sum up to 1. In the
sample used in this table, the mean (s.d.) of the share of migrants in counties covered by the Facebook data is 0.998 (0.007),
with a minimum of 0.86 and the maximum of 1. Here we rescale the exposure to Facebook U.S. social distancing such that the
migrant shares sum up to 1. Columns (1)–(4) use the principal component of the rescaled Facebook measure and the Unacast
measure, and Columns (5)–(8) use the rescale Facebook measure. Week fixed eﬀects and municipio fixed eﬀects are controlled
in all columns. The sample is the Week-9-to-21 panel of municipios with at least one Covid-19 case by the end of Week 21.




                                                              14
C.5      Robustness of the main results when flexibly controlling for local and U.S.
         cases
Table 17 replicates Table 3 Columns (4) and (8) in our main analysis, but controls for flexible
functional forms of the number of cases. The results are nearly identical after including these
flexible controls, ruling out concerns about the disease transmission along the migrant network as
the underlying channel of our main results.

Table 17: Larger exposure to U.S. social distancing led to more social distancing in Mexico, Week
9 to Week 21, Unacast measure as the outcome
 Outcome:                                           (1)            (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)
 Mexico social dist.                                  Municipios with cases>0                        All municipios


 Exposure to U.S. social dist.                   0.045***      0.048***     0.048***      0.029***     0.032***       0.031***
                                                  (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.004)
 Exposure to log U.S. cum. cases                 -0.015***    -0.012***     -0.013***    -0.012***     -0.009***      -0.010***
                                                  (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.002)      (0.002)        (0.002)
 Log cum. cases in Mexico muni.                  0.005***                                 0.005***
                                                  (0.001)                                  (0.001)
 Log cum. cases in Mexico muni. squared          0.002***                                 0.002***
                                                  (0.000)                                  (0.000)
 I (number of cum. cases > 0)                                   -0.001                                 0.009***
                                                                (0.002)                                 (0.001)
 I (number of cases in (0, 100] )                                           0.007***                                  0.013***
                                                                             (0.002)                                   (0.001)
 I (number of cases in (100, 1000] )                                        0.055***                                  0.066***
                                                                             (0.004)                                   (0.004)
 I (number of cases > 1000)                                                 0.108***                                  0.124***
                                                                             (0.007)                                   (0.007)
 Constant                                        0.286***      0.285***     0.286***      0.264***     0.256***       0.259***
                                                  (0.015)       (0.015)      (0.015)       (0.013)      (0.013)        (0.013)


 Observations                                      10,051       10,051        10,051       13,036        13,036        13,036
 R-squared                                          0.92           0.91        0.92         0.91          0.91          0.91
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. This table replicates Table 3 Columns (4) and
(8) by using the diﬀerent types of measures of severity of the local outbreak. Week fixed eﬀects and municipio fixed eﬀects are
controlled in all columns. Columns (1)–(3) include the municipios with at least one Covid-19 case at the end of Week 21, and
Columns (4)–(6) include all municipios. The mean (s.d.) of Mexican social distancing in the first four columns is 0.21 (0.15),
and the mean (s.d.) of the exposure to U.S. social distancing is -0.02 (1.4). The mean (s.d.) of the log cumulative cases in
Mexico is 1.4 (1.8), and the mean (s.d.) of the exposure to U.S. cases is 5.1 (2.7). The corresponding numbers for the last
four columns are: 0.21 (0.15), -0.01 (1.4), 1.1 (1.7), and 5.1 (2.7). Columns (1) and (4) include the log cumulative cases in
Mexico and the squared term. Columns (2) and (5) include a dummy variable indicating in this municipio and week, if there is
a positive number of cumulative cases. Columns (3) and (6) include a dummy if the number of cumulative cases is in between
of 0 and 100, 100 to 1000, and larger than 1000.




                                                              15
    Table 18 replicates Table 3 in our main analysis, but includes leads and lags of the exposure to
U.S. social distancing to rule out reverse causality. In this case, we see that the coeﬃcients leading
up to the beginning of our period of study are not statistically diﬀerent from zero, suggesting that
that U.S. social distancing are in fact transmitted to Mexico through the migrant network and not
the other way around.

Table 18: Results in Table 3 are robust to controlling for leads and lags of exposure to U.S. cases.
                                                                         (1)        (2)                (3)       (4)
      Outcome: social distancing in Mexico                             Muni with cases > 0               All muni.

      Exposure to U.S. social dist.                                    0.05***       0.04***        0.03***      0.03***
                                                                        (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.004)       (0.004)
      Log cum. cases in Mexico muni.                                    0.02***       0.02***       0.02***       0.02***
                                                                        (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)
      Exposure to log U.S. cum. cases                                  -0.03***      -0.02***       -0.02**      -0.01***
                                                                        (0.009)       (0.005)       (0.008)       (0.004)
      Exposure to log U.S. cum. cases, lagged one period                 0.007                       -0.001
                                                                        (0.005)                     (0.004)
      Exposure to log U.S. cum. cases, lead one period                   0.006                        0.008
                                                                        (0.007)                     (0.006)
      Exposure to log U.S. cum. cases, lagged one week                               0.008***                      -0.001
                                                                                      (0.003)                     (0.002)
      Exposure to log U.S. cum. cases, lead two weeks                                  0.004                        0.006
                                                                                      (0.005)                     (0.005)
      Constant                                                         0.266***      0.239***      0.240***      0.214***
                                                                        (0.020)       (0.027)       (0.018)       (0.024)

      Observations                                                      10,051         9,276         13,036       12,032
      R-squared                                                          0.919         0.923          0.913        0.918
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. This table replicates Table 3 by controlling
for leads and lags of the exposure to U.S. cases. Week fixed eﬀects and municipio fixed eﬀects are controlled in all columns.
Columns (1)–(4) include the municipios with at least one Covid-19 case at the end of Week 21, and Columns (5)–(8) include
all municipios. The mean (s.d.) of Mexican social distancing in the first four columns is 0.21 (0.15), and the mean (s.d.) of
the exposure to U.S. social distancing is -0.02 (1.4). The mean (s.d.) of the log cumulative cases in Mexico is 1.4 (1.8), and the
mean (s.d.) of the exposure to U.S. cases is 5.1 (2.7). The corresponding numbers for the last four columns are: 0.21 (0.15),
-0.01 (1.4), 1.1 (1.7), and 5.1 (2.7).




                                                               16
C.6    Robustness of the main results by taking into account the share of jobs
       facilitating work from home
As shown in Dingel and Neiman [2020], diﬀerent industries and occupations have diﬀerent shares of
jobs that can be performed at home. In Table 19, we present the crosswalk of industries in Mexico
and in the United States. The share of jobs facilitating work from home at the 2-digit NAICS
sector level is from Table 3 in Dingel and Neiman [2020], and out of the 20 industries, 14 industries
have direct matches with the IPUMS general industry code used in the 2015 Intercensal Count
(Panel A), and 6 industries do not have exact matches (Panel B). In later analysis, we construct the
municipio-level shares allowing work from home using the individual level industry code in the 2015
Intercensal Count and the Mexican industry level workable-at-home job shares. Given the imperfect
matching, we use two matching methods. In the first one, “Other services” and “Private household
services” in Mexico are assigned the value of 0.31 and 0.43 (unweighted and weighted by wage) to
match “Other services (except for public administration)” in the U.S. The second method match
these two Mexican industries to the average of unmatched U.S. industries, including “Professional,
scientific, and technical services”, “Management of companies and enterprises”, “Information”, “Other
services (except public administration)”, “Administrative and support and waste management and
remediation services”, and “Arts, entertainment, and recreation”.




                                                 17
                  Table 19: Share of jobs facilitating work at home, by industry in Mexico
 Panel A. Matched                                                                                     Share of jobs doable at home
 Mexican industry (IPUMS general industry)        US industry (2-digit NAICS sector)                 Unweighted   Weighted by wage
 Agriculture, fishing, and forestry               Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting            0.08             0.13
 Mining and extraction                            Mining, quarrying, and oil and gas extraction         0.25             0.37
 Manufacturing                                    Manufacturing                                         0.22             0.36
 Electricity, gas, water and waste management     Utilities                                             0.37             0.41
 Construction                                     Construction                                          0.19             0.22
 Wholesale and retail trade                       Wholesale trade                                       0.52             0.67
                                                  Retail trade                                          0.14             0.22
 Hotels and restaurants                           Accommodation and food services                       0.04             0.07
 Transportation, storage, and communication       Transportation and warehousing                        0.19             0.25
 Financial services and insurance                 Finance and insurance                                 0.76             0.85
 Public administration and defense                Federal, state, and local government                  0.41             0.47
 Business services and real estate                Real estate and rental and leasing                    0.42             0.54
 Education                                        Educational services                                  0.83             0.71
 Health and social work                           Health care and social assistance                     0.25             0.24
 Panel B. Unmatched
 Other services                                   Professional, scientific, and technical services      0.80             0.86
 Private household services                       Management of companies and enterprises               0.79             0.86
                                                  Information                                           0.72             0.80
                                                  Other services (except public administration)         0.31             0.43
                                                  Administrative and support and waste                  0.31             0.43
                                                    management and remediation services
                                                  Arts, entertainment, and recreation                   0.30             0.36

Notes: This table reports the crosswalk between Mexican industries and U.S. industries, where U.S. industries have the share of
jobs doable at home from Dingel and Neiman [2020]. The U.S. industries are at the 2-digit NAICS sector level, and the Mexican
industries are from the IPUMS International general industry code, where the grouping “roughly conform to the International
Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC)” (IPUMS International). Panel A shows the list of matched industries, and Panel B
shows the list of unmatched industries.




                                                              18
   Table 20 controls flexibly for the share of jobs facilitating work from home by using the interac-
tion of the share with week fixed eﬀects. The coeﬃcient estimates for the exposure to U.S. social
distancing are very similar to those in Table 3, indicating that migrants are either not sorting into
U.S. regions with similar ability to work from home, or that sorting is not influencing the eﬀects of
U.S. social distancing on Mexican social distancing.




                                                 19
Table 20: Results robust to flexibly controlling for the share of people whose job is workable at home
           Outcome: Mexico social distancing                (1)        (2)                 (3)        (4)
           Variable for interaction:                      Matching method 1              Matching method 2
           Workable at home share                        Unweighted Weighted            Unweighted Weighted

           Exposure to U.S. social distancing             0.043***        0.043***        0.043***        0.043***
                                                           (0.005)         (0.005)         (0.005)         (0.005)
           Week 10 Interaction                              0.003           0.006           -0.002          0.002
                                                           (0.086)         (0.079)         (0.079)         (0.074)
           Week 11 Interaction                             0.159*          0.169**         0.137*          0.150**
                                                           (0.084)         (0.076)         (0.076)         (0.071)
           Week 12 Interaction                            0.299***        0.295***        0.273***        0.273***
                                                           (0.077)         (0.070)         (0.070)         (0.065)
           Week 13 Interaction                            0.307***        0.279***        0.287***        0.265***
                                                           (0.071)         (0.065)         (0.065)         (0.061)
           Week 14 Interaction                            0.305***        0.276***        0.286***        0.263***
                                                           (0.071)         (0.065)         (0.065)         (0.060)
           Week 15 Interaction                            0.358***        0.325***        0.328***        0.304***
                                                           (0.071)         (0.065)         (0.065)         (0.060)
           Week 16 Interaction                            0.348***        0.302***        0.318***        0.283***
                                                           (0.070)         (0.064)         (0.064)         (0.060)
           Week 17 Interaction                            0.420***        0.349***        0.381***        0.326***
                                                           (0.072)         (0.065)         (0.065)         (0.061)
           Week 18 Interaction                            0.438***        0.362***        0.400***        0.340***
                                                           (0.072)         (0.065)         (0.065)         (0.061)
           Week 19 Interaction                            0.493***        0.404***        0.460***        0.387***
                                                           (0.076)         (0.069)         (0.069)         (0.064)
           Week 20 Interaction                            0.494***        0.414***        0.460***        0.395***
                                                           (0.075)         (0.069)         (0.069)         (0.064)
           Week 21 Interaction                            0.479***        0.391***        0.442***        0.371***
                                                           (0.077)         (0.070)         (0.070)         (0.065)

           Observations                                     10,025          10,025         10,025          10,025
           R-squared                                         0.915           0.915          0.915           0.915
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Municipio fixed eﬀects are controlled in all
Columns. The workable-at-home measure is the mean of workable at home job shares using the industry code of working
age population (aged 16–65) in a municipio and the industry-level workable at home job shares. The workable-at-home share
for “Wholesale and retail trade” in Mexico is calculated as the mean of the workable-at-home shares for “Wholesale trade”
and “Retail trade” in the U.S. (Table 19). In Columns (1)–(2), “Other services” and “Private household services” in Mexico
are matched to “Other services (except public administration)” in the U.S., while in Columns (3)–(4), “Other services” and
“Private household services” in Mexico are matched to “Other services (except public administration)”, “Professional, scientific,
and technical services”, “Management of companies and enterprises“, “Information”, “Administrative and support and waste
management and remediation services”, “Arts, entertainment, and recreation” in the U.S. (all unmatched service items in Table
19). Columns (1) and (3) use the unweighted shares, and Columns (2) and (4) use the weighted by wage shares.




                                                               20
    Table 21 shows the heterogeneous eﬀect of the exposure to U.S. social distancing with respect
to the workable-at-home shares. We find that Mexican regions with higher workable-at-home job
shares responding more strongly to U.S. social distancing. This is consistent with the heterogeneous
eﬀects found in Table 23, since as shown in Dingel and Neiman [2020], higher income is associated
with higher shares of workable-at-home jobs (at the country level).


Table 21: Municipios with higher workable-at-home shares respond more strongly to U.S. social
distancing
                                                            (1)         (2)                 (3)         (4)
      Outcome: Mexico social dist.                         Matching method 1               Matching method 2
                                                         Unweighted Weighted             Unweighted Weighted

      Exposure to U.S. social distancing                   0.025***        0.023***        0.025***        0.022***
                                                            (0.006)         (0.006)         (0.006)         (0.006)
      Interaction with workable at home shares             0.080***        0.070***        0.074***        0.066***
                                                            (0.010)         (0.009)         (0.009)         (0.009)
      Constant                                             0.215***        0.215***        0.215***        0.215***
                                                            (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)

      Mean (s.d.) of workable at home shares              0.25 (0.04)     0.33 (0.05)     0.28 (0.05)     0.34 (0.05)
      ˆ                                                       7%              8%              8%              7%
      Observations                                          10,025          10,025          10,025          10,025
      R-squared                                              0.914           0.914           0.914           0.914
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Week fixed eﬀects and municipio fixed eﬀects
are included in all columns. Each column replicates the regressions in Column (1) of Table 3 and adds the interaction of a
municipio’s workable-at-home job share. Similar as in Table 20, Columns (1) and (2) match “Other services” and “Private
household services” in Mexico to “Other services (except public administration)” in the U.S., while Columns (3) and (4) match
these two Mexican industries to the average of the unmatched service industries in Table 19 Panel B. Columns (1) and (3) use
the unweighted shares, and Columns (2) and (4) use the weighted by wage shares.




                                                             21
C.7     Robustness of the main results when including all municipios
Table 22 replicates Table 4, but includes municipios with no cases. The results are similar in
magnitude and significance to those in our main analysis, indicating that dropping municipios with
no cases does not substantially aﬀect the results.

                   Table 22: The results in Table 4 hold when all municipios are included
    Variable for                     (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)
    interaction                 pop. density     % urban     % age 16–65     years edu.    log income    % employed


    Exposure to U.S. social       0.026***      0.025***         0.031***     0.028***      0.034***       0.028***
       distancing                  (0.004)       (0.004)         (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)
    Week 10 Interaction             0.002         0.010           0.119         0.002         0.007          0.034
                                   (0.002)       (0.011)         (0.083)       (0.002)       (0.008)        (0.038)
    Week 11 Interaction           0.004***      0.031***         0.266***     0.006***      0.024***       0.088**
                                   (0.001)       (0.011)         (0.083)       (0.002)       (0.008)        (0.037)
    Week 12 Interaction           0.007***      0.059***         0.517***     0.013***      0.048***       0.205***
                                   (0.001)       (0.010)         (0.079)       (0.002)       (0.008)        (0.035)
    Week 13 Interaction           0.010***      0.041***         0.547***     0.012***      0.033***       0.179***
                                   (0.001)       (0.009)         (0.071)       (0.002)       (0.007)        (0.032)
    Week 14 Interaction           0.011***      0.041***         0.551***     0.011***      0.025***       0.185***
                                   (0.001)       (0.009)         (0.070)       (0.002)       (0.007)        (0.032)
    Week 15 Interaction           0.012***      0.052***         0.617***     0.014***      0.041***       0.207***
                                   (0.001)       (0.009)         (0.070)       (0.002)       (0.007)        (0.031)
    Week 16 Interaction           0.011***      0.045***         0.570***     0.013***      0.029***       0.182***
                                   (0.001)       (0.009)         (0.070)       (0.002)       (0.007)        (0.032)
    Week 17 Interaction           0.013***      0.045***         0.630***     0.014***      0.033***       0.190***
                                   (0.001)       (0.009)         (0.070)       (0.002)       (0.007)        (0.031)
    Week 18 Interaction           0.014***      0.039***         0.632***     0.014***      0.034***       0.181***
                                   (0.001)       (0.009)         (0.071)       (0.002)       (0.007)        (0.032)
    Week 19 Interaction           0.016***      0.041***         0.822***     0.017***      0.036***       0.231***
                                   (0.001)       (0.010)         (0.075)       (0.002)       (0.007)        (0.033)
    Week 20 Interaction           0.016***      0.046***         0.812***     0.017***      0.033***       0.226***
                                   (0.001)       (0.010)         (0.074)       (0.002)       (0.007)        (0.033)
    Week 21 Interaction           0.016***      0.045***         0.815***     0.016***      0.032***       0.211***
                                   (0.001)       (0.010)         (0.077)       (0.002)       (0.008)        (0.034)


    Observations                   13,036         12,841          13,036       13,010        13,010         13,036
    R-squared                       0.910         0.907           0.911        0.910          0.908          0.909
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Municipio fixed eﬀects are controlled in all
columns. Each column replicates the regression in Table 3 and adds the interaction of a city characteristic with week fixed
eﬀects. Week 9 is the baseline week. The sample is the Week-9-to-21 panel of all municipios.




                                                            22
    Table 23 replicates Table 7, evaluating heterogeneity in the eﬀects of exposure to U.S. social
distancing based on the characteristics of Mexican municipios, but includes municipios with no
cases. The results are similar in magnitude and significance to those in our main analysis, indicating
that dropping municipios with no cases does not substantially aﬀect the results.

                  Table 23: The results in Table 7 hold when all municipios are included
 Outcome: Mexico social dist.               (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)             (6)

 Exposure to US social dist.            0.028***       0.021***        -0.043***        0.007       -0.028***       0.009*
                                         (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.007)        (0.005)       (0.009)        (0.005)
 Interact: population density           0.002***
                                         (0.000)
 Interact: share urban                                 0.010***
                                                        (0.001)
 Interact: aged 16-65 share                                            0.124***
                                                                        (0.010)
 Interact: yrs of schooling                                                           0.003***
                                                                                       (0.000)
 Interact: log income                                                                               0.007***
                                                                                                     (0.001)
 Interact: % employed                                                                                              0.044***
                                                                                                                    (0.004)
 Constant                               0.209***       0.207***        0.209***       0.209***      0.209***       0.209***
                                         (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)

 Mean (s.d.) of the interaction         0.45 (1.6)    0.56 (0.27)     0.61 (0.04)     8.3 (1.4)     8.4 (0.40)    0.50 (0.09)
 ˆ                                         11%           10%             15%            13%             9%           13%
 Observations                             13,036        12,841          13,036         13,010         13,010        13,036
 R-squared                                 0.908         0.907           0.909          0.908          0.908         0.908
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Week fixed eﬀects and municipio fixed eﬀects are
included in all columns. Each column replicates the regression in Table 3 and adds the interaction of a municipio characteristic
with the exposure to U.S. social distancing. The sample is the Week-9-to-21 panel of all municipios.




                                                              23
    Table 24 replicates Table 8, evaluating heterogeneity in the eﬀects of exposure to U.S. social
distancing based on the characteristics of U.S. counties, but includes municipios with no cases.
The results are similar in magnitude and significance to those in our main analysis, indicating that
dropping municipios with no cases does not substantially aﬀect the results.

                    Table 24: Results in Table 8 hold when all municipios are included
 Outcome: Mexico soc dist.                  (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)

 Exposure to U.S. soc dist.              0.032***        0.030***        -0.049**         -0.027*          0.022          0.034
                                          (0.005)         (0.004)         (0.022)         (0.016)         (0.067)        (0.050)
 Interact: % Hispanic                      -0.002
                                          (0.004)
 Interact: % Mexican                                      0.007*
                                                          (0.004)
 Interact: Hispanic education                                            0.007***
                                                                          (0.002)
 Interact: education                                                                     0.004***
                                                                                          (0.001)
 Interact: log Hispanic income                                                                             0.001
                                                                                                          (0.006)
 Interact: log income                                                                                                     -0.000
                                                                                                                         (0.004)
 Constant                                0.209***        0.209***        0.209***        0.209***        0.209***       0.209***
                                          (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)

 Mean (s.d.) of the interaction         0.29 (0.08)     0.22 (0.08)     10.3 (0.21)    13.1 (0.29)     10.9 (0.06)     11.2 (0.08)
 ˆ                                                          2%              6%             5%
 Observations                             13,036          13,036          13,036         13,036           13,036          13,036
 R-squared                                 0.91            0.91            0.91           0.91             0.91            0.91
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Week fixed eﬀects and municipio fixed eﬀects are
included in all columns. Each column replicates the regression in Table 3 and adds the interaction of a municipio characteristic
with the exposure to U.S. social distancing. The municipio characteristics are characterized by the type of U.S. counties they
are connected to. The sample is the Week-9-to-21 panel of all municipios.




                                                              24
D      Additional results for instrumental-variables analysis using stay-
       at-home orders
This section presents additional supporting evidence on the validity of the instrumental variables
results from Section 4. It shows the first-stage residual plot and the reduced form results of the
instrumental variables analysis using U.S. stay-at-home orders as an instrument for observed U.S.
social distancing.
    Figure 14 shows the proportion of U.S. states imposing stay-at-home orders since the beginning
of the pandemic. We use indicators for U.S. state-level stay-at-home orders as an instrument for
U.S. social distancing, as defined in equation 4.

                          Figure 14: The dynamic of stay-at-home orders in the U.S.




Note: This figure shows the share of U.S. states that have stay-at-home orders on a particular date. All 50 states and the District
of Columbia are included. Stay-at-home or shelter-in-place orders only include directives and orders, but not guidance, and
the order must apply to the entire states. According to this definition, 11 states never enacted the order, including: Arkansas,
Connecticut, Iowa, Kentucky, Nebraska, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas, Utah, and Wyoming. Similarly, the
end of the order must also apply to the entire state. See details of the definition at Raifman et al. [2020].




                                                               25
    Figure 15 shows the distribution of the exposure to U.S. stay-at-home orders faced by Mexican
municipios in Week 12, 15, 18, and 21. There is a great deal of variation in exposure to U.S.
stay-at-home orders across municipios and over time.

                        Figure 15: Variation in exposure to U.S. stay-at-home orders




Note: This figure shows the distribution of Mexican municipios’ exposure to stay-at-home orders in the United States, in Week
12, 15, 18, and 21. The sample is restricted to municipios that have at least one covid case by the end of Week 21 and have
non-missing measures of social distancing in the corresponding week.




                                                             26
    Table 25 performs a similar analysis to the one presented in Table 5, but at the U.S. county
level rather than the municipio level, demonstrating the determinants of social distancing behavior
in the U.S.

 Table 25: Predicting the social distancing in the U.S., Week 9 to Week 21, around 2,570 counties
                                                         (1)            (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)
        Outcome: U.S. soc distancing                        Facebook measure                      Unacast measure


        Shelter-in-place order in the state, U.S.      0.14***        0.13***   0.13***   0.17***     0.16***    0.16***
                                                       (0.001)        (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.01)     (0.001)    (0.001)


        Employment share controls                        No            Yes       Yes        No          Yes         Yes
        Commuting share controls                         No             No       Yes        No          No          Yes
        Observations                                   33,411         33,411    33,411    33,411      33,411      33,411
        R-squared                                        0.27          0.33      0.33       0.26       0.32        0.33
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The thirteen industries include: agriculture,
construction, manufacturing, wholesale, retail, transportation, information, finance, professional, education, arts, public admin-
istration, and other services. The means of transportation include: (1) car, truck, or van; (2) public (excluding taxicab); (3)
taxicab; (4) motorcycle; (5) bicycle; (6) walked; and (7) worked at home.




                                                                 27
    Figure 16 shows the first-stage residual plot corresponding to Column (1) of Table 5, showing
a strong positive relationship between exposure to U.S. social distancing (1) and the stay-at-home
exposure instrument (4).


                          Figure 16: First-stage residual plot of Table 5 Column (1)




Note: This figure is the residual plot of Table 5 Column (1).




                                                                28
    Table 26 presents reduced-form regressions using the stay-at-home exposure instrument (4),
showing a positive relationship between exposure to U.S. stay-at-home orders and Mexican social
distancing.

Table 26: Reduced form evidence: exposure to U.S. stay-at-home orders positively aﬀected Mexican
social distancing
          Outcome: Mexican social distancing                       (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)

          Exposure to U.S. stay-at-home orders                0.013**      0.013**        0.011**        0.011**
                                                              (0.005)      (0.005)        (0.005)         (0.005)
          Exposure to log U.S. cum. cases                                 -0.010***                     -0.012***
                                                                           (0.003)                        (0.003)
          Log cum. cases Mexican muni.                                                    0.016***       0.016***
                                                                                           (0.001)        (0.001)

          Observations                                        10,051        10,051         10,051         10,051
          R squared                                            0.91          0.91           0.92           0.92
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Week fixed eﬀects and municipio fixed eﬀects
are controlled in all columns. The mean (s.d.) of the exposure to U.S. stay-at-home orders is 0.54 (0.36), and the mean (s.d.)
of Mexican social distancing is 0.21 (0.15). The sample is the Week-9-to-21 panel of municipios with at least one Covid-19 case
by the end of Week 21.


    Table 27 replicates Table 5 in our instrumental variables analysis including controls for stay-at-
home orders imposed in Mexican states that diﬀer from those imposed by the federal government.
The tables show that the first stage results are robust to the inclusion of these controls.




                                                              29
Table 27: First stage: municipios with larger exposure to U.S. stay-at-home policies were also more
exposed to U.S. social distancing
    Outcome: Exposure to U.S. social distancing                       (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)

    Exposure to U.S. stay-at-home orders                           0.274***      0.274***       0.274***      0.274***
                                                                    (0.017)       (0.016)        (0.017)        (0.016)
    Exposure to log U.S. cumulative cases                                        0.051***                     0.050***
                                                                                  (0.014)                       (0.014)
    Log cum. cases Mexican muni.                                                                0.006***       0.006***
                                                                                                 (0.002)        (0.002)
    Mexico state-level stay-at-home orders                         -0.039***     -0.044***     -0.040***        (0.004)
                                                                    (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)      0.006***
    Constant                                                       -0.157***     -0.449***     -0.165***      -0.452***
                                                                    (0.009)       (0.078)        (0.009)        (0.078)

    Observations                                                    10,051        10,051         10,051         10,051
    R-squared                                                        0.993        0.993           0.993          0.993
    First-stage F-statistic                                           614          622             613            621
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. This table replicates Table 5 by including
controls for Mexican state-level stay-at-home orders. Week fixed eﬀects and municipio fixed eﬀects are included in all columns.
The mean (s.d.) of exposure to U.S. social distancing is -0.02 (1.4), and the mean (s.d.) of the exposure to U.S. stay-at-home
orders is 0.54 (0.36). The sample is the Week-9-to-21 panel of municipios with at least one Covid-19 case by the end of Week
21.


    Table 28 replicates Table 6 including controls for stay-at-home orders imposed in Mexican states
that diﬀer from those imposed by the federal government (See Appendix B). The results are nearly
identical to those in Table 6.

                            Table 28: IV results confirm main findings in Table 3.
         Outcome: Mexican social distancing                        (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)

         Exposure to U.S. social distancing                   0.046**         0.045**       0.042**       0.0421**
                                                              (0.019)         (0.019)       (0.019)         (0.019)
         Exposure to log U.S. cum. cases                                     -0.012***                    -0.014***
                                                                              (0.003)                       (0.003)
         Log cum. cases Mexican muni.                                                       0.015***       0.016***
                                                                                             (0.001)        (0.001)
         Mexico state-level stay-at-home orders                0.003          0.004**         -0.001         0.001
                                                              (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)

         Observations                                          10,051          10,051        10,051        10,051
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. This table replicates Table 6 by including
controls for Mexican state-level stay-at-home orders. Week fixed eﬀects and municipio fixed eﬀects are included in all columns.
The sample is the Week-9-to-21 panel of municipios with at least one Covid-19 case by the end of Week 21. The exposure to
U.S. social distancing is instrumented with the exposure to U.S. stay-at-home orders in all columns.




                                                              30
