NEER WORKING

PAPER SERIES

UNEXPECTED INFLATION, REAL WAGES, AND
DETERMINATION IN UNION CONTRACTS

EMPLOYMENT

David Card

Working

Paper No. 2768

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Masaachusetta Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1988

This is a revised version of Princeton Industrial Relations Section Working
Paper Number 232, May 1988. I am grateful to seminar participants at Harvard
University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Princeton University
for comments and suggestions on this paper. I am also grateful to Thomas
Lemieux and Sarah Turner for research assistance. This research is part of
NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NEER Working Paper #2768
November 1988

UNEXPECTED INFLATION, REAL WAGES, AND EMPLOYMENT DETERMINATION
IN UNION CONTRACTS

ABSTRACT
This paper presents new microeconometric evidence on the
relevance of nominal contracting for employment determination in the
unionized sector.

Real wages in long term union contracts contain an

in prices
unanticipated component that reflects unexpected changes
and the degree of indexation.

These unexpected wage components

provide a convenient tool for separating the causal effects of wages
on employment from other endogenous sources of employment and wage
variation.
The empirical analysis of employment and wage outcomes among
collective agreements in the Canadian manufacturing sector reveals
that employment and wages are only weakly related.

When unexpected

the
changes in real wages are used as an instrumental variable for
contract wage, however, employment
to wages.

is

consistently negatively related

The results imply that the institutional structure of wage

determination has important effects on the cyclical characteristics
and persistence of employment changes.
David Card
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544

Unexpected Inflatjp. Real Wazes. and Emolovment Determination
In Union Contracts
What role do nominal wage contracts play in the determination of
employment and the characteristics

of the business cycle?

An influential

series of papers by Fisher (1977), Phelps and Taylor (1977), and Taylor
feature of the
(1980) suggested that fixed wage contracts are a central

link between employment and demand shocks.
fluctuations,

More recent models of macro

however, have downplayed the role of nominal wage rigidities.

Real business cycle models (for example, Kydland and Prescott (1982))
assume that supply and demand in the labor market are equilibrated at
Walrasian levels, and ignore the institutional structure of wage
determination.

Recent business cycle models in the Keynesian tradition,

the other hand, have shifted attention from nominal wage rigidities

on

to real

wage rigidities (e.g. Blanchard and Summers (1986)) or nominal price
rigidities (e.g. Mankiw (1985), Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987)).
The shift in interest away from models of nominal wage rigidity can be

attributed to two complementary forces.

On the theoretical side, there are

as yet no convincing explanations for the existence of nominally-fixedwage
contracts.

Many of the contracting models developed over the past decade

predict constant real wages or constant real earnings.1 More generally,
the existence of long-term attachments

in the labor market calls into

question the assumption that employment is allocated on the basis of

current

wage rates.

2

.
The notion that long-term contracts

introduce

some

the
flexibility into the relation between employment and wages lies behind
concise summary of the implications of these models is presented
by Fischer (1987, pp. 42-50).

paper.

point was made by Barro (1977) in a comment on Fisher's (1977)
A similar argument is pursued by Hall (1980).

2

recent literature on efficient wage bargaining (McDonald and Solow (1981),
Brown and Ashenfelter (1986), MaCurdy and Pencavel (1986)).
On the empirical side, the evidence in support of nominal contracting
models is also weak.

The simplest of these models assume that aggregate

demand shocks generate real wage changes that lead to movements along a
downward-slopingemployment demand schedule.

The weak aggregate

correlation between employment and real wages (Geary and Kennan (1982))
poses a serious threat to this chain of argument.

Even with micro-level

contract data, it has not been easy to establish a systematic negative
correlation between employment and real wages.

In fact, the absence of

such correlations was s major impetus to research on more sophisticated
implicit and/or efficient contracting models.3
This paper presents new microeconometric evidence on the relevance of
nominal contracting models to employment determination
sector of Canadian manufacturing.
escalated contracts,

in the unionized

Using s large sample of fixed wage and

I find strong support for the implications of a naive

contracting model: unexpected changes in prices over the course of a
contract lead to unanticipated real wage changes that in turn generate
systematic employment responses.

Furthermore, real wage losses or gains in

one contract spill over to subsequent ones.

Thus, unanticipated price

changes generate persistent real wage changes and persistent employment
responses in the union sector.
In fact, unanticipated real wage changes play a central role in the
empirical

analysis.

A difficulty that arises in any study of employment

3See for example the papers by Hall and Lilien (1979) and McDonald and
Solow (1981).

3

and wages is the fact that the two
labor market.4

variables

are Jointly determined in the

With micro-level data the problem is particularly severe:

many components of employment variation that appear as random to an outside
observer are perfectly predictable to the parties involved.
that these components also influence wage determination,

To the extent

they impart a

simultaneity bias to the partial correlation of employment and wages.
Unanticipated real wage changes that occur during the term of fixed-wage or
partially indexed contracts provide a potential solution to this
simultaneity problem.

By construction,

these changes are correlated with

wages but uncorrelated with omitted variables that effect the expected
component

of real wages.

They therefore form an ideal instrumental

variable for a structural analysis of employment demand.
The empirical analysis confirms the usefulness of this approach.
Controlling for industry demand conditions, employment is only weakly
correlated with the level of contract wages.

When unexpected teal wage

changes are used as an instrumental variable for contract wages, however,

employment is systematicallynegatively related to wages.

These findings

are consistent with a very simple structural model, in which nominal wages
are set in anticipation of future demand conditions,

determined ex-post on the demand curve for labor.

and employment is

While the theoretical

underpinnings of such a naive model are currently lacking, the evidence
suggests that they are a worthwhile topic of further research.

4Kennan (1988) presents an illuminating analysis of the difficulties
that arise in the interpretationof aggregate employment and wage data when
these data are generated by even simple models of demand and supply.

4
I. Emolovment
a.

and Wases in a

Sirnole

Model of Lona Term Contracts

Interpreting the Correlation of Employment and Wases
This section presents a simple model of long term contracting in which

nominal wages are pre-determined,

and employment is set unilaterally by the

firm after aggregate prices and firm-specific demand shocks are observed.
Even in this simple model, the interpretation of the partial correlation of
employment and real wages is clouded by the fact that the contracting
parties may have better information on future demand shocks than is
available

to an outside data analyst.

To develop this point more formally,

suppose that wages are negotiated in some base period (period 0) for a

contract of duration T.

Let n(t) and w(t) denote the logarithms of

employment and real wages in period t of the contract, respectively,
assume that hours per worker are fixed.

The notion of

and

"nominal

contracting" is captured by the assumption that the bargaining parties do
not set w(t) directly:
increases

rather, they establish a series of nominal wage

from the start of the contract, possibly in conjunction with an

indexation formula.5
conditional

Let w*(t) represent the parties' expectation of w(t),

on their information in the negotiating period, and let u(t)

w*(t).

represent

the forecast error w(t)

-

obviously

depend on the length of

the contract,

The distribution of u(t) will
and on whether or not it

contains a cost-of-living escalation clause.6
5The nature of typical indexation formulas in North American labor
contracts is described in Card (1983). The only case in which the real
wage is set directly by the parties is the case of a contract in which
nominal wages are indexed to the consumer price level with a formula that
increases the wage by one percent for each percent increase in prices.
Such formulas are extremely rare, particularly in the manufacturing sector
of the U.S. and Canada.
6This point is made by Hendricks and Kahn (1987).

5

Assume that n(t) is determined from an employment demand schedule of the
form
(1)

n(t)

—

a

z(t)

+

$

w(t)

+

e(t),

where z(t) is a vector of observable variables shifting the demand for

represents

labor, $

the elasticity of labor demand ($

unobservable component of employment variation.

<

0), and e(t) is an

The precise specification

of z(t) and the corresponding interpretation of $ are discussed in the next
Note that supply considerations are explicitly ignored: there are

section.

assumed to be enough available workers to fill the firm's demand,
irrespective

of wages.

Implicitly then, the contractual wage is assumed to

be high enough to ensure a perfectly elastic supply of workers.
This simple model is completed by a specification of the determinants
of w*(t).

Assume that the expected real wage rate in period t is

determined at the negotiation date by variables known at that time, say
x(0), and by the parties' expectations

of z(t) and e(t),

Z*(t) and e*(t),

respectively:
w*(t) —

(2)

a z*(t)

+

b x(O) + c e*(t).

The realized real wage rate in the
w(t)

—

a z*(t)

+

th

b x(O)

period of the contract is therefore

+ c e*(t)

+

u(t).

The extent of simultaneity bias in ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates
of the employment determination equation (1) depends on the extent to which
the parties anticipate components of labor demand that are unobservable to
an outside observer or econometrician,

and on the extent to which these

anticipated components affect the negotiated wage rate.
e*(t) —

0

for all negotiations and all

informational

advantage

t,

On one hand, if

then the parties have no

and there is no simultaneity problem.

On the other

hand,

if c

—

0, so that

expected real wages are unaffected by higher or

lower expected levels of employment, then again there is no simultaneity
problem.

If the parties are better able to forecast employment than an

outside observer,

however,

and if higher forecasted employment leads to an

increase in negotiated wage rates, then real wage rates will be positively

correlatedwith the econometric error e(t) in the employment equation, and
estimates of the partial correlation between wages and employmentwill be

positively biased.
Irrespective of the parties' wage setting behavior,
may be consistently
unanticivated

the elasticity fi

estimated by considering the correlation between

wage rates and employment outcomes.

forms an ideal instrumental variable for w(t):

The forecast error u(t)

by definition, it is

correlated with the realization of wages and uncorrelated with information
svailsble

to the psrties at the time of their negotiations.

Additional

instrumental variables may also be available if there are determinants of

negotiated wages which may be legitimately excluded from the employment
determination equation (the variables denoted as x(O) in the wage
determination equation above).

Assuming that the forecast error u(t) is

always an appropriate instrument,
restrictions

it

is possible to test the exclusion

implicit in the use of other candidate instrumental variables

by conventional over-identificationtests.
Even in the frsmework of this simple model, however, there are two
circumstances

in which the correlation between unexpected real wage changes

and employment levels may not provide useful information on the elasticity
of labor demand.

The first is the case in which the forecast error in real

wages is correlated with unobservable determinants of labor demand.

This

7
may arise, for example, if aggregate price increases signal increases in
demand thet lead directly to increases in employment.

A

simple way to

control for this possibility is to include consumer price increases
directly in the employment equation, and to use variation across contracts
in the degree of wage indexation to separately identify the effects of
unanticipated wage changes and aggregate price changes.
A second, potentially more serious difficulty may arise if employment
adjustment is costly, and if unexpected changes in real wages during the
term of a contract are immediately offset in subsequent negotiations.

In

this case, one would not expect to observe significant employment responses
to unexpected real wage changes occurring at the end of a contract,
these changes are inherently

short-lived.

since

In the empirical analysis

reported below, I examine this question and find that the negotiated wage
rates in the subsequent contract are positively correlated with the level

of real wages at the end of the previous contract.

Thus, unexpected

the cost of
changes in real wages generate persistent effects on

contractual labor, and should be expected to generate significant
employment effects if the demand elasticity is nonzero.

1.

Specification of the Employment Demand Function
This section discusses the specification of the employment demand

function (1) introduced above.

An important limitation of the contract-

based data set used in the empirical analysis is the absence of firm-

specific price or

output data.

Selling prices, intermediate input prices,

and output indexes are available at the three-digit industry level.

Under

certain conditions, these industry-level data may be used as proxies for

B
the underlying firm-specific variables.

resulting empiricsl specification,
three factors:

To derive an interpretation of the

suppose that output is produced from

labor, capital, and intermediate inputs (raw materials

and

Ignoring firm-specific constants, assume that the logarithm of

energy).

employment in a given firm in a particular industry in period

ia

t, n(t),

related to the logarithm of firm-specific output, y(t), the logarithm of
the logarithm of firm-specific

non-labor input

firm-specific

wages, w(t),

prices, v(t),

the user cost of capital in period t, r(t), (assumed to be

constant across firms and industries), and an error term q(t):
n(t) —

(3)

+

$1w(t)

-

fl2v(t)

(fl1+fl2)r(t) +

ay(t) + 1(t).

This equation can be interpreted as either a log-linear approximation

to an

arbitrary employment demand equation, or alternatively as an exact

demand function arising from an underlying Cobb-Douglas

employment

The restriction that the elasticities

production function.

of employment

demand with respect to the three factor prices sum to zero is a consequence

of the homogeneity of the cost function.

This restriction implies that the

equation is invariant to the deflator used to index wages and other factor
prices. The magnitude

of the coefficient a reflects the extent of returns

to scale: the assumption of constant returns to scale, for exsmple, implies
a—l.

Let

represent the logarithmof industry level output in period

(t)

and let

(t) and

(t) represent weighted averages of wages and

intermediate input prices in the industry.
the
(4)

fin's relative share of
y(t)

-

j'(t)

—

t,

1('ti(t)

-

Ignoring constants, assume thst

overall industry output can be written as

i(t))

+

-

2(v(t)

v(t))

+ e(t).

9

This equation can be derived by assuming that firms with identical CobbDouglas production functions act as price takers with respect to firm-

specific selling prices.7 Alternatively, equation (4) can be interpreted
as an approximation to the output share equation arising from a simple
In either case, the error

differentiated product oligopoly model.

component e(t) represents a combination of firm-specific relative demand
shocks and firm-specific productivity shocks.
The combination of equations

and (4) leads to an expression for

(3)

firm-specific employment in terms of firm-specific wages, industry level
output and intermediate input prices, the cost of capital, end industry
wages:
(5)

n(t) —

(fl1+a71)w(t)

+

2(t)

+ (fl2+c72)(v(t)-(t))

-

(fi1-4-2)r(t)

the coefficients

l

and

-

ci-y11(t)

÷ aE(t) + i(t).

Under the assumption that increases in
the ith firm lead to decreases

+ 1-(t)

the marginal

cost of production at

in its relative share of industry output,

are negative.

Thus,

the elasticity of

employment with respect to firm-specific wages, holding constant industry
output, is larger in absolute value than the elasticity holding constant
firm-specific

In fact, under

output.

7Specifically,

the

assumption of price taking

assumptions implies that the output

the

bb-Douglas
firm can be written as
supply equation of the i
y(t)

—

71w(t)

+

12v(t)

+

-y3r(t)

-(-y1+-y2+3)q(t)

÷ 9(t),

where q(t) is the selling price for the output of the firm and 9(t)
represents a total factor productivity shock. Define industry output as a
geometric weighted average of the outputs of the individual firms in the
Then aggregate output follows a similar equation, and equation
industry.
(4) can be derived directly, with
€(t) —

8(t)-9(t)

-

(1+-y2+y3)(q(t)-q(t).

10
behavior,

the implied elasticity is an estimate of the unconditional

elasticity of employment with respect to wages, allowing for the effect of
changes in wages on the output supply decision of the firm.

On the other

hand, the predicted elasticity of employment with respect to industry wages

is positive.

This reflects the assumption that as wages increase in the

industry as a whole, holding constant firm-specific wages, the firm's share
of industry output will rise.
Oespite the fact that industry-level output and intermediate input

prices are imperfect measures of

the corresponding

firm-specific

data,

equation (5) suggests that the estimated coefficients of these variables
are unbiased estimates

of the underlying elasticities of employment with

respect to output and intermediate

input prices.

The reasoning behind this

result is that the measurement errors that arise from using industry-level
data in place of firm-specific data are uncorrelated with the levels of the
industry variables.
industry-level

For example,

deviations of firm-specific

output from

output depend on firm-specific demand and cost shocks.

These shocks are in principle uncorrelatedwith the industry-averagelevel
of output.

Thus,

the implied regression coefficient of firm-specific

output on industry-level output in equation

(4)

is unity.

directly that the regression coefficient of firm-specific
industry output in equation

(5)

It follows
employment on

is the output elasticity a.

The specification of equation

(5) leads

to a direct interpretation of

the error component in employment demand e(t) introduced in the previous
section.

According to (5), the stochastic component of employment demand

consists of 3 terms: one term reflecting the deviation of firm-specific
from industry-averageintermediate input prices; one term reflecting the

11

combination of relative demand shocks and relative productivity shocks in
the output share equation (4); and a third term reflecting firm-specific

employment productivity shocks.
share firm-specific
significant

productivity shocks).

It seems quite likely that a

fraction of this econometric error is predictable to the

parties involved in the contract.
the estimated

The potential for simultaneity bias in

elasticity of employment demand is therefore accentuated by

the lack of firm-specific

c.

(The second and third terms therefore

output and price data.

Allowing for the Presence of Efficient Contracting
The specification of equation (3) reflects the assumption that intra-

contract employment levels are determined by the firm, taking the wage rate
as given.

Except under very special circumstances, however, unilateral

employment determination by the firm does not generate an optimal
allocation of employmentbetween contractual and extra-contractual
opportunities.8

For this reason, the empirical relevance of simple nominal

contracting models has been sharply questioned
example).

(see Sarro (1977) for

The optimal determination of contractual employment is formally

addressed in the implicit contracting literature (see the survey by Rosen
(1985)) and, under somewhat different

contracting literature.9

guise, in the more recent efficient

The basic point of both literatures

jointly optimal employment contract

(i.e.

is that a

one that maximizes profit subject

8As noted by Hall and Lilien (1979), these circumstances are
that the wage rate equals the marginal product on extra-

essentially
contrsctual

opportunities.

9See McDonald and Solow (1981) for a theoretical statement and Brown
and Ashenfelter (1986) for a concise summary of the empirical implications
of simple efficient contracting models.

12

to a utility constraint for workers) will determine employment on the basis
of a shadow wage that differs from the contractual wage.

The very simplest

contractual modal with homogeneous workers and unrestricted transfer

payments between employed and unemployed workers implies that the
appropriate

shadow wage is simply the marginal productivity of workers in

their best alternative job.

Brown and Ashenfelter

(1986) refer to this as

the "strong form" efficient contracting hypothesisJ°

In view of the ad hoc nature of simple contracting models with
employment determination, it is important to verify that the

unilateral

assumptions underlying such a model are valid.

Any test against the

alternative hypothesis of efficient contracting, however,
specification
employment.

requires a

of the appropriate shadow wage for the allocation of

A

simple hypothesis

is that the shadow wage is a weighted

average of the observed contract wage and some measured alternative wage.
This hypothesis

can be motivated formally by assuming that employees'

preferences are represented by a Cobb-Douglas utility function defined over
employment and the difference between the contractual wage and the
it can be viewed as a convenient

alternative

waga)1

statistical

framework for nesting the alternatives of the unilateral

Alternatively,

employment determinationmodel imbedded in equation (3) and the strong form
efficient

contracting model.

It is important to keep in mind, however,

that this simple procedure cannot provide a definitive test of efficient
versus "inefficient" contracting, since some specifications

of an efficient

10Sae Abowd (1987) for an attempt to test this hypothesis using stock
market data on negotiating firms.

See

Brown and Ashenfaltar (1986, page S54).

13

contracting model

imply that

the shadow wage is simply a constant fraction

of the contract wage,'2 and in any case the appropriate definition of the
alternative wage is open to interpretation.

Nevertheless,

useful evidence for or against a specification such as
alternative

is an empirically

(3),

it can provide
when the

testable version of the efficient contracting

hypothesis.

II. Data DescriDtion and Measurement
The empirical

Framework

analysis of employment and wages in this paper is based

on a sample of 1293 contracts negotiated by 280 firm and union bargaining
pairs in the Canadian manufacturing

sector.13

The available information

for each contract includes its starting (or effective)
expiration)

date, and the base wage rate in each month of the contract.14

Unfortunately,
available

the number of employees covered by the agreement

at renegotiation dates.

with the expiring agreement.
of-contract

date, its ending (or

is only

I associate this level of employment

Thus, each sample point consists of an end-

employment observation and

a

series of wages, including the

beginning-of-contractand end-of-contract wage rates.

12See MaCurdy and Pencavel

To this set of

(1986, page Sl3).

13chistofides and Oswald's (1987) analysis is based on a sample
A complete description of the sample and its
derived from the same source.
derivation is presented in the Data Appendix.
14The base wage rate is typically the wage paid to the lowest-skill
In some contracts,
group covered by the collective bargaining agreement.
the base rate refers to the rate for a more highly skilled occupation group
(such as assemblers in the automobile industry). An important assumption
for the analysis in this paper is that variation over time in intracontract wage differentials is small enough to be safely ignored.

14
contract observations

I have merged a variety of aggregate,

industry-

specific, and regional data.

Some summary characteristics

of the data set are presented in Table

1.

The sample spans a 16 year period between 1968 and 1983, with a fairly even
distribution of contracta over years after 1970.
the contracts

The average duration of

is 26 months, although durations vary somewhat by year, with

relatively short contracts in the mid-1970's.

The fraction of contracts

with escalation clauses shows a steadily increasing trend until the mid1970's and then varies erratically, with an overall average of 33 percent.

Some indication of the trends in employment and wages in the sample is
provided by the indexes in columns

(4) and (5)

of the table.

15

Real wages

among expiring contracts show significant growth until 1977, then remain
relatively constant.

Average employment shows no secular trend, but

reflects cyclical downturns

in 1971, 1975, and 1983.

The available employment measure is a crude one.
contract-to-contract

Nevertheless,

changes in employment are significantly correlated

with industry-level changes in real output over the same period (the simple
correlation coefficient over 1293 observations is .18).

This correlation

suggests that at least a fraction of the rather large variation in

contract-to-contractemployment changes consists of signal, rather than
noise.

The empirical strategy in this paper is to fit employment equations
based on equation (5) to end-of-contract observations on employment and

15The wage and employment indexes represent year-effects from
regression equations for contract-to-contract changes in end-of-contract
wages and employment. These indexes therefore control for the composition
of the set of expiring contracts in each year.

15

wages for each contract.
homogeneous

Assuming that the employment demand function

of degree zero in factor pricea, the empirical analyais is

invariant to the choice of deflators
prices.

is

for wagea and intermediate input

As the discussion in Section Ia suggests, however, it is

particularly convenient to work with wages in real terms, deflated by the
consumer price index.

In the remainder of the paper, wages and industry

prices are therefore expressed in real terms.
The real wage rate at the end of each contract (including any
contingent payments generated by a cost-of-living

escalator)

is measured

As pointed out in the previous section, this rate will

directlyJ6

generally differ from its expectation as of the negotiation date of the

contract by a component that depends on the indexation provisions of the
contract and the deviation between actual and expected prices at the end of

Let w*(T) represent the expected value of the logarithm of

the contract.

the real wage at the end of the contract.
logarithm

In a nonindexed contract,

the

of the actual real wage rate at the end of the contract, w(T), is

related to w*(T) by
(6)

w(T)

—

w*(T)

-

(p(T)

-

p*(T)),

where p(T) represents the logarithm of the consumer price index at the end
of the contract, and p*(T) represents

the parties'

expectation of p(T),

formed T months ago during negotiations over the current contract.
In an indexed contract, unexpected changes in prices generate unexpected
changes in real wage rates
incomplete.

if and only if the degree of indexation is

For example, if an escalation clause increases nominal wages

16The wage data used in this paper has been carefully checked for
changes in base rate definitions and misreporting of cost-of-living
See the Data Appendix.
payments.

16
by e percent for each one-percent increase in the consumer price index,
then w(T) and w*(T) are related by
(7)

w(T)

— w*(T)

Most escalated contracts

(l-e)(p(T)

-

-

p*(T)).

in North American labor agreements do not specify

a fixed elasticity of indexation)7 Instead, they specify a fixed absolute
wage increase per absolute point increase in consumer prices.

Some

agreements also specify a minimum price increase that must occur before
indexation begins, and/or a maximum wage increase that can be generated by
In such contracts, the elasticity of indexation

the escalation clause.

varies over the term of the contract, and may be zero for some range of
price increases.

Nevertheless,

equation (7) is approximately

correct for

an interval of prices around p*(T), where e is defined as the marginal
elasticity of indexation evaluated at the expected level of prices at the
end of the contract.
Given an estimate of the elasticity of indexation, &,

and an estimate

of the parties' expected price level at the end of the contract, (T), it
is possible to decompose the actual real wage rate at the end of a contract
into an estimate of its expected component, 4(T), and an estimate of its
unexpected component:
ü(T)

—

w(T)

-

4(T)

—

w(T)

-

4(T),

where

Using

(1

-

the definition of 4(T),

a)(p(T)

-

the estimated unexpected component

of real

wages can be written as:

175ee Card (1983) for a descriptive analysis of cost-of-living
escalation clauses among collective bargaining agreements in Canada.

17
(8)

ft(T)

—

u(T)

-

(

-

e)(p(T)

-

p*(T))

+

(1

-

a)((T)

This estimate differs from the true value u(T) by two terms:

-

p*(T)).

one of whith

depends on the differente between the actual and measured elasticity of

indexation (and is therefore identically zero in a non-indexed contract);
the other of which depends on the difference between measured price

expectations and the parties' true expectations.
are orthogonal to any factors that might otherwise

Provided that these terms
induce a correlation

between employment and real wages, however, the estimated forecast error
11(T)

may be used as a legitimate instrumental variable for the level of

wages at the end of the contract.
In this paper

I

use a naive forecasting model to form estimates

of the

expected price level at the end of the contract, based on the average rate
of inflation over the 12 months prior to the negotiation date.18

I have

experimented with other forecasting equations, including one that uses
estimated

coefficients based on the 10 most recent years of data prior to

the contract negotiation,

and found little difference between them.

Column 6 of Table 1 reports average forecasting errors in the end-ofcontract price level.

The average forecast error is 1.2 percent,

but

varies considerably by year, ranging from 7.0 percent for contracts
expiring in 1974 and 1975, to -4.5 percent for contracts expiring in 1971.
The other ingredient in the calculation of unexpected real wage changes
is the elasticity of indexation

e.

In the absence of precise information

on the actual indexation formulas in the sample, I use the ratio of total
18The forecasting equation predicts the one-year ahead inflation rate
at the negotiation date t as .0144 + .7858 DP(t-12), where DP(t-l2) is the
actual percentage change in prices over the preceding 12 months. The two
and three-year ahead inflation rate forecasts generated by this equation
are .021 + .693 DP(t-12), and .026 + .6135 DP(t-12), respectively.

18

escalated increases over the life of the contract to the total increase in
consumer prices over the life of

the

contract as an estimate of e.

This

measure is reasonably accurate for contracts with no restrictions on the
escalation formula.

For contracts

that restrict the escalation clause by

specifying a minimum price increase before the start of indexation, or a
delay in the start of indexation until the second or third year of the
contract,
introduces

or a maximum allowable escalated increase, this measure
some noise into the calculation of 11(T).

As the formulas in equations
end-of-contract

(6)

and (7) imply, forecasting errors in

real wage rates are strongly negatively correlated with

forecast errors in prices.

The annual averages of the forecast errors in

real wages in column 7 of Table 1 are close to mirror images of the
associated price forecasting errors.
are dampened,
contracts.
contracts

The forecasting errors in real wages

however, by the indexation provisions of the escalated

The average estimated elasticity of indexation among indexed
is .50, implying that the forecast errors in real wages among

these contracts are about one-half as large as the corresponding
errors in prices.

Interestingly,
wages

forecast

19
the average forecast error in end-of-contract

real

is strongly negatively correlated with the employment index in column

(5) (the correlation coefficient

over 16 annual observations

implied regression coefficient of employment on unanticipated
changes is -.70, with a standard error of .27).

is

-

.54;

the

real wage

This provides some

19The forecast error in end-of-contract real wages is -(l-e)p, where p
is the forecast error in end-of-contract prices, and e is the elasticity of
indexation.
The average forecast error in real wages is therefore
-(l-e)p + covarisnce(e,p), where e is the average elasticity of indexation
and p is the average forecast error in prices.

19

evidence that contractual employment outcomes are negatively related to
unexpected changes in real wages. By comparison, employment is poaltively
correlated with the level of real wages as measured by the index in column
(4).
correlations between employment and wages are

Contract-specific

reported in Table
consecutive

2.

contracts

The data are measured as first differences over
for the same sample of negotiations

used in Table 1.

Also presented in the table are correlations of contract-specific
employment and wage outcomes with two meaaures of outside wages: the
measured in the
average real wage rate in the same (2-digit) industry,
expiration month of the contract; and the average real wage for unskilled
non-production laborers in the same province, measured in the expiration
year of the contract2°
The simple correlations in Table 2 reveal several important features of
the contract-level data.

First, changes in employment are only weakly

negatively correlated with changes in end-of-contract real wage rates.
Second, the correlations between employment and outside wages are of
similar magnitude to the correlations
wages.

between employment

and contract

Third, changes in employment are more strongly negatively

correlated with changes in the unexpected component of real wages.

Thus,

the OLS estimate of the elasticity of employment with respect to contract
the corresponding instrumental
wages is much smaller in absolute value than
variables

estimate,

formed using unexpected

changes in real wages as an

20The provincial wage is measured from data collected annually by
Labour Canada in its area wage survey. Data in this survey is collected by
in each province as a
city. I have used the wage rate for the largest city
measure of the province-specific wage. See the Data Appendix.

20

instrumental variable.

The OLS estimate is

-

.19, with a standard error of

.08, while the instrumental variables estimate is

error of

.18.

-

.70,

with a standard

As will be seen below, this pattern continues to hold when

other covariates are added to the employment determination

equation.

III. The Effect of Previous Wage Rates on Subsequent Wage Determination
this

As a preliminary step in the analysis of employment determination,

section presents a brief summary of estimated wage determination equations
for the ssmple of collective bargaining contracts introduced above.

The

main purpose of this analysis is to identify the effect that the level of
reel wages at the end of the preceding contract exerts on subsequent wage
determination.
contracts

A finding of significant spillover effects between

implies that unexpected changes in real wages have persistent

effects on the costs of contractual labor.

A finding of insignificant

spillover effects, on the other hand, implies that these changes are shortlived.

The degree of persistence in unexpected wage changes, in turn, is

important

for assessing

the magnitude of the effect that these changes will

exert on employment determination.
The analysis is based on two alternative measures of negotiated wages:
the real wage at the start of the contract; and the expected average real

wage over the term of the entire contract.

In the presence of adjustment

costs, the wage at the start of the next contract is particularly relevant
for employment setting behavior in the last few months of an existing
agreement.

By comparison, the expected average real wage over the next

contract gives a longer-term measure of the costs of contractual
employment.

21

A

convenient statistical framework for analyzing the determinants of

wages is a simple components-of-variance

+ b

—

(8)

+

model of the form:
+

A

w(T)i11

w.1

where w.. represents the measure of contractual wages (either the real wage
at the start of the contract, or the expected average real wage over the
life of the contract) for the 1th contract of the ith firm,
permanent firm-specific component of wage variation,

Xii

e

represents

represents

a

a

vector of determinants of wages (measured at the negotiation date),

w(T)i11

and
represents the real wage at the end of the previous contract,

represents a contract-specific

component of variance.

and A can be estimated by taking contract-to-contract

-

—

(9)

Awii

w.11

—

b

Ax1

+

The parsmeters b

first differences:
+

A

Aw(T)i11

Conventional least-squares estimates of the first-differenced
may be inappropriate,

however,

wage equation

if there is any correlation between the real

wage at the end of the (11)5t contract and the error component

in

-

the first-differenced

wage equation.

This problem is

the lagged change in
readily overcome by using instrumental variables for

ending real wage rates.21

Suitable instruments include the first-

difference in the unexpected component of ending real wages and any
exogenous

components of

Axiii.

First-differencing

also introduces

a

from the
moving average error component into consecutive employment changes
in
same hargaining pair. The estimated standard errors and test statistics
the table therefore

allow for first-order residual correlationbetween

.
the effect of a
problem is very similar to one of estimating
data model: see Holtz-Aitken, Newey,
variable
in
a
panel
dependent
lagged
and Rosen (1987).
21

This

.

22

observations from the same pair,

as

well as arbitrary conditional

heteroskedasticity.

Estimation results for the first-differenced wage determination
equation

(9)

are reported in Table 3.

The first 4 columns of the table

report estimates using the real wage at the start of the contract as the
measure of wage outcomes, while the next 4 columns report estimates using
the first difference of the expected average real wage rate over the life

of the contract as the dependent variable.22

The components of

include
xii

the regional unemployment rate (measured in the effective month of the
contract),
effective

the real wage rate in aggregate manufacturing

(measured in the

month of the contract), the province-specificreal wage rate for

unskilled workers (measured in the effective year of the contract), and a
set of unrestricted year effects for the effective

date of the contract.

The addition of these year effects results in a significant improvement in
the fit of the wage equations,

although it does not alter the inferences

concerning the effect of previous wages. I have also estimated wage
equations

that include industry-level output and price variables.

variables

are only weakly related to negotiated wages, however,

These

and their

inclusion leads to very similar estimates for the other variables.
Columns (1) and (5) of Table 3 report OLS estimates
the two alternative

dependent variables, while columns

instrumental variables

(IV) estimates.

of equation
(2)

and

(6)

(9)

for

report

These various specifications all

22The expected average real wage in each month in the contract is
estimated by formulas analogous to equations (6) and (7), using estimates
of the expected price level in that month and estimates of the elasticity
of indexation as described above. The expected average real wage is an
unweighted average of expected monthly rates sampled at 6-month intervals
throughout the contract period, starting in the first month of the contract.

23
suggest that negotiated wagea are significantlypoaitively related to the
level of wages at the end of the preceding contract.

The OLS estimates

of

the coefficient A (in row 6.) differ somewhat for the two alternative

measures of the dependent variable, although the IV estimates are closer
together.

The last row of the table reports overidentificationtest

statistics for the instrumental variables
against the exclusion restrictions

in column

specification

(2).

estimators.

There is no evidence

implicit in the IV procedure for the

The test statistic for the specification in

column (6), on the other hand, presents mild evidence against these
restrictions.

In columns

(3)

and (7) the change in prices over the preceding contract

is introduced directly into the wage determination equation.

This addition

permits a test of the hypothesis that aggregate price increases

effect

future wage determination only to the extent that they affect the level of
real wages at the end of the preceding contract.

The estimated

coefficients in row 8. of the table provide no evidence against this
hypothesis.

Finally,

the specifications

in columns

(4)

and (8) relax the

assumption that the expected and unexpected components of the
end-of-contractwage
Perhaps surprisingly,
specification:

w(T)11

have the same effect on subsequent wages.23

there is no evidence against the restricted

the t-statistics for the hypothesis of equal coefficients

for the expected and unexpected components are 1.32 in column (4), and 1.22
in column (8).

23These equations are estimated using the change in prices over the
previous contract, the manufacturing wage at the effective date of the
previous contract, and year effects for the effective date of the previous
contract as instrumental variables for the expected and unexpected
components of real wages at the end of the previous contract.

24

In summary,

these

results suggest thst unexpected changes in wages have

persistent effects on the costs of contractual labor.

An unanticipated

one-percent decrease in real wages leads to spproximately

a one-third

percent lower real wage in the following contrsct.

even in the

Thus,

presence of costly employment adjustment, unanticipated changes in contract
wages provide a potentially useful mechanism for identifying the causal
effects of real wages on employment determination.

I)LThe Determinants of

Contractual

Employment

This section turns to eatimates of the contractual employment
determination equation (5).

The framework for the empirical analysis is a

components-of-variancemodel for the logarithm of end-of-contract
employment in the ith contract of the
(10)

+ a

—

+

nij

represents

In this equation,

th

firm

w(T)i
a permanent

(n):

+
firm-specific

effect,

zij

represents a vector of determinants of employment, measured at the end of
the contract,
contract,

wij(T)

and

represents

the real wage rate at the end of the

is a contract-specific

disturbance.

Assuming that

cii

industry output and prices are used as proxies for firm-specific
price data, the elasticity fi

of

output and

equation (10) is related to the underlying

parameters of the employment demand schedule (3) and the relative output
equation (4) by

fi

—

&l

+

25
Again, a convenient method for handling the pair-specific
take first-differences
—

(11)

a

across consecutive contracts, yielding

zij

In many previous studies,

+

fi

e.

+

w(T)1

employment outcomes have been found to follow a

—

partial adjustment equation of the form
n*ij

effects is to

(l

÷

-

n*ij

'-l

where

represents the optimal level of employment in the absence of

adjustment costs, as given by an equation such as (5).

Partial adjustment

is readily accommodated within the framework of equation (11) by the

addition of a lagged dependent variable.

In the present context, however,

the interval of observation on employment

outcomes is typically 24-36

months.

Thus, the extent of incomplete adjustment

is likely to be much

smaller than that observed in quarterly or annual data.

This issue is

addressed more thoroughly below.
Estimation results for the first-differenced employment equation are
presented in Tables 6 and

5.

Following

the discussion in section Ib, the

determinants of employment include the 3-digit industry input price
(deflated by the consumer price index), industry-level
end-of-contract

real wage rate.

real output, and the

Measures of the industry-level real wage

rate as well as a regional measure of workers' alternative wage rate are
included in the regressions in Table

5.

In addition, a lagged dependent

variable is included several of the specifications

in Table

5.

made any attempt to directly measure the user cost of capital.
that capital costs are constant across manufacturing

I have not

Assuming

industries, however,

variation in the user cost of capital is absorbed by the trends and/or time
effects in the empirical specification.

26
In order to capture partial adjustment phenomena,

and also to control

in part for the fact that industry output is measured annually,

the

employment equations in Tables 4 and 5 include industry output in both the
expirationyear of the agreement and the previous year.
experimentedwith specifications

I have

that also include wage rates and input

prices in the year prior to the expiration date, but the effects of these

variables are always poorly determined and small in magnitude.
The first two columns of Table 4 present OLS estimatea of the

employment equation with and without year effects for the expiration year
of the contract.

Employment is positively related to intermediate input

prices and positively related to both current and last year's level of
output.

The estimate of the elasticity of employment with respect to

output (the sum of the coefficients of the current and previous years'
output)

is substantially

scale in the framework

less than unity, implying increasing returns to

of equation

(3).

The addition of year effects

results in only a relatively small improvement in the fit of the employment
equations:

the probability value of an exclusion test for the year effects

is reported in row 8. of the table.
however,

The addition of the year effects,

substantially reduces the estimated effect of wages on employment.

Controlling

for year effects, employment

is virtually uncorrelated with

contract wages.
The point estimates of the elasticity of employment demand are
significantly

larger (in absolute value) when the end-of-contract

wage rate

is instrumentedby the unanticipated change in real wages over the term of
the contract.
(4)

of Table 4.

The results of this exercise are reported in columns

(3) and

Without year effects, the estimated elasticity rises from

27
-

.15 to

-

.28, although the estimated standard error

rises proportionately.

With year effects, the change in the point estimate is even more
remarkable:

from

.02

-

to

the OLS and IV estimates

-

.45.

A Hausman test of the difference between

is not significant at conventional

however, mainly as a consequence

levels,

of the imprecision of the IV estimator

when year effects are included in the employment equation.24
The IV estimators in columns (5) and (6) attempt to address this
imprecisionby expanding the list of instrumental variables for the end-ofcontract real wage rate to include year effects for the signing date of the
contract and the aggregate real wage in manufacturing in the starting month
of the contract.

The addition of the extra instruments increases the

magnitude of the point estimates of the elasticity of demand slightly, and
results in some improvement

in the precision of the estimates.

The

overidentificationtests for the consistency of the instrument sets are
well below conventional significance levels: the probabilityvalues of
these teats are reported in row 9. of the table.
these extra instrumental variables,

however,

Even with the addition of

the estimated elasticity of

labor demand from the equation with year effects is only marginally
significant.
estimated

Nevertheless,

a Hausman test of the difference between the

demand elasticities in columns 1 and 5 is significant at the 1

percent level, while a test of the difference between the estimated
elasticities

in columns 2 and

6

is significant at the 10 percent level.

simple Hausman test procedure cannot be applied to the estimates
in Table 4 because the OLS estimates are not fully efficient under the null
hypothesis of no simultaneity bias, given the serial correlation and
heteroskedasticityof the residuals.

28
These findings suggest that the OLS estimates of the elasticity of
employment demand are significantly positivelybiased.
The final columns of Table 4 present estimated employment equations that
include the change in aggregate

consumer prices over the term of the

contract as an additional explanatory variable.

These equations

are

included as a check that the IV estimates are not biased by a direct
correlation between inflation rates and employment growth rates.
real wage rates, there ia no evidence of

Controlling for end-of-contract
such a correlation.

consistent with a

The contract data are therefore

simple structural model in which aggregate price changes lead to real wage
changes that lead to employment changes.
The effects of outside wage rates on contractual

determination are addressed in Table 5.

employment

The analysis

identified two alternative routes for this effect.

in section I

First, average wages in

the industry are expected to have a nositive effect on employment, as a
consequence of the fact that output is measured at the industry rather than
the firm level.

the alternative wage available

Second, wages representing

to employees are expected to have a negative effect on employment, if
In an

employment is influenced by efficient contracting considerations.
effort to distinguish between these hypotheses, I have included the
industry wage in columns

(1)

and (3) of the table, and a province-specific

wage for unskilled laborers in columns
measures are included in column

(2)

Both wage

(5).

The OLS estimates in columns (1) and
either outside wage measure.

and (4) of the table.

(2)

show no evidence of a role for

When the contract wage is instrumented,

however, the point estimate of the effect of industry-specific

wages riaea

29

substantially while the estimated effect of the regional wage measure
remains close to zero.

A similar pattern emerges in column

outside wage measures are included.
elasticities,
results.

it

is difficult

However,

(5)

when both

Given the imprecision of the estimated

to draw strong conclusions from these

the point estimates lend much stronger support to the

view that outside wages belong in the employment equation as a proxy for
the level of competitor's

relative costs than to the view that outside

wages belong in the employment equation as a proxy for the shadow value of
employees'

time.

If the former view is taken literally, the point

estimates in column

(3)

employment demand with respect to wages is

-

.33, while

output supply with respect to an increase in wages is

estimate of the output-constant
-

.2

to

-

elasticity of

suggest that the output-constant

-

the elasticity

of

.70.25 The implied

demand elasticity is consistent with the

.4 range of estimates generally obtained in the literature on

static employment demand (see Hamermesh (1986, pp. 451-454).

The question of whether these estimated employment equations are robust
to the inclusion

of Table

5.

differences,

of lagged employment is explored in the last two columns

Since the employment equations

are estimated

in first

and the correlation of consecutive first differences

of the

change in employment is biased downward by any measurement error in
employment,

the lagged value of industry output is added to the list of

instrumental variables

and lagged employment and real wages at the end of

25Recall from equation (5) that the elasticity of employment with
+
of employment with
respect to wages is
a1), while the elasticity
An estimate of a from column (3)
respect to industry average wages is a1
of Table 5 is .39 (the sum of the coefftcienta of current and last year's
output).
Using the other estimated coefficients from this equation leads
to the conclusions in the text.
.

30
The results show no

the contract are treated as jointly endogenous.

evidence of a direct role for lagged employment, once industry output,
input prices, and contract wages are included in the employment equation.
As mentioned earlier, this is perhaps unsurprising,
between consecutive observations
order of 2-3 years.

since the time lag

in this contract-baseddata set is on the

Over such an interval, the effects of partial

adjustment are likely to be smaller than over an interval of a quarter or
26
year.

The empirical results in Tables 4 and 5 lead to two main conclusions.
First, there is consistent

evidence that contractual employment outcomes

are negatively related to contractual wage rates.

correlationbetween end-of-contract

employment

Although the raw

and wages is small and

statistically insignificant, this is apparently a consequence of
simultaneity bias.
exogenous

variables

When unanticipated real wage changes and/or other
are used as instrumental variables for the end-of-

contract wage, the estimated employment elasticities are consistently
negative and stable in magnitude across alternative specifications.
Second, there is no evidence that contractual employment is related to
outside wage rates in a manner consistent with simple models of efficient
contracting.
measures,
wages.

While employment is uncorrelated with region-specific

however,

wage

it is weakly positively correlated with industry average

This positive correlation is consistentwith the hypothesis that

261n principle, the coefficient of the lagged dependent variable will
In view of the
depending on the duration of the previous contract.
imprecision of the estimated effects in columns (7) and (8) of Table 5,
however, I have not attempted to address this issue.
differ,

31
higher average industry wages lead to improvements in the firm's
competitive position and increases in employment.27

Conclusions
This paper studies the nature of employment determination
union contracts.

in long-term

A key aspect of these contracts, much emphasized in the

macroeconomics literature, is the fact that nominal wages are partly or
wholly pre-determined.

Real wage rates at the end of a contract therefore

contain unanticipated components that reflect unexpected changes in
consumer prices over the life of the contract and the degree of indexation
in the contract.

These unanticipated real wage changes provide a

convenient tool for separating the causal effect of wages on employment
determination from other ertdogenous sources of employment and wage
variation.

The empirical analysis is based on a large panel of collective
bargaining agreements from Canadian manufacturing.

In this sample,

contract-to-contractchanges in employment are only weakly related to
corresponding changes in contractual wages.

When unexpected changes in

real wages are used as an instnimental variable for wages, however,

employment is consistently negatively related to contract wages.

This

finding suggests that the characteristicallyweak correlations between
employment and wages reported in many previous studies may be due in part
to the endogenous determination of wages in the labor market.

Once this

endogeneity is taken into account, the results from this study suggest that

27The finding that firm-level employment is positively related to
industry average wages is also reported by Nickell and Wadhwani (1987).

32

employment and wages at the firm level are significantly negatively
related.

Two other findings emerge from the empirical analysis.

First,

unanticipated changes in prices generate changes in real wages not only
during the term of existing contracts, but also in subsequent agreements.
Second,

there is no evidence that contractual

employment

determination is

related to outside wage rates in a manner consistent with simple models of
efficient

contracting.

Rather, the empirical results suggest that

employment outcomes in union contracts are determined on a conventional
downward-slopingdemand schedule, taking the prevailing contract wage as
given.

These findings underscore

the importance of the institutional

structure of wage determination for the cyclical properties and persistence
of employment changes.

Data AnDendix
1.

Contract Samole
The contract sample is derived from the December 1985 version of Labour

Canada's Wage Tape.

This Tape contains information on collective

bargaining agreements covering more than 500 employees in Canada.

Starting

from the 2868 manufacturing contracts on the tape, I merged together
contract chronologies between the same firm and union covering different
establishments,

and eliminated contracts

than four contracts.

from bargaining pairs with fewer

These procedures yield a sample of 2258 contracts

negotiated by 299 firm and union pairs.
process and the characteristics

Further information on the merging

of the resulting sample are presented in

the Data Appendix to Card (1988) and in Tables 1 and 2 of that paper.
The employment data for this sample were then checked in two stages.
First, the number of workers covered in each contract was compared to the

number covered in the preceding and subsequent agreements.

Second, in

cases where the number of workers changed dramatically between contracts,
the contract summaries

in Labour Canada's Collective Bargaining Review

(Ottawa: Labour Canada Collective

Bargaining

Division) were consulted.

In

238 contracts, the employment counts recorded on the Wage Tape were found
to be in disagreement with the counts reported in the Collective
Review.
used.

Bargaining

In these cases, counts from the published contract summaries were
In caaes for which the set of establishments

covered by the contract

changed over time, contracts with inconsistent coverage were deleted from
the sample.

Of the 2258 contracts in the subsample of merged contracts,

valid coverage data are available for 1813 contracts

33

(80.3 percent).

34

of the

Checking

extremely

employment

greteful to him

data

was

performed by

Thomas Lemieux.

I

am

for providing me with these data.

In this paper, employment at the end of a contract is measured by the
number of workers covered by the subsequent agreement. Furthermore,

the

estimation procedures require informationon employment and wage outcomes
in the previous agreement, and on various industry and aggregate data which
are only available between 1966 and 1983.

The sample of contracts used in

this paper therefore consists of the subset of contracts in the initial
2258 contract merged subsample that satisfy the following criteria:
-(a)

information on at least one previous contracts

is available in the

sample.
(b) -information

on at least one subsequent contract is available in the

sample.

after
(c) the expiration dates of the current and previous contract are
January 1966 and before December 1983.
(d)

valid employment data are available for both the current and
preceding contract (i.e. valid counts of workers covered are
available for both the current and subsequent contracts).

2 Aesregate and Industry-levelData
The following

aggregate and industry-level

data were merged to the

contract sample.
(a) Consumer price index, all items, 1981—100.

January 1961 to

November 1985: Cansim D484000, from the 1985 Cansim University Base
Tape.

December 1985 to June 1986:

November 1986.

from the Bank of Canada Review,

35
(b) Average hourly earnings in manufacturing.
1983:

January 1961 to March

Cansim D1518, from the 1983 Cansim University Base Tape.

April 1983 to June 1986:

Cansim L5607, from the Bank of Canada

Review, various issues.

Data from April 1983 and later are

multiplied by 1.04035 to correct for the revision in the establishment survey.
(c) Average hourly earnings of nonproduction production laborers,

province.

by

Annual data on hourly earnings for selected occupations

are available for major cities.

I matched data for the following

cities to their respective provinces: Halifax, St. John, Montreal,
Toronto, Winnipeg, Regina, Edmonton, Vancouver.

The wage rates

used are listed as rates for "male general laborers" between 1966
and 1977, for "general laborers in service occupations" between
1978 and 1981, and for "nonproduction laborers" between 1982 and
1985.

Data for 1966-72 are from Wage Rates. Salaries, and Hours of

Labour (Ottawa: Canada Department of Labour), 1966-1972 editions.
Data for 1973-1986 are from Canada Year Book (Ottawa: Statistics
For contracts that cover two or more

Canada), various editions.

and
provinces I used a weighted average of Montreal, Toronto,
Vancouver rates with weights of .35, .55, and .10, respectively.
(d) Unemployment rates, seasonally adjusted.

For contracts in Quebec,

Ontario, and British Columbia I used the province-specific
unemployment rates for all workers.

For contracts in other

provinces I used the national average unemployment rate.
series used were: Quebec
D768648; British Columbia

Cansim D768478; Ontario

-

-

-

The

Cansim

Cansim D769233; all others

-

Cansim

36
D767611.

Data for January 1966-November 1983 were obtained from

the 1983 Cansim University Base.

Data for December 1983-December

1985 were taken from the Bank of Canada Review November 1986.
(e) Industry selling prices, input prices, and output.

Three-digit

industry level annual data for 1961-71 were taken from Statistics
Canada's Real Domestic Product By Industry 1961-71 (Ottawa,
Statistics Canada).

These data are classified by 1960 standard

industrial codes (SIC's).

Data on a 1971 SIC basis for 1971-83

were taken from the 1978 and 1984 issues of Gross Domestic Product

By Industry (Ottawa: Statistics Canada).

The 1960 and 1971 SIC

codes were then matched, and the price and output indexes spliced
using the 1971 observations from the two sources.

Of 65 3-digit

industries represented in the contract sample, there were a total
of 31 for which 3-digit level data was not available on
consistent basis.
used.

a

For these industries, 2-digit level data was

The publications report the value of gross output and

implicit price indexes for gross output and intermediate inputs.
These data were used to construct the value of real gross output
(the measure of "output" used in this paper).

Implicit price

indexes for gross output and intermediate inputs were deflated
by the annual average consumer price index to obtain real
selling prices and input prices used in the paper.
(f) Industry average hourly earnings.

Monthly two-digit industry-level

average hourly earnings data for the period January 1961 to March
1983 were taken from the 1983 Cansim University Base.

Earnings

data are unavailable for two industries: knitting mills, and

37
miscellaneous manufacturing.
clothing industries.
all manufacturing.
constructed by

For the former I used earnings in

For the latter, I used average earnings in
Wage rates for April-December 1983 were

index-linking wage rates from the new establishment

survey to the rates in the old survey using their values in March
1983.

Earnings data from the new survey for March-December 1983

were taken from Statistics Canada Emoloyment. Earnings, and Hours.

References
"Collective Bargaining and the Division of the Value of the
Abowd, John.
Enterprise." National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No.
2137, January 1987.
"Long Term Contracts, Sticky Prices, and Monetary
Policy." Jounal of Monetary Economics 3 (July 1977): 305-316.

Barro, Robert.

Blanchard, Olivier and Lawrence Summers.
"Hysteresis and the
NBER
Problem."
Macroeconomics Annual
European Unemployment
(1986):

15-78.

"Monopolistic Competition
Blanchard, Olivier and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki.
and the Effects of Aggregate Demand." American Economic Review
77 (September l987):647-666.
"Testing the Efficiency of Employment
Contracts." Journal of Political Econoy 94 (June 1986): S40-S87.

Brown, James and Orley Ashenfelter.

David.
"Strikes and Wages: A Test of a Signalling Model."
Princeton University Industrial Relations Section, Unpublished
Manuscript, February 1988.

Card,

"Costof Living Escalators in Major Union Contracts."
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 37 (October 1983): 34-48.

__________

"Efficient and Inefficient
Christofides, Louis and Andrew Oswald.
A Study Based on Canadian Contract Data." Oxford
Employment Outcomes:
Institute of Economics and Statistics, Applied Economics Discussion
Paper No. 37, November 1987.
Fischer, Stanley. "Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the
Optimal Money Supply Rule." Journal of Political Economy 85
(February 1977): 191-206.

"Recent Developments in Macroeconomics." NBER
___________
Number 2473, December 1987.
Paper
Working
Geary, Patrick and John Kennan. "The Employment-Real Wage Relationship:
An International Study." Journal of Political Economy 90 (August 1982):
854-871.

38

39
"Employment Fluctations and Wage Rigidity." Brookings
on Economic Activity 1 1980: 91-123.

Hall, Robert.

pers

"Efficient Wage Bargains Under Uncertain
Hall, Robert and David Lilien.
Supply and Demand." American Economic Review 69 (December 1979): 868879.

"The Demand for Labor in the Long Run." In Orley
Hamermesh, Daniel.
Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, Eds. Handbook of Labor Economics.
(Amsterdam: North Holland) 1986.
"Contract Length, Wage Indexation,
Hendricks, Wallace and Lawrence Kahn.
and Ex-Ante Variability of Real Wages." Journal of Labor Research B
(Summer 1987):

221-236.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, Whitney Newey and Harvey Rosen. "Wages and Hours:
Estimating Vector Autoregressions with Panel Data." Princeton
University Industrial Relations Section, Working Paper No. 222, June
1987.

Kennan, John. "An Econometric Analysis of Fluctuations in Aggregate Labor
Supply and Demand." Econometrica 56 (March 1988): 317-334.
'Time to Build and Aggregate
Kydland, Finn and Edward Prescott.
Fluctuations." Econometrica 50 (November 1982):1345-1370.
Mankiw, N. Gregory. "Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles: A
Macroeconomic Model of Monopoly." Quarterly Journal of Economics
100 (May l985):529-539.
McCurdy, Thomas and John Pencavel.
"Testing Between Competing Models of
Wage and Employment Determination in Unionized Markets." Journal of
Political Economy 94 (June 1986): S3-S39.
McDonald, Ian and Robert Solow. "Wage Bargaining and Employment."
American Economic Review 71 (December 1981): 896-908.
Nickell, Stephen and S. Wadhwani. "Financial Factors, Efficiency Wages
Employment: Investigations Using U.K. Micro-Data." London School of
Economics, Center for Labour Economics Working Paper No. 993, November
1987.

Edmund and John Taylor. "Stabilization Powers of Monetary
Policy under Rational Expectations." Journal of Political
Economy 85 (February 1977): 163-190.

Phelps,

Rosen, Sherwin, "Implicit Contracts: A Survey." Journal of Economic
Literature 23 (September 1985): 1144-1176.

table

1

rhrartsriqt1rq of Ernirine Contracts by Year:

Percent with

Nu.ber

Year

of
Contracts

Average
Duration

(1)

Escalation

Real Wage

Index'

Clause

1971=100

(2)

(3)

(4)

1968—1983

c/
Employment
Average Forecast Error
IndexP
1971=100
Prices
Real Wages
(5)

(6)

(7)
.1

1968

5

11.2

0.0

87.6

104.4

—.1

1969

23

21.9

0.0

89.5

101.8

—.8

.9

94.1

108.0

—2.0

1.8
3.8

1970

87

26.9

12.6

1971

68

29.0

17.6

100.0

100.0

—4.6

1972

76

26.3

14.4

104.6

103.6

—3.0

2.8

1973

90

28.9

11.1

104.8

103.3

1.1

—1.1

1974

82

29.4

28.0

104.5

110.4

7.1

—6.1

1975

92

26,9

32.6

106.2

105.9

7.0

—6.3

1976

104

25.6

52.9

115.2

108.1

1.9

—1.2

1977

113

23.7

50.4

118.9

105.7

—2.2

1.8

1978

134

22.1

27.6

118.5

105.6

.1

—.3

22.7

34.5

118.2

112.8

1.1

24.8

37.7

117.8

112.1

1.9

1979

81

—.9
—1.2

1980

114

1981

64

25.9

40.6

115.9

109.9

4.5

-3.3

1982

85

27,4

38.8

119.3

111.7

9.9

—3.8

1983

75

28.5

122.2

104.6

—.5

1.2

Overall 1293

25.9

———

———

1.2

—.9

Notes:

653

32t9

Sample consists of 1293 contracts in sanufacturing sector with usable
employuent data for current and previous contract and expiration dates
between 1966 and 1983 for the corrent and previous contract.

'Estisated wage index for level of real wages at the end of expiring
contracts.

'Estimated employment index for level of employment at the end of
expiring

contracts.

&"Average percentage difference between price level (real wage) at end of
contract and expected price level (real wage) as forecast at the
See text.
signing date of contract.

Table
Means and Correlations

2

of E.ployment and Wage Measures

(First—Differences

of Logarith.s)a/'

Correlation

with:

Real
Contract Wage
(End of Contract)

Mean

Standard
Deviation

-.017

.201

1.00

—.07

2. Rea1 Contract Wage
(End of Contract)

.052

075

- .07

1

3.

Industry Wage
(Expiration Month)

.045

.056

-.04

.59

4.

Provincial Wage

.044

.060

—.07

.51

—.004

.077

—.12

.45

.020

.077

.09

- .22

1.

Employ.ent
(End of Contract)

Employ.ent
(End of Contract)

00

(Expiration Year)
5.

Unanticipated Real Wage
Change Over contractP/

6.

Change in Consu.er Price
Index Over Contract

-

Notes:

/Sa.ple is described in Table
measured as first—differences

Percentage difference between

Sa.ple size is 1293. All variables
over consecutive contracts.

1.

are

real wage at end of contract and expected real
wage forecast at signing of Contract.

Table 3
Estimated Wage Determination Equations (First—Differences)
(standard errors in parentheses)
Real Wage
at Start of contract

xv"

01.5

1.

Year Effects

Expected Average
Real Wage During Contract

ivW

DLS

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yea

Yes

Yes

Yes

—.50

- .45

—.46

- .45

—.4T

(.12)

(.12)

(.12)

-.46
(.12)

—.38
(.12)

—.44
(.13)

.04
(.10)

.11
(.11)

.11
(.11)

.10
(.12)

.40
(.11)

4. Real Wage in Region

.02
(.05)

.04
(.04)

.04
(.04)

.03
(.05)

5. Real Wage at End of
Previous Contract

.48
(.03)

.36
(.05)

.35
(.07)

-——

-——

.46
(.08)

———

.41
(.06)

2. Regional Unemployment

Rate
3.

Real Wage in

Manofacturing

6. Expected Real
End

of

at

Wage
Previous Contract

at

7. Unexpected Real Wage
End
Previous contract

of
8. Change in Prices During
Previous Contract

9. Standard Error
10. OveridentificationW
Test (p—value)
Notes

(.13)

(.13)

-3D
(.12)

.31
(.12)

.26
(.12)

.04
(.05)

.01
(.05)

.02
(.05)

.01
(.05)

.25
(.03)

.41
(.06)

.35
(.07)

--—

-——

(.03)

-—-

.36
(.09)
.43
(.07)

(.03)

.039

.039

.039

.038

.038

———

.261

.273

.489

———

.039

.038

.038

.037

.016

.006

Sample is described In Table 1.
Sample size is 1293. All regressions
include a (first—differenced) linear trend. The mean and standard deviation
of the dependent variable in columns (1)—(4) are .050 and .066. The sean
and standard deviation of the dependent variable in columns (5(—(8) are .043
and .061. Standard errors are corrected for first—order moving average error
component and heteroakedasticity.
Win columns (2). (3), (6) and (7), instrumental variables for real waEe at the
end of the previous contract include 18 year effects, the real wage in manufacturing at the start of the previous contract, and the unanticipated change in
In columns (4) and (8) instrumental
real wages over the previous contract.
variables for expected real wage at the end of the previous contract include 18
year effects, the real wage In manufacturing at the start of the previous
contract, and the change in prices during the previous contract.

Test

The statistic is
for orthogonality of residuals and instruments.
distributed aa chi-squaredwith 19 degrees of freedom in columns (2). (3),
and (7), and with 18 degrees of freedom in columns (4) and (8).

(6)

Table 4
Estimated Employment

Determination

(First-Differeçj.

Equations

(standard errors in parentheses)

IV'

OLS

1.

Year Effects

2. Real Industry
Price

Input

(1)

(2)

No

Yes

IV"

(4)

(3)

No

Yes

(5)

)6)

(7)

No

Yes

No

(8)

Yes

.22
(.06)

.16
(.08)

.20
(.06)

.16
(.08)

.19
(.06)

.16
(.08)

.18
(.06)

.16
(.08)

3.

Real Industry Output

.20
(.07)

.29
(.09)

.22
(.07)

.28
(.09)

.23
(.07)

.28
(.09)

.23
(.07)

.28
(.09)

4.

Real Industry Output
(Previous Year)

.17
(.06)

.10
(.07)

.15
(.07)

.10
(.07)

.14
(.06)

.11
(.07)

.14
(.06)

.11
(.07)

5.

Real Wage at End of
Contract

—.15
(.08)

—.39
(.12)

—

.51

—.39

(.29)

(.14)

—.62
(.39)

in Prices

.03

(.10)

-.05

Contract

6. Change

During

7. Standard

Error

8. Test for Exclusion of
Year Effects (p—value)

.196

---

- .02
(.10)

.28

—

(.16)

45

—

(.35)

.194

.196

.195

.196

.196

.003

-—-

.006

———

.004

———

.004

.76

.97

.73

.96

10. Overldentification
Test (p—value)
Notes:

Sample

a

is described

in Table

(.14)

1.

size is 1293.

Sample
(first differenced) linear treod. The mean

.196

All regressions

and standard deviation of

.197

include
the

variable are —.017 and .201. Standard errors are corrected for
first—order moving average error component and heteroskedasticity.
dependent

!/'Inmtrentai variable for real

wage at end of contract is the unanticipated
in real wages during the contract.
Wlnstrumental variables for real wage at end of the contract include 18 year
effects, the real wage in manufacturing at the start of the contract, and the
unanticipated change in real wages during the contract.
'Test for orthogonalityof residuals and instruments. The statistic is
distributedas chi—squared with 19 degrees of freedom in all cases.

change

Table 5
Estimated

Employment Determination

Equations

(First Differences)

(standard errors in parentheses)

lV

IV

OLS

(4)

(5)

(6(

(7(

No

Yes

(l(

(2)

(3)

Yea

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

1.

Year Effects

2.

Real Industry Input
Price

.16
(.08)

.16
(.08)

.14
(.08)

.16
(.08)

.14
(.08)

.13
(.07)

.10
(.09)

3.

Real Industry Output

.29
(.09)

.29
(.09)

.27
(.09)

.28
(.09)

.27
(.09)

.20
(.07)

.25
(.09)

4. Real Industry Output
(Previous Year)

.10
(.07)

.10
(.01)

.11
(.07)

.11
(.07)

.12
(.07)

.15
(.07)

.13
(.08)

5. Real WageatEndof
Contract

-.03
(.10)

—.02
(.10)

-.56
(.31)

—.51
(.31)

—.56
(.32)

—.52
(.22)

—.58
(,32(

.06
(.22)

———

.23
(.26)

———

.23
(.26)

.26
(.22)

.38
(.25)

———

.04
(.16)

.06
(.21)

———

-——

———

———

———

—.13

—.08

(.14)

(.15)

6.

Real Wage In Industry

7. Real Wage

in

———

Region

—.03

(.15)

8. Lagged Dependent Variable

———

———

(insturmented(

9. Standard Error
10.

0veridentification
Test

Notes:

.194

.194

.196

.196

.196

.193

.194

—

———

.972

.967

.972

.451

.666

(p—value)

See notes to Table

4.

Instrumental variables for the real wage at the end of the contract include
year effects, the real wage in manufacturing at the start of the contract,
the unanticipated change in real wages during the contract.

18
and

'Estissted on subsample of 1101 observations. Mean and standard deviation of
Instruments
the dependent variable are -.015 and .0200, respectively.
include the instruaent set above plus the lagged value of industry output.

Test

The statistic is distrifor orthogonalityof residuals and instruments.
buted as chi—squared with 19 degrees of freedom in columns )3)—)5), and 16
degrees of freedom in columns (6)—(7),

