NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE INTERNATIONAL ASPECTS OF MACROPRUDENTIAL POLICY
Kristin J. Forbes
Working Paper 27698
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27698

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2020

This paper was prepared for the Annual Review of Economics. Thanks to Shikha Sharma for data
assistance, and to Katharina Bergant, Anusha Chari, Christian Friedrich, Dennis Reinhardt and
Karlye Stedman for helpful comments. This paper draws heavily on research for a project
evaluating Iceland’s macroprudential toolkit, for which the author received funding from the
Government of Iceland and benefitted from conversations with Anil Kashyap, Don Kohn,
Athanasios Orphanides, and members of the Iceland Task Force (available at (https://
mitsloan.mit.edu/shared/ods/documents/?DocumentID=4919). All views in this paper, however,
are those of the author. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Kristin J. Forbes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The International Aspects of Macroprudential Policy
Kristin J. Forbes
NBER Working Paper No. 27698
August 2020
JEL No. E44,E5,F33,F36,F38,G21,G23,G28
ABSTRACT
Countries are using macroprudential tools more actively with the goal of improving the resilience
of their broader financial systems. A growing body of evidence suggests that these tools can
accomplish specific domestic goals and should reduce country vulnerability to many domestic
and international shocks. The evidence also suggests, however, that these policies are not an
elixir. They will not insulate economies from volatility and they generate leakages to the nonbank financial system and spillovers through international borrowing, lending and other crossborder exposures. Some of these unintended consequences can mitigate the effectiveness of
macroprudential policies and generate new vulnerabilities and risks. The “Corona Crisis”
provides a lens to evaluate the effectiveness of current macroprudential regulations during a
period of extreme market volatility and economic stress. Experience to date suggests that
macroprudential tools provide some benefits and can help achieve certain macroeconomic goals,
but they have limitations and expectations of what they can accomplish must be realistic.

Kristin J. Forbes
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-416
Cambridge, MA 02142
and CEPR
and also NBER
kjforbes@mit.edu

1.

INTRODUCTION

The 2008 Global Financial Crisis was a painful reminder of the importance of macroprudential policy that
focuses on the resilience of the broader financial system. Solid economic growth, price stability, and
microprudential regulation (of individual financial institutions) were not enough to protect domestic
financial systems as problems originating in one sector (US housing) were quickly magnified and spread
with devastating global effects. This experience spurred a major rethinking of how to design
comprehensive macroprudential frameworks to mitigate these risks and amplification effects in the
future. As these tools have been adopted more widely, there is now beginning to be enough experience
to critically evaluate their performance 1. The “Corona Crisis” should also provide a timely lens to
evaluate if macroprudential tools are delivering on their goal of increasing the resilience of financial
systems during a period of unprecedented market volatility and economic stress.
This paper surveys what has been learned about the use and effectiveness of macroprudential
tools, focusing on the international experience and challenges from using regulations primarily aimed at
domestic banking systems in a world of cross-border banking flows and other global sources of finance. 2
Although this literature is still in its infancy, and there are a number of challenges to empirical analysis,
the evidence suggests that these tools have had some success in attaining certain direct goals (such as
reducing domestic credit growth and bank exposure to foreign currency borrowing), but are less
effective in other areas (such as limiting international capital flows). The evidence on whether they can
accomplish their ultimate goals of strengthening the resilience of financial systems to shocks and
mitigating amplification effects is supportive on net, but more tenuous, and likely at the cost of slightly
lower short-term growth.
A key theme in this body of research, and factor muting the effects of most macroprudential
regulations, are unintended leakages and spillovers. When regulations constrain the behavior of certain
entities (usually domestic banks), non-bank financial intermediaries, foreign banks and other institutions
outside the regulatory perimeter respond. These leakages and spillovers usually only counteract a small
to moderate portion of the direct domestic effects of the regulations, but can still be meaningful and
shift risks in ways that generate future vulnerabilities. As a result, although macroprudential regulations
should improve the resilience of financial systems and broader economies, they should not be expected

Kenc (2016) highlights that although many of these issues are not new, the use of macroprudential tools had
been fairly limited and idiosyncratic. Bolton et al. (2019) and Metrick and Rhee (2018) discuss the increased
attention to macroprudential policy in the broader set of reforms addressing vulnerabilities from the 2008 crisis.
2
See BIS (2016) for a collection of related research.
1

1

to prevent periods of sharp volatility and avert all financial crises. They are a useful and important
addition to the macroeconomic policy toolkit, but not an elixir.
The remainder of this paper is in four sections. Section 2 briefly reviews the goals of
macroprudential policy and tools to achieve these goals, focusing on tools addressing international
exposures and vulnerabilities. This section closes with information on how the use of macroprudential
tools has evolved since 1990. Section 3 summarizes the empirical evidence assessing the effectiveness of
macroprudential policy. It discusses the econometric challenges and evidence on whether these tools
affect: housing markets and credit growth; international borrowing, lending and foreign-currency
exposure; and boom-bust cycles, growth and resilience to external shocks. This section closes by tying
together the evidence on the importance of international spillovers and leakages from macroprudential
policy. Section 4 reports new analysis on whether macroprudential policy buffered countries during the
period of heightened market volatility at the start of the Corona Crisis. Countries with tighter
macroprudential stances appear to have had more resilience in their equity markets, but not in their
credit default swaps, exchanges rates or GDP growth. Section 5 concludes.
2.

THE GOALS, TOOLS, AND RECENT USE OF MACROPRUDENTIAL POLICY

This section summarizes the goals of macroprudential policy and tools available to accomplish these
goals, highlighting those aimed at mitigating international risks. The section ends by documenting their
increased use since 2010.
2.a. The Goals and Theory
Macroprudential regulations encompass a diverse set of tools focused on the stability of the entire
financial system. They target the buildup of systemic risk over time, as well as how vulnerabilities in
individual institutions can spillover or interact with other policies to affect the entire system and overall
economy. In certain situations, there is little distinction between macroprudential regulation and other
types of tools—such as microprudential regulation and capital controls. More specifically,
microprudential regulation, which focuses on the stability of individual financial institutions, can be
similar to macroprudential regulation in countries where the financial system is dominated by a small
number of financial institutions. 3 Capital controls, which are taxes or rules based on an investor’s

3

Forbes (2018) discusses this issue in Iceland.

2

residency, can be similar to macroprudential regulations that focus on the currency of the investment
(IMF, 2015).
After the Global Financial Crisis, international institutions, central banks and other policy forums
launched major initiatives on how to mitigate macro-financial vulnerabilities (FSB, 2009; CGFS, 2010;
IMF, 2014a). These discussions prioritized three related objectives for macroprudential policy:
•

Addressing excessive credit expansion and strengthening resilience in the overall financial

system. This involves containing unsustainable increases in leverage and debt by adjusting the quantity
and quality of capital held by financial institutions. This should improve the economy’s ability to
withstand aggregate shocks and allow the financial system to function effectively during adverse
conditions.
•

Reducing key amplification mechanisms of systemic risk. This involves reducing pro-cyclical

feedback between asset prices and credit and stocks, including through volatile funding. It can include
regulating liquidity, funding, maturity, and any other pricing risks and mismatches, including related to
foreign currencies.
•

Mitigating structural vulnerabilities related to the role of important institutions in key

markets: This targets vulnerabilities that arise through interlinkages, common exposures, and
intermediaries in key markets, including those that can render individual institutions “too-big-to-fail”.
As policymakers shifted attention to macroprudential policy to accomplish these goals,
academic research developed theoretical models showing why macroprudential tools (usually modeled
as a Pigouvian tax) were beneficial even in the presence of sound prudential regulation of individual
institutions. This literature is well summarized in Bengui and Bianchi (2018), Bianchi and Mendoza
(2018), Brunnermeier et al. (2013), Claessens (2015), Engel (2016), and Galati and Moessner (2018). A
common theme is that agents overborrow in good times and do not internalize the cost of their
financing choices (which could include duration, liquidity, or currency choice). This overborrowing is
generally modelled as some sort of pecuniary externality, combined with incomplete markets and
financial constraints that depend on market prices (Bianchi, 2011; Caballero and Krishnamurthy, 2001;
Jeanne and Korinek, 2019; and Korinek, 2018). A related strand of literature focuses on how

3

macroprudential policy can address aggregate demand externalities in the presence of nominal rigidities
(Farhi and Werning, 2016).
A few papers modelling the benefits of macroprudential regulation also incorporate the risk of
leakages and spillovers. For example, Ahnert et al. (2020) show how macroprudential taxes on foreigncurrency bank lending reduce socially costly bank defaults, but cause a partial “snowbank shifting” of
risk to less-informed sectors, potentially lowering investment, productivity and growth. Bengui and
Bianchi (2018) show how macroprudential taxes on debt can cause “leakages” as unregulated agents
respond by taking on more risk, but still improve aggregate welfare by reducing the severity and
frequency of financial crises. Agénor and da Silva (2019), Costinot et al. (2011), and Korinek (2018)
model how macroprudential policies and capital controls can spillover internationally—with the impact
on other countries either positive or negative based on the model’s assumptions.
2.b. The Tools
A range of macroprudential tools have been developed to address these multifaceted goals (Claessens,
2015; BIS, 2012; IMF, 2014a, 2014b). More will undoubtedly be developed over time. They can be
divided into five sets of instruments: capital/reserve, liquidity, credit, resolution/structural, and
taxation/capital flow measures. Each set includes tools focused on risks related to international
exposures (including foreign currency (FX) levels and liquidity, international lending and borrowing, and
exchange rate movements), which are in italics below.
•

Capital and reserve instruments: Capital requirements (equity held by banks against certain

positions) and reserve requirements (cash held by banks against certain positions) can be set and/or
adjusted to take into account the stage of the economic cycle (such as the countercyclical capital buffer,
dynamic provisioning requirements, time-varying leverage ratios, and rules on profit distribution). These
can also be applied to certain sectors (such as housing debt), systemically-important institutions, or risks
related to FX exposure (such as on FX deposits or deposits from abroad).
•

Liquidity instruments: Regulations supporting liquidity and containing maturity mismatch

include core funding ratios, net stable funding ratios, liquidity coverage ratios, taxes on volatile funding,
and caps on loan-to-deposit ratios. Any of these ratios and requirements can be set more stringently for
foreign borrowing, including on net open-currency positions or FX deposits. Deposits may also be

4

required to be repaid in domestic currency (regardless of the deposit currency), to alleviate concerns
about withdrawals for which the central bank cannot act as lender-of-last resort.
•

Credit instruments: These policies often target potential vulnerabilities to mortgage risk from

asset price and income shocks (such as through caps to loan-to-value ratios or debt-service-to-income
ratios) or place ceilings on credit growth. These can also target FX borrowing and lending with stricter
ratios if the mortgage is in FX, by limiting FX credit growth, or setting additional limits on FX borrowing
by any entity (either at fixed levels or linked to FX earnings).
•

Resolution Procedures and Mitigating Structural Institution Vulnerabilities: These tools involve

additional cushions and capital surcharges for systemically-important institutions (such as additional loss
absorbency requirements, tighter risk weights, and limits on exposures) and regulations for key
intermediaries. These also include regular “stress tests” of major financial institutions to better
understand how the financial institutions could withstand various shocks (including foreign and global)
and plans for resolution regimes, both nationally and across borders.
•

Taxation and Capital Flow Measures: Taxes on certain transactions or holdings can be

structured to discourage types of activity through levies, reserve requirements, or quantitative limits.
These are often used to target FX exposure or more volatile capital flows (often debt). These could be
standard taxes, or unremunerated reserve requirements (when a fee is held in a non-interest bearing
account for a fixed period) that make shorter-term investments more expensive. 4
2.c. Use of Macroprudential Tools
Cross-country data on macroprudential policy was limited before the 2008 crisis, but several researchers
and institutions have begun to fill this void. The most comprehensive early efforts include: data on seven
tools from an IMF survey described in Lim et al. (2011); more detailed data on twelve tools from another
IMF survey described in Cerutti et al. (2017); survey data on housing-sector tools described in Kuttner
and Shim (2016); data focused on foreign-exchange exposures discussed in Ahnert et al. (2020); and
information on governance structures for adjusting macroprudential tools in Edge and Liang (2017).

This paper focuses on the standard definition of macroprudential measures, which excludes capital controls
(based on residency), but references studies that use broader definitions as some countries include certain capital
controls as part of their macroprudential framework.

4

5

To date, the most comprehensive cross-country, time-series data on a broad set of
macroprudential regulations is the IMF’s integrated Macroprudential Policy (iMaPP) database, described
in Alam et al. (2019). This database combines information from a number of pre-existing surveys with a
new IMF annual survey and country-specific data to provide detailed information on a range of
macroprudential tools for 134 countries from 1990-2016. It groups these tools into 17 different types of
policy instruments (with subcategories) and tracks when the tools are tightened or loosened using
dummy variables. 5 Some measures incorporate information on international exposures based on the
currency of the transaction (such as limits on FX lending and FX positions), but the database does not
include capital controls.
Figure 1 uses this iMaPP data to document the general tightening in macroprudential policy over
time. The top panel shows net changes in macroprudential policy accumulated each year since 1990
across all 134 countries, or just advanced economies (AEs) or emerging/developing economies
(EMDEs). 6 There is a modest net tightening (mainly in EMDEs) from 2000-2007, abrupt loosening in
2008-2009, sharp tightening in 2010, and more gradual tightening since. At the end of the sample in
2016, macroprudential policy had been tightened 96 times on net (54 times in EMDEs and 42 in AEs).
Although more net tightening occurred in EMDEs, especially from 2002-2015, this does not reflect more
net tightening on average in this group, but instead the larger number of EMDEs. This becomes evident
in the middle of Figure 1, which averages the annual net changes in macroprudential policy by the
number of countries in each group. AEs have loosened more on net during recessions, and tightened
more often on net since 2012. At the end of the sample, AEs were tightening macroprudential policy an
average of 1.2 times per country on net, about twice the average for emerging markets.
Next, although the iMaPP data does not measure the overall macroprudential policy stance in
each country, it is possible to construct a proxy by aggregating the changes in each country’s
macroprudential policies since the data starts in 1990—a year when the use of these tools was fairly
limited so each country can be assumed to start from a similar, neutral stance. Adopting this approach
(also used in Bergant et al., 2020), the bottom of Figure 1 shows average macroprudential stances.
There was minimal change in the 1990s, and the modest net tightening over the 2000s implied that on
the eve of the 2008 Global Financial Crisis, macroprudential policy had been tightened less than 2 times
on net per country on average. Countries began to tighten macroprudential policy more frequently after
It also includes quantitative LTV ratios.
This measure nets out any tightening and loosening in macroprudential policy and therefore does not capture
how actively a policy is used, just any net tightening or loosening. For example if a country simultaneously loosens
one tool and but tightens twice (with the same tool or two different tools), this yields +1 for the net policy change.

5
6

6

2010, so that by 2016 the average net macroprudential stance was five tightenings. AEs had a looser
macroprudential stance on average than EMDEs, although the gap was closing by the end of the sample,
with the looser stance for AEs reflecting their greater tendency to loosen during recessions, rather than
a hesitation to tighten during stable times.
To better understand which macroprudential tools are more widely used, Figure 2 calculates
average policy stances for the different tools in the iMaPP data. The top panel shows that the
macroprudential tool tightened most by 2016 was banks’ capital requirements (which includes some
microprudential tightening). Other tools with a tighter stance are: limits on LTV ratios, limits on FX
positions, liquidity requirements, and loan restrictions. The use of different tools also varies by country
group, with advanced economies more likely to have tightened measures aimed at the housing market
(LTV and DSTI ratios) and SIFIs, but loosened reserve requirements. In contrast, EMDEs are more likely to
have tightened (on net) reserve requirements and set limits on FX restrictions and liquidity.
Finally, while Figure 1 documents that macroprudential policy has become tighter on average,
this masks important differences across countries. To better understand this variation, Figure 3 graphs
the number of countries with different macroprudential stances at four dates: 2000q1 (before the
boom), 2007q1 (before the crisis), 2010q1 (after the crisis), and 2016q4 (the sample end). In 2000, half
of the sample had not tightened their macroprudential stances on net over the last decade, and only 5%
had tightened three or more times on net. In 2007, the peak of the boom, only 20% of countries had
tightened their macroprudential stances more than 3 times (predominantly EMDEs). In contrast, by 2016
almost two-thirds of the sample had tightened their macroprudential stances at least 3 times on net. As
the average stance tightened, however, the cross-country variation increased. In 2016 20% of countries
had tightened macroprudential policy 10 or more times, while 17% had not tightened at all on net. (AEs
and EMDEs had similar average stances, but AEs were over twice as likely to have not tightened at all on
net.) This increased variation in macroprudential stances could help identify if these policies improve a
country’s resilience to global shocks in empirical analysis.
3.

EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE: CAN MACROPRUDENTIAL POLICY ACHIEVE ITS GOALS?

As countries use macroprudential policy more actively, and cross-country, time-series data on these
tools has become available, a body of empirical research provides initial evidence of what works—and
what does not. This section begins by discussing the empirical challenges in assessing the effects of
macroprudential policy (part a). Then it surveys the literature on whether the tools achieve their direct
goals in terms of: the housing market and broader credit growth (part b), international borrowing,
7

lending and FX exposure (part c), and GDP growth, pro-cyclicality, and resilience to shocks (part d). This
section concludes by tying together a key theme; many macroprudential tools can influence their
immediate objective, but have unintended consequences, especially through non-bank financial
intermediaries and international capital flows. These leakages and spillovers can be significant and
meaningful, and should be part of any assessment of macroprudential policy, although they are
generally smaller than the direct domestic effects. For additional background on the research below, see
Bergant et al. (2020), Buch and Goldberg (2016), Cerutti et al. (2017), ECB (2020a) Galati and Moessner
(2018), and IMF-FSB-BIS (2016). Particularly noteworthy is Araujo et al. (2020), which performs a metaanalysis of over 66,000 results from 58 empirical studies on macroprudential policy to ascertain which
results are consistent across instruments, approaches, time horizons, samples and outcome variables. 7
3.a. Empirical Challenges
Empirical assessments of macroprudential policy face five challenges: measuring intensity, reverse
causality, omitted variable bias, limited time series, and spillovers/leakages. Some papers have
addressed these challenges through unique micro-level data, natural experiments, or creative
econometric strategies, but each approach has advantages and disadvantages.
A first challenge is measuring the intensity of macroprudential measures—including both the
relative intensity of the same tool applied across countries as well as of different tools within a specific
country. Countries have adopted different macroprudential tools, with different thresholds, different
levels of enforcement, different goals, and in different financial settings, so that imposing the
assumption that a tightening has the same effect across countries would bias coefficient estimates
toward zero (i.e., suggesting no effect). For example, even something as specific as a limit on FX lending
could be a modest cap relative to a bank’s overall loan portfolio (or FX assets), or limits on just FX
mortgage lending, or a complete prohibition on all FX lending. Even more complicated is comparing the
magnitudes of changes in different types of tools—even within the same country. For example, how can
a change in the CCyB be compared to changes in rules on FX borrowing or tighter regulations on SIFIs?
Given these challenges, most empirical studies do not incorporate the intensity of changes in
macroprudential policy and instead simply code any tightening in any tool as a +1 (and any easing -1).
This amalgamation of very different macroprudential actions into dummy variables biases studies
against finding any effect of macroprudential regulation.
The “FRAME” online repository from the BIS (https://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt1903f.htm) provides updated
evidence on the impact of a subset of bank regulations.
7

8

Only a few studies have attempted to address this challenge of measuring the intensity of
regulations. Forbes et al. (2015) analyse reports by investors and international financial institutions to
classify a subset as “major”. Vandenbussche et al. (2015) and Ahnert et al. (2020) use detailed data on
four similar tools in Eastern Europe to incorporate the magnitudes of adjustments. Cerutti et al. (2017)
cumulate the number of changes in reserve requirements over time to create an index of intensity, and
Alam et al. (2019), Richter et al. (2019), and Friedrich et al. (2020) use changes in either the LTV ratio or
CCyB (which are more comparable across countries). Each of these studies finds evidence that more
“major” or larger adjustments have larger effects—although sample sizes are generally small and error
bands are wide. The studies which incorporate precise magnitudes (such as for the LTV or CCyB),
however, have the important advantage of providing information on how to calibrate adjustments to
achieve a certain result—a calibration critically important for policy.
A second challenge in assessing the impact of macroprudential policy is reverse causality. When
the dependent variable (such as credit growth or FX borrowing) starts to increase, policymakers are
more likely to tighten tools related to those variables. This would downward bias estimates of the
impact of the tools—or even find correlations suggesting the opposite of expected. To address this
challenge, most papers take the easy approach of lagging their measures of macroprudential policy. This
is unlikely to fully address issues around endogeneity and selection bias. Several papers go further by
instrumenting for the policy changes and/or creating some type of exogenous macroprudential policy
shock (Cizel et al., 2019; Ahnert et al., 2020). This is more likely to lead to unbiased estimates, but the
first-stage is often imprecisely estimated because it is difficult to predict when tools are adjusted.
Another solution is to use micro data or event studies (often combined with some type of binding
constraint), such as Aiyar et al. (2014b) and Jiménez et al. (2017). This can provide better identification,
but the specific examples may not generalize and the narrower tests can miss important leakages and
spillovers. One of the best approaches is propensity score matching, which compares the dependent
variables in countries that have adjusted policy with the “nearest neighbor” or a synthetic construct of
similar countries that do not adjust policy. This approach was first used in Forbes et al. (2015) and
Forbes and Klein (2014, 2015), with more recent applications in Cizel et al. (2019) and Frost et al. (2020).
The two main challenges with this approach are finding good “matches” and large standard errors over
longer horizons.
A third and closely related challenge in estimating the impact of macroprudential tools is
omitted variable bias. This occurs if factors correlated with regulations, but not included in the empirical
specification, affect the dependent variable. This is an issue because countries which use
9

macroprudential policy more actively have significantly different institutions and macroeconomic
characteristics than countries which do not (Forbes and Klein, 2015; Forbes et al., 2015), and because
countries often adjust macroprudential policy in conjunction with other policies (Akinci and OlmsteadRumsey, 2018). The obvious solution is to control for any country characteristics and policy changes that
are correlated with changes in macroprudential policy, but many of these studies already have limited
degrees of freedom and it can be difficult to control for such a broad array of other hard-to-measure
characteristics and policies. Some studies reduce these concerns, however, with careful attention to
their econometric specification and/or by using difference-in-difference methodologies. 8
A fourth challenge in this literature is the relatively limited use of macroprudential tools to date
(Forbes, 2019 and 2020). Many tools have only been adjusted by small increments and to levels well
below what models suggest are optimal (see Hanson et al., 2011 for the CCyB). As a result, some tools
may not have been tightened to levels that meaningfully improve resilience to certain shocks. Also, the
majority of macroprudential adjustments have been tightenings (Figure 1), so there is limited evidence
on whether the effects of tightening and loosening are symmetric. Perhaps most problematic,
macroprudential tools have only become more widely used during the recovery after the Global
Financial Crisis, so there has been little opportunity to analyze their effectiveness during downturns and
over the full business cycle (Forbes and Klein, 2014). The financial market stress and sharp recession in
2020 from Covid-19, however, will provide an opportunity to assess if current stances can provide the
hoped-for resilience to a large external shock (Section 4), as well as if loosening macroprudential tools
(such as for the CCyB, in Friedrich et al., 2020) can cushion the impact of the crisis.
A final challenge in this literature is that any analysis should assess not only the direct impact of
macroprudential tools, but also any leakages or spillovers. Leakages are generally defined as lending or
credit shifting to other domestic institutions that are not subject to the same regulations (often nonbank entities), while spillovers are when lending or credit shifts to other countries. The evidence
suggests that these leakages and spillages often occur, can be significant, and can meaningfully mitigate
the impact of macroprudential policies on their specific targets—as well as impact other variables and
countries. Agénor and da Silva (2018) survey the evidence on international spillovers, especially through
cross-border banking flows. Incorporating these leakages and spillovers in any empirical analysis can be
challenging, however, as it often involves incorporating additional data (such as from non-bank entities

For example, Forbes et al. (2016) look at portfolio shares (instead of total portfolio flows) to control for any
omitted variables affecting capital flows, and Ahnert et al. (2020) compare changes in banks’ and corporates’
borrowing and debt issuance to control for any omitted variables that affect each type of entity or borrowing.
8

10

and non-resident banks). Studies that achieve better identification by using detailed micro data are
often unable to capture these types of unintended consequences. More recent macroeconomic work,
however, is paying closer attention to these leakages and spillovers when possible given the evidence on
the importance of the regulatory perimeter (Ahnert et al., 2020; Cerutti and Zhou, 2018).
3.b. Empirical Effects: Housing and Domestic Credit Growth
Despite these empirical challenges, a rapidly growing literature assesses the effects of macroprudential
policies. A focus of this literature is the housing market and broader credit growth—two key targets of
macroprudential policy given the evidence that housing booms, growth in mortgage lending, and rapid
credit growth are correlated with financial stability risks, sharper recessions and slower recoveries (Mian
et al. 2017; Jordá et al., 2016).
Beginning with the housing market, most studies find that tightening a range of macroprudential
tools meaningfully dampens housing activity. 9 The tools appear to be more effective in terms of slowing
the growth of mortgages and household credit, with weaker effects on house prices (Araujo et al.,
2020). There is also some evidence that macroprudential tools can increase the resilience of borrowers
and the financial system to shocks to house prices or income, including by reducing the pro-cyclical
feedback between credit and house prices. Studies also suggest that there are benefits from using
multiple housing-related tools at the same time—such as some targeting lenders and others
borrowers—in order to reinforce their effectiveness and mitigate the shortcomings of individual tools.
For example, although LTV limits are one of the more popular and easy-to-implement regulations, other
tools become more important when house prices increase rapidly (making LTV limits less effective).
A closely related focus of empirical work is how macroprudential policy affects overall credit
growth. Tighter macroprudential policy is generally significantly correlated with slower aggregate credit
growth, with some evidence this is where macroprudential policy is most effective (Araujo et al.,
2020). 10 Much, but not all, of the impact on aggregate credit growth occurs through household credit,
and there is mixed evidence on which tools are most effective. For example, Claessens et al. (2014)
show that caps on borrowers (such as LTV and DTI ratios) have a stronger impact than general capital
buffers, while Araujo et al. (2020) find stronger effects from liquidity tools.

Key studies include: Crowe et al. (2013); Vandenbussche et al. (2015); He et al. (2016); Kuttner and Shim (2016);
Cerutti et al. (2017); Akinci and Olmstead-Rumsey (2018); Alam et al. (2019); Richter et al. (2019); and Acharya et
al. (2020).
10
See Lim et al. (2011); Aiyar et al. (2016); Cerutti et al. (2017); Jiménez et al. (2017); and Akinci and OlmsteadRumsey (2018).
9

11

This literature examining the impact on housing measures and broader credit growth also
provides some evidence on when macroprudential policy is more effective. There is stronger evidence
when regulations are tightened (instead of loosened), although this may reflect the limited observations
for the later. Macroprudential policy appears to have larger effects: in less financially developed and less
open economies (Cerutti et al., 2017; Cizel et al., 2019); when targeted narrowly at specific sectors
(Crowe et al. 2013; Basten and Koch, 2015); and in emerging markets, for shorter windows, or when
using micro-level data (Araujo et al., 2020). One factor that can influence the size of the estimated
effects is if the analysis incorporates leakages through non-bank credit and spillovers through
international banks (section 3e). When tighter regulations slow the growth in domestic bank credit,
there is often a corresponding increase in credit from other sources. These other sources are generally
more responsive in countries with more developed non-bank financial markets (usually advanced
economies), in countries more integrated with international financial markets, and over longer periods.
These unintended consequences are also less likely to be captured in research using micro data.
3.c. Empirical Effects: International Lending, Borrowing and FX Exposure
Another focus of the empirical literature on macroprudential regulations is the effects on lending abroad
by domestic banks, domestic borrowing from foreign sources, and domestic exposure to foreign
currency (which includes borrowing from domestic or foreign entities). Much of this work focuses on
international banks, building on a long literature on regulatory arbitrage and banks’ internal capital
markets (Cetorelli and Goldberg, 2012), although some incorporates other sources of cross-border
credit. Understanding these international exposures and capital flows is important as they can generate
macrofinancial vulnerabilities and amplification effects that are a key concern of macroprudential
policy.11 They can also be an important part of the leakages and spillovers that undermine the
effectiveness of macroprudential tools aimed at bolstering the domestic economy.
To begin, consider how macroprudential regulations that increase the cost of lending
domestically and reduce domestic credit growth (Section 3b) affect a bank’s decision to lend abroad.
Some papers find that banks respond by reducing lending both at home and abroad by similar amounts
(Aiyar et al., 2014a), or that the reduction in lending abroad is substantially larger when the regulations
interact with other policies that make domestic lending more attractive (Forbes et al., 2017). This
evidence, however, largely comes from detailed UK bank data, which allows cleaner identification of

11

See Eichengreen et al. (2003), Bordo and Meissner (2005), and Ahnert et al. (2020).

12

country-specific loan demand and supply effects than most work, but may not generalize to other
experiences. Other work focusing on a cross-section of countries generally finds that tighter
macroprudential regulations cause banks to increase lending abroad, primarily through affiliates (Cerutti
and Zhou, 2018). Banks also appear to respond by increasing foreign lending more in countries with
fewer regulations and weaker standards, leading to weaker overall lending standards (Ongena et al.,
2013; McCann and O’Toole, 2019; Houston et al., 2012). 12 These international spillovers suggest that
macroprudential tools that only regulate domestic lending may be less effective at bolstering overall
bank resilience.
Why do tighter regulations at home contribute to a large contraction in foreign lending in some
cases, but not others? Buch and Goldberg (2016) help reconcile these findings using detailed micro-data
for fifteen countries. They document different effects across countries, partially reflecting different bank
characteristics and macroprudential tools. For example, they find greater international spillovers from
tools targeting liquidity or specific sectors, and weaker effects from capital tools. In most cases, they find
that the spillovers through international lending are small in magnitude, albeit with the important
caveat that few countries tightened macroprudential policy over their sample.
While the evidence on how macroprudential regulations impact banks’ lending abroad is mixed,
there is stronger evidence of the impact on international exposures and borrowing (from banks and
other entities). A large literature shows that “surges” of borrowing from abroad are significantly
correlated with unsustainable credit growth and asset price bubbles, as well as with “sudden stops” that
correspond to sharp recessions and currency and banking crisis (Forbes and Warnock, 2012). The
theoretical literature shows how borrowers do not fully account for the externalities from international
debt (section 2a), justifying macroprudential tools restricting international borrowing and foreign
currency exposures (section 2b). This literature often lumps together macroprudential measures related
to foreign currency exposures with capital controls on international borrowing—jointly referred to as
“capital flow management measures”. 13
This literature generally finds that macroprudential limits on borrowing in foreign currency
(including limits on FX exposure, FX liquidity and currency mismatch) can be highly effective. For
example, De Crescenzio et al. (2017) show that currency-based restrictions on banks reduce short-term
cross-border banking flows, and Aguirre and Repetto (2017) find that limits on banks’ FX positions

Danisewicz et al. (2017) find that multinational banks respond to changes in capital regulations by adjusting
lending through branches more than through subsidiaries.
13
See Forbes (2007), Cline (2010), Ostry et al. (2010), Magud et al. (2011), and Klein (2012) for surveys on controls.
12

13

meaningfully reduce credit growth in Argentina. In the most detailed study of FX-related
macroprudential tools to date, Ahnert et al. (2020) find significant and large reductions in bank
borrowing and lending in foreign currency, albeit with a side-of effect that companies react by
increasing their FX bond issuance. The overall FX borrowing of the economy declines (as the increase in
FX bond issuance is significantly less than the reduction in FX bank borrowing), but FX exposure shifts
from regulated banks to unregulated sectors. 14 Bank sensitivity to the exchange rate declines, which
could reduce bank failures after large currency depreciations, but the sensitivity of the broader economy
to exchange rate movements does not appear to improve as much due to these leakages.
Given these leakages from regulations focused on FX exposure by banks, another approach for
limiting a country’s exposure to foreign borrowing is to limit capital inflows directly, such as through
moderate taxes on capital inflows. The evidence on whether these types of measures work, however, is
less compelling than for measures targeting FX exposures directly. A few studies focusing on an
individual country or small group of countries find some impact, 15 but cross-country studies generally
find no significant or lasting effect on the volume of inflows. On a more positive note, many studies of
the impact of moderate taxes on capital inflows find that they can shift the composition of flows in ways
that should reduce country vulnerability, such as to a longer duration or away from debt towards equity
(De Gregorio et al., 2000; Ostry et al., 2010; Ostry et al., 2012; Klein, 2012; and Magud et al., 2011). The
issue of selection bias (section 3a) is a major challenge in these studies, as countries with larger capital
inflows are more likely to enact policies limiting these flows, therefore biasing estimates of their effects
towards zero. Studies that address this with propensity-score matching, however, also find that capitalflow measures do not significantly affect the volume or volatility of aggregate portfolio flows, but can
reduce other measures of financial vulnerability (Forbes et al., 2015 and Frost et al., 2020). 16
Taxes on capital inflows also appear to generate meaningful leakages and spillovers. For
example, Alfaro et al. (2017) find that Brazil’s capital controls had no impact on large, export-oriented
firms, as they could more easily shift to other sources of finance. Forbes et al. (2016) use portfolio-level
data to show that investors responded to Brazil’s taxes on capital inflows by shifting exposure to
countries that are “similar” to Brazil, while decreasing exposure to other countries viewed as more likely
to adjust their capital controls. Giordani et al. (2017) find similar evidence of capital controls shifting

Bacchetta et al. (2019) also find that macroprudential FX regulations correspond to increased FX bond issuance
of non-financial corporates.
15
See Bruno et al. (2015) for 12 Asia-Pacific countries and Forbes et al. (2016) for Brazil.
16
Frost et al. (2020) also finds that some FX-based macroprudential policies are more effective at shifting the
composition of flows in ways that correspond to a lower probability of banking crises and inflow surges.
14

14

flows into other countries with similar economic characteristics (measured using risk levels). Both
papers find that the magnitude of this capital flow “deflection” from controls can be important in
magnitude, and that there is no comparable deflection from macroprudential regulations. Forbes et al.
(2016) suggest that the larger spillovers from capital controls may reflect a greater “salience” as they
receive more attention from international investors than macroprudential policies.
3.d. Empirical Effects: Pro-cyclicality, Boom-Bust Cycles, Resilience to Shocks and GDP Growth
While most of the empirical literature on macroprudential regulations assesses their direct impact on
specific variables that correspond to financial risks (such as housing, credit growth, FX exposure, and
international lending and borrowing), several papers are more ambitious and test if macroprudential
regulations achieve their broader goals of stabilizing growth, dampening boom-bust cycles, and reducing
vulnerability to shocks. In other words, instead of assessing intermediary targets that should make the
financial system less likely to amplify shocks, these papers directly assess if the regulations make the
financial sector less pro-cyclical and more resilient. The evidence from these more ambitious tests is
even more tentative, however, because omitted variable bias is a greater concern and macroprudential
tools have not been in widespread use for long enough to assess these effects across the full business
cycle. The sharp volatility and recession in 2020 from the “Covid shock”, however, should provide an
initial test during a sharp “bust” (section 4).
Studies using a variety of approaches find some evidence that tighter macroprudential tools can
reduce pro-cyclicality and boom-bust cycles. For example, Nier and Zicchino (2008) show that bettercapitalized banks lend more during downturns and crises, and Jiménez et al. (2017) find that dynamic
provisioning can smooth post-crisis credit supply. Buchholz (2015) reports faster credit growth after the
2008 crisis in countries with caps on banks’ leverage, and Dell’Ariccia et al. (2012) find that
macroprudential tools reduce the frequency of credit booms and the severity of the following busts.
Several studies find evidence that tighter regulations reduce the negative tail risk of output growth by
tempering booms and cushioning the economy during recessions (Boar et al., 2017; Neanidis, 2019).
A branch of this literature focuses on whether macroprudential tools can reduce vulnerability to
shocks. Brandao-Marques et al. (2020) show that macroprudential regulations dampen downside risks
from external financial shocks, with some evidence this occurs by dampening capital flow volatility
(Neanidis, 2019; Gelos et al., 2019). In contrast, capital controls appear to be less effective at dampening
capital flow volatility (Forbes and Warnock, 2012; Bergant et al., 2020), and can even be
counterproductive by prompting greater capital outflows after foreign shocks (Gelos et al., 2019).
15

International spillovers and leakages are important in assessing these tools. For example, Forbes (2020)
shows that tighter macroprudential regulations reduce surges of capital inflows, but have less impact
(and may even increase) sudden stops. These seemingly contradictory results occur because the
regulations decrease cross-border bank lending (which becomes less prone to surges), but increase
cross-border debt issuance (which is more prone to sudden stops). Bergant et al. (2020) show that
macroprudential regulations (but not capital controls) reduce the impact of global financial shocks on
GDP growth in emerging markets, but have decreasing marginal returns as tighter regulations push
some financial activities outside the regulatory perimeter.
Bergant et al. (2020) also explore one channel through which macroprudential regulations could
increase a country’s resilience to external shocks—providing more freedom to adjust monetary policy to
support domestic growth. Financial systems with stronger capital and liquidity buffers, and that are
better hedged against currency movements, should be better able to withstand any reduction in capital
inflows or currency depreciations that often correspond to negative external shocks. This would give a
country more flexibility to respond to negative shocks by reducing interest rates to stabilize growth,
rather than tightening monetary policy to support capital inflows or stabilize the currency. Takáts and
Temesvary (2019a), Aizenman et al. (2020), Friedrich et al. (2020), and Mano and Sgherri (2020) also find
that macroprudential policy helps emerging economies gain some monetary policy independence to
respond more counter-cyclically to global financial shocks. Aizenman et al. (2020) highlight, however,
that peripheral economies are less likely to have this independence if they have current account deficits,
low reserve levels, relatively closed financial markets, and/or recent sharp increases in net portfolio
inflows and credit growth.
While these studies finds tentative evidence that macroprudential regulations can reduce a
country’s vulnerability to negative shocks, moderate boom-bust cycles, and support long-term growth,
there is some evidence that this comes at a cost in terms of short-term growth. When tighter
macroprudential policy achieves its goals of slowing credit growth and reducing international exposures
(sections 3b and 3c), this reduced access to credit can slow economic activity and GDP growth (Belkhir et
al., 2020; Sanchez and Rohn, 2016; Richter et al., 2019). The meta-analysis in Araujo et al. (2020)
provides evidence of these contrasting effects over different time horizons. Most evidence of significant
negative effects of macroprudential policy on economic activity occur in the short term, with more
muted and often positive effects over longer horizons. This could generate political challenges to
tightening macroprudential policies, as the costs accrue today while the benefits accrue over a longer
period than the political cycle.
16

3.e: Summary: Weighing the Direct Effects against the Indirect Leakages and Spillovers
The evidence on the effectiveness of macroprudential regulations suggests that they have had some
success in terms of their direct targets—primarily in terms of credit growth (including mortgages) and
certain types of riskier exposures (such as to FX bank borrowing). There is also tentative evidence that
they can moderate boom-bust cycles over time, albeit possibly at a cost of slower short-term growth.
There is less evidence, however, that these regulations (including capital-flow management measures)
can meaningfully affect other variables, such as the exchange rate or volume of capital flows. One
emerging theme is how regulations can also have unintended consequences that dampen their
effectiveness and shift risks outside the regulatory perimeter.
More specifically, although tighter macroprudential regulations restrain lending by domestic
banks, the impact on broader credit growth is more muted as lending increases through non-banks
(Akinci and Olmstead-Rumsey, 2018; Cizel et al., 2019; Ahnert et al., 2020) and foreign banks (Aiyar et
al., 2014a, 2014b; Reinhardt and Sowerbutts, 2015; Avdjiev et al., 2016). Banks can even dodge certain
regulations by adjusting the type of loan. 17 The size of these leakages and spillovers depends on the
characteristics of the banking system, with larger effects in countries that have more developed nonbank financial systems and that are more open to international banks (Beirne and Friedrich, 2017). Most
important, however, although these leakages and spillovers can be large, the increased lending by
international banks and non-bank institutions appears to only partially compensate for the reduction in
credit from domestic banks, so that macroprudential regulations still accomplish their direct goals. 18
While these leakages and spillovers appear to only mute, but not undermine, the effectiveness
of macroprudential regulations, they could also introduce other hard-to-measure risks. For example, if
macroprudential regulations cause banks to have safer lending portfolios at home, but increase lending
to riskier entities abroad—what are the implications for the resilience of domestic banks? Or if
regulations reduce banks’ exposure to currency movements, but FX exposure shifts to other domestic
entities that are less sophisticated and less hedged against currency rate movements—is the country as
a whole more vulnerable (Ahnert et al., 2020)? Or if regulations cause banks to reduce lending to
leveraged households but increase lending to the corporate sector, are they less resilient to some

For example, banks responded to LTV limits on secured lending in Sweden by increasing unsecured loans
(Sveriges Riksbank, 2012).
18
For example, Aiyar et al. (2014b) estimate that resident foreign branches fill in about one-third of the initial
contraction in domestic lending from tighter regulations in the UK, while Ahnert et al. (2020) estimate that
corporate debt issuance fills in for about 10% of the contraction in domestic lending from tighter FX requirements.
17

17

shocks in the future (Acharya et al., 2020)? Finally, many of these scenarios involve shifting risks outside
the regulated sector, implying government authorities could be less cognizant of risks building in the
broader economy, and possibly less able to effectively respond to a major shock.
This growing evidence that macroprudential regulations can shift risks outside the regulatory
perimeter and across borders raises important questions about the coordination of macroprudential
regulations across countries. Agénor and da Silva (2018), ECB (2020a), and Engel (2016) are
comprehensive surveys of the arguments and evidence; all conclude that there is a strong case for
international coordination in order to improve effectiveness at the national level, especially in a world of
global capital markets. ECB (2020b) provides framework for assessing and moderating these spillovers
within Europe, and BIS (2010) for use of the CCyB. Theoretical models, however, show that while there
can be sizable gains from coordination, especially for more financially integrated economies, the gains
can be asymmetric and small for the world as a whole (Agénor and da Silva, 2019). This can create
political economy challenges, in addition to concerns that many macroprudential authorities (including
central banks) have a purely domestic mandate. Bergant et al. (2020) makes the important point,
however, that even if macroprudential policies in one country lead to regulatory arbitrage that shifts
risks to others, this could still be optimal for the receiving country if it improves the resilience of an
important trading and financial partner. Therefore, even if practical and political hurdles limit the
international coordination of macroprudential policies, there are still net benefits for each country in
bolstering its own financial resilience, despite widespread regulatory arbitrage.
4.

DID MACROPRUDENTIAL POLICY REDUCE VULNERABILITY DURING THE CORONA CRISIS?

The spike in risk aversion, increase in market volatility and sharp economic contraction in early 2020 due
to the “Corona Crisis” provide a unique natural experiment to fill in one of the gaps in the literature on
macroprudential policy: whether countries that tightened policy have meaningfully improved the
resilience of their financial systems and broader economies to external shocks. This assessment was
previously constrained by the limited number of recessions and “busts” over the window that these
tools have gained prominence (section 3d). Moreover, even though the tentative evidence to date
suggests that tighter macroprudential policy can moderate financial cycles, it is unclear if policy has
been tightened enough to provide meaningful support during a severe shock. The sharp impact of the
Corona Crisis, however, provides a test under extreme stress. The unexpected global spread of the virus
in early 2020 also provides an econometric setting that avoids the endogeneity issues plaguing earlier
empirical work (section 3a), as the initial impact was independent of country adjustments to
18

macroprudential policy. Data is not yet available for a full assessment, but this section performs a first
look at whether macroprudential stances mitigated the immediate negative impact on market variables
and growth forecasts.
This analysis is most closely related to Takats and Temesvary (2019b), which finds that
macroprudential measures helped stabilize cross-border capital flows during the 2013 taper tantrum,
but that the effects were stronger in advanced economies than emerging markets (the opposite of
expected). This analysis is also related to Ostry et al. (2012), which shows that emerging markets with
FX-related regulations and/or capital controls experienced smaller declines in GDP growth during the
2008 Crisis. One challenge for both of these papers, however, was the more limited use of
macroprudential policy during these earlier episodes (Figure 1).
This section assesses if a country’s pre-existing macroprudential policy stance affected key
variables during the first quarter of 2020—what I will refer to as the “Covid shock”. This window
captures the period of market stress when the world shifted from expecting Covid-19 would likely be
contained to one region to realizing its global contagion and virulence. Although the health and
economic effects were still largely unknown at the start of 2020, strong policy responses began to
stabilize financial markets by early April, so that most market measures (such as the VIX and credit
spreads) began to improve just after 2020Q1. This timing is propitious as it allows the use of quarterly
data.
More specifically, to assess the impact of a country’s macroprudential policy stance during this
period of heightened stress, I estimate:
�𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖,𝐶𝐶 − 𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖,𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵 � = 𝛼𝛼 + 𝛽𝛽 ∗ 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖,𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵 + 𝛿𝛿 ∗ 𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖,𝐶𝐶 + 𝛾𝛾 ∗ 𝑍𝑍𝑖𝑖,𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵 + 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖,𝐶𝐶

,

where 𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖,𝐶𝐶 and 𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖,𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵 are measures of the resilience of each country i during the Covid shock (C) and

before Covid (BC); MPi, BC is the country’s macroprudential policy stance before the Covid shock; Xi,C are

variables to control for the immediate impact of the coronavirus; and Zi,BC are variables to control for

key characteristics of the economy before the Covid shock. The 𝛼𝛼 captures the average impact of the

Covid shock across countries.

To measure a country’s macroprudential policy stance (MPi, BC), I begin by aggregating all

changes in macroprudential policy since 1990 from the iMaPP data in Alam et al. (2020), as discussed in
Section 2c and graphed in Figures 1-3. The resulting policy stances range from -5 to 54 across 134

19

countries, with a higher value indicating a tighter stance. 19 The distribution is asymmetric with a long
right tail (Figure 3), reflecting a few countries that have tightened macroprudential policy frequently,
while the majority have made more limited net changes. 20 Since this measure may not accurately
capture the intensity of macroprudential policy, 21 and since the effect of policy on resilience may be
non-linear, I construct several proxies for the policy stance. First, MPi, BC is a dummy variable equal to 1 if
the country has tightened macroprudential policy on net since 1990 (83% of the sample). I also define

the dummy with tighter thresholds—such as if the country tightened policy at the median (four times)
or more. Next, MPi, BC is a continuous measure (the net changes in macroprudential tools since 1990, in

Figure 3) to roughly measure intensity. Finally, I create different “bins” capturing rough groups of

countries that have tighter or looser stances. For example, I create one bin for countries with a modestly
tight stance (from 1 to 6 tightenings, 51 % of sample) and another for countries with more aggressive
tightening (over 6, 32% of sample). I also create narrower sets of bins. 22 In each case, the omitted bin is
countries that have made no change or loosened macroprudential policy since 1990 (17% of the
sample).
Country resilience (𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖 ), is assessed using four measures: a broad equity index (in local currency);

the 5-year credit default swap rate (in US$); the US$ exchange rate; and the IMF’s forecast for 2020 GDP
growth. 23 For the regressions predicting exchange rate movements, I exclude countries with a fixed
exchange rate (based on Ilzetzki et al., 2019). For the baseline analysis, the control variables for the
immediate impact of the Covid shock are: the confirmed cases of Covid-19 as percent of the population
and the stringency of the containment and closure measures as of March 31. 24 The controls for
characteristics before the Covid shock are: the Chinn-Ito measure of financial openness; the current
account balance as a percent of GDP; and country risk 25. All estimation uses robust regression in order

The data ends in 2016 and therefore does not capture recent changes in macroprudential policy, including
tighter CCyB ratios in several countries (see Friedrich et al., 2020).
20
China has the tightest stance (54), followed by Peru and South Korea (23).
21
See section 3a. Also, countries which tighten often in small increments will appear to have a tighter stance than
countries which tighten less frequently in large increments.
22
For example, I use three narrower bins (tightening 1-4 times, 5-10 times, or >10 times). The results do not
change.
23
Equity indices and exchange rates are from Datastream and the IMF’s IFS. CDS are from Bloomberg. IMF growth
forecasts for the before-covid period were released in October 2019, and for the Covid period in April 2020. All
dependent variables are percent changes, except the growth forecasts which are in changes.
24
The case and stringency variables are for March 31 from the Oxford Covid-19 Government Response Tracker
available at: https://github.com/OxCGRT/covid-policy-tracker/.
25
See http://web.pdx.edu/~ito/Chinn-Ito_website.htm for the Chinn-Ito index. Current account data for 2019 is
from the IMF’s WEO Database, April 2020. Country risk is an index compiled by Fitch Solutions that incorporates
19

20

to reduce the influence of outliers (which is important given the skewness of the variable measuring the
intensity of macroprudential policy). A series of sensitivity tests includes additional explanatory
variables, none of which changes the main results.
Table 1 shows a sample of resulting estimates. Countries that had a tighter macroprudential
stance (and were more financially open) had significantly better equity market performance during the
Covid shock using each measure of the macroprudential stance. More specifically, column 1 shows that
equity markets fell by an average of 22% for countries that had not tightened macroprudential policy at
all, but about 16% (5.6pp less) for countries that had tightened policy at least once. Moreover, there
appears to be no additional benefit to equity markets from tightening macroprudential policy more
aggressively (relative to tightening only modestly). For example, column 3 shows no significant
difference in equity market resilience for countries that did some tightening (1 to 6 times) relative to
those that tightened more than 7 times. Results are similar using tighter bin cutoffs. Equity market
performance is also similar when the criteria for a “tight” macroprudential policy uses stricter thresholds
than just tightening once or more. 26 Moreover, although the coefficient on the continuous measure of
the macroprudential stance is significant in column 2, which could indicate a linear relationship between
tighter policy and equity market resilience, this coefficient becomes insignificant when China (which had
the tightest stance and a relatively resilient equity market) is dropped.
Although a tighter macroprudential stance appears to have supported equity markets during the
Covid shock, it provided no significant support for CDS rates, exchange rates, or expected growth. More
specifically, a tighter macroprudential stance is correlated with a smaller rise in CDS spreads, but the
effect is insignificant. The relationship between tighter macroprudential policy and the exchange rate or
expected growth appears to be even weaker, with positive coefficients in some cases and negative in
others. The results at the right of the table also suggest that far more important than macroprudential
policy for growth revisions during the Covid shock was the spread of the virus and stringency of the
government response.
To further explore if tighter macroprudential policy boosted equity market resilience during the
initial phase of the Corona crisis, but provided no significant support for CDS rates, exchange rates, or
expected growth, I perform a number of sensitivity tests. I add squared and/or cubed terms for the
macroprudential stance (using the measure of intensity) to test for different non-linear relationships,
operational, short-term and long-term political and economic risk, with a higher value indicating less risk,
https://www.fitchsolutions.com/sites/default/files/downloads/Product_Guide_Country_Risk_Apr19.pdf.
26
For example, when the macroprudential dummy is based on the tighter threshold of the sample median, the
coefficient falls slightly to 0.041 (and remains significant).

21

but these additional terms are not significant (even for equity markets). I also add eight variables (one at
a time) to capture country characteristics in 2019: an emerging market/developing economy dummy,
growth in GDP per capita, the fiscal balance to GDP, gross government debt to GDP, volatility in the
commodity terms-of-trade index (to capture reliance on commodity exports or imports, from Gruss and
Kebhaj, 2019), a rule of law index (from World Governance Indicators), restrictions on the capital
account (from Fernandez et al., 2016) and a business risk index (from Fitch Solutions). 27 In each case, the
key results are unchanged. A tighter macroprudential stance is correlated with significantly stronger
equity performance in every case (at least at the 10% level), but no significant difference in CDS,
exchange rates, or growth revisions. The additional variables are almost never significant.
Although it is still early in the Corona crisis, these results are consistent with the empirical
evidence assessing the impact of macroprudential tools (Section 3). One of the strongest effects of
tighter macroprudential policy is restraining credit growth, which is likely to restrain equity market
booms before 2020, and therefore make these markets less vulnerable to sharp declines during the
Covid shock. Given the more limited effects of macroprudential policy on capital flows and exchange
rates, it is not surprising these tools provided less support for CDS and exchange rates. Finally, although
macroprudential tools may mitigate downside risks and amplification effects, any benefits for short- and
medium-term growth are likely to be overwhelmed by the effects of the virus on health, the stringency
of the corresponding shutdowns, and other policy responses.
5.

CONCLUSIONS

Many countries have substantially improved their macroprudential frameworks since the 2008 crisis,
providing a set of experiences to evaluate what works—and what does not. Although the literature
analyzing macroprudential policy is still in its infancy, and the number of observations and period for
analysis is still limited, a compelling body of evidence is beginning to emerge. This accumulating
evidence suggests that many of these tools can influence their immediate objective (such as slowing
credit growth and reducing exposure to FX borrowing) and some may provide benefits in terms of
achieving their longer-term goals of building financial resilience and reducing procyclicality. There is
more mixed evidence, however, on whether these tools can accomplish other goals (such as restricting
capital flows or stabilizing exchange rates), and on how effective they would be during sharp downturns.
Certain tools appear to be more effective than others, and many can create significant leakages and

27

All variables are from the IMF’s World Economic Outlook unless otherwise noted.

22

spillovers, side-effects that can partially undermine the effectiveness of the macroprudential policies by
reducing resilience in unregulated sectors.
Several caveats to this evaluation of macroprudential tools are of critical importance. Many of
these regulations are fairly new and untested, and there is only limited understanding of the
appropriate levels at which to set them in order to sufficiently reduce systemic financial risk during the
next major shock. Even if they are set at optimal levels and work as intended to improve resilience and
reduce the chances of another financial crisis, they should not be expected to reduce all volatility, tame
the business cycle, or reduce the probability of another financial crisis to zero. The unexpected spillovers
and leakages are also shifting some vulnerabilities from the regulated banking sector to other
unregulated sectors, thereby generating a new set or risks that are less closely monitored and less
understood. As macroprudential tools remain tighter for longer periods, regulatory arbitrage will only
increase, making it important to continually adapt the regulations and possibly adjust the regulatory
perimeter.
The experience from the early stages of the Corona Crisis largely support the empirical evidence
on the effectiveness of macroprudential regulations. In 2020 Q1, as markets experienced
unprecedented volatility and it became clear there would be a sharp global recession, bank resilience
was not a prominent concern. Tighter macroprudential regulations over the previous decade appeared
to mitigate issues around banks amplifying the initial shock (as occurred in 2008). Countries with tighter
macroprudential policy stances also appear to have suffered less of a decline in equity markets—
possibly because the regulations had previously mitigated credit growth. At the same time, however,
liquidity dried up, markets became dislocated, and other sectors experienced significant stress (such as
money market funds and many bond markets). These sectors were outside the purview of many of the
macroprudential tools discussed in this paper, but also where some of the risks may have shifted
through spillovers and leakages as banks responded to earlier macroprudential regulations.
As the Corona Crisis is still in its early stages, these results are only preliminary. Over time,
however, future work should be able to use this experience to fill in gaps in the existing literature on
macroprudential policy. Top priorities should be better understanding which macroprudential tools
meaningfully improve resilience during a severe negative shock, if the tools are being calibrated
appropriately, and whether regulations need to be adjusted to account for the leakages, spillovers, and
other forms of regulatory arbitrage that may be generating new risks in the future.

23

References
Acharya, V, Bergant, K, Crosignani, M, Eisert, T, McCann, F. 2020. The Anatomy of the Transmission of
Macroprudential Policies. NBER Working Paper No 27292.
Agénor, PR, da Silva, LP. 2019. Global Banking, Financial Spillovers, and Macroprudential Policy
Coordination. BIS Working Papers No. 764.
Agénor, PR, da Silva, LP. 2018. Financial Spillovers, Spillbacks, and the Scope for International
Macroprudential Policy Coordination. BIS Papers No. 97.
Aguirre, H., Repetto G. 2017. Capital and Currency-Based Macroprudential Policies: An Evaluation Using
Credit Registry Data. BIS Working Papers No. 672.
Ahnert, T, Forbes, K, Friedrich, C, Reinhardt, D. 2020. Macroprudential FX Regulations: Shifting the
Snowbanks of FX Vulnerability? Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Aiyar, S, Calomiris, C, Hooley, J, Korniyenko, Y, Wieladek, T. 2014a. The International Transmission of
Bank Capital Requirements: Evidence from the UK. Journal of Financial Economics 113(3): 368-382.
Aiyar, S, Calomiris, C, Wieladek, T. 2014b. Does Macro-Pru Leak? Evidence from a UK Policy Experiment.
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 46 (1): 368–82.
Aiyar, S, Calomiris, C and Wieladek, W. 2016. How Does Credit Supply Respond to Monetary Policy and
Bank Minimum Capital Requirements? European Economic Review 82: 142-165.
Aizenman, J, Chinn. M and Ito, H. 2020. Financial Spillovers and Macroprudential Policies. Open
Economies Review 31: 529-63.
Akinci, O, Olmstead-Rumsey, J. 2018. How Effective Are Macroprudential Policies? An Empirical
Investigation. Journal of Financial Intermediation 33 (C): 33–57.
Alam, Z, Alter, A, Eiseman, J, Gelos, G, Kan, H, Narita, M, Nier, E, Wang, N. 2019. Digging Deeper:
Evidence on the Effects of Macroprudential Policies from a New Database. IMF working Paper
WP/19/66.
Alfaro, L, Chari, A, Lanczuk, F. 2017. The Real Effects of Capital Controls: Firm-Level Evidence from a
Policy Experiment. Journal of International Economics 108(C): 191-210.
Araujo, J, Patnam, M, Popescu, A, Valencia, F, Yao, W. 2020. Effects of Macroprudential Policy: Evidence
from over 6,000 Estimates. IMF Working Paper WP/20/67, International Monetary Fund, Washington,
DC.
Avdjiev, S, Koch, C, McGuire, P, von Peter, G. 2016. International Prudential Policy Spillovers: A Global
Perspective. BIS working papers 589 (October).
Bacchetta, P, Cordonier, R, Merrouche, O. 2019. The Rise in Foreign Currency Bonds: The Role of Capital
Controls. Mimeo.
24

Basten, C, Koch, C. 2015. Higher Bank Capital Requirements and Mortgage Pricing: Evidence from the
Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCB). BIS Working Papers 511. September.
Beirne, J, Friedrich, C. 2017. Macroprudential Policies, Capital Flows, and the Structure of the Banking
Sector. Journal of International Money and Finance 75(C): 47-68.
Belkhir, M, Naceur, S.B, Candelon, B, and Wijnandts, JC. 2020. Macroprudential Policies, Economic
Growth, and Banking Crises. IMF Working Paper WP/20/65.
Bengui, J, Bianchi, J. 2018. Macroprudential Policy with Leakages. NBER Working Paper 25048, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Bergant, K, Grigoli, F, Hansen, HJ, Sandri, D. 2020. Dampening Global Financial Shocks: Can
Macroprudential Regulation Help (More than Capital Controls)? IMF Working Paper 20/106.
Bianchi, J. 2011. Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle. American Economic
Review 101 (7): 3400-3426.
Bianchi, J, Mendoza, EG. 2018. Optimal Time-Consistent Macroprudential Policy. Journal of Political
Economy 126:588-634.
BIS (Bank of International Settlements). 2016. BIS Papers No 86: Macroprudential Policy. Papers from a
joint CBRT/BIS/IMF conference on “Macroprudential policy: effectiveness and implementation
challenges”, held in Istanbul, Turkey, on 26-27 October 2015. Available at:
https://www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/bispap86.htm
BIS (Bank of International Settlements). 2012. Operationalising the Selection and Application of
Macroprudential Instruments. CGFS Papers 48. December.
BIS (Bank of International Settlements). 2010. Guidance for National Authorities Operating the
Countercyclical Capital Buffer. December. Available at: https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs187.pdf
Boar, C, Gambacorta, L, Lombardo, G, da Silva, LP. 2017. What are the Effects of Macroprudential
Policies on Macroeconomic Performance? BIS Quarterly Review, September: 71-99.
Bolton, P, Cecchetti, S, Danthine, JP, Vives, X. 2019. Sound at Last? Assessing a Decade of Financial
Regulation. London, UK: Centre for Economic Policy Research.
Bordo, M, Meissner, C. 2005. The Role of Foreign Currency Debt in Financial Crises: 1880-1913 vs. 19721997. NBER Working Paper 11897.
Brandao-Marques, L, Gelos, G, Narita, M, Nier, E. 2020. Leaning Against the Wind: An Empirical CostBenefit Analysis. IMF Working Paper 20/123.
Brunnermeier M, Eisenbach T, Sannikov Y. 2013. Macroeconomics with Financial Frictions: A Survey. In
Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Tenth World Congress of the Econometric Society, Vol. III, ed.
D Acemoglu,M Arellano, E Dekel, pp. 3–94. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.
25

Bruno, V, Shim, I, Shin, HS. 2015. Comparative Assessment of Macroprudential Policies. BIS Working
Papers 502.
Buch, C, and Goldberg, L. 2016. Cross-Border Prudential Policy Spillovers: How Much? How Important?
Evidence from the International Banking Research Network. NBER Working Paper 22874.
Buchholz, M. 2015. How Effective is Macroprudential Policy During Financial Downturns? Evidence from
Caps on Bank Leverage. Eesti Pank Working Papers. July.
Caballero, R. Krishnamurthy, A. 2001. International and Domestic Collateral Constraints in a Model of
Emerging Market Crises. Journal of Monetary Economics 48(1); 513-548.
Cerutti, E, Claessens, S, Laeven, L. 2017. The Use and Effectiveness of Macroprudential Policies: New
Evidence. Journal of Financial Stability 28: 2013-224.
Cerutti, E., Zhou, H. 2018. Cross-border Banking and the Circumvention of Macroprudential and Capital
Control Measures. IMF Working Paper WP/18/217.
Cetorelli, N and Goldberg, L. 2012. Liquidity Management of U.S. Global Banks: Internal Capital Markets
in the Great Recession. Journal of International Economics 88(2): 299-311.
CGFS (Committee on the Global Financial System). 2010. Macroprudential Instruments and Frameworks:
A Stocktaking of Issues and Experiences. CGFS Papers #38. Available at:
https://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs38.pdf
Chinn, MD, Ito, H. 2006. What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls, Institutions and
Interactions. Journal of Development Economics 81(1, Oct.): 163-192.
Cizel, J, Frost, J, Houben, A, Wierts, P. 2019. Effective Macroprudential Policy: Cross-Sector Substitution
from Price and Quantity Measures. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 51: 1209–235.
Claessens, S. 2015. An Overview of Macroprudential Tools. Annual Review of Financial Economics 7:397422.
Claessens, S, Ghosh, S, Mihet, R. 2014. Macro-Prudential Policies to Mitigate Financial System
Vulnerabilities. IMF Working Paper 14/155.
Cline, W. 2010. Financial Globalization, Economic Growth, and the Crisis of 2007-09. Peterson Institute
of International Economics: Washington, DC.
Costinot, A, Lorenzoni, G, Werning, I. 2011. A Theory of Capital Controls as Dynamic Terms-of-Trade
Manipulation. NBER Working Paper 17680.
Crowe, C, Dell’Ariccia, G, Igan, D, Rabanal, P. 2013. How to Deal with Real Estate Booms: Lessons from
Country Experiences. Journal of Financial Stability 9(3): 300-319.

26

Danisewicz, P, Reinhardt, D, Sowerbutts, R. 2017. On a Tight Leash: Does Bank Organizational Structure
Matter for Macroprudential Spillovers. Journal of International Economics 109(Nov): 174-194.
De Crescenzio, A, Golin, M, Molteni, F. 2017. “Have Currency-Based Capital Flow Management Measures
Curbed International Banking Flows?” OECD Working Papers on International Investment 2017/04.
De Gregorio, J, Edwards, S, Valdés, R. 2000. Controls on Capital Inflows: Do They Work? Journal of
Development Economics 63, 59-83.
Dell'Ariccia, G, Igan, D, Laeven, L, Tong, H. 2012. Policies for Macrofinancial Stability: How to Deal with
Credit Booms. IMF Staff Discussion Note 12/06.
ECB (European Central Bank). 2020a. Cross-border Spillover Effects of Macroprudential Policies: A
Conceptual Framework. ECB Working Paper No 242. June
ECB (European Central Bank). 2020b. Framework to Assess Cross-border Spillover Effects of
Macroprudential Policies. April ECB Report available at:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ecb.200428_framework_to_assess_crossborder_spillovers_of_macroprudential_policies~72576c7b4e.en.pdf
Edge, R, Liang, N. 2017. New Financial Governance Structures and Central Banks. Hutchins Center
Working Paper #32.
Eichengreen, B, Hausmann, R, Panizza, U. 2003. Currency Mismatches, Debt Intolerance and Original Sin:
Why They are Not the Same and Why it Matters. NBER Working Paper 10036.
Engel, C. 2016. Macroprudential Policy in a World of High Capital Mobility: Policy Implications from an
Academic Perspective. Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 42(Dec): 162-172.
Farhi, E, Werning, I. 2016. A Theory of Macroprudential Policies in the Presence of Nominal Rigidities.
Econometrica 84(5): 1645-1704.
Fernandez, A, Klein, M, Rebucci, A, Schindler, S, Uribe, M. 2016. `Capital Control Measures: A New
Dataset. IMF Economic Review 64: 548-574.
Forbes, K. 2020. Do Sounder Banks Make Calmer Waters? The Link between Bank Regulations and
Capital Flow Waves. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 110(May): 516522.
Forbes, K. 2019. Macroprudential Policy: What We’ve Learned, Don’t Know, and Need to Do. American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 109(May): 470-475.
Forbes, K. 2018. Macroprudential Policy After the Crisis: Forging a Thor’s Hammer for Financial Stability.
Report prepared for the Task Force reviewing monetary and currency policies for Iceland. Available at:
https://mitsloan.mit.edu/shared/ods/documents/?DocumentID=4919

27

Forbes, K. 2007. The Microeconomic Evidence on Capital Controls: No Free Lunch. In Capital Controls
and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices, and Consequences, S. Edwards (ed.),
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press: 171-132.
Forbes, K, Fratzscher, M, Kostka, T, Straub, R, 2016. Bubble Thy Neighbor: Portfolio Effects
and Externalities of Capital Controls. Journal of International Economics 99:85-104.
Forbes, K, Fratzscher, M, Straub, R. 2015. Capital-Flow Management Measures: What are They Good
For? Journal of International Economics 96(S76-S97.
Forbes, K, Klein, M. 2015. Pick Your Poison: The Choices and Consequences of Policy Responses to
Crises. IMF Economic Review 63 (April): 197-237.
Forbes, K, Klein, M, 2014. Removing the Punch Bowl: Moderating Vulnerabilities from Global Economic
Booms. Mimeo, MIT-Sloan School of Management.
Forbes, K, Reinhardt, D, Wieladek, T. 2017. The Spillovers, Interactions, and (Un)intended Consequences
of Monetary and Regulatory Policies. Journal of Monetary Economics 85:1-22.
Forbes, K, Warnock, F. 2012. Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight and Retrenchment. Journal of
International Economics 88 (2): 235–251.
Friedrich, C, Guérin, P, Leiva-León, D. 2020. Monetary Policy Independence and the Strength of the
Global Financial Cycle. Bank of Canada Staff Working Papers No 20-25.
Frost, J, Ito, H. Stralen, R. 2020. The Effectiveness of Macroprudential Policies and Capital Controls
against Volatile Capital Inflows. Unpublished mimeo.
FSB (Financial Stability Board). 2009. Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Addressing Procylicality
in the Financial System. April. Available at: http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/r_0904a.pdf
Galati, G, Moessner, R. 2018. What Do We Know About the Effects of Macroprudential Policy?
Economica 85 (340): 735–70.
Gelos, G, Bronicka, L, Koepke, R, Sahay, R, Sgherri, S. 2019. Capital Flows at Risk: Taming the Ebbs and
Flows. IMF Working Paper WP/19/279.
Giordani, PE, Ruta, M, Weisfeld, H, Zhu, L. 2017. Capital Flow Deflection. Journal of International
Economics 105: 102–18.
Gruss, B, Kebhaj, S. 2019. Commodity Terms of Trade: A New Database. International Monetary Fund
Working Paper 19/21.
Hanson, S, Kashyap, A, Stein, J. 2011. A Macroprudential Approach to Financial Regulation. Journal of
Economic Perspectives 25(1): 3-28.

28

He, D, Nier, E, Kang, H. 2016. “Macroprudential Measures for Addressing Housing Sector Risks. BIS
Papers No 86: Macroprudential Policies. Bank of International Settlements: 117-121.
Houston, J, Lin, C, Ma, Y. 2012. Regulatory Arbitrage and International Bank Flows. The Journal of
Finance 67 (5): 1845–895.
Ilzetzki, E, Reinhart, C, Rogoff, K. 2019. Exchange Arrangements Entering the Twenty-First Century:
Which Anchor Will Hold? Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(2): 599-646.
IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2015. Measures which are both Macroprudential and Capital Flow
Management Measures: An IMF Approach. Available at:
http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2015/041015.pdf
IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2014a. “Staff Guidance Note On Macroprudential Policy.”
December. Available at: http://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Policy-Papers/Issues/2016/12/31/StaffGuidance-Note-on-Macroprudential-Policy-PP4925
IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2014b. Staff Guidance Note on Macroprudential Policy-Detailed
Guidance on Instruments. December. Available at:
http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2014/110614a.pdf
IMF-FSB-BIS. 2016. Elements of Effective Macroprudential Policies: Lessons from International
Experience. Available at: http://www.imf.org/external/np/g20/pdf/2016/083116.pdf
Jeanne, O, Korinek, A. 2019. Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A Pigouvian Taxation Approach. Journal
of Monetary Economics 107(Nov): 2-17.
Jiménez, G, Ongena, S, Peydro, JL, Saurina, J. 2017. Macroprudential Policy, Countercyclical Bank Capital
Buffers and Credit Supply: Evidence from the Spanish Dynamic Provisioning Experiments. Journal of
Political Economy 125(6): 2126-77
Jordá, Ó., Schularick, M, Taylor, A. 2016. The Great Mortgaging: Housing Finance, Crises and Business
Cycles. Economic Policy 31(January): 107-52.
Kenç, T. 2016. Macroprudential Regulation: History, Theory and Policy. In BIS Papers No 86:
Macroprudential Policy: 1-16.
Klein, M. 2012. Capital Controls: Gates vs. Walls. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Fall 2012, pgs.
317-355.
Korinek, A. 2018. Regulating Capital Flows to Emerging Markets: An Externality View. Journal of
International Economics 111 (March): 61-80.
Kuttner, K, Shim, I. 2016. Can Non-Interest Rate Policies Stabilize Housing Markets? Evidence from a Panel
of 57 Economies. Journal of Financial Stability 26(October): 31-44.

29

Lim, C., Columba, F, Costa, A, Kongsamut, P, Otani, A, Saiyid, M, Wezel, T, Wu, X. 2011. Macroprudential
Policy: What Instruments and How to Use Them? Lessons from Country Experiences. IMF Working Paper
WP/11/238.
Magud, N, Reinhart, C, Rogoff, K. 2011. Capital Controls: Myth and Reality – A Portfolio Balance
Approach. Peterson Institute of International Economics WP 11-7.
Mano, R and Sgherri, S. 2020. One Shock, Many Policy Responses. IMF Working Paper WP/20/10.
McCann, F, O’Toole, C. 2019. Cross-Border Macroprudential Policy Spillovers and Bank Risk-Taking.
International Journal of Central Banking 15 (4): 267–311.
Metrick, A and Rhee, J. 2018. Regulatory Reform. Annual Review of Financial Economics 10:153-172.
Mian, A, Sufi, A, Verner, E. 2017. Household Debt and Business Cycles World-Wide. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 312:1755-1817.
Neanidis, KC. 2019. Volatile Capital Flows and Economic Growth: The Role of Banking Supervision.
Journal of Financial Stability 40: 77–93.
Nier, E, and Zicchino, L. 2008. Bank Losses, Monetary Policy and Financial Stability-Evidence on the
Interplay from Panel Data. IMF Working Paper No. 08/232.
Ongena, S, Popov, A, Udell. GF. 2013. When the Cat’s Away the Mice Will Play: Does Regulation at Home
Affect Bank Risk-Taking Abroad? Journal of Financial Economics 108 (3): 727–50.
Ostry, J, Ghosh AR, Chamon M, Qureshi MS. 2012. Tools for Managing Financial-Stability Risks from
Capital Inflows. Journal of International Economics 88: 407-421.
Ostry, J, Ghosh, A, Habermeier, K, Chamon, M, Qureshi, M, Reinhardt, R. 2010. Capital Inflows: The Role
of Controls. IMF Staff Position Note 10/04.
Reinhardt, D, Sowerbutts, R. 2015. Regulatory Arbitrage in Action: Evidence from Banking Flows and
Macroprudential Policy. Bank of England Working Paper No 546.
Richter, B., Schularick, M, Shim, I. 2019. The Costs of Macroprudential Policy. Journal of International
Economics 118 (2): 263–82.
Sánchez, A, Röhn, O. 2016. How do Policies Influence GDP Tail Risks?, OECD Economics Department
Working Papers, no 1339.
Sveriges Riksbank. 2012. Financial Stability Report 2012:1. Available at:
http://www.riksbank.se/Documents/Rapporter/FSR/2012/FSR_1/rap_fsr1_120601_eng.pdf
Takáts, E, Temesvary, J. 2019a. How Does the Interaction of Macroprudential and Monetary Policies
Affect Cross-border Bank Lending? BIS Working Papers No 782.
30

Takáts, E, Temesvary, J. 2019b. Can Macroprudential Measures Make Cross-Border Lending More
Resilient? Lesson from the Taper Tantrum. International Journal of Central Banking 15(1): 62-105.
Vandenbussche, J, Vogel, U, Detragiache, E. 2015. Macroprudential Policies and Housing Prices: a New
Database and Empirical Evidence for Central, Eastern, and Southeastern Europe. Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking 47 (S1), 343–377.

31

Table 1
Impact of Macroprudential Stance on Equities, CDS, Exchange Rates and Expected Growth during the Covid Shock
Equity Market
MP Measure
Dummy Intensity
Bins
Macroprudential 0.056** 0.003**
Stance
(0.025) (0.001)
Moderate MP
0.059**
Tightening
(0.027)
Aggressive MP
0.055*
Tightening
(0.028)
Covid Cases
-0.217
-0.180
-0.210
/ Population
(0.252) (0.246) (0.258)
Stringency
-0.000
-0.000
-0.000
of Response
(0.001) (0.001) (0.001)
Capital account 0.120** 0.105** 0.117**
openness
(0.040) (0.039) (0.041)
Current account 0.002
0.002
0.002
/ GDP
(0.002) (0.002) (0.002)
Country risk
-0.002
-0.001
-0.002
index
(0.001) (0.001) (0.001)
Constant
-0.220* -0.226** -0.216*
(0.112) (0.106) (0.114)
Observations
R-squared

65
0.260

65
0.259

65
0.253

Credit Default Swap Rate
Dummy Intensity
Bins
-0.206
-0.016
(0.255) (0.011)
-0.204
(0.277)
-0.209
(0.282)
-1.992
-2.186
-1.993
(2.121) (2.022) (2.147)
0.001
0.001
0.001
(0.007) (0.007) (0.008)
-0.698* -0.768** -0.698*
(0.362) (0.353) (0.366)
0.007
0.012
0.008
(0.024) (0.023) (0.024)
-0.013
-0.012
-0.013
(0.013) (0.013) (0.014)
2.611** 2.576** 2.609**
(1.008) (0.946) (1.020)
72
0.218

72
0.250

72
0.217

Exchange Rate
Dummy Intensity
Bins
0.028
0.003
(0.057) (0.003)
-0.001
(0.064)
0.037
(0.064)
0.295
0.355
0.301
(0.346) (0.336) (0.364)
-0.001
-0.001
-0.001
(0.001) (0.001) (0.001)
-0.126
-0.161*
-0.122
(0.075) (0.078) (0.080)
-0.008
-0.010*
-0.009
(0.005) (0.005) (0.005)
0.001
0.002
0.001
(0.003) (0.003) (0.003)
0.175
0.138
0.159
(0.201) (0.199) (0.211)
30
0.230

30
0.269

30
0.208

GDP Growth Forecast for 2020
Dummy Intensity
Bins
-0.622
0.005
(0.522) (0.026)
-0.495
(0.545)
-0.840
(0.576)
-11.325** -9.158* -11.633**
(4.726) (4.807) (4.701)
-0.033** -0.033** -0.032**
(0.012) (0.012) (0.012)
-1.409** -1.263* -1.397**
(0.694) (0.711) (0.690)
0.078** 0.066** 0.079**
(0.031) (0.032) (0.031)
-0.073** -0.075** -0.071**
(0.024) (0.025) (0.024)
2.010
1.397
1.835
(1.712) (1.689) (1.722)
106
0.375

106
0.352

106
0.387

Notes: Equi ty ma rket, credi t defa ul t s wa p ra te a nd excha nge ra te a re the percent cha nge i n the broa d equi ty i ndex (i n l oca l currency), fi ve-yea r credi t-defa ul t s wa p (i n
US$), a nd excha nge ra te (vers us the US$) from end-2019 to 2020Q1. GDP growth foreca s t for 2020 i s the cha nge i n the IMF's foreca s t for 2020 GDP growth between i ts
October 2019 foreca s t a nd Apri l 2020 foreca s t. Countri es wi th a fi xed excha nge ra te a re excl uded from the excha nge ra te regres s i ons . The MP (Ma croprudenti a Pol i cy) i s
ei ther: a "Dummy" equa l to 1 i f ma croprudenti a l pol i cy ha s been ti ghtened 1 or more ti mes on net; "Intens i ty" whi ch i s a conti nus ous mea s ure of the a ggrega te
ti ghteni ng s i nce 1990; or "Bi ns " wi th a dummy equa l to one for "Modera te MP Ti ghteni ng" (from 1 to 6 ti mes ) or "Aggres s i ve MP Ti ghteni ng" (more tha n 6 ti mes ). See
text for other va ri a bl e defi ni ti ons . Al l es ti ma tes a re robus t regres s i ons . ** a nd * i ndi ca te s i gni fi ca nce a t the 5% a nd 10% l evel , res pecti vel y.

32

Figure 1
Changes in Macroprudential Policy over Time
Net Changes in Macroprudential Policy
Annually by Country Group
100
All Countries

80

Advanced Economies

60

Emerging & Developing Economies

40
20
0
-20

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Average Changes in Macroprudential Policy
Annually per Country in each Group
1.2
All Countries
Advanced Economies

0.8

Emerging & Developing Economies

0.4

0.0

-0.4

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Average Macroprudential Policy Stance
Annually by Country Group
6
All Countries

5

Advanced Economies

4

Emerging & Developing Economies

3
2
1
0
-1

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Notes: Ma croprudenti a l da ta ba s ed on da ta from Al a m et a l . (2019). Country cl a s s i fi ca ti on ba s ed on IMF,
Worl d Economi c Outl ook da ta ba s e (2018). See text for a ddi ti ona l deta i l s on ca l cul a ti on of
ma croprudenti a l mea s ures .

33

Figure 2: Average Country Stance by Macroprudential Tool (2016q4)
Full Sample
1.00
0.80
0.60
0.40
0.20

OT

RR

SIFI

LFX

LTD

Liquidity

Tax

LTV

DSTI

LCG

LoanR

LLP

LVR

Capital

Conservation

CCB

-0.20

LFC

0.00

Advanced Economies
1.00
0.80
0.60
0.40
0.20
0.00

OT

RR

SIFI

LFX

LTD

Liquidity

Tax

LTV

DSTI

LCG

LoanR

LLP

LVR

Capital

CCB

Conservation

LFC

-1.5

-0.20

Emerging & Developing Economies
1.00
0.80
0.60
0.40
0.20

OT

SIFI

RR

LFX

LTD

Liquidity

Tax

DSTI

LTV

LoanR

LCG

LLP

LVR

Capital

Conservation

CCB

-0.20

LFC

0.00

Notes: The ma croprudenti a l tool s a re: the counter-cycl i ca l ca pi ta l buffer (CCB), ca pi ta l
cons erva ti on buffer (Cons erva ti on), ca pi ta l requi rements (Ca pi ta l ), l evera ge l i mi ts (LVR),
l oa n l os s provi s i ons (LLP), Li mi ts on credi t growth (LCG), l oa n res tri cti ons (Loa nR), l i mi ts on
forei gn currency l endi ng (LFC), l i mi ts on l oa n-to-va l ue ra ti os (LTV), l i mi ts on the debt-s ervi ceto-i ncome ra ti o (DSTI), ta xes a nd l evi es a ppl i ed to certa i n tra ns a cti ons , a s s ets or l i a bi l i ti es
(Ta x), l i qui di ty requi rements (Li qui di ty), l i mi ts on the l oa n-to-depos i t ra ti o (LTD), l i mi ts on
forei gn excha nge pos i ti ons (LFX), res erve requi rements for ma croprudenti a l rea s ons (RR),
mea s ures to mi ti ga te ri s ks from gl oba l a nd domes ti c s ys temi ca l l y i mporta nt i ns ti tuti ons
(SIFI) a nd ma croprudenti a l mea s ures not ca ptured i n the a bove l i s t (OT).
Source: Ba s ed on da ta from Al a m et a l . (2019).

34

Figure 3
Distribution of Macroprudential Policy Stances
30

2000q1

65

25

30

Advanced Economies
Emerging & Developing

20

20

15

15

10

10

5

5

0

0
-5

0

30

5

2010q1

25

10

>14

Advanced Economies
Emerging & Developing

15

15

10

10

5

5

-5

0

5

-5

0

10

>14

5

2016q4

25
20

0

Advanced Economies
Emerging & Developing

30

20

0

2007q1

25

10

>14

Advanced Economies
Emerging & Developing

-5

0

5

10

>14

Notes: Macroprudential policy stance is cumulative changes in 17 different macroprudential policies since 1990q1. Sample includes 36 advanced economies and 98 emerging and
developing economics, based on IMF, WEO 2018 classification.
Source: Based on quarterly data from Alam et al. (2019), version 2019-03-05.

35

