                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            MEASURING CUSTOMER CHURN AND INTERCONNECTEDNESS

                                        Scott R. Baker
                                         Brian Baugh
                                       Marco C. Sammon

                                       Working Paper 27707
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27707


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Scott R. Baker, Brian Baugh, and Marco C. Sammon. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring Customer Churn and Interconnectedness
Scott R. Baker, Brian Baugh, and Marco C. Sammon
NBER Working Paper No. 27707
August 2020
JEL No. D22,E22,G32

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper demonstrates that it is possible to construct accurate pictures of firm revenue, growth,
geographic dispersion, and customer base characteristics using an increasingly accessible class of
consumer financial transaction data. We develop two new measures which characterize firms'
customer bases: the rate of churn in a firm's customer base and a metric of the pairwise similarity
between firms' customer bases. We show that these measures provide important insights into the
behavior of both real firm decisions and firm asset prices. Rates of customer churn affect the level
and volatility of firm-level investment, markups, and profits. Churn also affects how quickly
firms respond to shocks in the value of their growth options (i.e. Tobin's~Q). Moreover, high
churn firms tended to face steeper declines in consumer spending during the recent COVID-19
outbreak. Similarity between firms' customer bases highlights one under-explored type of
predictability among stock returns -- we demonstrate that significant alpha can be generated using
a trading strategy that exploits our index of customer base similarity across firms.


Scott R. Baker                                   Marco C. Sammon
Kellogg School of Management                     Department of Financce
Northwestern University                          Kellog School
2211 Campus Drive                                Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208                               2001 Sheridan Rd, Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER                                         mcsammon@gmail.com
s-baker@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Brian Baugh
College of Business
University of Lincoln - Nebraska
bbaugh2@unl.edu
1        Introduction
For firms throughout the economy, customer bases represent one of the most important assets as
well as one of the biggest sources of risk. Understanding the composition and behavior of customer
bases can be crucial for understanding both firm asset prices and real economic decisions. While
some firms interact with an ever-changing set of customers, other firms build a durable customer
base that adjusts only slowly to firm-level shocks. Differences in the durability of customer bases
across firms is likely to influence firm behavior. For example, firms with stable customer bases
may be able to charge higher markups than firms with more transient customer bases.
        Another important characteristic of customer bases is the distribution of income within the
customer base. Shocks to the income of customer bases can drive revenue growth, volatility, and
correlations across firms. Firms both across and within industry may have substantial overlaps in
customer bases, yielding a new vector for demand shocks (e.g. income shocks among customers)
to affect multiple firms at once.
        Despite the implications that customer bases and customer networks may have for firm-level
outcomes, it has been difficult to obtain systematic data about firm customer bases for any par-
ticular firm, much less a full network of firms and linkages through their customer bases. In this
paper, we address this shortfall in data by utilizing financial transaction data to gain insights into
the composition, characteristics, and time-series variation in firm-level customer bases.
        Numerous researchers in the United States and around the world have begun to gain access to
detailed financial transaction data and conduct research focusing mainly on questions relating to
household decision-making: consumption and behavioral finance, microeconomic foundations of
aggregate shocks, policy analysis, and individual equity market behavior.1 While financial trans-
action data has already transformed these fields related to households and consumers, this paper
shows that this class of data has substantial utility when applied to research regarding consumer-
facing firms, as well.
        In part, this paper works to demonstrate that financial transaction data can be applied to many
more questions and fields than has currently been the case. To our knowledge, Agarwal et al.
    1
        Some research utilizing financial transaction data has used sources from Mexico (Bachas et al., 2019), Singapore
(Agarwal and Qian, 2014), Brazil (Medina, 2020), Turkey (Aydin, 2019), Germany (Baker et al., 2020), Iceland
(Olafsson and Pagel, 2018), and the United States (Ganong and Noel, 2019).


                                                             1
(2020) is perhaps the only other paper that takes this view using transaction-level data. They
demonstrate that disaggregated spending data can provide high quality signals about consumer
demand and equity prices for consumer-facing firms. They also find some indications that the
types of customers that patronize a given retailer predicts the equity market response to spending
shocks at that retailer.
    In this vein, we show that using individual financial transaction data to understand firm cus-
tomer bases can allow for unique insights into industry-level concentration and competition, the
real effects of marketing and advertising on customer behavior, how regional shocks propagate
through the economy, and how customer bases respond to mergers or financial distress within
firms. We develop and validate several metrics relating to firms’ customer bases and demonstrate
two applications in which such metrics yield insights into both the real economic outcomes of
firms as well as the extent to which their stock prices may co-move.
    In this paper, we utilize a transaction-level database that covers debit and credit card spending
across approximately two million American users to gain insights about the firms that they patron-
ize. One limitation of utilizing data stemming from individuals’ financial transactions is that we
are unable to analyze firms across all industries. Firms in industries like business services, manu-
facturing, wholesale retail, and government do not interface directly with the household sector and
thus will not be the counterparty to any consumer credit or debit transactions.
    As a consequence, our high quality window into the customer bases – the source of revenue – of
firms is limited to the set of directly consumer facing firms like grocery stores, restaurants, retailers,
utilities, airlines, hotels, and many online services. In this paper, we match to approximately 550
American firms, 420 of whom are publicly traded and 130 of which are private. While we are
limited to a subset of firms in the economy, for this set of firms we can observe the distribution
of firm’s revenue as well as data on each individual customer and the other firms at which that
customer shops. Finally, we can observe how these customer base characteristics change over time
for each matched firm.
    Our first task is to demonstrate that the picture we obtain of a given firm from its customer
base yields accurate information. To do so, we compare financial and geographic characteristics
for the matched firms within our data to similar data obtained from external sources. In particular,
we show that, using our financial transaction data, we can accurately predict firm revenue levels


                                                    2
and growth rates when compared to data from Compustat. Second, we compare the geographic
distribution of revenue to firms that we observe in our data and compare to an external measure
of the geographic spread of firms’ establishments. We find a close correlation between the two,
demonstrating that we can obtain clear signals of not only aggregate revenue and growth rates, but
also the geographic dispersion of firm revenue. Finally, we compare elements of the observed cus-
tomer bases, like average levels of income. We find that the observed average income of customer
bases predicts firm quality and prices obtained from Yelp.com.
       With our validated data, we turn to generating some stylized facts about firm customer bases
and how they shift over time. We first construct an index of the rate of churn in a firm’s customer
base over time. We also design a metric of the pairwise similarity between two firms’ customer
bases.
       These are quite distinct from existing firm-level measures. For instance, while there are other
measures of similarity across firms, these typically measure distance in terms of product attributes
or competitive distance (eg. Hoberg and Phillips (2010)). Our measure of customer-base similarity
captures a crucial element of correlated risks and similarity from the demand side. Moreover,
measuring customer churn directly provides a cleaner and more direct indicator of customer loyalty
and stability than existing proxies like SG&A spending.
       We show that both of these measures provide important insights into the behavior of both real
firm decisions and firm asset prices. First, we find that rates of customer churn affect the level and
volatility of firm-level investment, markups, and profits, as well as how quickly firms respond to
shocks. Second, we find that customer base similarity measures are a source of correlated demand
shocks for retailers’ goods – if customers face an income shock, all firms they frequent may be
affected – and can lead to predictable asset price co-movements among customer-linked firms.
       In our first application, we use our measure of customer base churn to test predictions of a
model in which a firm’s customer base acts as a state variable – firms invest in customer acquisition
and retention and thus the customer base is sticky and adjusts only slowly over time. This model
acts as one possible foundation of an adjustment cost model of firm investment and yields a number
of predictions about real firm outcomes.2 In particular, such a model would predict that firms
with lower levels of customer base churn would have higher rates of profitability, investment, and
   2
       See e.g. Christiano et al. (2005), Eberly et al. (2012).



                                                                  3
markups and would also respond more slowly to shocks to the firm over time.
   In earlier work, Gourio and Rudanko (2014) test for the presence of a relationship between
firm’s customer bases and these financial outcomes among publicly traded U.S. firms. Without a
direct measure of customer base churn, they rely on Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
(SG&A) or advertising expenses across industries to proxy for the level of ‘customer capital’ that
an industry has: the higher the ratio of SG&A expenses to sales, the higher the predicted level
of customer capital would be. Using our direct measure of customer base churn, we are able to
confirm the presence of these relationships at an individual firm-level. We also demonstrate that,
while SG&A spending tends to correlate with customer capital in most industries, it is a poor
measure of customer capital, measured more directly by customer base churn, within the retail and
restaurant sector.
   We then test whether our measure of customer base churn predicts consumer responses to the
COVID-19 outbreak. We find that firms in the top quartile of customer churn experience declines
in consumer spending that are at least 10 percentage points larger in magnitude than firms in the
bottom quartile of customer churn.
   Our second application explores the potential to better understand correlations in the demand-
side risk faced by firms – firms with overlapping customer bases are subject to correlated demand
fluctuations following shocks to their customer bases. If these customer base similarities are unob-
served or ignored by market participants, asset prices may only respond with a lag to information
about demand shocks.
   In a related test of firm linkages generating predictable asset price changes, Cohen and Frazz-
ini (2008) examine the predictability of stock returns among firms who act as supplier-customer
pair. They note that markets often do not fully incorporate information regarding the likely future
profitability of the supplier following news releases (measured as earnings report surprises) by the
customer.
   In this paper, we perform a similar analysis, testing whether the stock returns of firms tend to
predict future stock returns of firms with similar customer bases. We find strong evidence that this
relationship holds for both stock returns and earnings announcement surprises. Moreover, after a
surprising earnings release by firm i, future analyst accuracy for similar firms j ∈ J are unaffected.
That is, analysts seem to be unaware of (or unable to measure) these customer base similarities,


                                                  4
responding only with a substantial lag and allowing for the possibility of predictable returns among
these similar firms. We find that a trading strategy exploiting our measure of customer base simi-
larity can generate annual alpha of approximately 5%.
    Overall, this paper demonstrates the utility of detailed firm-level data regarding customer bases
and customer networks. While financial transaction level data has been utilized to great effect
in the study of household behavior, its use in fields like industrial organization, marketing, asset
pricing, and corporate finance has been minimal. We demonstrate that this type of data can generate
new insights into the heterogeneous real economic outcomes of firms and also into previously
unobservable firm-firm networks that predict co-movement in asset prices across firms.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our data and the procedures
taken to match credit and debit card transactions to firms. Section 3 presents some stylized facts
about customer bases and details our measures of customer base churn and customer base similarity
across firms. Section 4 presents evidence that we are observing accurate pictures of firm customer
bases and their characteristics. Sections 5 and 6 lay out two applications in which we demonstrate
that understanding firm’s customer bases can yield important insights about asset prices and real
economic decisions taken by firms. Finally Section 7 concludes.



2     Data

2.1    Transaction-Level Linked-Account Data

Online aggregation of financial accounts is a popular service that allows users to easily monitor
financial activities from across multiple financial institutions using a single web-page or smart-
phone app. Account aggregation services often allow features such as budgeting, expense tracking,
etc. Dozens of companies currently provide such services and our data comes from one of the
largest of these firms.
    Once a user initially signs up for the free service, they are given the opportunity to provide
the service with user-names and passwords to a variety of financial accounts (checking, savings,
credit card, brokerage, retirement, mortgage, student loan, etc.) from any financial institution,
though our particular data is limited to bank and credit card accounts. After signing up, the service
automatically and regularly pulls data from the user’s financial institutions. The data contains

                                                 5
transaction-level data similar to those typically found on monthly bank or credit card statements,
containing the amount, date, and description of each transaction. The full dataset contains 2.7
million users from 2010 to 2015 and, though the sample grows over time, there is very little
attrition in our sample.
   Our data is not a random sample of the population, but it appears to be widely representative,
with some exceptions. In Baugh et al. (2018) and Baugh et al. (2020), the authors illustrate the
income distribution of users in this database relative to the U.S. Census. While the raw sample
differs from the true income distribution in the United States, the sample covers users with a wide
range of incomes rather than solely identifying users of a particular income group. We also find
that users in our sample are well dispersed geographically, though we have higher concentrations
of users in the states of California, New York, and Texas relative to true population distributions.
However, dropping members from any given state (e.g. overrepresented states) or applying other
weighting strategies, does not substantially impact our results. Similarly, excluding users in the
top or bottom deciles of income has little impact on our empirical results.
   One challenge with working with aggregator data is the measurement of key variables, such
as income and consumption. Our ability to accurately measure income, for example, depends on
whether a user has linked the checking or savings account that receives their direct deposit income.
If we observe no income in linked checking or savings accounts, it is impossible for us to determine
whether the user truly has zero income or is simply receiving income in an unlinked account. To
mitigate this concern, restrict our analysis to the subset of users for whom we observe income
flowing to their checking or savings accounts. Specifically, we exclude from our analysis any
user with less than $500 per month in income. In Figure 1, we compare the income distribution
of remaining users to that of the U.S. Census in 2014, our last full calendar-year of aggregator
data. As shown, our dataset has less population than the U.S. Census when looking at household
incomes of less than $10,000 per year. However, there is considerable overlap in the remaining
income distribution.
   To address the issue of unobserved consumer spending due to unlinked credit cards, we remove
any user who makes excessive credit card payments from the bank account relative to observed
spending in the credit card account. Specifically, we remove from the sample any user that, over
our entire sample period, spends twice as much on credit card payments than observed credit card


                                                 6
spending. This has the effect of removing users which we believe have substantial amounts of
spending that we do not observe transactions for. A similar restriction could be made for regular
transfers from unlinked checking accounts, though these are comparatively rare as Americans tend
to have a range of credit cards but generally only one or two checking accounts.
   Recent work has also utilized similar transaction-based sources to make inferences about the
financial habits of the broader population. For instance, Baker (2018), and Kueng (2018) also
utilize data from an online personal finance platform. They perform a multitude of validity tests
comparing to data sources such as Census Retail Sales, home price data from Zillow, the Survey
of Consumer Finance, and the Consumer Expenditure Survey. They find a close parallel between
household-level financial behaviors and distributions in these sources relative to those found among
users of the online platform. That is, conditional on basic demographic types, selection into the
online platform did not predict differential financial behavior or characteristics.
   Ganong and Noel (2019) and Olafsson and Pagel (2018) perform similar exercises using data
taken from JPMorgan Chase and a financial services app covering the population of Iceland, re-
spectively. Across a range of financial indicators, they find strong evidence of external validity of
their results using their sample population. Such results point to the fact that, while these types
of bank-derived sources will mechanically exclude financial activity by the unbanked, transaction-
level financial data can produce accurate portrayals of aggregate economic activity and household
behavior.


2.2     Matching Procedure

2.2.1   Transaction Description Cleaning

We begin our analysis by working to match credit and debit card transactions that we observe to
firms that we can then link to time-varying firm characteristics and financial performance. The ini-
tial universe of transaction description strings is made up of about 25 million unique strings. This
reflects not only a large number of unique firms, but also differences in description strings within
firm driven by things like numeric transaction descriptions (e.g. ‘txn: 491349’), establishment
locations (e.g. ‘walmart super center lancaster’), and how different credit and debit cards include
or exclude punctuation.


                                                  7
       Our first step is to reduce this count of unique strings by removing capitalization, numeric
characters, punctuation, and common components (e.g. ‘inc’). We are then left with approximately
1.5 million unique cleaned strings. Table 1 displays some samples of the transaction descriptions
in our dataset. For each of these unique cleaned descriptions, we display the number of times that
transaction is observed in our data from 2010-2015, the average transaction amount, the fraction of
transactions that are debited from an account (instead of credited), and the fraction of transactions
that are similar to a previous transaction to that description within a user.
       As is easily seen, some transactions are much more commonly observed than others. This
reflects both the relative size of retailers but also the degree to which a given retailer has different
descriptions for different locations or types of transactions. For instance, we estimate that Walmart
Inc. (and its subsidiary Sam’s Club) is the merchant referred to in approximately 15,000 unique
description strings that span different types of Walmart stores (e.g. ‘Neighborhood Market’, ‘Super
Center’), different locations, and differences in whether debit or credit cards were used.


2.2.2      Firm Selection and Matching

Given our sample of 1.5 million unique strings, we then set out to develop a set of firms names to
match with these strings. Our goal is to match our transaction data to all major firms that directly
transact with households because we have a relatively complete picture of these firms’ revenue.
       We start with Compustat and the universe of public firms in a set of industries that meet our
criteria of being mostly consumer-facing. These industries include Building materials and garden
supply, general merchandise retailers, grocery stores, restaurants, hotels, personal and business
services, utilities, home furnishings, apparel, communications, and airlines.3 In addition, to sup-
plement our set of public firms, we also search the web for lists of large private firms that directly
interface with consumers. For instance, we find lists from sources such as Business Insider, Forbes,
and Wikipedia that enumerate the largest firms and retailers in a range of categories, both public
and private, and also lists that limit to solely large private firms.4
       For each of these firms, we then manually search our database of unique transaction strings for
   3
       These correspond to the two-digit SIC codes: 45, 48, 49, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 70, 72, and 73. We end
up excluding most gasoline stations as their revenue is typically combined with a large refiner or oil producer and thus
the consumer-facing business does not provide a good gauge of overall firm revenue or operations.
    4
      See, for instance the Wikipedia supermarket chains and Wikipedia fast food chains.


                                                           8
transactions that mention the firm name precisely or a range of potential abbreviations and variants
of a firm’s name. This yields a many to one matching between transaction descriptions and firms.
For each firm, there may be many strings that tend to be associated with that firm (e.g. ‘wal mart’,
‘walmart’, ‘wm super center’, ‘sams club’, ‘walmart sacramento’, ‘walmart joliet’, etc.).
    Using regular expressions to define our match criteria, our goal is to capture as many true
positives as possible while not flagging excessive amounts of false positives. For instance, the term
‘subway’ will match sandwich purchases at a Subway restaurant but also transactions made at any
number of public subway systems around the world or any of the hundreds of small businesses
who’s name includes the term ‘subway’. For this reason, we also often employ limitations in our
matching procedure based on retailer category (which is captured in our transaction database) as
well as transaction sizes. As one example, when attempting to match Subway sandwich stores, we
limit the retailer category of the transaction description to restaurants and the average transaction
size for the transaction description to under 20 dollars.
    Unfortunately, traditional machine learning algorithms are not well suited to the task of map-
ping these transaction descriptions to firms. Given the huge set of firms in the transaction data
(everything from large national retailers to single-establishment stores), automated methods that
rely on string-similarity measures tend to produce extremely high rates of false positives. More-
over, many firms’ descriptions are not at all similar to their official firm name (e.g. ‘tgt’ may refer
to ‘Target Corporation’). For this reason, we mostly rely on manual inspection and experimen-
tation to find descriptions that map to firms. In our entire sample of matched retailers, the mean
number of unique text descriptions associated with a given retailer is 176 and the median number
is 41.
    After working through our sets of large public and private consumer-facing firms, we turn
directly to the transaction data to fill in any potential holes in the data. We sort the transaction
descriptions by the frequency with which they appear in our data and inspect each of the most
frequent 10,000 transaction descriptions. We attempt to map any unmatched transaction descrip-
tions in this set to a firm; generally this firm is one from an industry that we did not previously
inspect. For instance, Lyft and Uber appear frequently in our data but are assigned a two-digit SIC
industry of 41 (Local And Suburban Transit And Interurban Highway Passenger Transportation).
Netflix similarly was not in one of our focused consumer facing industries according to our SIC


                                                  9
classification (it is found with two-digit SIC of 78, which mostly contains movie producers).
    In the end, we are able to match 558 firms during our sample window. Of these 428 are public
and 130 firms are private. While these firms constitute a small fraction of total firms, they are
also by far the largest consumer facing firms in the economy. We match our public firm data to
Compustat, and rank firms based on their total 2014 revenue. Appendix Table A.4 compares the
numerical ranks (with one being the highest), and percentile ranks (with 100% being the highest)
of the firms in our matched sample by industry. In all industries, the average firm in our matched
dataset is large relative to the average firm in Compustat.
    For industries where we have extensive coverage, like airlines, general merchandise, and gro-
ceries, we are able to match all 5 of the largest firms. In other industries we have only partial
coverage of top firms. For example, we do not match to the Disney Corporation, one of the largest
firms in the consumer telecom industry because generally households do not interact directly with
the parent company itself (rather they interact through retailers of toys or movie theaters). Sim-
ilarly, the International Game Technology company is one of the largest entertainment industry
firms, but it makes slot machines so has few direct transactions with households. Other firms in
our partially covered industries transact mostly with businesses or through webs of subsidiaries
that are hard to currently track.
    In total, we are able to assign approximately 32% of total spending in our dataset to a particular
firm. With additional work, higher numbers of matches could potentially be made with this data.



3     Measuring Customer Bases with Transaction Data

3.1    Customer Characteristics and Revenue

Our matched sample of firms and financial transactions spans a large part of the consumer economy
and captures a sizable amount of consumer spending. Table 2 provides some summary statistics
regarding our matched firm-level data. In the first row, we see the the median firm in our sample
receives approximately $1.6M from the linked users in our sample in a given quarter. Firm-level
spending is skewed towards the largest firms, with the average firm receiving about $8.4M and
the largest single firm (Walmart) has observable income from our sample users of approximately
$550M per quarter.

                                                 10
   The second row in the table displays the fraction of firm’s quarterly revenue that we observe
among the users in our matched sample. We can only calculate this statistic for public firms with
data available on Compustat. On average, we capture about 0.6% of a firm’s quarterly revenue
(median of 0.4%). There is substantial heterogeneity in the fraction of revenue that we observe in
our data – the fraction may be impacted by the portion of a firm’s revenue obtained from foreign
consumers, whether a firm has substantial business-to-business revenue that is unobserved in our
data, and if a firm has a large portion of transactions conducted with cash rather than credit or debit
cards. In the third and fourth rows, we note the number of transactions as well as the number of
unique users that we can link to a firm in a given quarter. In general, each firm-quarter observation
receives tens of thousands of transactions in our data from tens of thousands of users.


3.2     Customer Base Churn and Customer Base Similarity

In this paper, we focus on applications of data regarding two aspects of firm customer bases. The
first is the churn in customer base from year to year within a given firm. The second is the similarity
(i.e. overlap) of customer bases between two different firms in the same period.


3.2.1   Customer Base Churn

We measure customer base churn as the similarity between the customer base of firm f in year t
and the customer base of firm f in year t − 1, weighted by customer spending at that firm. We
define sf,i,t as the share of firm f ’s revenue in our matched sample that comes from customer i in
                                                          P
year t. This definition implies that sf,i,t ∈ [0, 1] and i sf,i,t = 1 for all f and t. We measure
churn as:
                                                                        !
                                                  X
                               Churnf,t−k =            |sf,i,t − sf,i,t−k | /(2)                        (1)
                                                   i
                P
where the sum      i   |sf,i,t − sf,i,t−k | is taken over all customers that shop at firm f in either year t
or year t − k. In words, churn is the difference in spending shares coming from each customer i
                                                   P
between years t and t − k. The way it is defined, i |sf,i,t − sf,i,t−k | can vary between zero and
two. A value of zero would imply constant revenue shares, and a constant customer base between
years t and t − k, while a value of two implies a completely different customer base. We divide this


                                                       11
by 2 so churn is normalized to values between 0 and 1. We allow k to vary between 1 and 4 years.
Figure 7 plots histograms of this measure across all firms for k = [1, 4]. As one would expect, we
note that our measure of churn increases over time. That is, the customer base of a firm at time t
is more similar to the customer base of that firm at time t − 1 than at time t − 4. Over each time
horizon, there is substantial spread among firms in how ‘sticky’ their customer base is. At the most
extreme, about 10% of firms see about 90% of their revenue coming from new customers relative
to the previous year.
   Figure 8 highlights the fact that much of this variation in rates of customer churn over time
is driven by systematic differences in rates of churn across industries. Firms in industries like
Utilities, Telecom, and Groceries tend to have highly persistent customer base distributions. In
contrast, the customers providing revenue in industries such as Hotels, Car Rentals, and Clothing
retailers tend to be much less persistent across years. While there exists substantial variation
across industries, even in the most homogenous industries, some firms tend to do a much better
job at retaining customers and revenue from one year to the next than others. Such variation may
be driven by regional concentration, customer loyalty programs, advertising, or other methods.


3.2.2   Customer Base Similarity

The second aspect of a firm’s customer base that we focus on is the similarity of firm i’s customer
base to that of firm j. Again, we define sf,i,t as the share of firm f ’s revenue in our matched sample
that comes from customer i in year t. We define similarity between firms f and j in year t as:
                                                                    !
                                              X
                     Similarity(f,j),t = −        |sf,i,t − sj,i,t | /(2) + 1                  (2)
                                                      i
                P
where the sum     i   |sf,i,t − sj,i,t | is taken over all customers that shop at either firm f or j in year
t. As with our churn measure, this sum can vary between zero and two. We multiply by −1/2 and
add 1 so that a similarity score of one would imply that the firms have the exact same revenue share
from each customer, and a value of zero would imply no overlap in customer bases. We calculate
this measure for all firm-firm pairs in our sample at an annual frequency.
   Figure 9 displays the average level of customer base similarity within a broad industry group
for all firm-firm pairs in that industry. As with the customer base churn metric discussed above,
there exists substantial variation in cross-firm similarity across industries. Firms within the Utility

                                                     12
industry are the most dissimilar to other Utility firms – which is to be expected as most customers
have only a single utility provider and do not vary in their provider much over time. In contrast,
restaurants have the highest amount of within-industry cross-firm similarity – over 5 times higher
than that of Utility firms. This reflects the fact that many users tend to spend large amounts of
money eating out but spread their spending across multiple restaurants rather than focusing on a
single restaurant.
       Figure 10 focuses on the difference in customer base similarity within an industry versus firm-
firm similarity across industries. We note that, on average, within-industry customer base similar-
ity is higher than that across industries (this is seen as the right panel, within-industry firm-firm
similarity, is shifted to the right relative to the left panel). That is, many users tend to dispropor-
tionately weight their spending towards a particular industry, not simply a particular firm within
an industry. However, both panels in this figure have substantial cross-firm variation – for both
within- and cross-industry firm-firm pairs we see some that are highly dissimilar and some that are
highly similar. Moreover, the set of most similar firms for a given firm tends to span industries.5


3.3       Firm Quality and Customer Concentration

Another aspect of firm customer bases that can be easily surmised from transaction-level data is
that of the average income of any given consumer-facing firm. Following our work in Baker et al.
(2019), we can construct a quarterly index of the average user income of a store’s clients, weighted
by the amount they spend at that retailer:
                                                      P
                                                          spendingirt ∗incomeit
                                                      i
                                       Qualityrt =          P
                                                              spendingirt
                                                               i


       Where r identifies a retailer, i indexes users, and t refers to a calendar year. Firms in our sample
exhibit large differences in this measure, lining up with an ex-ante notion of the firm’s quality.
Figure 5 shows a selection of customer income distributions for pairs of firms in the same industry.
For instance, the bottom right panel displays the distribution of customer income (weighted by
   5
       For instance, the ten firms with the most similar customer bases to Walmart are: Yum Brands, Dine Brands,
Darden Restaurants, Sonic Corp, Netflix, Amazon, Kohls, Dollar Tree, Dominos, and Papa Johns. Among retailers,
the ten firms with the most similar customer bases to Walmart are: Amazon, Kohls, Dollar Tree, Bed Bath and Beyond,
Autozone, Sally Beauty, Gamestop, Office Depot, Big Lots, and Dicks Sporting Goods.


                                                          13
spending at the firm) within two grocery stores: Save-a-Lot and Whole Foods. We sort income
into $1,000 bins and censor the histogram at $300,000 for visibility. We can see that Whole Foods
customers tend to be substantially richer than those of Save-a-Lot, indicating a higher quality firm.
        One final illustration of the benefit of linking users to firms using this class of transaction data
is the ability to get information not only about levels of spending at a particular firm, but the distri-
bution of spending (i.e. revenue) within a firm across its customers. In Table 3, we display statistics
that illustrate how concentrated firm revenue is within its customer base. Looking across broad in-
dustry categories, we show that there is a substantial amount of variation in revenue concentration.
For instance, the top 5% of customers for a given Utility firm provides approximately 15% of a
firm’s revenue6 . In contrast, revenue for hotels and airlines is much more concentrated within their
customers, with the highest spending 5% of customers making up almost 30% of their revenue
in our sample. This variation in concentration is maintained down the distribution of customers,
with the top 20% of customers making up around 40% of revenue in low customer concentration
industries and over 75% in high customer concentration industries.



4        Validation
In this section, we provide some evidence that our transaction data provides a meaningful window
into the source of firms revenue across several dimensions.


4.1        Compustat Validation

Our first test is to directly compare a firm’s official revenue data to the spending that we observe at
that firm across all individuals in our sample.
        We match all public firms in our sample to their official revenue data obtained from Compustat
across our sample period (2010-2015). This comprises 428 firms (of the 558 in our sample).
For each firm-quarter, we observe total spending as well as total reported revenue. Our cleaned
sample of individuals contains approximately 1.7 million users, out of a total U.S. population of
320 million (as of 2015). If all firm revenue was obtained directly from consumers located in the
    6
        Here, we mean the percent of revenue in our matched dataset. In this example, the top 5% of customers make up
15% of the revenue we can see in our matched dataset, not 15% of the revenue in Compustat.


                                                          14
United States, we would expect that the spending we observe would make up approximately 0.53%
of revenue that these firms report. On average, for firms in our matched sample, we observe an
average of 0.7% of quarterly revenue (median of approximately 0.5% of quarterly revenue).
   In Figure 2, we plot both logs of the total spending and changes in logged spending derived
from these two different sources. While the absolute levels are different owing to the fact that we
observe only a sample of total spending, we find a strong correlation between our own spending
data and the revenue reported by public firms in relative terms. This holds true in both levels of
spending as well as quarter-to-quarter changes within a firm. That is, we do a good job of matching
relative sizes of firms as well as the within-firm growth dynamics over time.
   Our measure achieves higher rates of correlation and fit when restricting to firms that do not
have sizable operations overseas. In addition, we see closer correlations when we exclude firms
that have larger fractions of revenue from non-household sources (e.g. if a firm has both business-
to-business as well as business-to-consumer divisions).


4.2    Chain Store Guide Validation

We also test whether the geographical distribution of stores and revenue firm-level revenue in our
data matches the empirical distribution of their stores. To do this, we utilize data from Chain Store
Guide (CSG) database, which tracks the physical locations of retailer branches for a wide range of
large regional or national chains. In addition, they include some characteristics about the types of
establishments, size of stores, and branch number. We collect CSG data from the entirety of our
sample period (2010-2015).
   We are able to match 58 firms from the CSG database to the sample of retailers we observe in
our transaction data. For each firm, we then construct three values. The first two are derived from
our transaction data. First, we simply calculate the fraction of consumer spending that we observe
from users in a given state at a particular firm for each year in our sample.
                                                       P
                                                         spendingirst
                                  F racSpendist =     PiP
                                                          spendingirst
                                                      i   s


   Where i indexes users, r indexes retailers, s indexes states (and Washington DC), and t repre-
sents a calendar year.



                                                 15
   Secondly, using the transaction-level description strings, we are able to pick out transactions
at particular retailers locations. For instance, a transaction may be labeled as ‘McDonalds (Store
#391)’ rather than simply as ‘McDonalds’. We utilize this to construct a measure of the fraction
of a retailer’s locations in a state each year. We also construct the analog to this variable from the
CSG data: the fraction of stores in a given state for a firm-year observation.
   We would not necessarily expect a perfect one-to-one relationship between these measures for
each retailer. Especially for the fraction of spending we observe, since we do not have establish-
ment level sales data. While a state may have 10% of a retailer’s physical stores, those stores may
account for 15% of that retailer’s national sales. However, on average we would expect a strong re-
lationship between these measures. If we are systematically finding that we under- or over-estimate
sales occurring in any particular state, we may be more worried about the representativeness of our
sample.
   In Figure 3, we display bin-scatter plots of these measures across all state-years in our sample.
In the top row, we plot the relationship between the two store level measures (fraction of stores
by state-year-retailer in our transaction data against fraction of stores by state-year-retailer in the
CSG data). The right panel censors the plot to better highlight the fit among the smaller states.
The bottom row displays the relationships between the fraction of spending that we observe for a
retailer in a state-year against the fraction of stores from the CSG data in a state-year. Figure 4
breaks down these comparisons by state. In all cases, we see a strong relationship that lies quite
close to the 45-degree line, suggesting that we are getting an accurate and unbiased sample of the
geographic distribution of spending, on average.


4.3    Firm Quality Validation - Yelp

Lastly, we examine the types of users that patronize a given retailer in our data and compare this
to external indicators of retailer quality. We construct a measure of the average income of a firm’s
customers, as described above. As one validation of both our data and this particular measure,
we then compare this measures of firm quality to data from Yelp.com. From Yelp, we are able to
obtain indicators of how expensive the average product at a particular firm is for about two thirds
of our sample of firms. For each matched firm, we get a rating between $ and $$$$ that indicates
low to high prices, respectively. We regress our measure of firm quality on indicators for these

                                                  16
price rankings and report the results in Table 4.
    On average, we find that firms that have higher income customer bases in our data tend to be
those selling higher priced goods. This is both true overall and in all subcategories of firm that we
examine. For instance, relative to the average customer of the lowest priced restaurants ($), the
average customer of the highest priced restaurants in our sample ($$$$) tends to have a $24,016
higher annual income.



5    Customer Capital and Firm Outcomes
While churn in firm-level customer bases over time is a new metric with which to assess customer-
facing firms, we hope to demonstrate that it is a meaningful indicator, as well. Higher levels of
churn in firm customer bases may be a measure of (and potential source for) risk and volatility
across firms in similar industries. To test this hypothesis, we run the following regression:

                        Outcomei,t = α + βChurni,(t−1,t) + Ind. FE + i,t                          (3)

where Churni,(t−1,t) is measured based on each year’s customer base relative to the previous
year’s. To better understand how well our measure of firm churn predicts common firm-level
indicators of risk, we examine a range of outcome variables: (1) total volatility, the standard devi-
ation of daily stock returns in that year (2) idiosyncratic volatility, the standard deviation of daily
CAPM residuals in that year (3) the beta from a regression of a stock’s daily excess returns on the
excess returns of the market in a given year and (4) revenue growth, measured as the absolute value
of the log change in year-over-year revenue.
    Table 5 contains the results. For all the volatility measures, there is a strong positive correla-
tion between the outcome of interest and our measure of churn in the univariate regressions. We
then want to evaluate whether our churn measure has marginal explanatory power, over industry
fixed effects. The “Ind. FE” specification columns do not include the churn measure, but instead
includes fixed effects for the industry groups: Restaurants, General Merchandise, etc. The “Add
Churn” specification keeps the industry-level fixed effects, and adds our churn measure.
    In all cases, our churn measure remains statistically significant after including the industry
fixed effects. This is a high bar, as we only have 4 years of data for each firm, and firms do not


                                                    17
switch industries. Moreover, we find substantial increases in R2 with the inclusion of churn to a
specification with industry-level fixed effects. In the total volatility case, adding the churn measure
increases the R2 by almost 0.1 – an increase of about 40% – relative to just including the industry-
level fixed effects. These results suggest that firms which have more churn in their customer bases
are riskier and more volatile than other firms in the same industry.


5.1    Churn as Firm-level Indicator for Customer Frictions

In Gourio and Rudanko (2014), the authors examine the role that product market frictions may
have in driving firm-level outcomes. They note that firms which ‘invest’ in a sticky customer base
are generating a form of intangible capital. That is, firms can invest up front in acquiring a stable
base of customers and then extract value from those customers over time. In a search model of
firms where these frictions are present, a firm with a higher degree of customer stickiness can be
expected to have higher levels of profits, higher markups, higher market to book value (Q), and
higher rates of investment.
   To demonstrate this claim empirically, Gourio and Rudanko (2014) utilize the ratio of ‘Selling,
General, and Administrative’ (SG&A) to annual firm sales as a proxy for product and customer
frictions. In addition, they utilize the ratio of advertising to sales as an alternative proxy. They
conjecture that firms which spend more on SG&A or advertising are doing so to invest in long-run
customer acquisition.
   With our data, we can directly examine the churn in firm-level customer bases. Rather than
relying on a proxy like SG&A spending or advertising, we can directly measure how sticky a
particular firm’s customer base is from year to year. If SG&A spending represents investment in
customer bases to create long-term customers, we would expect to see higher SG&A spending
associated with lower levels of firm-level churn. Figure 11 displays the correlation between firm-
year SG&A expenses and our measure of firm-level annual customer base churn. Contrary to
expectations, across our entire sample, we find a weak positive relationship between these two
variables – firms with higher level of churn tend to spend more on SG&A.
   However, this relationship is governed by the composition of our sample, which is highly
concentrated on retail firms. If we split our sample into retail and non-retail firms, a clear picture
emerges: the relationship between customer churn and SG&A is negative for non-retail firms but

                                                  18
highly positive for retail firms. These findings are mirrored when we look at how churn relates to
advertising rather than SG&A for the subset of firms that report advertising expenditures.
       Gourio and Rudanko (2014) hypothesize that firms generally spend to acquire customers for
the long-run, a pattern that seems to play out among non-retail firms. This may in part be driven
by the prevalence of long-term contracts (as in cell phone providers) or strong loyalty programs
(as in hotels and airlines). However, in the retail industry, a constant battle for market share often
drives firms to spend substantial amounts on SG&A and advertising only to win customers from
its competitors in the short run. Thus, we may expect that the empirical predictions of Gourio
and Rudanko (2014) regarding product market frictions may be more accurately captured by our
measure of customer churn than by SG&A within the retail industry.
       In Table 6, we turn to the same real firm-level outcomes that were investigated by Gourio and
Rudanko (2014) and similarly exclude financial firms and utilities. In columns 1-4, we test whether
our measure of customer base churn is related to firm investment, profits, markups, and Q at a firm-
year level, including firm and industry fixed effects.7 . In all cases, we find that the relationship is
negative, with higher levels of churn being linked to lower levels for all variables.
       In columns 5-7, we turn to testing the relationship between customer base churn and the volatil-
ity of investment, profits, and markups. In all cases, the dependent variable is scaled by the vari-
ability of Q, as in Gourio and Rudanko (2014). Again, we find results that concur with those
in Gourio and Rudanko (2014): higher levels of churn (lower firm-level customer frictions) are
correlated with higher volatility across these metrics.
       Table 7 then tests whether our measure of customer churn is associated with differences in
dynamics of responses to firm-level shocks. Here, we see how the divergence between SG&A and
our measure of churn seen in Figure 11 can affect our results. Columns 1 and 4 essentially replicate
the results of Gourio and Rudanko (2014), showing that firms with low levels of SG&A appear to
be more like ‘classical’ no-adjustment-cost firms who respond more strongly to shocks to Q than
do firms with higher levels of SG&A spending. Columns 2-3 and 5-6 mimic this specification with
an indicator for a firm being in the top half of firms in terms of customer churn or a continuous
measure of churn. We find consistent results – firms with higher levels of churn appear to respond
more strongly to changes in Q than low-churn firms.
   7
       Excluding industry fixed effects, we find similarly sized coefficients



                                                             19
       In columns 7-9, we restrict the analysis to retail firms. Here, the magnitude of the coefficient
on the SG&A variable falls by 80% and is statistically indistinguishable from zero. In contrast, the
coefficient on the interactions with our measures of customer churn remain statistically significant
and of approximately the same magnitude as the results including non-retail firms. In short, our
measure of customer churn can more consistently capture the firm-level frictions discussed by
Gourio and Rudanko (2014) for retail firms.


5.2       Firm-Specific Revenue Declines During COVID-19

We further test this relationship between customer-base churn and firm-specific risk in the recent
COVID-19-driven recession. Previous work, such as Baker et al. (2019), has shown that the ten-
dency for households to visit new retailers declines as income declines. This may manifest during
a recession as households retrenching into their usual retailers and restaurants and not trying out
somewhere they have not visited before. To test this effect, we examine whether firms relying on
a steady stream of new customers are more strongly impacted by the recent COVID-19 outbreak
and associated policy responses.
       During March 2020, city and state governments began unprecedented efforts to halt the spread
of COVID-19 by dramatically limiting the ability of retail businesses to remain open and to operate
normally. Many businesses were virtually halted or else mandated to operate only remotely. For
instance, restaurants were often required to allow only take-out or delivery orders, and many other
retail establishments were forced to operate only online, using delivery services or curbside pickup.
Moreover, the limits in economic activity sparked a large recession and significant declines in
consumer spending.
       As our primary transaction data do not extend to 2020, we utilize data from the SafeGraph
Data Consortium to examine the impact of these events on consumer spending at a range of retail
establishments and how these changes in spending are linked to rates of churn measured at those
retailers in earlier years. The SafeGraph data uses data from a range of debit cards to track ag-
gregated levels of daily consumer spending across merchants.8 We use daily spending data from
January 2019 through the end of March 2020 and can observe hundreds of millions of transactions
   8
       In particular, the data is sourced from cards issued by Challenger online banks, payroll cards offered by a range
of major employers, and government issued cards (mostly alimony recipients).


                                                           20
at retailers linked to our previous customer metrics.
    In particular, we test whether firms with higher levels of customer churn – as measured by
our firm-level metric from 2010-2015 – experienced differential declines in consumer spending as
compared to those with low levels of customer churn. Table 8 displays the results of this analysis.
Column 1 shows that firms, on average, saw 30% reductions in customer spending during March
2020 as compared to March 2019. Columns 2 and 3 then add in interactions with our measure of
customer churn. In general, firms with high levels of customer churn (estimated using the 2010-
2015 data) tended to see much larger declines in customer traffic and spending than those with low
levels of churn. For example, a firm in the top quartile of churn saw a decline in spending of about
37% while those in the bottom quantile saw declines of only 24%.
    These differences are not simply driven by the industry that these firms are in. Using both
industry and industry times month fixed effects in columns 4 and 5, we see that the effect persists
with similar magnitude. Controlling for the industry-level decline in consumer spending during
March 2020, firms in the top quartile of churn tended to see declines in consumer spending of 10
percentage points larger (eg. 35% vs. 25% decline).
    This exercise highlights the fact that customer capital, as measured by rates of customer churn,
has important implications for both firm behavior and firm performance during the business cycle.



6     Customer Base Overlap and Stock Predictability

6.1    Portfolio Analysis

The connection between firms is still an under-explored area in asset pricing. An exception to
this is Cohen and Frazzini (2008), which shows that firms connected via the supply chain have
predictable returns. Our measure of customer overlap seems like a natural way to identify eco-
nomically linked firms. If a set of customers are hit by an economic shock, the collection of firms
where these customers shop should be similarly affected. Unlike the supply chain linkages in Co-
hen and Frazzini (2008), which are reported in firms’ SEC filings, our measure of customer base
overlap is not easily observable. If this information is not fully incorporated into stock prices, it
may be possible to form portfolios which generate significant alpha relative to known risk-factors.
    To test this, we start with all securities in the CRSP/Compustat merged database, and then

                                                 21
restrict to ordinary common shares (sharecodes 10 and 11) traded on major exchanges (exchange
codes 1, 2 and 3). We also remove financial firms (SIC codes 6000-6999) and utilities (SIC codes
4900-4999). After matching this subset to our customer-base overlap data, we have about 250
firms per month between 2010 and 2018. We form five portfolios each month using the following
procedure. First, we compute the average overlap between firms’ customer bases for each pair of
firms in our sample. We compute this average using the average of annual overlap between 2011-
2014, as these are the only years in our sample with four quarters of data. We use a single average,
even though this introduces a look-ahead bias in our portfolio formation, as the overlap does not
change much over time.
   Each month, we identify the 10 firms with the highest overlap for each firm in the matched
dataset. We then form a value-weighted portfolio of these 10 firms, and calculate the return of
this portfolio over the past quarter. We then sort firms into 5 portfolios: Portfolio 1 (low) has
firms whose 10 most overlapping firms had the lowest stock returns over the past quarter. Portfolio
5 (high) has firms whose 10 most overlapping firms had the highest stock returns over the past
quarter. We then form a hedge portfolio which is long portfolio 5 and short portfolio 1. We want
to test whether the return of firms with high customer-base overlap has predictive power for future
returns, adjusting for known risk-factors. We regress the returns of our portfolios on the 5 Fama-
French factors (Fama and French (2015)) and a momentum factor (see e.g. Jegadeesh and Titman
(1993)) obtained from Ken French’s website.
   Table 9 contains the results. Alpha is monotonically increasing from the Low to High port-
folios. Further, our hedged portfolio has a large and statistically significant alpha of almost 1%
per month. This suggests that when firms with similar customer bases to a given firm j have high
(low) returns, firm j will likely have high (low) returns in the future. At this point, it is not clear
whether this is alpha a risk-premium or an anomaly. To our knowledge, there is no theoretical
model of asset prices with heterogeneous/overlapping customer bases, but we conjecture the effect
we find is an anomaly. Given that our data is not publicly available, it would not be surprising if
this information was not fully incorporated into stock prices.
   As mentioned above, our portfolio formation process involves some look-ahead bias. We com-
pute the overlap in customer bases one time using all the data between 2011 and 2014, and apply
that to portfolio formation between 2010-2018. Table A.1 forms portfolios, but without a look


                                                  22
ahead bias. We use the overlap in year t to form portfolios in year t + 1. For example, we use
overlap data from 2011 to form portfolios in 2012. This shrinks our sample, as we do not extend
portfolio formation back to 2010, or extend forward to 2016-2018. Even in this smaller sample,
and without the look-ahead bias, the alphas are monotonically increasing from the low to high
portfolios. Further, the alpha on the hedge portfolio is almost unchanged in magnitude, and is still
statistically significant. This suggests that this look-ahead bias is not driving our results.
       Another concern is that our measure of customer overlap is picking up a firm characteristic
already known to predict returns or risk premia. An obvious one is momentum, as it’s possible that
the returns of similar firms are highly correlated with a firm’s own past returns. This is unlikely to
drive our results, however, as we are already controlling for the momentum factor in all the asset
pricing regressions.9
       Another possible proxy for customer base overlap is correlation of stock returns. To test this,
we compute the correlation of each pair of firms’ daily stock returns from 2011-2014. Then, each
month, we identify the 10 most correlated firms. We then repeat the procedure for forming 5
portfolios from above, except we use the 10 most correlated firms instead of the 10 firms with the
highest overlap on customer base. Portfolio 1 (low) has firms whose 10 most correlated firms had
the lowest returns over the past quarter. Portfolio 5 (high) has firms whose 10 most correlated firms
had the highest returns over the past quarter. Table A.2 contains the results. There is no pattern in
the alphas from low to high. This suggests that our results are picking up something independent
of correlation.
       Despite the results in Table A.2, it’s possible that our results are still related to past correlation
in stock returns. To further rule out this channel, we perform a double sort. The first sort is on
performance of high customer base similarity firms with above/below median past returns. The
second sort is on performance of high past stock market correlation with above/below median past
returns. We then form two hedge portfolios on the overlap dimension. Table A.3 contains the
   9
       In unreported results, we perform a 2-by-2 double-sort on own firm returns from t − 12 to t − 2 as in Jegadeesh
and Titman (1993), and returns of firms with high customer base overlap over the past quarter. We find that the returns
on portfolios that go long firms with overlapping firms which have high returns, and short firms with overlapping firms
which have low returns has a positive alpha regardless of whether we restrict to only low past-return/momentum firms,
or high past-return/momentum firms. This is not surprising, given the poor performance of momentum strategies
between 2010 and 2018.


                                                          23
results. Both hedge portfolios have statistically significant alphas, again suggesting that our results
are not driven by correlation in stock returns among firms with high customer base overlap.


6.2       Earnings Announcements

To understand the mechanism behind the results in Table 9, we examine days where we know
fundamental information about firms is released: earnings announcements.
       To make things easier to understand, in this subsection, we explain everything from the per-
spective of a single example firm, Wal-Mart (WMT). All the regressions, however, use data from
all the firms in our dataset that we can match to IBES. We require matching to IBES for two rea-
sons: (1) IBES provides the time of each earnings announcement. This is important, because it lets
us determine the first day that investors could trade on that information during normal hours – we
call this the effective earnings announcement date. For example, if earnings were released at 8AM
on a Monday, we would identify that as the effective earnings date. If earnings were released at
5PM on a Monday, the next trading day would be the effective earnings date. Table 10 contains
the results. In all the tests that follow, we restrict to firms which have the same fiscal period end
as WMT (although not necessarily the same fiscal year end), and that release earnings in the same
quarter as WMT.10
       We use a definition of standardized unexpected earnings (SUE) as the year-over-year (YOY)
earnings growth divided by the standard deviation of YOY earnings growth over the previous 8
quarters (see e.g. Novy-Marx (2012)). We are interested in whether earnings growth in firms with
high customer base overlap with WMT has predictive power for earnings growth at WMT. Column
1 is a regression of WMT’s SUE on the SUE of the 20 firms with the highest overlap to WMT,
which released earnings before WMT in a given calendar quarter. Column 2 is a regression of
the SUE of the 20 firms with the highest overlap to WMT on WMT’s SUE, but which released
earnings after WMT in a given calendar quarter. Column 1 implies that when firms with similar
customers to WMT have high earnings growth, and report earnings before WMT, WMT also has
high earnings growth. Column 2 says that when WMT has high earnings growth, high overlap
firms which report later in the quarter also have high earnings growth.
  10
       This essentially excludes firms which release earnings late. A firm releasing news late is news in and of itself, see
e.g. Begley and Fischer (1998).


                                                             24
   Having shown predictability in fundamentals, we want to show predictability in stock returns
around earnings announcements. Define earnings-day returns as the cumulative market-adjusted
log returns from t−5 to t+1 where t is an earnings announcement date. We define market-adjusted
returns as in Campbell et al. (2001): The difference between the excess return on the stock, and
the return on the market factor from Ken French’s data library. We are interested in whether high
earnings day returns for firms with high customer base overlap with WMT has predictive power
for earnings day returns for WMT.
   Column 3 is a regression of WMT’s earnings day returns the earnings day returns of the 20
firms with the highest overlap to WMT, which released earnings before WMT in a given calendar
quarter. Column 4 is a regression of the earnings day returns of the 20 firms with the highest
overlap to WMT on WMT’s earnings day returns, but which released earnings after WMT in a
given calendar quarter. Column 3 implies that when firms with similar customers to WMT have
high earnings day returns, and report earnings before WMT, WMT also has high earnings day
returns. Column 4 says that when WMT has high earnings day returns, high overlap firms which
report later in the quarter also have high earnings day returns.
   Finally, we are interested in how analysts covering WMT, and firms with overlapping customer
bases, react to the release of new information. Define forecast (in)accuracy as the absolute dif-
ference between actual earnings per share and the average analyst forecast of earnings per share,
normalized by the share price at the time of the earnings announcement. We are interested in
whether analyst accuracy for firms with high customer base overlap with WMT has predictive
power for analyst accuracy for WMT. The logic is that analysts could use large surprises at firms
with large overlap to correct their forecasts for WMT. If this were true, when those other firms had
a large surprise, relative to analyst estimates, we would expect WMT to have a smaller surprise.
   Column 5 is a regression of WMT’s analyst accuracy on the analyst accuracy of the 20 firms
with the highest overlap to WMT, which released earnings before WMT in a given calendar quarter.
Column 6 is a regression of the analyst accuracy of the 20 firms with the highest overlap to WMT
on WMT’s analyst accuracy, but which released earnings after WMT in a given calendar quarter.
Both columns are insignificant, which suggests that analysts do not use this overlap information to
update their forecasts.




                                                 25
7    Conclusion
Using credit and debit card transaction data, this paper demonstrates that it is possible to construct
accurate pictures of firm revenue, growth, geographic dispersion, and customer base characteristics
at a highly granular level. We use this data to develop two new measures of firm customer bases.
First, we generate an index of the rate of churn in a firm’s customer base over time. Second, we
construct a metric of the pairwise similarity between two firms’ customer bases.
    We show that these measures provide important insight into the behavior of both real firm
decisions and firm asset prices. Rates of customer churn affect the level and volatility of firm-level
investment, markups, and profits and affect how quickly firms respond to shocks. In addition,
similarity between firms’ customer bases highlights one under-explored type of correlated shocks
– we demonstrate that significant alpha can be generated using a trading strategy that exploits our
index of firm-firm customer base similarity. We note that these measures are possible to construct
by researchers using an increasingly accessible class of financial transaction data and encourage
researchers outside fields like household finance and macroeconomics to leverage transaction data
in order to answer questions regarding consumer-facing firms.




                                                 26
References
Sumit Agarwal and Wenlan Qian. Consumption and debt response to unanticipated income shocks:
  Evidence from a natural experiment in singapore. American Economic Review, 104(12):4205–
  4230, 2014.

Sumit Agarwal, Wenlan Qian, and Xin Zou. Disaggregated sales and stock returns. Working Paper,
  2020.

Deniz Aydin. Consumption response to credit expansions: Evidence from experimental assignment
  of 45,307 credit lines. Working Paper, 2019.

Pierre Bachas, Paul Gertler, Sean Higgins, and Enrique Seira. How debit cards enable the poor to
  save more. Working Paper, 2019.

Scott Baker, Lorenz Kueng, Steffen Meyer, and Michaela Pagel. Measurement error in imputed
  consumption. Working Paper, 2020.

Scott R. Baker. Debt and the Response to Household Income Shocks: Validation and Application
  of Linked Financial Account Data. Journal of Political Economy, 126(4):1504–1557, 2018.

Scott R. Baker, Brian Baugh, and Lorenz Kueng. Income Fluctuations and Firm Choice. Working
  Paper, 2019.

Brian Baugh, Itzhak Ben-David, and Hoonsuk Park. Can taxes shape an industry? evidence from
  the implementation of the âĂIJamazon taxâĂİ. Journal of Finance, 73(4):1819–1855, 2018.

Brian Baugh, Itzhak Ben-David, Hoonsuk Park, and Jonathan Parker. Assymetric consumption
  smoothing. Working Paper, 2020.

Joy Begley and Paul E Fischer. Is there information in an earnings announcement delay? Review
  of accounting studies, 3(4):347–363, 1998.

John Y Campbell, Martin Lettau, Burton G Malkiel, and Yexiao Xu. Have individual stocks
  become more volatile? an empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk. The Journal of Finance,
  56(1):1–43, 2001.


                                                 27
Lawrence J Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L Evans. Nominal rigidities and the
  dynamic effects of a shock to monetary policy. Journal of political Economy, 113(1):1–45,
  2005.

Lauren Cohen and Andrea Frazzini. Economic Links and Predictable Returns. Journal of Finance,
  63, 2008.

Janice Eberly, Sergio Rebelo, and Nicolas Vincent. What explains the lagged-investment effect?
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 59(4):370–380, 2012.

Eugene F Fama and Kenneth R French. A five-factor asset pricing model. Journal of financial
  economics, 116(1):1–22, 2015.

Peter Ganong and Pascal Noel. Consumer spending during unemployment: Positive and normative
  implications. American Economic Review, 109(7):2383–2424, 2019.

Francois Gourio and Leena Rudanko. Customer Capital. Review of Economics Studies, 81, 2014.

Gerard Hoberg and Gordon Phillips. Product market synergies and competition in mergers and
  acquisitions: A text-based analysis. Review of Financial Studies, 23(10):3773–3811, 2010.

Narasimhan Jegadeesh and Sheridan Titman. Returns to buying winners and selling losers: Impli-
  cations for stock market efficiency. The Journal of finance, 48(1):65–91, 1993.

Lorenz Kueng. Excess Sensitivity of High-Income Consumers. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  133(4):1693–1751, 2018.

Paolina C. Medina. Selective attention in consumer finance: Evidence from a randomized inter-
  vention in the credit card market. Working Paper, 2020.

Robert Novy-Marx. Is momentum really momentum? Journal of Financial Economics, 103(3):
  429–453, 2012.

Arna Olafsson and Michaela Pagel. The liquid hand-to-mouth: Evidence from personal finance
  management software. Review of Financial Studies, 31(11):4398–4446, 2018.




                                               28
                   Figure 1: Income Distribution - Aggregator Data vs. U.S. Census




Notes: This figure compares the distribution of 2014 income of the account aggregator and the U.S. Census. The
Census data uses the variable HINC-06 and is available for download at census.gov. The difference in distributions at
the bottom end of the income distribution is due to censoring of zero income users in our dataset. See Section 2 for
more details.




                                                         29
             Figure 2: Comparison Between Reported Revenue and Observed Spending


                  Revenue (Levels)                                    Revenue (Levels) - Binscatter




                 Revenue (Changes)                                   Revenue (Changes) - Binscatter




Notes: These graphs show the relationship between firm-level revenue measured in two ways: through Compustat
and as observed in our transaction data. Each dot denotes a firm-quarter observation. Along the x-axis, we measure
ln(Revenueit ) obtained from Compustat. Along the y-axis, we measure the total spending observed at a firm in
a quarter within our transaction database. The top two panels examine levels of revenue and observed transaction
spending. The bottom two panels examine changes in revenue and observed transaction spending.




                                                       30
  Figure 3: Geographic Concentration - Transaction Revenue Data and Chain Store Guide Data


             All States (Store v. Store)                           All States (Store v. Store) - Censored




           All States (Store v. Revenue)                        All States (Store v. Revenue) - Censored




Notes: The graphs demonstrate the relationship between geographic concentration within a firm in two different ways.
The first, measured on the x-axis, uses data from Chain Store Guide data and limits our sample primarily to retail
firms. The x-axis measures the fraction of a firm’s stores that are in a given state in a year (an observation is a firm-
state-year). The y-axis measure uses data from our transaction data base and measure the fraction of spending at a
retailer that is conducted by users living in a given state. Data covers all retailers able to be matched between samples
and spans all 50 states, 2011-2014.




                                                          31
Figure 4: Geographic Concentration - Transaction Store Data and Chain Store Guide Data, Se-
lected States


                Alaska                                   California                                  Florida




                Illinois                                 Nebraska                              New Hampshire




              New York                               South Carolina                                 Wyoming




Notes: The graphs demonstrate the relationship between geographic concentration within a firm in two different ways.
The first, measured on the x-axis, uses data from Chain Store Guide data and limits our sample primarily to retail
firms. The x-axis measures the fraction of a firm’s stores that are in a given state in a year (an observation is a firm-
state-year). The y-axis measure uses data from our transaction data base and measure the fraction of spending at a
retailer that is conducted by users living in a given state. For each graph, the data spans all retailers operating in the
listed state in our matched sample, 2011-2014.




                                                           32
              Figure 5: Income Distribution of Customerbase, Firm-level Comparisons




Notes: Figures demonstrate the distribution of income among customers for a selected sample of firms. Customer’s
are dollar-weighted by sales at a firm, so a user spending $500 at a firm will have double the weight in the histogram
as a user spending $250. Annual income is binned in $1,000 increments and is censored at $300,000 for illustrative
purposes. In each panel, two firms of similar types are compared. Data spans 2010-2015.




                                                         33
       Figure 6: Income Distribution of Customerbase, Firm-level Comparisons (continued)




Notes: Figures demonstrate the distribution of income among customers for a selected sample of firms. Customer’s
are dollar-weighted by sales at a firm, so a user spending $500 at a firm will have double the weight in the histogram
as a user spending $250. Annual income is binned in $1,000 increments and is censored at $300,000 for illustrative
purposes. In each panel, two firms of similar types are compared. Data spans 2010-2015.




                                                         34
                                                  Figure 7: Customer-Base Similarity Within Firm Over Time
35




     Notes: Each panel denotes the distribution of customer base churn over time across all firms in our sample. Churn is measured as the dollar-weighted overlap
     between the customer base of a firm f in year t and the customer base of firm f in year t − x where x is between 1 and 4 and is labeled above each panel. Overlap
     is scaled between 0 and 1 where 1 is an identical customer base and 0 is no overlap between customer bases across years.
                                                     Figure 8: Customer-Base Annual Churn, By Industries
36




     Notes: Each panel denotes the distribution of customer base churn over time across all firms in a given industry grouping in our sample. In this figure, churn is
     measured as the dollar-weighted overlap between the customer base of a firm f in year t and the customer base of firm f in year t − 1. Overlap is scaled between 0
     and 1 where 1 is an identical customer base and 0 is no overlap between customer bases across years.
             Figure 9: Similarity of Firm Customer Bases Within Category, by Category




Notes: Bars denote the average cross-firm similarity within the listed industries. That is, the similarity between firm i
and firm j who are both operating in broad industry classification x.




                                                          37
     Figure 10: Similarity of Firm Customer Bases Within Category and Outside of Category




Notes: The left panel displays a histogram that describes the distribution of firm-firm similarity over all annual firm-
firm pairs where firm i and firm j are in different broad industry groups. The right panel displays a histogram that
describes the distribution of firm-firm similarity over all annual firm-firm pairs where firm i and firm j are in the same
broad industry.




                                                           38
                                 Figure 11: S,G&A Expenses, Advertising Expenses, and Customer Churn
                     All Firms                                    Non-Retail Firms                                        Retail Firms




                     All Firms                                    Non-Retail Firms                                        Retail Firms
39




     Notes: Retail firms defined as public firms in our sample with a one-digit SIC code of ‘5’. SG&A expenses and Avertising expenses obtained for all firms with
     non-missing data in Compustat. Customer churn scaled between zero and one and is measured as the similarity of a firm’s customer base at time t relative to the
     customer base at time t−1, weighted by customer spending. Observations in the underlying data are firm-year. Plotted data cover 2011-2014 to exclude partial-year
     observations.
                  Figure 12: Stock Correlation and Similarity of Firm Customer Base
                              Average Annual Correlations and Similarity




Notes: Plot represents a bin-scatter of firm-firm pair annual observations. Stock correlation is measured as the average
pairwise daily correlation in stock returns for a given year in our sample period. Similarity in customer base is
measured as the fraction of spending at firm i that overlaps with with spending at firm j (e.g. is sourced from the
same customers) and is averaged across the entirety of our sample period. Firm customer base similarity is scaled to
between zero and one.




                                                          40
                                                            Table 1: Examples of Transaction String Data
      Description                                       Count of Txns Average Txn Amount                   Frac Debit      Avg Loose Recurring


      home depot                                          11,002,662                   74.31                  0.911                 0.001
      starbucks corpx                                      8,676,113                   7.14                   0.999                 0.007
      jack in the box                                      3,035,066                   8.91                   1.000                 0.005
      aeropostale                                           327,696                    41.53                  0.948                 0.001
      duane reade th avenew                                 160,318                    18.72                  1.000                 0.004
      bos taxi med long island cny                           46,648                    17.68                  1.000                 0.002
      sbc phone bill ca bill payment                         22,248                    83.07                  1.000                 0.132
41




      golden pond brewing                                    2,385                     38.98                  1.000                 0.001
      cross bay bagel                                        1,542                     15.46                  1.000                 0.000
      lebanese taverna bethe                                 1,542                     68.44                  0.999                 0.005
      racetrac purchase racetrac port charlot                1,357                     31.32                  1.000                 0.007
      trader joes rch palos vr                               1,273                     41.91                  1.000                 0.000
      chevys fresh mex aronde                                  956                     36.83                  1.000                 0.000
      gracey s liquor                                          113                     15.99                  1.000                 0.018

     Notes: Table denotes sample transaction descriptions from our database of financial transactions. Each panel displays the cleaned description
     string (e.g. removing numerics), the number of observations of that string in our data, the average transaction amount for that description string,
     the fraction of transactions that are debited from an account (instead of credited), and the fraction of transactions that are similar to a previous
     transaction to that description within a user.
                                                           Table 2: Summary Statistics, by Firm-Quarter
      Variable                        # Obs.          Mean           10%           25%            50%              75%              90%


      Observed Spending                10,528     $8,368,492       $51,955      $439,811      $1,616,576       $5,324,263      $16,539,201
      ObservedSpending
42




      CompustatRevenue
                                       6,751         0.0061         0.0002       0.0013          0.0041          0.0076            0.0127
      Number of Transactions           10,528       204,425           734         6,964          39,472          131,970          423,665
      Unique Users                     10,528        66,317           353         4,082          19,969          64,603           171,473

     Notes: Table reports basic summary statistics regarding the 558 matched firms in our sample. Compustat revenue data only available for the
     subset of public firms in our sample. An observation is a firm-quarter. Quarters with no observed transactions for a given firm are dropped.
                           Table 3: Customer Base Concentration, by Industry
 Category                        # Obs.      HHI     Top 5% Share        Top 10% Share         Top 20% Share


 Clothing & Shoes                   207      0.57         24.8%                37.7%                55.1%
 Consumer Telecom                   59       0.62         17.9%                30.3%                49.3%
 Convenience Stores                 44       0.70         40.6%                56.5%                73.2%
 Entertainment                      56       1.50         25.2%                37.7%                55.1%
 General Merchandise                462      0.81         29.1%                43.1%                61.2%
 Groceries                          166      1.51         42.8%                59.9%                77.3%
 Hotels, Rentals, Airlines          96       1.16         29.2%                42.5%                60.7%
 Misc Services                      59       0.57         24.8%                37.7%                55.8%
 Online Services & Tech             126      1.12         24.7%                36.9%                53.9%
 Restaurants                        369      0.38         27.9%                41.1%                57.9%
 Utilities                          116      0.83         15.5%                26.7%                44.6%

Notes: Table reports summary statistics across firms in a range of industry groupings. An observation is a firm-year.
HHI is within-firm concentration in customer dollars. HHI is measured as the sum of squared fractions of revenue
obtained from each customer, multiplied by 10,000. In this table, we equally weight firm-years but remove firms with
fewer than 7,500 observed customers in a year.




                                                         43
                                Table 4: Firm Quality Index and Yelp Ratings



                                  (1)              (2)                 (3)                (4)             (5)
      VARIABLES               All Stores      Restaurants       General Stores        Clothing        Groceries


      Yelp - $$               11,845***        8,176***           11,364***          18,135***        8,240***
                                (402.7)          (622.9)             (833.4)            (1,023)         (1,355)

      Yelp - $$$-$$$$         32,677***        24,016***          39,666***          32,214***        28,858***
                                (685.9)          (2,128)             (1,458)            (1,430)         (1,502)



      Year FE                    YES              YES                 YES                YES             YES
      Observations               3,808             918               1,054               796              364
      R2                         0.482            0.356              0.567              0.329            0.510
                                          Robust standard errors in parentheses

                                            *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Notes: Observations are individual retailers from our sample able to be matched to Yelp. Independent variables are
indicators for a firm’s price range in Yelp, where the excluded category is Yelp ‘$’. Coefficients denote the average
difference in firm ‘quality’ corresponding to different Yelp price categories. Firm ‘quality’ is determined by the dollar-
weighted average income of customers at a given retailer.




                                                           44
                                   Table 5: Customer Churn and Volatility



                          (1)           (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
  VARIABLES           T. Vol.         T. Vol.          T. Vol.          I. Vol.          I. Vol.          I. Vol.

      Churn         0.0158***                        0.0113***        0.0116***                        0.00658***
                      (0.002)                         (0.002)          (0.002)                            (0.002)
  Observations         1,037           1,037           1,037            1,038             1,038            1,038
        R2             0.276           0.257           0.341            0.185             0.226            0.262
  Specification: Univariate        Ind. FE          Add Churn       Univariate        Ind. FE          Add Churn



                          (7)           (8)              (9)             (10)             (11)              (12)
  VARIABLES          CAPM β          CAPM β          CAPM β         Rev. Growth Rev. Growth            Rev. Growth

      Churn          0.783***                         0.368**         0.199***                           0.0860**
                      (0.140)                         (0.172)          (0.055)                            (0.038)
  Observations         1,037           1,037           1,037            1,034             1,034            1,034
        R2             0.245           0.377           0.409            0.165             0.326            0.344
  Specification: Univariate        Ind. FE          Add Churn       Univariate        Ind. FE          Add Churn
Notes: The level of customer churn is calculated at a firm-year level (2011-2014), and it is the churn from last year’s
customer base. “T. Vol.” is total volatility, the standard deviation of daily stock returns in that year. “I. Vol.” is
idiosyncratic volatility, the standard deviation of daily CAPM residuals in that year. “CAPM β” is the beta from a
regression of a stock’s daily excess returns on the excess returns of the market in a given year. “Rev. Growth” is the
absolute value of the log change in year-over-year revenue. All regressions are value weighted: each observation has
a weight proportional to the firm’s lagged market capitalization. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. All
LHS variables Winsorized at the 1% and 99% level. The “Ind. FE” specification includes fixed effects for the industry
groups: Restaurants, General Merchandise, etc. The “Add Churn” specification keeps the industry fixed effects, and
adds our churn measure.




                                                         45
                                                         Table 6: Customer Churn and Firm Characteristics

                                               (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)                (5)                    (6)                 (7)
        VARIABLES                         Invest Rate      Profit Rate       Markup              Q         SD(Invest Rate)        SD(Profit Rate)       SD(Markup)


        Annual Customer Churn            -0.0246***        -0.0695***       -0.0188**      -1.885***          0.0394***              0.0782***            0.0243***
                                           (0.00868)         (0.0139)        (0.00772)        (0.245)           (0.00464)              (0.00620)           (0.00448)



        Observations                         2,319            2,362            1,943          2,082               2,349                 2,349                2,349
46




        R2                                   0.121            0.049            0.041          0.122               0.044                 0.070                0.020
        Year FE                               YES              YES             YES             YES                YES                    YES                 YES
        Industry FE                           YES              YES             YES             YES                YES                    YES                 YES
                                                                         Standard errors in parentheses

                                                                     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
     Notes: Investment rate measured as the ratio between capital expenditures and lagged assets. Profitability is measured as the ratio between net income and lagged
     assets. Markups are proxied for by gross margins. Tobin’s Q is measured as the inverse of book to market ratio. Columns 5-7 measure the time series standard
     deviation of a given variable scaled by the average standard deviation of that firm’s Tobin’s Q. The level of customer churn for each firm is calculated at a firm-year
     level and then averaged across all years in the sample (2010-2015). Average firm churn is then applied to all available years of Compustat data back to 1970 for
     each firm.
                                                    Table 7: Customer Churn and Firm Investment Dynamics



                                    (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)          (6)            (7)             (8)             (9)
      VARIABLES                 All Firms        All Firms        All Firms        All Firms       All Firms    All Firms        Retail          Retail           Retail
      Qt−1                     0.00730***       0.00706***        -0.00429       0.00964***        0.0104***     0.00403      0.0162***        0.0105***        0.00224
                                (0.000399)        (0.00146)        (0.00406)       (0.000393)       (0.00145)    (0.00398)      (0.00126)       (0.00107)       (0.00284)

      Qt−1 *Low SG&A           0.00857***                                        0.00817***                                     0.00168
                                (0.000568)                                         (0.000549)                                   (0.00152)

      Qt−1 *High Churn                          0.00973***                                         0.00674**                                  0.00552***
                                                  (0.00257)                                         (0.00246)                                   (0.00181)
47




      Qt−1 *Churn                                                0.0269***                                       0.0131*                                       0.0186***
                                                                   (0.00712)                                     (0.00696)                                      (0.00497)

      Observations                56,676            2,038           2,038           56,661           2,037        2,037          8,691           1,690            1,690
      R2                          0.402             0.415           0.415            0.444           0.489        0.489          0.478           0.525            0.526
      Firm FE                      YES              YES              YES              YES             YES          YES            YES             YES             YES
      Year FE                       NO               NO               NO              YES             YES          YES            YES             YES             YES
                                                                            Standard errors in parentheses

                                                                       *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
     Notes: Investment rate measured as the ratio between capital expenditures and lagged assets. Tobin’s Q is measured as the inverse of book to market ratio. The
     level of customer churn for each firm is calculated at a firm-year level and then averaged across all years in the sample (2010-2015). ‘Low SG&A’ (‘High Churn’)
     is an indicator at a firm-level for being in the bottom (top) of the SG&A (customer churn) distribution across firms. ‘Churn’ is a continuous variable measuring
     average firm-level customer churn. Retail firms are those with the one-digit SIC code of 5.
            Table 8: Customer Churn and Revenue Decline During COVID-19 Outbreak

                                          (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
   VARIABLES                          ln(Spend)      ln(Spend)       ln(Spend)       ln(Spend)       ln(Spend)


   March 2020                        -0.304***        -0.0535        -0.202***
                                       (0.00895)       (0.0349)        (0.0171)

   Mar 2020*Churn                                    -0.375***                       -0.432***
                                                       (0.0505)                        (0.0587)

   Mar 2020*Churn Quartile                                          -0.0416***                      -0.0298***
                                                                      (0.00590)                       (0.00671)



   Observations                        139,089        139,089         139,089         139,089         139,089
   R2                                   0.910           0.910           0.910           0.915           0.915
   Month of Year FE                      YES            YES             YES             YES             YES
   Day of Month FE                       YES            YES             YES             YES             YES
   Day of Week FE                        YES            YES             YES             YES             YES
   Firm FE                               YES            YES             YES             YES             YES
   Industry FE                           YES            YES             YES             YES             YES
   Industry*Month FE                     NO              NO              NO             YES             YES
                                            Standard errors in parentheses

                                         *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: The level of customer churn for each firm is calculated at a firm-year level and then averaged across all years
in the sample (2010-2015). ‘March 2020’ is an indicator equal to one in March of 2020. It is interacted with the
continuous measure of churn and with churn as binned into four quartiles. Spending data spans January 1, 2019 to
March 31, 2020. Continuous measure of churn ranges from roughly 0.33 - 0.9.




                                                         48
                                Table 9: Customer-Base Similarity and Returns

                                 Low            2              3             4           High        Long/Short

            MKT               1.064***     1.065***       1.071***      0.959***       0.978***         -0.086
                               (0.082)      (0.082)        (0.067)       (0.069)        (0.065)        (0.085)
            SMB                 -0.042       0.021         -0.042         -0.065       -0.198**         -0.155
                               (0.150)      (0.130)        (0.139)       (0.110)        (0.092)        (0.174)
            HML                 -0.207        -0.32        -0.185         -0.027        -0.184           0.023
                               (0.158)      (0.197)        (0.126)       (0.166)        (0.143)        (0.178)
           RMW                 0.438**     0.576***       0.512***        0.273         0.256*          -0.182
                               (0.187)      (0.206)        (0.175)       (0.176)        (0.131)        (0.215)
            CMA                  0.171       0.048         -0.307         -0.077        -0.084          -0.255
                               (0.189)      (0.315)        (0.213)       (0.216)        (0.196)        (0.213)
           MOM                   0.154       0.019        0.236**         0.071          0.081          -0.074
                               (0.100)      (0.089)        (0.108)       (0.087)        (0.092)        (0.118)
           Alpha                -0.003       -0.002         0.003         0.003        0.005**        0.009***
                               (0.003)      (0.003)        (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.002)        (0.003)

             Obs                  108          108            108           108           108             108
            R-sq                 0.706       0.674          0.728         0.683          0.715           0.046
       Sharpe Ratio              0.664       0.739          1.133         1.074          1.353           0.832
   Mkt. Sharpe Ratio             0.91         0.91            0.91         0.91           0.91           0.91

Notes: 10 closest firms, 2010-2018, exclude finance/utilities, drop 2010 and 2015 from our data vw portfolio of nearest
firms, returns over the past quarter.




                                                         49
                         Table 10: Customer-Base Similarity and Earnings Reports



                                                 SUE                Earnings Returns            Forecast Accuracy
                                          (1)            (2)         (3)            (4)            (5)          (6)

       Overlapping SUE                0.00728*
                                       (0.004)
           Your SUE                                  0.0112**
                                                       (0.005)
      Overlapping return                                          0.0153***
                                                                   (0.005)
           Your return                                                          0.0336***
                                                                                  (0.006)
 Overlapping forecast error                                                                    -0.00427
                                                                                                (0.003)
      Your forecast error                                                                                    -0.0067
                                                                                                             (0.006)

          Observations                  59,660         74,178      59,660         74,178         59,580       73,983
           R-Squared                    0.208           0.041       0.125          0.057         0.358        0.034

Notes: 20 closest firms, 2010-2018, drop 2010 and 2015 from our data, require firms to have same fiscal period end,
and release earnings in the same calendar quarter. All specifications include calendar quarter fixed effects and firm
fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the security level.




                                                            50
                                 Table A.1: Asset Pricing Application (timing)

                                    Low            2             3              4           High         HML

              MKT                0.806***     0.881***      0.939***       0.883***      0.848***        0.042
                                  (0.110)      (0.062)        (0.157)       (0.112)       (0.112)      (0.143)
              SMB                  -0.023      -0.284*      -0.492**        -0.036          -0.13       -0.107
                                  (0.141)      (0.154)        (0.190)       (0.172)       (0.146)      (0.198)
              HML                  -0.306      -0.216         -0.411        -0.024         -0.295        0.011
                                  (0.236)      (0.198)        (0.408)       (0.270)       (0.223)      (0.347)
              RMW                  0.063        0.055          -0.15         -0.25         0.259         0.195
                                  (0.315)      (0.237)        (0.449)       (0.235)       (0.239)      (0.373)
              CMA                 0.703**       0.203         0.047          0.116         0.076        -0.627
                                  (0.271)      (0.299)        (0.420)       (0.367)       (0.322)      (0.438)
              MOM                 -0.220*       0.067         0.281*         0.083         -0.014        0.206
                                  (0.117)      (0.087)        (0.165)       (0.115)       (0.121)      (0.143)
              Alpha                -0.002          0          0.004          0.005         0.006        0.008*
                                  (0.004)      (0.003)        (0.004)       (0.003)       (0.004)      (0.005)

               Obs                      48        48            48             48            48           48
               R-sq                0.673        0.728         0.621          0.687         0.636         0.162
         Sharpe Ratio              0.492        1.117         1.466          1.512         1.557         1.32
      Mkt. Sharpe Ratio            1.079        1.079         1.079          1.079         1.079         1.079

Notes: 10 closest firms, 2012-2016, exclude finance/utilities, drop 2010 and 2015 from our data vw portfolio of nearest
firms, returns over the past quarter.




                                                         51
                             Table A.2: Asset Pricing Application (correlation)

                              Low              2               3             4          High         HML

             MKT           0.842***       1.042***      0.926***       0.893***      0.946***        0.104
                             (0.075)       (0.056)        (0.059)          (0.086)     (0.103)      (0.150)
             SMB              0.051         -0.095        -0.053           -0.185      -0.117        -0.169
                             (0.121)       (0.108)        (0.101)          (0.121)     (0.148)      (0.228)
             HML             -0.209         -0.096        -0.158            -0.1     -0.568***        -0.36
                             (0.136)       (0.113)        (0.141)          (0.177)     (0.210)      (0.281)
             RMW              0.145       0.563***      0.771***           0.268        0.213        0.069
                             (0.157)       (0.163)        (0.169)          (0.189)     (0.227)      (0.278)
             CMA              0.068       -0.397**         0.154           0.137      0.591**        0.523
                             (0.216)       (0.189)        (0.240)          (0.225)     (0.271)      (0.375)
             MOM              0.14          0.074          0.109           0.253*       0.169        0.029
                             (0.086)       (0.089)        (0.088)          (0.133)     (0.116)      (0.172)
             Alpha            0.004            0               0           0.002        0.003        -0.001
                             (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)          (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.004)

              Obs              108           108            108             108          108          108
              R-sq            0.642         0.761          0.693           0.608        0.569        0.036
            Sharpe            1.148         0.941          0.987           1.038        1.098        0.116
         Mkt. Sharpe          0.91           0.91           0.91            0.91        0.91          0.91

Notes: 10 closest firms, 2010-2018, exclude finance/utilities, drop 2010 and 2015 from our data vw portfolio of nearest
firms, returns over the past quarter. ‘Sharpe’ denotes the Sharpe Ratio.




                                                          52
                            Table A.3: Asset Pricing Application (double sort)

                             Low Overlap                    High Overlap                     High-Low
                       Low Corr.      High Corr.      Low Corr.       High Corr.     Low Corr.       High Corr.

        MKT            0.959***        0.928***        1.000***        0.833***         0.041          -0.094
                        (0.067)         (0.078)         (0.064)            (0.068)     (0.093)         (0.095)
         SMB             -0.035          -0.117          -0.068             -0.14       -0.033         -0.023
                        (0.112)         (0.140)         (0.112)            (0.094)     (0.176)         (0.186)
        HML              -0.218         -0.342*          -0.07             -0.233       0.148           0.108
                        (0.135)         (0.204)         (0.131)            (0.142)     (0.208)         (0.263)
        RMW             0.377**          0.397*        0.491***             0.169       0.114          -0.228
                        (0.177)         (0.203)         (0.144)            (0.173)     (0.245)         (0.270)
        CMA              0.038           0.283           -0.299             0.249       -0.337         -0.035
                        (0.214)         (0.305)         (0.196)            (0.162)     (0.312)         (0.368)
        MOM             0.135**          0.154            0.09         0.214***         -0.044          0.061
                        (0.064)         (0.120)         (0.090)            (0.074)     (0.110)         (0.141)
        Alpha            -0.002          -0.002         0.004*             0.005**     0.006*         0.007**
                        (0.002)         (0.003)         (0.002)            (0.002)     (0.003)         (0.003)

         Obs               108            108             108               108          108             108
         R-sq            0.734           0.566           0.732              0.693       0.021           0.018
        Sharpe           0.748           0.666            1.19              1.429        0.65           0.627
    Mkt. Sharpe           0.91            0.91            0.91              0.91         0.91            0.91

Notes: 10 closest firms, 2010-2018, exclude finance/utilities, drop 2010 and 2015 from our data vw portfolio of nearest
firms, returns over the past quarter. ‘Sharpe’ denotes the Sharpe Ratio.




                                                          53
                            Table A.4: Matching to Largest Firms by Industry
                                         Avg. Rank             Avg. Percentile Rank                 % of Top 5
          Industry              Matched       Unmatched        Matched      Unmatched        Matched      Unmatched
          Airlines                   6             15            73%            32%            100%            0%
    Clothing & Shoes                19             21            52%            48%            100%            0%
    Consumer Telecom                20             66            84%            45%            80%             20%
       Entertainment                11             24            77%            45%            40%             60%
  General Merchandise               69             103           59%            39%            100%            0%
         Groceries                   6             10            58%            18%            100%            0%
      Hotels, Rentals               16             32            73%            43%            60%            40%
 Others Services & Tech             95             195           74%            47%            20%            80%
         Resturants                 30             82            76%            34%            100%            0%
          Utilities                 23             77            83%            43%            60%            40%
Notes: We rank compustat firms based on their total revenue in 2014. We then compare the numerical ranks (with
one being the highest), and percentile ranks (with 100% being the highest) of the firms in our matched sample, with
Compustat at large by industry. We then keep the 5 largest firms in each industry by revenue, and count how many of
those firms are in our matched dataset. When matching to Compustat, and calculating the ranks, we restrict the sample
to U.S. firms, with a traded common stock, non-missing revenue and non-missing NAICS industry.




                                                         54
