                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        MONEIARY POLICY SIRATEGIES




                               Robert Flood

                                Peter Isard




                           Working Paper No. 2770




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                November 1988




Ihis research is part of NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #2770
                                        November 1988


                         MONETARY POLICY STRATEGIES


                                   ABSTRACT


     The paper considera the merits of rulea and discretion for monetary


policy when the structure of the macroeconomic model and the probability

distributions of disturbances are not well defined.     It is argued that

when it is costly to delay policy reactions to seldom-experienced shocks

until formal algorithmic learning has been accomplished,    and when time

consistency problems are significant, a mixed strategy that combines a

simple verifiable rule with discretion is attractive.      The paper also

discusses mechanisms for mitigating credibility problems and emphasizes

that arguments against various types of simple rules lost their force under

a mixed strategy.



Robert Flood                            Peter Isard
Research Department                     Research Department
International Monetary Fund             International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20431                    Washington, DC 20431
Robert Flood
Peter Isard j/




                         Monetary Policy Strategies

                              I.   Introduction

     Although the major industrial countries have experimented with

different strategies for monetary policy since the mid-l970s, a number of

basic issues remain unresolved.     These   issues include:   (1)   the

importance of monetary policy credibility and the roles for rules and

discretion;   (2) the relative attractiveness of monetary growth rates,

exchange rates, and other variables as targets or objectives for policy;

and (3) the appropriate degree of complexity to incorporate into state-

contingent procedures for adjusting the settings of policy instruments in

response to new information about the economy.

     This paper addresses these and other issues that are basic to the

design and implementation of policy strategies in practice.          The paper


begins by developing a simple anslytic framework that can be used to

compare the implications of different monetary policy strategies for an

open economy in which social welfare depends negatively on both price

level instability and deviations of output from its full employment level

(Section II).    Under the assumptions   that the structure of the economic

model is known and that disturbances to the economy can be characterized

as having well-defined probability distributions, three alternative

policy strategies are compared (Section III).       These strategies are:




  j/ We thank Kenneth Rogoff for helping us formulate issues at an early
stage and Elhanen Helpman and Dale Henderson for valuable reactions and
discussions. However, they should neither be blamed for, nor assumed to
agree completely with, our views.
                                     -2-


(1) discretion,   (2) the optimal non-state-contingentrule for monetary

growth,   and (3) the optimal state contingent rule for monetary growth.

     The paper then turns to issues arising from uncertainty about the

structure and parameters of the macroeconomic model and the nature of

economic disturbances (Section IV).    Although it is possible to use new

information to continuously re-evaluate the model in a systematic manner,

and to specify well-defined procedures for adjusting the settings of

monetary policy instruments in response to new information, it would be

difficult for society to monitor compliance with a complicated state-

contingent policy strategy in the context of period-by-period revisions in

the estimated macroeconomic model.    Moreover it may be costly or

impossible to learn much quickly about the nature of seldom-experienced

disturbances, and delaying policy reactions until formal, algorithmic,

learning has been accomplished may be very costly to society. Thus,     in

the presence of distortions that generate time-inconsistent incentives for

the monetary authorities, attempts to rely on a complicated state-

contingent strategy could give rise to credibility problems.

     While the problems associated with complicated state-contingent

strategies have led some economists to propose the adoption of simple

monetary rules, this paper shows that the strategy of mixing a simple

rule with discretion can be preferable both to rigid adherence to the

rule and to complete discretion (Section V).    The paper also discusses

the role of institutional arrangements for mitigating monetary policy

credibility problems (Section VI) and the choice of variables for simple

monetary rules (Section VII).    It is emphasized that the relative merits

of different choices of variables for a monetary rule may depend on
                                     -3-


whether the policy strategy calls for rigid adherence to the rule or for

mixing the rule with discretion.     A final aection provides concluding

remarks.

                         II.   The Analytic Framework

     This section develops a simple analytic framework that aheda light

on a number of issuea that arise in adopting a monetary policy strategy

for an open economy.     Following conventional practice,    we consider an

economy in which society dislikes deviations    of output from its full

                                                            In this
employment level and also dislikes price level instability.

context, it is assumed for simplification that the objective of monetary

policy is to minimize the loss function:




    (1)       —      -     +   a(P               > 0,




where   y   is the logarithm of output in period t, 5   is   the logarithm of

full employment output, Pt LS the logarithm of the price level,

and a is a strictly positive weight that society places on price level

stabilization relative to output stabilization. j/
                                                                    that
      Following Gray (1976), Ganzoneri (1985) and others, we assume
                                                        is set in a
output is produced by labor, that the nominal wage rate

contract negotiated prior to the realization of the price level, and that

 the employment contract calls for workers to supply whatever amount of



   j/ We abstract, in our single-period optimization from issues involving
 "reputation" of the policymaker. For a survey of issues concerning
 reputation, see Rogoff (1987).
                                      -4-

labor is demanded by firms at the negotiated wage rate.       These assumptions

are taken to imply that, in combination, the production function and the

labor demand function yield a relationship in which output is a decreasing

function of the real cost of a unit of labor:



     (2)    y—d     -
                        c(w   -




Here, wt   is the logarithm of the wage rate, c and d are
                                                          parameters, and

t   is a mean zero productivity shock.j,'    It is also convenient to assume

that wage setters know the output supply function and act to minimize the

expected squared deviation of output (employment) from some implicit

target level (g)   that   may differ from the full employment concept that
enters the social loss function. 2/     Thus,   the wage level is determined

from the first order condition



                          2 — 0
     (3)
           r— E1(y-)

which, together with (2), implies

    (4)    wt —   Ejp +


  ]J Assuming that the logarithm of the production function is
yt — A + 8lt + Xt, where lt is the logarithm of labor input, Xt is the
shock to the production function and 0 C B < 1, then    —p    xt/(l-B).
  2/ See Rogoff (1985) for one possible elaboration of this approach.
Rogoff defines   as the level of output (employment) that would arise if
contracts could be negotiated after observing the productivity shock and
all other period t information.
                                                        -5-


Substitution of (4) into (2) yields an output supply relationship:



    (5)     yt   —       + c(pt      -
                                         Ejp) +
which is similar to the standard rational expectations supply function

introduced by Lucas (1972).                Substitution of (5) into (1) implies


    (6)      *   —
                         [c(pt   -
                                     Ejp)       -   K   + Pt]2 + a[pt        -
                                                                                 Pt-li2




    (7)     *t —     [cOrt - Etllrt)        -           +   t'ti +   alrt2




where   t   —   Pt   -
                         Pt-I.   is the rate of inflation and




    (8)         sc—y-


is the difference between the social concept of full employment output

and the level of output that wage setters implicitly target when

negotiating their wage contracts.                       The existence of "distortions" such as

unemployment compenaation or income taxation--or of incentives for wage

setters     to maximize the welfare of some subset of the labor force that is
                                           -6-


already employed (or that has seniority rights to employment)--may give

rise to a situation in which a is positive.

     To address monetary policy issues for an open economy,             it is

convenient to use the relationship:



    (9)




where   lrt* is   the foreign rate of inflation,       s   is the rate of change of

the nominal exchange rate (the rate of change of the domestic currency

price of foreign exchange),          and   is    a shock to the purchasing power

parity relation.         It is assumed that monetary authorities control base-

money growth and that the nominal rate of depreciation of the domestic

currency can he decomposed into one component that varies systematically

with the differential between domestic base-money growth rate (bt) and the

foreign inflation (ir), a second component (it) reflecting the purchasing

power parity shocks, and a third part (vt) that reflects other elements

responsible for nominal exchange rate movements. This relationship is

given by: jJ



    (10)             b    -      -         + v




  j/ The formulation is intended to be a stripped-down version of a
flex-price model.
                                                             -7-


       To simplify the later algebra,                            it is assumed that Etlvt —            0.   Thus,

under the additional assumptions that Vt is exogenous to domestic policy

and uncorrelated with                 p,      / and the              distortion term      (ic)   is time and

policy invariant, equations (9) and (10) can be combined to yield:                                          J
      (11)




and



      (12)            —
                          [c(b    +    v      -
                                                   E1b)          -     +        ]2+ a[b    +     v)2



To simplify notation further, it is convenient to transform variables and

to express the policy problem as that of minimizing the social loss

function


      (13)
             Lt
                  —
                          (bt   + v    -
                                           E1b           -   k   +    u)2   +
                                                                                a(b + v)2



where Lt —    t/c2,             k —   ic/c,       Ut —   pt/c,        and a —    a/c2.
         Note that while our primary interest lies in analyzing monetary

policy for an open economy, equations (11)                                  -
                                                                                 (13) apply not only to an


  j/ Allowing correlations between the various shocks would introduce
covariances into our later analysis, but would not change any of our
basic points. We have refrained from analyzing exchange rate regimes in
our setup because of the key role played in exchange rate regime choice
literature by the covariances we are assuming away.
  21 While our main points are robust to many relaxations of the white
noise and independence assumptions about the shocks, things would be much
more complicated in the realistic setting where the coefficient on bt in
equation (10) was not known with certainty.
                                    -8-


open economy with stochastic tens in the purchasing power parity

relation and the nominal exchange rate equation,    but also to a closed

economy with white noise in the relationship between inflation and base-

money growth.

                 IlL   Comparisons of Alternative Strategies

      The analytic framework developed in the previous section will now be

used to compare social welfare--as measured by the expected value of the

social loss function- -under (1) a strategy of monetary discretion, (2) the

optimal non-state-contingent rule for money growth, and     (3)   the optimal

state contingent rule for monetary growth. jJ      It should be emphasized

that in any discussion of the optimal design of monetary policy,       a central

consideration is the extent to which the structure of the macroeconomic

model is known, the relevant economic variables are observable, and the

disturbances to the economy can be characterized in terms of well-defined

probability distributions.    In this section it is assumed that both the

monetary authority and the private sector know the macroeconomic

structure, can deduce ut and vt from observable variables and their

knowledge of the parameters of the model ex post, and have accurate ex

ante information about the probability distributions from which ut and Vt

are   drawn.

1.     Discretion

       Under discretion, the monetary authority sets bt to minimize (13)

subject to the observed values of ut and vt, and, most importantly,


  j/ In a companion paper, we include a fixed exchange rate among the
monetary policies that we study. Such a consideration is not pursued
presently because we have assumed Vt and ut to be uncorrelated, which
removes most of the interesting aspects of exchange rate regime choice.
                                             -9-


subject to a predetermined value of Etjlrt.               The first order condition

for a minimum of (14) with respect to bt is:



   (14)    b— - v     +
                           1(E1b
                          l+a
                                         + k   -
                                                   Ut)


Private agents understand the monetary authority's motives,                so they form

their expectations of base-money growth by taking the expectation of bt in

equation (14).    Combining this expectation with the expectation of

equation (11) yields:



   (15)           —
                      Eib — k/a

This expression links the inflationary bias that arises under discretion

to the distortion term k.           If k were zero, deviations of output from its

full employment level would also be zero in the absence of inflation

surprises and productivity shocks (recall conditions (5) and (8)), and

there would be no inflationary bias.

     To evaluate social welfare, substitute (15) into (14) to obtain:



                                         k
   (16)    bD   — -   v   -         +
                              l+a        a



where   b is base growth under discretion.               Thus,   from (5), the realized

loss from discretion is:



    (17)    L—    k2ai(k÷               ii't2
                                       - 10   -




and the expected loss is:



     (18)            —         k   +    a
                          a            l+a



where V(u) is the variance of Ut       conditional on   information from period

t-l. j/     The first tern in (18) reflects the expected loss associated

with whatever output or labor market distortions are responsible for the

inflation bias, while the second term reflects the loss associated with

fluctuations in productivity.

2.   The optimal non-state-contingent rule

     Next consider the implications of following a non-state-contingent

rule for money growth--that is, a rule in which the setting of bt is

independent of expected shocks to the economy as characterized by the

disturbances Ut and vt.       Given that the model contains no variables that

change predictably over time, one rule that might be considered would set

bt equal to that constant b that minimizes the expected value of the loss

function when private agents have rational expectations such that

Etibt — b.     For such a rule, b would appear only in the second term of

the loss function (13), and since a constant b is uncorrelated with the


vt shocks, the loss-minimizing rule of this type is b — 0.




  j/ We are assuming that policy strategies in this uncertain environment
are evaluated using the expectation of the loss function.
                                                -   11   -




       From equation        (13), the realized loss from following the optimal

non-state-contingent rule is:


       (19)
              L   —
                      (Vt
                            + u     -
                                        k)2 +   a2

and the expected loss is:



       (20)             —    k2 +       (1 + a)V(V) + V(u),


where V(v) is the Variance of Vt.

       Now compare (18) and (20).               Note that even for the closed economy

case with perfect correlation between inflation and base-money growth--

that   is, for the case Vt =            0   for all t--the preference ordering between

discretion and the optimal non-state contingent rule depends on the size

of the distortion term relative to the Variance of the productivity shock,

as well as on the weight that society places on inflation stabilization

relative to output stabilization. It is readily apparent that the rule

dominates in the nonstochastic case.                     It is also apparent, however, that

discretion becomes increasingly attractive as the variance of the

productivity shock increases,               and also becomes more attractive as the

relationship between the inflation rate and base-money growth becomes

noisier (i.e., as V(v) increases). j/                        These comparisons reflect the fact

that discretion has the undesirable consequence of generating an

inflationary bias whenever there are distortions affecting the

determination of output, but also has the desirable consequence of



  j/ Had we allowed co-variance between ut and Vt this conclusion would
need to be altered accordingly.
                                                        -     12   -




allowing      the monetary authority to offset some of the undesirable effects

of either productivity shocks or noise in the relationship between

inflation and base-money growth. jJ

3.    The optimal state-contingent rule

          The optimal state-contingent rule for monetary growth is the

strategy that mimics the discretion strategy (16) without including a

response to the distortion term k: 21



      (21)    b    —
                       -vt-              1+a



Under this rule


                       r         au                      i2            ru     ,2
      (22)
               s
              Lt
                   —           ......._1..
                                 1+a
                                               -
                                                       ic]
                                                                   +
                                                                       a{tj
                                                                        1+a



and

      (23)     EtiL        —     2       +         a
                                                            V(u)
                                               l+a



Note from (18) and (20) that this strategy dominates the other strstegies

we have considered.



  j/ These comparisons ignore additional "accountability" considerations
that might arise to the extent that the central bank may have different
preferences than society at large and might not seek to minimize the
social loss function if left to its own discretion.
     2/
      From the structure of the model and the assumption of uncorrelated
disturbances, it is intuitively clear that the optimal state contingent
strategy must have a linear form bt — out + $vt. Under the assumption of
model-consistent expectations, it is straightforward to show that the
coefficients in (21) describe the values of o and fi that minimize the
social loss function.
                                      -   13   -




      Note   also, however, that while    b is an optimal rule,          it is not a

time-consistent discretionary strategy and therefore expectations

predicated on it as a strategy are not rational unless the central bank

can somehow be precommitted to follow the strategy.             jJ   If at time t-l,

in the absence of limits on central bank discretion,               the private sector

had believed an announcement that the central hank at time t would follow

      implying Etlbt —   Ejb — 0, then             it can be shown that for

& —   k/(l+a), EjL(b         + &Et.jbt — 0) <       EtjL.      This would provide a

temptation for the monetary authority to increase social welfare by

deviating from the announced strategy at time             t.   Consequently, the

monetary authority could not achieve           L under    discretion because the   b
strategy would not be credible to market participants who rationally

perceived the central bank's incentive             to shift from   b to b + 6.
Without the ability to precommit to a strategy--i.e., without

relinquishing the discretion to deviate from whatever strategy it

announced-- the minimum expected loss that the monetary authority could
                         D
achieve would be   EjL.
                    IV. Issues Arising From Uncertainty
                         About the Macroeconomic Model

      If ut and vt were generated by well-understood sources and were

observable to the monetary authority and to society, then society could

design its institutions to provide strong incentives for the central bank

to adhere rigidly to the optimal state contingent rule.                Ihe




 j/    See Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Barro and Cordon (1983).
                                    - 14    -




precommitment or credibility problem could be solved by making it costly
for the monetary authority to deviate from the social optimum.

     In practice, however, monetary authorities and private agents must

operate with incomplete information,       not only about the nature of the

shocks that buffet the economy, but also about the responses of output

and inflation to different types of shocks. j/       The oil price shocks in

the 1970s were not perfectly understood at the time they were

experienced, and the implications for output and inflation of different

monetary policy responses to those shocks could not have been predicted

with much confidence.   2/   The implications of financial innovation and

deregulation for the relationship between inflation and (base) money

growth is still not well understood.       The appropriate monetary policy

response to the stock market collapse of October 1987 was, in general

terms, widely agreed upon in advance, but the question of how much

liquidity to leave in the system after stock prices had stabilized at

lower levels could not be answered with much confidence.       Similarly, the

implications of large changes in exchange rates for output and inflation

cannot be predicted with much confidence when the reasons for the exchange

rate changes are not well understood.

     What type of monetary policy makes the most sense when there is

considerable uncertainty about both the structure of the macroeconomic


  j/ Policymakers are not so concerned about how to respond to often-
experienced disturbances; they have learned from experience and advice how
to make such responses and these responses could be codified into an
evolving rule.  Indeed, the overlapping tenures of central bank staff
contributes to the development of "central bank tradition", which is a
form of evolving rule.
  2/ See Rogoff (1985) for a treatment of some aspects of uncertainty in
this setting.
                                   - 15   -




model and the nature of economic disturbances? In part,     the answer

depends on whether there is a basis for believing that the time

consistency problem is a significant concern.

     The reasons for believing that the time consistency problem is

indeed a significant concern include not only the existence of

unemployment compensation,   union bargaining power and a distorting income

tax system, but also the fact that monetary policy is conducted in an

environment in which different political pressure groups implicitly want

the authorities to minimize different loss functions and make strong

efforts to influence the choice of central bank governors. The latter

fact does not necessarily imply that discretionary monetary policy has

induced an inflationary bias in the past. jJ    Rather,   it simply recognizes

that in a democratic society there are constant political pressures for

central banks to make choices that invalidate what market participants had

previously been led to expect.

     We will assume, accordingly, that we are interested in devising a

monetary policy strategy for an economy in which time consistency is

indeed a relevant issue, and we will also assume (perhaps heroically)

that the parameters of the social loss function are well defined and

stable over time.   If the economic structure and the probability

distributions of economic disturbances were well known, the policy

problem could be viewed as a matter of designing institutional mechanisms

for overcoming the time consistency problem by credibly precommitting the



  j/ Many would argue that relative to the monetary rules that some
political interest groups might have suggested, the presence of monetary
discretion in the major industrial countries has had deflationary
consequences during the l9SOs.
                                    -   16   -




monetary authorities to following the optimal state contingent        rule.   (The

use of institutional mechanisms to mitigate monetary policy credibility

problems will be discussed in Section VI below.)

        We have in mind a situation where the policymaker must operate in an

environment containing some aspects quite different than those portrayed

in typical economic models.     In particular we assume that the policymaker

must react to both recurring and nonrecurring events.         Even without full

information about parameters and distributions, optimal reactions to

recurring events can be codified into a rule.         For the recurring part of

the environment new information can be used to continuously re-evaluate--

in   a systematic and statistically appropriate manner- -    the structure and

structural parameters of the economy and the nature and probability

distributions of economic disturbances.          Because there may be important

gains    from allowing the central bank to make use of the latest available

information in determining the settings of its policy instruments,        this

conditioning procedure seems useful and appropriate for feeding informa-

tion into the day-to-day problems facing the policymaker.

        On the other hand there is another part of the policymaker's

environment, which is not so amenable to codification of reactions. This

part involves seldom-experienced events like wars, commodity-price

shocks,    asset market panics, or horizon-expanding inventions.      The nature

of these events makes attempts at policy precommitment prior to the event

seem far fetched.
                                        -   17    -




        V.   The Strategy   of Mixing       a Simple Rule with   Discretion

     Uncertainty   and ignorance about macroeconomic behavior-- in

combination with time conaiatency problems--has led some economists to

                                                      McCallum (1988, p.3) argues,
propose simple rules for monetary policy.

for example, that "neither theory nor evidence points convincingly to any

one of the many competing models of the dynamic interaction between

nominal and real variables" and proposes a simple rule that performs well

in counterfactual simulation experiments conducted with a variety of

structural models of the economy.           j,J


     The attractiveness of simple rules is also auggested implicitly by

past policy practices, which have included non-state-contingent money
                                                                         It is
growth targets and exchange rate stabilization objectives.

difficult to imagine that a complicated state contingent rule would be

attractive to monetary authorities or politically acceptable to the
                                                to imagine that a simple
public at large, although it is relatively easy

state contingent rule for money growth (e.g. ,           a rule calling explicitly

for countercyclical behavior) could be acceptable.

      This section of the paper argues that rigid adherence to a simple

rule may be inferior to the strategy of mixing a simple rule with

discretion. The possible gains from a mixing strategy can be illustrated

                                                to begin with, that
using the framework built earlier. We presume,
                                              the central bank to follow
society has identified the rule that it wants

 in the absence of situations calling for discretion;            this rule may be


                                                           base that are
  1/ McCallum's rule prescribes settings for the monetary at a non-
intended to keep nominal aggregate demand growing smoothly
                                               for an analysis of the
inflationary rate. See Flood and Iaard (1988)
Mccallum proposal.
                                     - 18   -




either    state contingent or non-state-contingent, as long as it is easy for

society to ascertain whether the rule has been followed ex post.             To

capture the fsct that society wants the central bank to exercise

discretion only when there are relatively large payoffs in terms of the

social loss function, we assume that the central bank has been motivated

to minimize the sum of the social loss function L (as specified by

condition (13)) plus a cost that arises whenever policy settings deviate

from the rule. j/

     For purposes of providing a simple illustration,         we consider the

analytic framework used in Section II under the assumptions that vt—0 and

that the ut shocks are not well-understood in the sense that neither

society nor the policymaker has enough experience with the shocks to

parameterize the shock's distribution.          For present purposes,   ut

represents uncertainty. Having simplified the problem by assuming away

all of the shocks coming from well-understood distributions, we also

assume,   consistently,   that the rule that society wants the central bank to

follow is the optimal non-state-contingent rule         b — 0. 2/   We further




  2/ From the point of view of our example it makes little difference
whether society imposes the cost on itself (perhaps in the form of a
costly institutional adjustment) or imposes the cost directly on the
central bank (perhaps in the form of reduced bonuses or endless
Congressional testimony).  We sdopt the simplest structure by assuming
that the cost is imposed on the monetary authority snd we assume that the
cost is not a deadweight loss to society as a whole. Other examples can be
constructed with alternative cost assumptions.
  2! In the presence of well-understood shocks, a verifiable state
contingent rule would be more attractive.
                                           -   19   -




assume that       the distribution of ut shocks is symmetric, and we consider a

threshold size         9   and an associated probability q such that


                   —                  9
    (24)      q            prob(luI


We view (ut:lutt > 9) as a set of "large poorly-understood shocks" to

which society would like the monetary authority to respond by overriding

the rule.   L       If society has established the appropriate incentives for

the monetary authority (i.e. , made the                 cost of overriding the rule large

enough but not too large), then society can expect that the rule will be

overridden if, and only if, the shock is large.                 J    In this case, it is

straightforward to show that for some parameter values the mixed strategy

is preferable to (i.e. results in a smaller expected loss than) both the

rule and discretion.

        The first step in the demonstration is to note that:


                            —             +
    (26)      E1b               qE1bIR         (l-q)E1bjD

where    EjbR is            the period t-l conditional expectation of base

money growth given that the rule is being followed,                  and   EjbtD   is the



      We recognize that our writing down a parameterization of the ut
shocks is in an uneasy tension with our assumption that the shocks come
from poorly-understood sources. One possible interpretation of our set up
in a modern idiom is that the agents in the model have not converged to
rational expectations concerning ut. In this environment, with little
known about the distribution of ut, we would expect considerable
disagreement about the parameters in (24).
  21 In a companion paper, we show how to set the cost optimally from
the perspective of the social loss function both if the social loss
includes the cost and if it does not.
                                                 -20-


t-l conditional expectation of bt given discretion.                Recalling that a

discretionary strategy must satisfy the first order condition (14)                it

follows that:



                                         k
    (26)
           bID
                 —
                      1(Et1bt
                     l+a
                                     +       -
                                                 u)

where we have used vt —        0.    Next,       use equation (17) and the condition

btIR — 0 to derive:


                           —    k
    (27)     Et1btID
                               a+q

The q, which is the probability of following the rule, shows up in

equation (27) because this scheme modifies agents' rational expectations

of base growth.       As long as q is positive,           the scheme reduces expected

base growth conditional on discretion and will therefore reduce the

inflationary bias.         Unconditional expected base growth, which is obtained

from equations (25) and (27), is:


                       —    (l-q)k
    (28)     Et1b              a+q




     Next,   consider that the expected value of the loss function under

the mixed strategy is:



    (29)
             Et1L
                       —
                            qE1L             +
                                                  (l-q)E1LM1
                                                  -    21      -




where          is the loss under the mixed strategy,                               is the loss if the

rule is followed and         LM    is the loss if discretion is exercised, given

that private agents know that the mixed strategy has been adopted.                                  From

(13) and (29) it can be seen that:



      (30)
               L     —
                         [.Eiik
                          (a+q)
                                          -
                                                      ]2


and


                         —       (1+a)2 k2
      (31)
               EtIL                               +     V(uIR),
                                 (a+q)2


where V(uJR) is the variance of u conditional on the rule, which is

equivalent to being conditional on u being "small."                                  Similarly, from

equations (13), (14), and (28) it can be seen that:


                                              a                      a
      (32)      LM   —
                             a      [
                                        (a+q)
                                                  k        -

                                                                   (li-a)
                                                                            u 12

and



                         —       a(1+a) k2 -                   a
        (33)                                                             V(u!D),
                EtlLM                                      (1+a)
                                 (a+q)2


where V(uID) is the variance of                   u   conditional on discretion,             which is

equivalent to being conditional on u being "large."
                                                  - 22   -




        Combining these         two branches of the loss function yields:


                                           + qV(ujR)         +       (l-q)a V(uID).
        (34)    EtlL                                                 (l+a)
                                a+q


                        N
Note from (18) that EtjLt —               EjL0 when              q
                                                                     — 0, since   in this case

V(uID) —       V(u).     Similarly,   note from (20) that                    EtlL —   EtlL when q — 1,
since     in this      case V(utR)    =   V(u).
         So far, our demonstration is simply a formalism.                          What we will show

next is that under a range of parameter values the mixed strategy is

superior to both the optimal rule and discretion.                               Since we simply want to

show a possibility, an example will suffice.                             Recall (24) and consider a

situation in which ut is uniformly distributed on the interval [-U,U] such

that q — 9/U for any choice of               9    on the relevant interval.              For this

distribution,          V(u) — U2/3, V(ulD) —         (l-q3)U2/3(l-q)             and V(uIR) — q2U2/3.

Furthermore, by substituting these conditional variances into (34) and

minimizing       EtlL      with respect to q, it can be shown that the optimal

value of q must satisfy the condition: j/




  j/ To obtain this condition, substitute the conditional variance
expressions into (34) and set the derivative of this expression with
respect to q equal to zero. Rearrange the resulting expression so that it
becomes:

                     2(l+a)2k2
          q2U2   —
                       (a+q)2

from which equation (34) follows.
                                             - 23   -




    (35)    q2 + aq   -
                          (l+a)k/U       —   0.

The probability q need not be an object of choice, we are simply checking

to see that if q is chosen to minimize (34) then the resulting q at the

minimum is a number between zero and one.                 If the resulting q is not

between zero and one then it is impossible,                in this example,   for the


mixing strategy to dominate both the optimal rule and discretion.                   If we

find, however, that the value of q that minimizes (34) does lie between

zero and one, then we will have constructed an example where the mixing

                                                                   Such an example arises
strategy is superior to both rules and discretion.

when society places equal weight on output stabilization and price level

stabilization (i.e., when a —        I   in condition (13)), since in that case the

unique positive root of (35) is between zero and one when k/U < 1.                 ,./


     It should be noted that     the mixed strategy is not always optimal.


Indeed,    if k is large or if U is small,              the rule will dominate a mixed


strategy. Note, however, that if U is extremely large relative to k, then

discretion has an advantage relative to the rule, but (as long as k is

positive) the mixed strategy will beat both the rule and discretion.

    More generally, it should be emphasized that the support that such

analysis provides for strategies that combine rules and discretion

requires careful interpretation.              In particular,     the analysis does not



                                                         u distribution
  j,J The reader should not interpret the moments of the
to be agreed upon numbers--they would be the subject of much dispute.
Indeed, it seems to us to be a perfectly respectable position to claim
that u does not have any finite moments. Of course, such a position,
while respectable, is not very helpful and we are proceeding as if the
rules versus discretion disputants had agreed on a set of moments to use
when discussing u.
                                     -   24   -




support   the strategy of announcing a rule but not taking the rule

seriously, as has sometimes appeared to have been the practice in the

past.    Rather,   as we interpret the analysis,       the mixed strategy calls for

the authorities to follow a precisely defined rule in "normal

circumstances", but to be prepared to override the rule in "abnormal

circumstances". In implementing such a strategy,            society would have to

think carefully about how it wants to define "abnormal circumstances".

Our example interpreted abnormal circumstances as synonymous with large

and poorly understood shocks, but it might also be appropriate for the

central bank to override the rule temporarily whenever the ultimate

target variables had drifted too far off their intended course.


                      VI.   Institutional Arrangements for
                            Mitigating Credibility Problems

        Because we know from the time consistency literature that even

authorities concerned solely with maximizing social welfare may be teapted

to deviate from the optimal rule in the presence of distortions (recall

Section 11.4), it is important to establish mechanisms for overcoming

monetary policy credibility problems.             In some countries, the existence of

independent central banks, and the practice of granting long and

overlapping tenures to central bank governors,           may provide an

institutional framework within which an announced monetary policy strategy

has more credibility than would be the case if monetary policy was

controlled by elected officials with shorter terms of office.

Nevertheless, even independent central banks have credibility problems in

the sense that their announcements are not always accepted at face value.

        As emphasized above, monetary policy credibility problems could he
                                   -   25   -




easily   resolved if the structure of the macroeconomic model was well known

to all economic agents,   if all relevant economic variables were

observable, and if all disturbances to the economy could be characterized

as having well defined probability distributions.   In that case, society

would derive no benefit from allowing the central bank to exercise

discretion and, conversely,   would have nothing to lose from resolving the

monetary policy credibility problem by requiring the central bank to

adhere rigidly to the optimal state contingent rule.   By contrast, when

the central bank has the opportunity to base the settings of its policy

instruments on better information about the economy than private agents

have (or hsd) in making contracts for wages and other relevant variables,

eliminating monetary policy discretion can have the undesirable

consequence of preventing central banks from performing a beneficial
stabilization role.

     In analyzing the difficulties that can arise in resolving monetary

policy credibility problems when central banks have "private

information"--i.e., different information than other economic agents can

obtain or verify- -Canzoneri (1985) has noted that "private information"

includes both superior information about the economy and information about

the policymaking process that the private sector cannot reconstruct.     Our

discussion in Section IV has emphasized that the policymaker's environment

includes seldom-experienced events--such as wars, commodity price shocks,

asset market psnics, or horizon-expanding inventions--that are not

amenable to any codification of policy reactions.    In our view,   it is this

environment-- superimposed on a world in which private agents find it

rational (based on transactions and negotiations costs) to enter into
                                   - 26   -




contracts   for wages and other variables for fixed periods of tiae in forms

that are not fully state contingent or subject to continuous revision--

that creates the possibility for discretionary central bank responses to

seldom-experienced eventa to play a valuable stabilization role.

     In considering the strategy of mixing a simple rule with discretion

in the manner defined in the previous section,    one of the important issuea

that arises is how to limit the exercise of central bank discretion when

the circumstances in which discretionary responses are desired cannot be

defined very precisely in advance.    Our formal analysis relied on the

assumption that the central bank was induced to minimize the sum of the

social loss function plus a fixed cost that it incurred whenever it

deviated from the rule.    In practice,   the achievement of an appropriate

mix of rule and discretion seems likely to depend on: (1) the selection of

a clearly-defined rule that can be expected to steer the economy in a

direction broadly consistent with social preferences; (2) the appointment

of central bankers whose preferences are closely aligned with those of

society at large; and (3) the imposition of an appropriate penalty for

deviating from the rule.

     With regard to the first of these factors, many countries have

allowed their central banks to operate with very imprecisely defined

rules for monetary growth.    For example: most monetary targets have been

specified as ranges, few countries have adopted rules that preclude

"drift" between targets    for successive years, a number of countries have

shifted their targeting strategies from one measure of money to another,

and some countries have specified simultaneous tsrgets for several

monetary aggregates that cannot easily be controlled independently. Thus,
                                     - 27   -




in   the context of the political viability that would come from an explicit

understanding that rules would be mixed with discretion, there is scope

for all countries to define their monetary rules more precisely. There

also may be scope for adopting more sensible types of simple rules- -for

example,   rules that prescribe explicit countercyclical behavior.

      For some countries, the achievement of an optimal mix of rule and

discretion might also be facilitated by changes in the process for

selecting central bank governors. Rogoff (1985) has emphasized that in

the context of a time-consistency problem, society can sometimes make

itself better off by leaving monetary policy at the discretion of central

bankers with preferences that attach more weight than the preferences of

society at large to price level stabilization relative to output

stabilization.     By contrast,   under the mixed strategy envisioned in this

paper, society wants its central bankers to adhere rigidly to a rule under

"normal" circumstances, and only to deviate from the rule when doing so

provides a sufficient reduction in the value of the social loss function.
                                                           central bankers
Accordingly, in this set up, it seems desirable to appoint

whose preferences are similar to those of society at large.

        Finally,   the issue of how severely to penalize central banks for


exercising discretion to override the rule may be a natter that can only

be decided through experimentation. At present, some countries subject

their central bankers to regular cross-examinations by elected officials,

but it is difficult for such procedures to discipline central bankers

effectively when announced rules for monetary policy are not clearly

defined. With a clearly defined monetary rule, the costs imposed by

public cross-examinations and protestations might well dissuade central
                                   - 28   -




bankers from overriding the rule with much frequency. Regardless of

whether public cross examination is sufficient for this purpose, however,

the severity of the penalty (or the cross examination) should be inversely

related,   other things equal, to the level of confidence with which it is

expected that the rule will steer the economy in a direction consistent

with social preferences.

              VII.   The Choice of Variables for Monetary Rules

     The adoption of a mixed strategy for monetary policy might have an

important bearing on the appropriateness      of different choices of

variables for monetary rules.    This section first discusses the choice of

variables for monetary rules in general, and subsequently considers how

the arguments change when rules can be overridden in some circumstances.

1.   Conceptual distinctions

     Discussions of monetary policy strategies draw conceptual

distinctions between three types of variables: policy instruments,

intermediate variables, end ultimate target variables. A further

distinction can be drawn between potential and actual policy instru-

ments.     Potential policy instruments are variables that the central

bank has the ability to control precisely; actual policy instruments are

potential instruments    that the central bank chooses to control.

Historically, monetary authorities have typically chosen as their

actual policy instruments either a short-term market interest rate

(such as the rate at which money market participants lend funds

overnight) or the quantity of some subset of the central bank's

liabilities (such as the aggregate reserves that commercial banks hold
                                     - 29   -




at   the central bank).   The exchange rate is also a potential policy

instrument that a central bank could control precisely by offering to buy

or sell (while supplies lasted) unlimited quantities of foreign currency

at whatever exchange rate level it wished to establish.

      In theoretical discussions of the optimal design of monetary policy,

the objectives and preferences of policymakers are generally con-

ceptualized in terms of a policy loss function.         J   The ultimate targets

are the variables on which the value of the loss function directly

depends. One of the two important classes of ultimate target variables

includes measures of real economic performance, such as unemployment

rates, gaps between actual and potential output, or rates of growth of

real output.   The other important class of ultimate target variables

includes measures of price stability.           The emphasis that theoretical

analysis places on these two classes of ultimate targets seems to reflect

popular sentiments. 21

       Bryant (1980) has identified four key characteristics that differ-

entiate monetary policy strategies from each other.          These

characteristics are:      (1) the choice of policy instruments;      (2) the

choice between a single-stage decision procedure in which instrument

settings are linked directly to the values of ultimate target variables,

or a multi-stage approach in which instrument settings are based on values


  ,./ The discussion in this section ignores discrepancies between the
preferences of policymakers and the preferences of society at large.
  21 In the context of our minimally articulated rational expectations
model, it is not obvious why the level of the inflation rate should have
much direct weight in the social loss function.  Nevertheless, price level
stabilization is repeatedly emphasized as an important objective of
society and its policy authorities.
                                       - 30   -




of    intermediate variables (i.e., variables that are neither ultimate

targets nor actual policy instruments,            such as monetary aggregates that

are defined to include more than the liabilities of the central banks);

(3) the choice of frequency with which to review and possibly adjust the

instrument setting; and (4) the choice of how to incorporate feedback from

new information.

2.     Rules based on monetary asaregates

       Beginning in 1975, a number of major industrial countries began to

experiment with multi-stage strategies in which central banks announced

and pursued target growth rates (or growth rate ranges) for selected

monetary aggregates as intermediate variables that were not directly

under their control. j/        Although this paper does not attempt to

reconstruct the explanations that these countries provided when they

turned to setting intermediate targets for money growth rates, it may be

noted that advocacy of monetary aggregates targeting is typically based

on:    (1) the belief that the stock of money is reliably linked to ultimate

target variables; and    (2)    the belief that central banks have the ability

to control the stock of money indirectly by adjusting their policy

instruments.

      The rationale for a multi-stage intermediate targeting approach can

be better appreciated when it is recognized that in practice the

objective of monetary policy is to achieve desirable outcomes for output

and the price level over a multi-period horizon in a framework in which

changes in the settings of policy instruments affect output and/or the


  j/ See Isard and Rojas-Suarez (1986) for a review of the experience
with monetary aggregates targeting.
                                   - 31   -




price   level with distributed lags.    In reality,   the authorities generally

have fairly accurate information about contemporaneous measures of output

and inflation, but confront major difficulties in forecasting how the

future paths of output and inflation will evolve under different settings

of their policy instruments.

     The difficulty of forecasting the evolution of output and infla-

tion, and of estimating the effects on these ultimate target variables

of changes in monetary policy instruments,     is one of the reasons that

central banks in the mid-l970s found it attractive to adopt the medium-

term strategy of setting intermediate targets for the growth rates of

monetary aggregates.    It was felt that the effects of changes in policy

instrument settings could be predicted more reliably,      and that

deviations from targets could be observed more accurately and corrected

more quickly, when targets were specified in terms of the monetary

aggregates rather than ultimate target variables. Moreover,             it was felt

that a medium-term strategy of gradually declining growth rates for

monetary aggregates would be consistent with steady real output growth and

gradually declining rates of inflation.

     More than a decade of experience has now shown that monetary

aggregates targeting was not as successful as the authorities had hoped

it would be.     Accordingly, central banks in most of the major industrial

countries have been led to abandon or de-emphasize their intermediate

targets for monetary aggregates.       The growing disenchantment with monetary

aggregates targeting has been largely attributed to       (1)   the instability of

velocity (i.e.     of the relationship between money and nominal GNP) in an

environment of financial deregulation and innovation,       and   (2)    the
                                      -   32   -




emergence of strong   political    pressures       to use the instruments of monetary

policy to resist "disruptive" movements in exchange rates following a

period in which the extraordinary rise and fall of U.S. dollar exchange

rates has subjected producers and consumers            to major shifts in the terms

of international competition.

3.   Other types of monetary rules

     As possible alternatives to rules based on monetary aggregates, it

has been suggested that monetary rules could be formulated in terms              of

such variables as nominal interest rates or exchange rates, real interest

rates or exchange rates, interest rates, the price level, real GNP or

nominal GNP.   Traditionally,     discussions of the choice of variables for

monetary rules has been based on a presumption that the authorities would

adhere rigidly to the rule rather than pursuing the type of mixed strategy

suggested in Section V.

     Under the presumption that the rule would be applied rigidly, an

argument that is often advanced against adopting a target for a nominal

interest rate or a nominal exchange rate is that price explosions (or

severe deflations) could occur if the authorities prevented nominal

interest rates or exchange rates from adjusting following a rise (decline)

in inflation or inflationary expectations.           j/   A   strong argument against

adopting a target for either a real interest rate or a real exchange rate

is that the authorities could not provide an effective anchor against

inflation by simply allowing changes in inflation or inflationary

expectations to be incorporated completely into nominal interest rates or


  jJ See Cagnon and Henderson (1988) for a recent analysis of nominal
interest rate pegging under alternative expectations hypotheses.
                                   -   33   -




nominal exchange   rates. )/   The main argument against targeting either the

price level or the level of real GNP is that both variables matter:

adopting a strategy that was concerned only with one of the two major

classes of ultimate target variables could lead to undesirable outcomes

for the other.    In this context, proponents of nominal GNP targets have

suggested that joint outcomes for real CNP and inflation would be

preferable to what likely would be achieved under either real CNP targets

or price level targets.    Opponents of nominal GNP targets have argued,

however, that such rules do not lead to desirable poilcy responses to
                                                               In particular,
"supply shocks" such as poor harvests or oil price shocks.

an expansionary response to the loss in nominal GNP associated with an
                                                                        be
output shortfall could not increase the supply of output and would thus

inflationary,    while a coritractionary response to the increase in nominal

GNP associated with a rise in the supply price of oil or other commodities

would reinforce the recessionary effects of the price rise on aggregate

demand.

     The arguments change when the choice of variables for monetary rules

is considered as part of a policy strategy in which a rule would be mixed

with discretion.     In this context, many of the arguments against the use

of particular variables in monetary rules lose their force.

     While a lengthy reconsideration of these arguments is beyond the

                                             a target for nominal GNP or
scope of this paper, 21 it may be noted that

an exchange rate becomes more appealing when discretion can be exercised


  jJ See Adams and Cros (1986) for an analysis of the consequences of
real exchange rate rules.
                                                                rules and
  2/ Our companion papers focus more extensively on nominal GNP
exchange rate stabilization strategies.
                                     - 34   -




in   response to supply shocks.    A consensus on a feasible and appropriate

target for nominal CNP growth might be much easier to reach than agreement

on either the appropriate macroeconomic model or the appropriate relative

weights to attach to price level stability and real output growth in the

social objective function. j/      Moreover,    while there are wide-ranging

disagreements over the appropriate specifications of macroeconomic models

in general, there appears to be considerably less disagreement about the

reduced form relationship between base-money growth and nominal GNP. 21

                           VIII.   Concluding Remarks

      During the 1980s, monetary authorities in the largest industrial

countries have become more tolerant of variability in monetary growth

rates relative to preannounced targets or projections, while giving

increasing consideration to exchange rate objectives.       j/   Although the

authorities have not modified their broad objective of maintaining

appropriate conditions for sustained noninflationary growth, there are

important unresolved questions about the appropriate strategy for

pursuing that objective,    particularly in the largest countries.

      This paper has used a simple analytic framework to review and

reconsider some of the basic issues that arise in designing and


  1/ See McCallum (1987,1988) and Flood and Isard(1988) for discussions
of (and counterfactual simulation experiments with) nominal GNP rules for
the United States.
  21 As McCallum (1987) notes, however, in the open economy context it
might be preferable to specify a target for some measure of nominal
aggregate demand other than nominal CNP.
  21 Monetary policy strategies have also involved policy coordination
among countries to encourage the depreciation of the U.S. dollar during a
period following the Plaza Meeting of the Croup of Five countries in
September 1985, and to resist further large changes in exchange rates
during the period since the Louvre Accord was announced in February 1987.
                                  - 35   -




implementing a strategy for monetary policy.      Among the main points are

the following.

     1.   Under the unrealistic assumption that both the monetary

authorities and the private sector know the macroeconomic structure, can

observe all relevant economic variables accurately ex post, and have

accurate ex ante information about the probability distributions of

disturbances to the economy, the optimal strategy is a state contingent

rule rather than the type of non-state-contingentmonetary targets that

countries have adopted in the past. j/       To the extent that time

consistency problems exist in such a situation,     the optimal state


contingent rule can be made credible through institutional mechanisms to

insure precommitment.

     2.   The resolution of credibility problems and the design of an

optimal strategy become more complicated when there is considerable

uncertainty about the economic structure and the nature of disturbances.

On the one hand, the environment generates new information that can be

used to continuously reevaluate the structure or structural parameters of

the economy and the nature of economic disturbances;      thus,   there are


important potential gains from allowing the central bank to make use of

the latest available information in its attempts to stabilize the economy.

On the other hand, when the environment includes seldom experienced events

that are not amenable to any codification of policy reactions, it seems

virtually impossible for the private sector to reconstruct the
                                                               be
policymaking process. The credibility of monetary policy would


  j/ It can also be shown, under this unrealistic assumption,          that a
fixed exchange rate strategy would not be optimal.
                                   -   36 -




questionable   in such circumstances if the central bank announced a

complicated state contingent procedure for setting its policy instruments

and was allowed to use new information to make period-by-period revisions

of the structural model and/or the parameter estimates on which its

instrument settings were based.

     3.   While the problems associated with complicated state-contingent

strategies in an environment of considerable model uncertainty have led

some economists to propose the adoption of simple policy rules, a mixed

strategy of combining a simple rule with discretion may be preferable both

to rigid adherence to the rule and to complete discretion. The type of

mixed strategy we are referring to here is not a strategy of announcing a

rule but not taking the rule seriously, as has sometimes appeared to have

been the practice in the past, but rather a strategy that calls for the

authorities to follow a precisely defined (but simple) rule in "normal

circumstances" and to override the rule only under certain types of

conditions.

     4.   Institutional mechanisms that penalized central banks for

exercising discretion might be important for resolving credibility

problems under a mixed strategy, just as they might be for precommitting

the authorities to adhere rigidly to a rule.    In this context, existing

institutional oversight arrangements (generally involving regular cross

examinations of central bankers by elected officials) might be more

effective if the rule component of the mixed strategy was defined

precisely.

     5.   In the context of a mixed strategy involving a simple rule that

can be overridden under certain types of conditions, many of the
                                  -   37   -




arguments against   the use of particular variables in monetary rules lose

their force.   A rule for targeting nominal GNP, for example, becomes more

attractive when the rule can be overridden in response to supply shocks.
                                     -   38   -




                                   References


Adams, Charles and Daniel Gros (1986), "The Consequences of Real Exchange
     Rate Rules for Inflation:  Some Illustrative Examples," International
     Monetary Fund Staff Papers 33:439-76.

Barro, Robert J. and David B. Cordon (1983), "Rules, Discretion and
     Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy," Journal of Monetary
     Economics 12:101-21.

Bryant, Ralph (1980), Money and Monetary Policy in Interdependent
     Economies, The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.

Canzoneri,    Matthew B. (1985), "Monetary Policy Games and the Role of
        Private Information," American Economic Review 75:1056-70.

Flood, Robert P. and Peter Isard (1988), "Simulations with a Rule That
     Links Base-Money Growth to Nominal GNP," forthcoming.

Gagnon,    Joseph E. and Dale W. Henderson (1988), "Nominal Interest Rate
        Pegging Under Alternative Expectations Hypotheses," revised
        manuscript (July).

Gray, Jo Anna (1976), "Wage Indexation:           A   Macroeconomic Approach,"
Journal of Monetary Economics 2:221-35.

Isard, Peter and Liliana Rojas-Suarez (1986), "Velocity of Money and the
     Practice of Monetary Targeting:  Experience, Theory and the Policy
     Debate." In International Monetary Fund, Staff Studies for the World
     Economic Outlook, Washington, D.C. :73-114.

Kydlund, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott, "Rules Rather Than Indiscretion:
     The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans," Journal of Political Economy
        85:473-92.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr.    (1972),   "Expectations       and the Neutrality of Money,"
        Journal of Economic Theory 4:103-24.

McCallum,    Bennett T. (1987), "The Case for Rules in the Conduct of
        Monetary Policy: A Concrete Example."   In Federal Reserve Bank of
        Richmond, Economic Review, Richmond:lO-18 (Sept./Oct.).

          (1988) ,
                  "Robustness Properties of a Rule for Monetary Policy,"
        revised manuscript (February).

Rogoff, Kenneth (1985),    "The Optimal Degree of Commitment to An
        Intermediate Monetary Target," Ouarterly Journal of Economics
        100:1169-89.
                           -   39   -




  (1987), "Reputation, Coordination and Monetary Policy,' forthcoming
in R. Barro (ed.), Handbook of Modern Business Cycle Theory,
Cambridge University Press.
