                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               MONETARY POLICY AND ASSET PRICE OVERSHOOTING:
              A RATIONALE FOR THE WALL/MAIN STREET DISCONNECT

                                       Ricardo J. Caballero
                                           Alp Simsek

                                       Working Paper 27712
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27712


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




Contact information: Caballero (MIT and NBER; caball@mit.edu) and Simsek (MIT, NBER, and
CEPR; asimsek@mit.edu). We are grateful to Tishara Garg and Joel Flynn for oustanding
research assistance and to Chris Ackerman, Jonathan Brownrigg, Guido Lorenzoni, and Andrei
Shleifer for their comments. Caballero and Simsek acknowledge support from the National
Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant Numbers SES-1848857 and SES-1455319, respectively.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Ricardo J. Caballero and Alp Simsek. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Policy and Asset Price Overshooting: A Rationale for the Wall/Main Street Disconnect
Ricardo J. Caballero and Alp Simsek
NBER Working Paper No. 27712
August 2020
JEL No. E21,E32,E43,E44,E52,G12

                                           ABSTRACT

We analyze optimal monetary policy when asset prices influence aggregate demand with a lag (as
is well documented). In this context, as long as the central bank's main objective is to minimize
the output gap, the central bank optimally induces asset price overshooting in response to the
emergence of a negative output gap. In fact, even if there is no output gap in the present but the
central bank anticipates a weak recovery dragged down by insufficient demand, the optimal
policy is to preemptively support asset prices today. This support is stronger if the acute phase of
the recession is expected to be short lived. These dynamic aspects of optimal policy give rise to
potentially large temporary gaps between the performance of financial markets and the real
economy. One vivid example of this situation is the wide disconnect between the main stock
market indices and the state of the real economy in the U.S. following the Fed's powerful
response to the Covid-19 shock.


Ricardo J. Caballero
Department of Economics, E52-528
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
caball@mit.edu

Alp Simsek
Department of Economics, E52-552
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
asimsek@mit.edu




A dynamic link to most recent draft is available at
https://www.dropbox.com/s/e92ev3owfw286fy/overshooting_public.pdf?dl=0public.pdf?dl=0
Figure 1: The disconnect between Wall Street and Main Street. Data: S&P500 index and
continued jobless claims (seasonally adjusted). Source: FRED.

 1.     Introduction
The blue line in Figure 1 shows the acute drop in the S&P 500 once the economic impact of
the Covid-19 shock became apparent. The …gure also shows the equally dramatic recovery
of the S&P 500 after the Fed announced its massive policy response (e.g., it cut the policy
rate to zero and pledged close to 20% of GDP in asset purchase and credit support
facilities). Other …nancial assets show a similar pattern. While the Fed was successful
in reversing the …nancial meltdown, it did not prevent a dramatic collapse in the real
economy. The red line in Figure 1 shows that the US continued claims (inverted scale)
declined substantially and remained low. This disconnect between the quick recovery of
…nancial markets and the sluggish response of the real economy has been the source of
much debate, as highlighted by the cover page of The Economist, May 9th, 2020 (“A
dangerous gap: The markets v the real economy”). To explain this discrepancy, some
observers point at what they see as irrational exuberance in …nancial markets, while
others point at the ine¤ectiveness of the Fed’s policies in helping main street.
    In this paper we present a model where the facts depicted in Figure 1 are the natural
result of optimal monetary policy— not (necessarily) a sign of irrationality or ine¤ective
policy. As long as the central bank’s principal objective is to minimize the output gap,


                                            2
and asset prices in‡uence aggregate demand with a lag, the central bank’s optimal policy
induces an asset price overshoot in response to an output gap. In fact, even if there is
no output gap in the present but the central bank anticipates a weak recovery dragged
down by insu¢ cient demand, the optimal policy is to preemptively support asset prices
today. These dynamic aspects of optimal policy give rise to potentially large temporary
gaps between the performance of …nancial markets and the real economy.
    Our model is set in continuous time. Output is determined by aggregate demand due
to nominal rigidities. Aggregate demand depends on asset prices through a wealth e¤ect
on consumption. The key ingredient is that individual agents adjust their consumption
infrequently, driven by a Poisson process that is independent across individuals. There-
fore, asset prices a¤ect consumption with a lag, consistent with empirical evidence (see,
e.g., Chodorow-Reich et al. (2019)). Monetary policy a¤ects aggregate demand through
its impact on asset prices; thus, the policy also a¤ects consumption and aggregate de-
mand with a lag. The central bank sets interest rates to minimize output gaps, taking
transmission lags into account.
    We …rst analyze a “recovery” scenario in which potential output has just recovered
from a large productivity shock (e.g., Covid-19). However, aggregate demand, dragged
down by a recent history of poor economic conditions, is initially below potential output.
Over time, demand gradually catches up with potential output and closes the negative
output gap. In this context, our main result shows that the equilibrium features asset price
overshooting: asset prices are initially high (above their levels consistent with potential
output) even though output is low. Intuitively, a central bank that dislikes output gaps
boosts asset prices to close the output gap as fast as possible. This boost creates a
large temporary disconnect between …nancial markets and the real economy, but it also
accelerates the recovery. In fact, the asset price boost (and its disconnect with the real
economy) is greatest at the beginning of the recovery phase, when the output gap is
widest.
    We then consider the “recession” phase that precedes the “recovery” phase. In the
recession, potential output has experienced a deep contraction but is expected to increase
according to a Poisson event— in which case the economy transitions to the recovery.
The overshooting result also applies in the recession: if output is below its (already
low) potential level, then the central bank boosts asset prices to close the gap. In fact,
the equilibrium in the recession also features preemptive overshooting: the central bank
boosts asset prices even if output is at its potential level. This preemptive overshooting
is stronger when the central bank expects a faster transition to recovery. Intuitively,
the central bank anticipates that the “recovery” will start with a large negative output

                                             3
gap due to the inertial behavior of aggregate demand. Therefore, the central bank acts
preemptively to boost asset prices and aggregate demand during the recession— in order to
ensure that aggregate demand is not too depressed during the early stages of the recovery
phase.
    Literature review. The concept of an overshooting asset price in response to mon-
etary policy actions or shocks was introduced by Dornbusch (1976). That model and
many others that followed it consider a world where goods’prices and output adjust slug-
gishly and there is a well de…ned long run equilibrium level of the real exchange rate.
Then, for the interest parity condition to hold across safe bonds, the nominal exchange
rate must overshoot its long run response to a monetary shock. While our model also has
sticky prices and sluggish aggregate demand, our overshooting result concerns asset prices
more broadly— rather than just exchange rates, and it is a feature of optimal monetary
policy— rather than the implication of an arbitrage condition.
    Closer to our paper is Caballero and Lorenzoni (2014). Their small open economy
model starts in an overvaluation phase (abnormally high demand for nontradables), and
randomly transitions to a normal phase. Because the export sector faces …nancial con-
straints, the real exchange rate overshoots at the transition and gradually returns to its
steady state level as the excess depreciation generates large pro…ts for the …nancially con-
strained export sector. In this context, the optimal policy is to reduce the overvaluation
in the …rst phase and exacerbate the overshooting at the transition, both with the purpose
of relaxing the export sector’s …nancial constraint. The optimal policy also induces over-
shooting in our model, but for a di¤erent reason: to stimulate output in an environment
with nominal rigidities and sluggish adjustment of aggregate demand.
    Like in Caballero and Simsek (2020a,b,c), monetary policy in our model operates
through …nancial markets. The central bank a¤ects asset prices, which in turn a¤ects ag-
gregate demand. The distinctive feature of this paper is the delayed response of aggregate
demand to asset prices, which is the main ingredient driving our overshooting results. In
the context of the Covid-19 recession, Caballero and Simsek (2020a) provides an expla-
nation for the large decline in asset prices and highlights the key role of large scale asset
purchases (LSAPs) in reversing that decline, and this paper provides a rationale for the
subsequent Wall/Main Street disconnect (see Figure 1).
    In terms of the model’s ingredients, this paper is also related to and supported by an
extensive empirical literature documenting that: (i) monetary policy a¤ects asset prices
(e.g., Thorbecke (1997), Jensen et al. (1996), Jensen and Mercer (2002), Rigobon and Sack
(2004), Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2004))— these papers …nd


                                             4
that, on average, an unanticipated 100 bps increase in the federal funds rate is associated
with a decrease in stock market returns in the range of 5.3% to 6.2%; (ii) asset prices a¤ect
aggregate demand and output (e.g., Davis and Palumbo (2001), Gilchrist and Zakrajšek
(2012), Kyungmin et al. (2020), Dynan and Maki (2001), Di Maggio et al. (forthcoming),
Chodorow-Reich et al. (2019), Mian and Su… (2014), Guren et al. (2018))— these papers
…nd wealth and balance sheet e¤ects in the range of 5–10 cents on the dollar depending on
the sample and the speci…c asset price; (iii) the e¤ect of asset prices on aggregate demand
and output is gradual (e.g., Davis and Palumbo (2001); Lettau and Ludvigson (2004);
Carroll et al. (2011), Dynan and Maki (2001), Case et al. (2013), Chodorow-Reich et al.
(2019))— these papers …nd that consumption typically takes between 8 and 9 quarters to
fully adjust to stock price changes.
    A central feature of our model is the infrequent adjustment of individual consumption
(aggregate demand). An extensive literature on durables’consumption (and investment)
uses …xed adjustment costs to explain this feature. This literature documents infrequent
adjustment in microeconomic data, and explains the inertia it introduces for aggregate
durables’ consumption and investment (see Bertola and Caballero (1990) for an early
survey). There is also a literature that emphasizes infrequent re-optimization for broader
consumption categories— due to behavioral or informational frictions— and uses this fea-
ture to explain the inertial behavior of aggregate consumption (e.g., Caballero (1995); Reis
(2006)) as well as asset pricing puzzles (e.g., Lynch (1996); Marshall and Parekh (1999);
Gabaix and Laibson (2001)). We take the infrequent adjustment of individual consump-
tion as given (driven by a Poisson process for simplicity) and study its implications for
optimal monetary policy.
    Finally, our paper is related to the growing empirical literature that analyzes the
forces that are driving asset prices during the Covid-19 recession (e.g., Gormsen and
Koijen (2020); Ramelli and Wagner (forthcoming); Landier and Thesmar (2020)). This
literature typically attributes the large stock market swing in Figure 1 to changes in the
e¤ective discount rate for stocks. Gormsen and Koijen (2020) argue that the discount rate
initially spiked and then declined to its pre-crisis levels— in part because of the decline
in expected interest rates. This explanation suggests, consistent with our model, that
monetary policy explains part of the recovery in the stock market. Other studies …nd
that unconventional monetary policies (which we discuss in Remark 1) also had a large
positive impact on asset prices (e.g., Fed (2020); Cavallino and De Fiore (2020); Arslan
et al. (2020); Haddad et al. (2020)).
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces our baseline environ-


                                             5
ment and describes the equilibrium conditions with optimal monetary policy. Section 3
analyzes the recovery phase and shows that the equilibrium features asset price overshoot-
ing. Section 4 considers the recession phase and shows that it features both overshooting
and preemptive asset price overshooting. Section 5 provides …nal remarks, and is followed
by several appendices.


 2.      The baseline model
In this section, we describe our baseline model and de…ne the equilibrium. We envision
a scenario that captures the aftermath of a recessionary shock to the economy, such as
Covid-19. Speci…cally, potential output has already recovered to its pre-shock level, but
initial aggregate demand and output— which were brought down by the recent negative
shock— are below potential output. We use this setup to study the optimal monetary
policy during the recovery from a recessionary shock. In Section 4, we extend the model
to introduce an ex-ante period with low potential output and study the optimal policy
during the recession (with an anticipated recovery).
    Time t     0 is continuous. There is a single consumption good and a single factor
(capital). Capital is normalized to one unit and there is no investment or depreciation.
Thus, potential output is the productivity of capital. Until Section 4, potential output
Y = 1 is constant and normalized to one. In particular, there is no aggregate risk.
    Actual output, denoted by Y (t), can be di¤erent than potential output due to nominal
rigidities. Speci…cally, there are New-Keynesian …rms that have permanently …xed prices
and can change their production by adjusting capital utilization.1 These …rms operate
with a markup and …nd it optimal to meet the demand for their good, even when this
demand deviates from their potential output (for relatively small deviations, which we
assume). This setup ensures that output is determined by aggregate demand. Since there
is no investment, output is determined by aggregate consumption:

                                             Y (t) = C (t) .                                           (1)

   There are two …nancial assets. First, there is a market portfolio that re‡ects a claim
on all current and future output. We let Q (t) denote the price of the market portfolio.
Second, there is a risk-free asset in zero net supply. We let R (t) denote the risk-free
   1
     Formally, Y (t) = Y where denotes capital utilization. We normalize the utilization that would
obtain absent nominal rigidities to one,      = 1. Operating capital with higher or lower utilization is
feasible but ine¢ cient. For simplicity, we do not explicitly model capital utilization costs in this paper
(see Caballero and Simsek (2020b) for a version of the model with these costs).


                                                    6
interest rate (nominal and real rates are the same since prices are permanently …xed),
and is set by the central bank.
    There is a continuum of identical consumer-investors. These consumers make a
consumption-savings choice as well as a portfolio choice. Consumers have time-separable,
log utility with discount rate . With these preferences, if there were no other frictions,
consumers would spend a constant fraction of their wealth, C (t) = Q (t). Since there
is no risk, they would also ensure the expected return on the market portfolio is exactly
equal to the risk-free rate, R (t). At this expected return, consumers would be indi¤erent
between the market portfolio and the risk-free asset. Assuming the central bank sets the
interest rate to ensure output is equal to its potential, the economy would immediately
reach a steady state with potential outcomes:

                                 Y (t) = Y = 1;             C (t) = C = 1;                                      (2)
                                                                       1
                                 R (t) = R =                and Q = .

    Set against this potential benchmark, our key friction is that consumers do not con-
tinuously adjust their consumption and portfolio allocations. At every instant, a random
fraction of consumers adjusts, with constant hazard . Their allocations remain unchanged
until the next time they have a chance to adjust.
    First consider the portfolio choice. Since there is no risk, the return on the market
portfolio is equal to the risk-free rate as in the benchmark. That is, the equilibrium asset
price satis…es
                                              Y (t) + Q_ (t)
                                     R (t) =                 .                           (3)
                                                  Q (t)
At this price, the consumers that adjust are indi¤erent to changing their portfolios. For
concreteness, we assume all consumers invest an identical fraction of their wealth in the
market portfolio. This fraction is equal to one to ensure market clearing.
   Next consider the consumption choice. There is a representative consumer whose
wealth equals aggregate wealth, Q (t). When adjusting, we assume this consumer chooses
her new level of consumption according to the rule

                        C adjust (t) = C + m (Q (t)             Q ) + n (Y (t)           Y ):

Here, C ; Y ; Q are the potential levels in (2) and m > 0; n 2 [0; 1) are parameters.
Individual consumers follow a similar rule scaled by their wealth shares.2 Equivalently,
  2                                                                     ai (t)
      Formally, let ai (t) denote a consumer’s wealth and   i
                                                                (t) =   Q(t)     denote her wealth share. A consumer


                                                      7
letting lowercase variables denote gaps relative to the potential, x (t)                        X (t)   X , we
assume
                               cadjust (t) = mq (t) + ny (t) .                                             (4)

Hence, the adjusting consumers’spending (measured in gaps from potential) can be writ-
ten as a linear and increasing function of the current asset price and of current output.
    Our formulation in (4) allows for a rich set of possibilities for consumption behavior.
For m = and n = 0, adjusting consumers are “myopic” and follow the same rule as in
the benchmark case of a continuously-adjusting consumer, C (t) = Q (t). In Appendix
A.2, we also analyze the decisions of a “fully rational” consumer who incorporates the
fact that she might not get to adjust in future periods. Along the equilibrium path, this
consumer’s optimal choice (up to linearization) can be written as in (4) with endogenous
weights m 2 (0; ) and n 2 (0; 1). We discuss the intuition behind this rule and the
implications for our analysis in Section 3.2. Beyond these cases, the rule in (4) can also
stand in for unmodeled ingredients that make (even unconstrained) households’spending
react to current income changes beyond wealth changes (see, e.g., Parker (2017); Kueng
(2018) for empirical evidence). Our main result applies for arbitrary parameters as long
as they satisfy the mild assumptions m > 0 and n < 1: that is, consumption responds
at least somewhat to asset prices, and its response to output is less than one to one. For
most of our analysis (except in Section 3.2), we take Eq. (4) as an exogenous rule with
…xed parameters m; n.3
    Assuming that the adjusting consumers are randomly selected, and using Eq. (1), we
also have an equation that describes the dynamics of output:

                                       Y_ (t) =        C adjust (t)     Y (t) .                            (5)

Hence, output increases if and only if the adjusted spending exceeds the current level of
spending and output, C (t) = Y (t). The initial level of spending and output, C (0) =
                    i
with wealth share       (t) follows the rule

                         C i;adjust (t) =   i
                                                (t) (C + n (Y (t)     Y ) + m (Q (t)   Q )) .
                                                                                            P
Aggregating across all adjusting consumers, we obtain (4) because the wealth shares satisfy i i (t) = 1.
   With this rule, there might be paths in which some consumers’ wealth becomes zero, e.g., if the
consumer does not readjust for a long time. If this happens, the budget constraint binds and consumption
falls to zero. We ignore these paths since we focus on relatively small shocks and linearized dynamics.
    3
      For the fully rational case, the weights m; n are endogenous to the dynamic equilibrium path but
exogenous to monetary policy decisions (as long as the central bank sets interest rates without commit-
ment, which we assume). We do not focus on this case and instead treat m; n as exogenous parameters to
avoid having to deal with complex …xed-point arguments that are unrelated to our main contributions.



                                                            8
Y (0), is exogenous (determined by unmodeled history). Rewriting the expression in terms
of the gaps from potential, and substituting (4), we also obtain

                       y_ (t) = (mq (t) + ny (t)             y (t))   given y (0) .               (6)

    It remains to describe monetary policy. The central bank sets a path of interest rates,
[R (t)]t2(0;1) , and implements a path of output and asset prices that satisfy Eqs. (3) and
(6). Note that it is equivalent to think of the central bank as setting a path of asset price
gaps, [q (t)]t2(0;1) . Given this path and the initial output gap y (0), Eq. (6) describes the
equilibrium path of output gaps. Eq. (3) then describes the equilibrium interest rate.
    We assume the central bank’s objective function is
                                         Z                                      !
                                             1                   2          2
                                                     t       y (t)      q (t)
                        V (0; y (0)) =           e                                  dt.           (7)
                                         0                     2           2

As usual, the central bank dislikes output gaps, y (t). We assume a quadratic cost function,
which leads to closed-form solutions. In addition, the central bank also dislikes asset price
gaps, q (t). The parameter is the relative weight on asset price gaps. In the limit ! 0,
we have the conventional setup in which the central bank does not (directly) pay attention
to asset prices. Our main results hold in this conventional limit but optimal asset price
behavior is extreme and unrealistic; in practice, central banks do not tolerate, let alone
induce, very large ‡uctuations in asset prices (see, e.g., Cieslak and Vissing-Jorgensen
(2020)). We capture this “aversion-to-overshooting” with the parameter              > 0. The
reasons for this aversion range from distributional considerations to …nancial stability.
The central bank’s discount rate is the same as that of the consumers, .
     Finally, we assume the central bank sets the current policy without commitment: that
is, it sets the current asset price gap q (t), taking the path of future gaps as given. In this
case, the central bank’s policy problem can be formulated recursively as4

                                                 y2             q2
                             V (y) = max                           + V 0 (y) y;
                                                                             _                    (8)
                                              q   2              2
                                  y_ =        (mq (1            n) y) ;
                             V (y)           0 and V (0) = 0.

The constraints in the last line follow from the objective function in (7) and ensure that
   4
     The lack of commitment does not restrict monetary policy as long as the consumption function in
(4) is exogenous to the policy. That is, as long as m and n are exogenous parameters, the Principle of
Optimality implies that maximizing (7) subject to (6) is equivalent to solving problem (8).


                                                         9
we pick the correct solution to the recursive problem.
    For closed form solutions, we also linearize Eq. (3) around the potential levels in (2)
to obtain
                             r (t) = (y (t) q (t) + q_ (t)) ,                           (9)

where r (t)    R (t)      denotes the interest rate gap. Thus, we de…ne the equilibrium as
follows.

De…nition            1. A (linearized) equilibrium with optimal monetary policy,
[y (t) ; q (t) ; r (t)]1
                       t=0 , is such that the path of asset price and output gaps, [q (t) ; y (t)],
solve the recursive problem (8) and the interest rate gap is given by (9).

Remark 1 (LSAPs). In Caballero and Simsek (2020a) we demonstrated that Large Scale
Asset Purchases (LSAPs) can be viewed as close substitutes to interest rate cuts in terms of
their impact on asset prices and output when there is risk (and risk-aversion). Moreover,
LSAPs are an ideal policy instrument to stabilize aggregate demand when conventional
monetary policy is constrained. For these reasons, a broader interpretation of the interest
rate policy in this paper (i.e., extended to an environment that includes risk considerations)
includes not only the policy rate but also LSAPs. In fact, LSAPs were a crucial component
of the Fed’s response to the Covid-19 shock.

Remark 2 (Interpreting Infrequent Adjustment). In the literature review section we cited
a variety of reasons for infrequent adjustment of individual consumption, ranging from
…xed costs for durable purchases to behavioral and informational reasons for broader cat-
egories of consumption. Yet another reason is habit formation: e.g., returning to restau-
rants and traveling after the Covid-19 threat is over may take a while.

Remark 3 (Households without Financial Wealth). For simplicity, we focus on relatively
wealthy households that can adjust their spending in response to asset price changes. We
can extend the model to accommodate households that do not hold …nancial wealth without
changing anything substantive. For example, suppose we split consumers (and income)
between our agents (share 1 h) and a group of hand-to-mouth consumers (share h) that
spend all of their income, C h (t) = Y (t). Then, in discrete time, output satis…es

                            Y (t) = (1       h) C (t) + hY (t) ;                              (10)
                       and C (t) =       C adjust (t) + (1   ) C (t     t) .

Here, we have used C (t) to denote spending by consumers that are not hand-to-mouth.
The …rst equation implies Y (t) = C (t). Substituting this into the second equation and

                                                10
taking the limit as t ! 0, we obtain Eq. (5): that is, output dynamics are exactly
the same. Hence, our results are robust to allowing for households that do not have any
…nancial wealth. These households reduce the direct impact of asset prices on output, but
they also create a multiplier e¤ect that leaves the total impact unchanged [cf. (10)].


 3.     Overshooting during the recovery
We next solve for the equilibrium and establish our main results about overshooting. To
capture the recovery from a recessionary shock such as Covid-19, we focus on the case
with a negative initial output gap, y (0) < 0. Speci…cally, potential output has already
adjusted to its long-run level but actual output (driven by spending) has not, since it
still re‡ects the recent decline in productivity and output. Our main result shows that
the optimal policy features asset-price overshooting: the central bank optimally chooses
a positive asset price gap. That is, even though output is below its potential level, the
asset price is high and above its potential level.
     The optimality condition for problem (8) is

                                             m
                                      q=         V 0 (y) .                            (11)

This condition is intuitive. The asset price is the central bank’s policy lever. Since
the asset price increases the output gap, the central bank increases the price whenever
increasing the output gap improves its value function. As we will see, this is the case for
negative output gaps, y < 0, where raising the output gap toward zero is valuable.
   We next di¤erentiate Eq. (8) with respect to y and use the Envelope Theorem to
obtain
                  ( + (1 n)) V 0 (y) = y + V 00 (y) (mq (1 n) y) .                    (12)

Eqs. (11) and (12) correspond to a second order ODE that characterizes the value func-
tion. We conjecture (and verify in the appendix) that the solution is a quadratic function,

                                       1 2
                         V (y) =         y                                            (13)
                                      2v
                                                                     2
                                                                         m2
                      where 0 = v 2      ( + 2 (1            n)) v            .       (14)

Here, v (“value”) denotes a normalized parameter that shifts the value function. Since
V (y) < 0, we also have v > 0: the solution corresponds to the positive root of (14).


                                             11
   Combining this with (11), we solve for the optimal asset price as

                                                      m
                                       q (t) =          y (t) :                           (15)
                                                      v

This expression illustrates the overshooting of asset prices. Starting with a negative
output gap, the optimal asset price is above its potential level.
   Next consider the change in output gaps along the optimal path. Combining Eqs. (15)
and (6), we obtain

                    y_ (t) =      y (t)                                                   (16)
                                    m2
                where                   +1       n     =v         ( + (1   n)) > 0.       (17)
                                     v

The composite parameter, , captures the convergence rate. We used (14) to simplify
the expression for this convergence rate. Starting with a negative output gap, and an
associated positive asset price gap (in view of overshooting), both gaps monotonically
converge to zero at rate .
   Finally, consider the linearized interest rate gap. Using Eq. (9), we obtain

                                                 y (t)     q_ (t)
                            r (t) =      q (t)           +                                (18)
                                                 q (t)     q (t)
                                                     v
                                   =       q (t)       + +       ,
                                                     m

where the second line uses Eqs. (15) and (16). Hence, the interest rate gap is inversely
proportional to the asset price gap. Starting with a negative output gap, and an associated
positive asset price gap, the interest rate gap starts below zero and gradually increases,
r (0) < 0 and r_ (t) > 0. The following result summarizes this discussion.

Proposition 1. The value function is given by (13) ; where v > 0 is the positive solution
to the quadratic equation (14). The equilibrium path of the asset price gaps, the output
gap, and the linearized interest rate gap [q (t) ; y (t) ; r (t)]1
                                                                 t=0 , is characterized by Eqs.
(15) ; (16) ; (18). Starting with a negative output gap, y (0) < 0, the equilibrium features
asset price overshooting: the asset price is above its potential level, q (0) > 0, and the
interest rate is below its potential level, r (0) < 0. Over time, output and asset price gaps
monotonically converge to zero at the exponential rate = v ( + (1 n)) > 0.

   Figure 2 illustrates the equilibrium dynamics for a particular parameterization starting
with a negative output gap. The equilibrium (the solid lines) features overshooting: the

                                                 12
central bank sets a positive asset price gap and gradually improves the output gap. The
central bank achieves this outcome by starting with a low interest rate, and then gradually
increasing the interest rate and reducing the asset price gap.5
    The …gure also illustrates the e¤ect of increasing the central bank’s aversion to over-
shooting, (the dashed lines). In this case, there is less overshooting, hence output gaps
are closed more slowly and the economy operates below its potential for a longer time.
Also note that by overshooting less when is high, the central bank might have to over-
shoot for longer. That is, asset prices can eventually be higher (and the interest rate
lower) when the central bank has a greater aversion to overshooting asset prices.


 3.1.     Comparative statics of overshooting
We next characterize how di¤erent parameters in our model a¤ect the overshooting result.
In particular, the following result describes the extent of overshooting for a given output
      q(t)
gap, y(t)  = mv (cf. (15)) as well as the convergence rate, (cf. (16)).

Proposition 2. Consider the equilibrium path with optimal monetary policy. Then, the
                                                                  q(t)
asset price overshoots by more per unit of output gap (greater y(t)    ) and output gaps are
closed faster (greater ) in each of the following cases:
    (i) When the central bank has smaller aversion to overshooting (smaller )
    (ii) When a larger fraction of consumers adjusts at any moment (larger )
    (iii) When adjusting consumers respond more to the asset price (larger m)
    In addition:
                                                     q(t)
    (iv) The asset price overshoots by more (larger y(t)  ) but output gaps are closed more
slowly (smaller ), when adjusting consumers respond more to current income (larger n).

   The …rst part of Proposition 2 formalizes the comparative statics illustrated in Fig-
ure 2. The second and the third parts say that the central bank overshoots more (and
induces a faster recovery) when the output-asset price relation is stronger— in the sense
that the spending response to asset prices is either faster (with smaller lags) or larger.
Strengthening the output-asset price relation generates two counteracting e¤ects. On the
one hand, it makes the asset price overshooting more e¤ective— which induces more over-
shooting. On the other hand, it enables the central bank to achieve the same impact on
   5
    In our model, the asset price level also declines over time (after an initial jump). This feature is
not essential to the argument. The same result would still apply for the asset price gap in a variant with
productivity growth. In this case, the potential asset price would also be increasing over time (at the
growth rate), so overshooting would not necessarily imply a declining asset price level. It would only
imply a frontloading of some of the future capital gains.


                                                   13
      0



  -0.02



  -0.04



  -0.06
          0   0.5       1        1.5       2        2.5      3        3.5       4




      1



    0.5



      0



          0   0.5       1        1.5       2        2.5      3        3.5       4




      0


  -0.05


   -0.1


  -0.15


   -0.2


          0   0.5       1        1.5       2        2.5      3        3.5       4




Figure 2: A simulation of the equilibrium for a parameterization with low (solid lines)
and high (dashed lines). The dotted lines correspond to the potential levels for the
corresponding variables.




                                          14
the output gap with smaller (or shorter) overshooting— which induces less overshooting.
With quadratic preferences (which are standard and commonly used in the literature),
the …rst force dominates and the central bank induces more overshooting when it is more
e¤ective.
   The …nal part of Proposition 2 considers the e¤ect of increasing the consumers’ re-
sponse to current income. This strengthens the ampli…cation force by which current
output gaps persist: for instance, negative output gaps tend to reinforce further negative
gaps (cf. (6)). This induces the central bank to overshoot more in order to mitigate the
ampli…cation loop and speed up the convergence. Despite the central bank’s response,
the ampli…cation force prevails and implies that the output gaps are closed more slowly.


 3.2.    Overshooting with fully rational consumers
So far, we have assumed consumers exogenously follow the rule in (4). In Appendix A.2,
we generalize our analysis to the case with fully rational consumers. Here, we brie‡y
discuss the results.
    The analysis proceeds in three steps. First, we characterize the general optimal (lin-
earized) consumption rule for a rational consumer who anticipates she will readjust in the
future with Poisson probability . In the benchmark with = 1 (continuous adjustment),
the consumer has a constant marginal propensity to consume (MPC) out of wealth. Un-
like this benchmark, the consumer with …nite has an endogenous MPC out of wealth
that depends on the future path of interest rates. As we explain below, keeping current
wealth constant, a higher interest rate increases the MPC. That is, since the consumer
cannot reoptimize in the future (in some states), the substitution e¤ect becomes weaker.
Therefore, despite log preferences, the substitution and income e¤ects do not net out. In-
stead, the income e¤ect dominates and implies that— keeping wealth constant— increasing
the interest rate increases spending. Equivalently, higher interest rates reduce the cost of
a …xed consumption stream until the next adjustment opportunity.
    Second, we characterize the consumption rule further for the equilibrium path with
optimal policy. Speci…cally, when the (linearized) output and the interest rate both
converge to the steady state at a constant rate > 0, we show

                                               y (0)                  +      +
          cadjust (0) =   (1   n
                               ~ ) q (0) + n
                                           ~           where   n
                                                               ~=              .       (19)
                                                +                      3     +
                                R1         t
For intuition, note that y(0)
                          +
                              =  0
                                   y (0) e e t dt corresponds to the consumer’s “…xed-
rate wealth”: her expected lifetime budget evaluated at the steady-state interest rate .

                                                15
Hence, the consumer reacts to a weighted average of her actual wealth, q (0), and her
“…xed-rate wealth,” y(0)+
                          . When asset prices increase because of an increase in current
income (y (0)), the two wealth measures increase by the same amount and the consumer’s
MPC out of wealth is as usual ( ). However, when asset prices increase because of an
interest rate cut, actual wealth increases while “…xed-rate wealth” remains constant. In
this case, the consumer’s MPC out of wealth is smaller ( (1 n        ~ )). This re‡ects the
income e¤ects associated with interest rate changes that we discussed earlier. Hence, Eq.
(19) says that the consumer does react to wealth changes induced by interest rate changes,
but less so than when she can adjust continuously. As expected, ! 1 implies n         ~ ! 0:
when consumption adjustment is su¢ ciently rapid, we recover the usual consumption rule.
    Finally, note that Eq. (19) is equivalent to the consumption rule in (4) with coe¢ cients
m = (1 n     ~ ) and n = n ~ = ( + ). Hence, our earlier analysis also applies in this case.
However, the coe¢ cients m and n are endogenous to the convergence rate . Recall that
the convergence rate also depends on the coe¢ cients m and n. Hence, with fully rational
consumers, the equilibrium corresponds to a …xed point. In the appendix, we establish
the existence of a …xed point with the desired properties and prove the following result.

Proposition 3. Consider the equilibrium with fully rational consumers analyzed in Ap-
pendix A.2. As long as > 9 , there exists an equilibrium in which consumption satis…es
Eq. (19) with weight n
                     ~ ( ) 2 (0; 1)— and thus Eq. (4) with weights m = (1 n     ~ ) 2 (0; )
and n = n ~ = ( + ) 2 (0; 1); and the equilibrium variables converge to the steady state at
the rate > 0 characterized in Proposition 1. In particular, the equilibrium with fully
rational consumers also features asset price overshooting.

    Thus, as long as consumers’adjustment is not too sluggish, our main result applies in
this case. Intuitively, rational consumers still respond to asset price increases [cf. (19)],
so the central bank also overshoots asset prices in this case.6


 4.      Preemptive asset price overshooting
So far, we have focused on an episode in which potential output has just recovered but
aggregate demand and output are below potential output due to a recent recessionary
   6
    Our analysis in Appendix A.2 also reveals that, with fully rational consumers, the convergence rate
has a …nite upper bound independent of aversion to overshooting         [cf. Lemma 2]. In particular, in
the limit in which aversion approaches zero, ! 0, the convergence rate does not approach in…nity— as
one might have expected from the analysis with exogenous m; n. As convergence becomes more rapid,
the coe¢ cient m (MPC out of actual wealth) endogenously declines toward zero. This in turn reduces
the extent of overshooting and slows convergence. In the limit ! 0, the coe¢ cient m approaches zero
and the convergence rate approaches its upper bound .


                                                  16
shock. We next explicitly analyze the preceding “recession” episode and show that it
features an even more extreme form of overshooting in order to accelerate the recovery
once potential output improves.
    Speci…cally, there are now two aggregate states denoted by subscript s 2 f1; 2g. State
s = 2 (the “recovery”) corresponds to our analysis up to now. In particular, potential
output is constant and normalized to one, Y2 (t) = 1. State s = 1 (the “recession”)
corresponds to an earlier period in which potential output is given by Y1 (t) = 1        <1
for some > 0. The economy starts in the recession state s = 1 and transitions to
the recovery state s = 2 according to a Poisson process with intensity > 0. Once the
economy transitions, it remains in state s = 2 forever.
    In this section, we use the notation ys = Ys (t) Y ; qs = Qs (t) Q ; rs = Rs (t) R to
denote normalized variables: their di¤erence from potential levels in the recovery state [cf.
(2)]. We use y~s ; q~s to denote output and asset price gaps: their di¤erence from potential
levels within the corresponding state. For the recovery state, the normalized and the gap
variables are the same, y2 = y~2 ; q2 = q~2 ; but for the recession state they are di¤erent,
y1 6= y~1 ; q1 6= q~1 (since the potential levels are lower).
    We make three additional simplifying assumptions. First, consumers have Epstein-
Zin preferences with discount rate , EIS equal to one, and RRA equal to 0. Hence,
consumers e¤ectively have log utility with respect to consumption-savings decisions as
before, but they are risk neutral with respect to portfolio decisions. This ensures that the
asset pricing side of the model (which is not our focus) is the same as before. The risk-free
rate is the same as the expected return on the market portfolio. Thus, the normalized
interest rate is given by (9) in state s = 2 and by the following expression in state s = 1:7

                    r1 (t) = (y1 (t)        q1 (t) + q_1 (t) + (q2 (t)         q1 (t))) :       (20)

The expected return on the market portfolio accounts for the change in the asset price if
there is a transition.
    Second, adjusting consumers follow the rule in (4) in both the recovery and the reces-
sion states. When consumers are fully rational, the optimal consumption rule would take
this form with possibly state-dependent coe¢ cients ms ; ns . We assume the same rule for
  7
    We obtain (20) by linearizing the following equation that describes the interest rate (around the
potential levels in the recovery state (Y ; Q ; R )):

                                       Y1 (t) + Q_ 1 (t) + (Q2 (t)   Q1 (t))
                            R1 (t) =                                           .
                                                         Q1 (t)




                                                   17
both states to keep the notation simple, although our results would qualitatively apply
in the more general case (as long as ms > 0; ns 2 (0; 1) for both states). In view of this
assumption, normalized output follows the same dynamics in the recession state [cf. (6)]:

                                 y_ 1 = (mq1         (1    n) y1 ) .                        (21)

   Finally, we let the central bank solve the following version of problem (8) in state 1:

                                   y~12   q~12
              V1 (y1 ) = max                   + V10 (y1 ) y_ 1 + (V2 (y1 )   V1 (y1 )) ;   (22)
                            q1      2      2
            where y~1 = y1       y1 with y1 =        < 0;
              and q~1 = q1       q1 with q1 =         (1     n) =m < 0.

Given current normalized output y1 , the central bank solves a gap-minimizing problem as
before. However, the gaps in state s = 1 are no longer equal to the normalized variables.
The potential output, y1 , is lower (recall that Y1 = 1  ). The potential asset price, q1 , is
also lower and re‡ects the lower potential output. If consumers adjusted instantaneously
( = 1), then keeping the asset price at its potential would ensure that output is also
at its potential [cf. (21)]. The value function also accounts for the expected transition
to the recovery state. In particular, V2 ( ) denotes the recovery value function that we
characterized earlier [cf. (13)].
    We de…ne the equilibrium with optimal monetary policy as before. In the recession
state, output and asset prices solve problem (22) given (21), and the interest rate is given
by (20). After transition to the recovery state, the equilibrium is given by De…nition 1.
    To analyze the equilibrium, note that Eq. (21) also holds in terms of the gaps:

                                 d~
                                  y1
                                     = (m~
                                         q1          (1     n) y~1 ) .                      (23)
                                 dt

Thus, problem (22) has a similar structure to the earlier problem (8). In the appendix,
we show that the solution also has a similar form [cf. (13)]:

                                                                1 2
                                       V1 = a + b~
                                                 y1              y~ ,                       (24)
                                                               2v 1
                             where      b =                        > 0.                     (25)
                                                     + +       v

Here, v; > 0 are the same as before. In this case, the value function features an
additional linear component, a + b~
                                  y1 , with b > 0. In particular, a positive output gap,


                                                18
y~1 > 0, increases the value function relative to the recovery state, b~y1 > 0.
    Intuitively, a positive gap is now less costly since it will reduce the size of the output
gap once potential output recovers. This suggests that the central bank might preemptively
induce positive gaps in the recession state. We next state our main result in this section,
which completes the characterization and veri…es that the equilibrium features preemptive
overshooting.

Proposition 4. (i) In the recession state s = 1, the value function is given by (24), where
a is a constant and b > 0 is given by (25). Absent transition, the optimal asset price and
output gaps follow the dynamics

                                            m            1
                                q~1 (t) =            b     y~1 (t) ;
                                                         v
                                            2
                              d~
                               y1 (t)           m2
                                      =              b   y~1 (t) .
                                dt

These gaps monotonically converge to strictly positive steady state levels given by

                                                                       1       n
          y~1 (1)                      >0        and      q~1 (1) =                y~1 (1) > 0.   (26)
                             + +                                           m

The normalized output and asset price y1 (t) ; q1 (t) converge to corresponding steady states
y1 (1) = y~1 (1)+y1 and q1 (1) = q~1 (1)+q1 . The steady state output exceeds its potential
in the recession state but remains below its potential in the recovery state, y1 (1) 2 ( ; 0)
(equivalently, y~1 (1) 2 (0; )).
    (ii) Suppose the normalized output is initially not too high, y1 (0) < y1 (1) (e.g., it is
at potential y1 (0) = y1 =       ). Before transition, the equilibrium features preemptive
asset price overshooting: The normalized asset price starts above its steady state level
as well as its potential, q1 (0) > q1 (1) > q1 . Absent transition, the normalized output
monotonically increases toward y1 (1), and the normalized asset price monotonically de-
creases toward q1 (1). At the moment of transition to recovery (time t0 ), asset price
overshooting increases: the normalized output remains unchanged but the output gap
becomes negative, y~2 (t0 ) = y2 (t0 ) = y1 (t0 ) < 0, and the normalized asset price level as
well as its gap jump upward, q~2 (t0 ) = q2 (t0 ) > q~1 (t0 ) > q1 (t0 ).

   Figure 3 illustrates the equilibrium (the solid lines) for a particular parameterization
in which the economy starts with a zero output gap and the transition takes place at its
expected time, t0 = 1= . The dotted lines illustrate the within-state potential levels (the
gaps are the distance from these lines). The equilibrium features preemptive overshooting:

                                                19
       0.01


           0



       -0.01


       -0.02


       -0.03


       -0.04



       -0.05


       -0.06
               0     1          2           3           4           5           6




           1


         0.8


         0.6


         0.4


         0.2


           0


        -0.2



               0     1          2           3           4           5           6




Figure 3: A simulation of the equilibrium variables starting in the shock state s = 1 with
overshooting (solid lines) and with extreme aversion to overshooting ( = 1, dashed
lines). The dotted lines correspond to the within-state potential output and asset price.




                                           20
       0.01


           0


       -0.01


       -0.02


       -0.03


       -0.04



       -0.05


       -0.06
               0      1           2            3            4            5            6




           1


         0.8


         0.6


         0.4


         0.2


           0


        -0.2



               0      1           2            3            4            5            6




Figure 4: Equilibrium with a greater expected transition rate ( ~ > , solid lines) and
with the baseline rate ( , dashed lines).

the central bank sets a positive asset price gap, which gradually induces a positive output
gap. After transition, the central bank overshoots the asset price even more, which helps
close the negative output gap. For comparison, the …gure also illustrates what happens
when the aversion to overshooting is extreme ( = 1) so that the central bank always
keeps the asset price at its potential. In this case, output does not start to recover until
productivity actually recovers. As a result, the economy enters the recovery with a greater
aggregate demand gap and closes this gap more slowly [cf. Figure 2].
    Figure 4 illustrates the e¤ect of increasing — the expected transition rate to recovery.
The solid lines plot the equilibrium when the expected transition rate is higher ( ~ > )
but the actual transition takes place at the same time as in the previous …gure (t0 = 1= ).
In this case, preemptive overshooting is stronger: asset prices increase by more and the
output in the recession converges to a level closer to its potential in the recovery [cf. (26)].
Intuitively, since the central bank expects a fast recovery, it also engages in considerable
overshooting in the recession. In fact, the …gure highlights that, by frontloading much of
the overshooting to the recession, the central bank might do less overshooting when the
recovery …nally arrives (compared to the early stages of the recession).


                                              21
 5.     Final Remarks
We proposed a model to illustrate that large gaps between the performance of …nancial
markets and the real economy need not re‡ect an unsustainable situation. In our model,
such gaps result from optimal monetary policy when aggregate demand is below its po-
tential and responds to asset prices with a lag. The central bank boosts asset prices to
close the output gap as fast as possible. In fact, the central bank also boosts asset prices
if aggregate demand is currently at potential but expected to fall below potential— due to
an anticipated recovery of potential output. These optimal policy responses create large
temporary gaps between …nancial markets and the real economy, but they also accelerate
the recovery.
    In practice, policymakers face e¤ective lower bound constraints for a variety of reasons:
e.g., a zero lower bound, an exchange rate stabilization concern, or a fear of destabilizing
the banking sector or money markets. While LSAPs can partially alleviate these con-
straints (see Remark 1), they are likely to face their own limits. In our model, the impact
of these limits can be captured in reduced form by increasing the parameter during the
recovery phase. The main implication of increasing this parameter, aside from reducing
the size of the overshooting during the recovery, is that the central bank has an even
larger incentive to preemptively boost asset prices before the recovery.
    Similarly, if we were to introduce …scal policy, the anticipation of a reversal of …scal
support in the future, and the corresponding contraction in aggregate demand, would
also lead the central bank to preemptively boost asset prices today. Conversely, the
anticipation of further …scal stimulus reduces the need for the central bank to boost asset
prices in the present.
    Throughout our analysis we assume that all …rms are equally a¤ected by the recession.
Adding heterogeneity (a central feature of the Covid-19 recession) does not change our
main results, but it introduces a large dispersion in asset prices across …rms during the
recession phase. In particular, …rms that are not adversely a¤ected by the productivity
shock see their shares’ value rise above its pre-recession level since they bene…t from
the central bank’s attempt to boost asset prices without su¤ering from the decline in
potential output. In the Covid-19 recession, this provides a rationale for the extraordinary
performance of indices such as the Nasdaq 100, whose main components consist of “Covid-
sheltered”…rms.
    Finally, while we have demonstrated that the broad features of asset markets during
the Covid-19 episode are consistent with a well managed monetary policy framework, we
do not wish to imply that there are no anomalies or pockets of irrational exuberance in


                                             22
some markets. Having said this, the logic of the model suggests that experiencing an
episode of irrational exuberance during a deep recession with a di¢ cult recovery ahead
has a positive dimension, since it reduces the burden on the central bank to engineer an
overshooting.




                                          23
References
Arslan, Y., Drehmann, M., Hofmann, B., et al., 2020. Central bank bond purchases in
  emerging market economies. Bank for International Settlements Bulletins 20.
Bernanke, B. S., Kuttner, K. N., 2005. What explains the stock market’s reaction to
  Federal Reserve policy? The Journal of Finance 60 (3), 1221–1257.
Bertola, G., Caballero, R. J., 1990. Kinked adjustment costs and aggregate dynamics.
  NBER macroeconomics annual 5, 237–288.
Caballero, R. J., 1995. Near-rationality, heterogeneity and aggregate consumption. Jour-
  nal of Money, Credit & Banking 27 (1), 29–49.
Caballero, R. J., Lorenzoni, G., 2014. Persistent appreciations and overshooting: A nor-
  mative analysis. IMF Economic Review 62 (1), 1–47.
Caballero, R. J., Simsek, A., 2020a. Asset prices and aggregate demand in a “Covid-19”
  shock: A model of endogenous risk intolerance and LSAPs. NBER working paper no.
  27044.
Caballero, R. J., Simsek, A., 2020b. Prudential monetary policy. NBER working paper
  no. 25977.
Caballero, R. J., Simsek, A., 2020c. A risk-centric model of demand recessions and spec-
  ulation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (3), 1493–1566.
Carroll, C. D., Otsuka, M., Slacalek, J., Feb. 2011. How large are housing and …nancial
  wealth e¤ects? a new approach. J. Money Credit Bank. 43 (1), 55–79.
Case, K. E., Quigley, J. M., Shiller, R. J., Jan. 2013. Wealth e¤ects revisited: 1975-2012.
Cavallino, P., De Fiore, F., 2020. Central banks’ response to Covid-19 in advanced
  economies. Bank for International Settlements Bulletin 21.
Chodorow-Reich, G., Nenov, P. T., Simsek, A., 2019. Stock market wealth and the real
  economy: A local labor market approach. NBER working paper no. 25959.
Cieslak, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2020. The economics of the Fed put. NBER working
  paper No. 26894.
Davis, M. A., Palumbo, M. G., 2001. A primer on the economics and time series economet-
  rics of wealth e¤ects. Vol. 9. Divisions of Research & Statistics and Monetary A¤airs,
  Federal Reserve Board.
Di Maggio, M., Kermani, A., Majlesi, K., forthcoming. Stock market returns and con-
  sumption. Available at SSRN 3103538.
Dornbusch, R., 1976. Expectations and exchange rate dynamics. Journal of political Econ-
 omy 84 (6), 1161–1176.

                                            24
Dynan, K. E., Maki, D. M., 2001. Does stock market wealth matter for consumption?
 FEDS working paper.

Ehrmann, M., Fratzscher, M., 2004. Taking stock: Monetary policy transmission to equity
  markets. J. Money Credit Bank. 36 (4), 719–737.

Fed, 2020. Financial stability report (May). Publications by the Board of Governors of
  the Federal Reserve System.

Gabaix, X., Laibson, D., 2001. The 6D bias and the equity-premium puzzle. NBER macro-
 economics annual 16, 257–312.

Gilchrist, S., Zakrajšek, E., 2012. Credit spreads and business cycle ‡uctuations. American
  Economic Review 102 (4), 1692–1720.

Gormsen, N. J., Koijen, R. S., 2020. Coronavirus: Impact on stock prices and growth
 expectations. University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working
 Paper (2020-22).

Guren, A. M., McKay, A., Nakamura, E., Steinsson, J., 2018. Housing wealth e¤ects: The
 long view. NBER working paper No. 24729.

Haddad, V., Moreira, A., Muir, T., 2020. When selling becomes viral: Disruptions in debt
  markets in the Covid-19 crisis and the Fed’s response. NBER working paper No. 27168.

Jensen, G. R., Mercer, J. M., 2002. Monetary policy and the cross-section of expected
  stock returns. Journal of Financial Research 25 (1), 125–139.

Jensen, G. R., Mercer, J. M., Johnson, R. R., 1996. Business conditions, monetary policy,
  and expected security returns. Journal of Financial Economics 40 (2), 213–237.

Kueng, L., 2018. Excess sensitivity of high-income consumers. The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics 133 (4), 1693–1751.

Kyungmin, K., Laubach, T., Wei, M., 2020. The macroeconomic e¤ects of large-scale
 asset purchases: New evidence. Finance and Economics Discussion Series.

Landier, A., Thesmar, D., 2020. Earnings expectations in the Covid crisis. NBER working
  paper No. 27160.

Lettau, M., Ludvigson, S. C., 2004. Understanding trend and cycle in asset values: Reeval-
  uating the wealth e¤ect on consumption. American Economic Review 94 (1), 276–299.

Lynch, A. W., 1996. Decision frequency and synchronization across agents: Implications
  for aggregate consumption and equity return. The Journal of Finance 51 (4), 1479–1497.

Marshall, D. A., Parekh, N. G., 1999. Can costs of consumption adjustment explain asset
 pricing puzzles? The Journal of Finance 54 (2), 623–654.


                                            25
Mian, A., Su…, A., 2014. House price gains and US household spending from 2002 to 2006.
 NBER working paper No. 20152.

Parker, J. A., 2017. Why don’t households smooth consumption? evidence from a $25
  million experiment. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 9 (4), 153–83.

Ramelli, S., Wagner, A. F., forthcoming. Feverish stock price reactions to Covid-19. Re-
  view of Corporate Finance Studies.

Reis, R., 2006. Inattentive consumers. Journal of monetary Economics 53 (8), 1761–1800.

Rigobon, R., Sack, B., 2004. The impact of monetary policy on asset prices. Journal of
  Monetary Economics 51 (8), 1553–1575.

Thorbecke, W., 1997. On stock market returns and monetary policy. The Journal of
  Finance 52 (2), 635–654.




                                          26
 A.      Appendix: Omitted derivations
 A.1.     Omitted proofs
Proof of Proposition 1. Most of the analysis is provided in the main text. It remains to
verify that the value function conjectured in (13) solves the HJB equation for appropriate
v > 0. Substituting the conjecture together with q = m V 0 (y) into (12), we obtain:

                                                            2
                                                 y              m2 y
                             ( + 2 (1    n))       =y                 .
                                                 v                 v2

After canceling y’s from both sides and rearranging terms, we obtain the quadratic equa-
tion in (14):
                                                         2 2
                                                          m
                       P (v) v 2 ( + 2 (1 n)) v               = 0.

This quadratic equation has one positive root and one negative root. The solution corre-
                                                              1 2
sponds to the positive root, v > 0, since we require V (y) = 2v y   0. This root has the
following closed form solution:
                                             q
                                                                            2
                            + 2 (1   n) +        ( + 2 (1        n))2 + 4       m2

                    v=                                                               .       (A.1)
                                                   2

   The rest of the analysis is in the main text. Using Eq. (A:1), we can also calculate
the convergence rate in closed form as follows [cf. (17)]:
                                             q
                                                                            2
                                              ( + 2 (1           n))2 + 4       m2

                 =v      ( + (1      n)) =                                               .   (A.2)
                                                                 2

This completes the proof.

  We next prove Proposition 2 that describes the comparative statics of the equilibrium.
The following lemma facilitates the proof.

Lemma 1. Consider the normalized value v which corresponds to the positive root of the
polynomial (14) given by (A:1).
    (i) Increasing decreases v and increases v .
    (ii) Increasing increases v and decreases v= .
    (iii) Increasing m increases v and decreases v=m.
    (iv) Increasing n decreases v and v=m.


                                              27
Proof of Lemma 1. Eq. (A:1) implies v is decreasing in , but v is increasing in
because                                  q
                     ( + 2 (1 n)) +          2
                                               ( + 2 (1 n))2 + 4 2 m2
              v =
                                               2
This proves the …rst part.
   The same equation also implies v is increasing in , but v= is decreasing in because:
                                                     q
                                                                               2          2
                           v       + 2 (1   n) +               + 2 (1     n)       + 4m
                               =                                                              .
                                                           2

This proves the second part.
   The same equation also implies v is increasing in m, but v=m is decreasing in m
because:                               r
                                                                          2         2
                                      +2 (1 n)                 +2 (1 n)
                                                 +        +4
                         v              m                        m
                            =                                  .
                        m                     2
This proves the third part. Finally, this expression together with Eq. (A:1) imply that
both v and v=m are decreasing in n. This proves the last part.

Proof of Proposition 2. Note that the overshooting and the convergence rate satisfy,
 q(t)
 y(t)
       = mv and = v ( + (1 n)) [cf. (17)]. Thus, parts (i) and (iii) follow directly
from the corresponding parts in Lemma 1.
     Consider part (ii). Lemma 1 implies increasing increases =v. Thus, it also increases
                     q(t)                                                     m2
the overshooting, y(t)      = mv as well as the convergence rate,             v
                                                                                 + 1 n [cf.
(17)].
     Consider part (iv). Lemma 1 implies increasing n increases m=v. Therefore, it in-
                          q(t)
creases overshooting, y(t)     = mv . Eq. (A:2) illustrates that it also decreases the conver-
gence rate, , completing the proof.

Proof of Proposition 4, Part (i). First consider the value function that solves problem
(22). After changing the variables to gaps, and using (6), we can rewrite the problem as:

                    y~12       q~12
  V1 (~
      y1 ) = max                    +V10 (~
                                          y1 ) (m~
                                                 q1      (1       n) y~1 )+ (V2 (~
                                                                                 y1               )       y1 )) . (A.3)
                                                                                                      V1 (~
              q~1    2          2

Here, with a slight abuse of notation, we continue to use V1 ( ) to denote the value function
de…ned over the output gap y~1 instead of the normalized output level y1 . After transition
to recovery, the output gap declines by even though the normalized output remains
unchanged (since potential output increases by ).

                                                      28
   Using the optimality conditions, we obtain analogues of Eqs. (11) and (12):

                                         m
                             q~1 =            V10 (~
                                                   y1 )                                                                  (A.4)
                                                      1                              00
    ( + (1     n) + ) V10 (~
                           y1 ) =        y~1            (~
                                                         y1              ) + V1 (y1 ) (m~
                                                                                        q1                 (1      n) y1 )(A.5)
                                                                                                                           .
                                                      v

Here, the second line uses (13) to substitute for V20 (~
                                                       y1 ).
   We conjecture that the solution has the form in (24):

                                                                         1 2
                                   V1 (~
                                       y1 ) = a + b~
                                                   y1                     y~ ,
                                                                        2v 1

Combining this conjecture with Eq. (A:5), and using y = y~1 to denote gaps, we obtain:

                                                                                 2
                            1                     1                       1          m2                1     1
  ( + (1     n) + ) b         y    =    y           (y             )                           b         y +   (1      n) y.
                            v                     v                       v                            v     v

   Collecting the terms with y, we obtain:
                                                                                 2
              1                                        1    1                        m2            1
                ( + (1      n) + ) y =            1      y+ 2                             y+         (1    n) y.
              v                                        v   v                                       v

After canceling v1 y from both sides, and dropping y, we obtain the same quadratic
(14). Hence, v is the same as before.
   Likewise, collecting the terms without y, we obtain:
                                                                                     2
                                                                             1           m2
                           ( + (1        n) + ) b =                                           b.
                                                                   v         v

After rearranging terms, we solve:

                                              v
                      b=                                       2
                                                                   m2
                                                                         =
                             + (1        n) +         +    1                         +    +        v
                                                           v


Here, the second equality substitutes for from (17). This proves the value function takes
the form in (24) with the coe¢ cient b > 0 given by (25).
   Next consider the solution. Substituting the value function into Eq. (A:4), we obtain:

                                                  m            1
                                  q~1 (t) =            b         y~1 (t) :                                               (A.6)
                                                               v




                                                      29
Combining this with (23), and using (17) to substitute , we obtain:

                                                      2
                                    d~
                                     y1 (t)               m2
                                            =                  b        y~1 (t) .                        (A.7)
                                      dt

This equation implies that the output gap converges to a steady state given by:
                                       2
                                           m2 b                    (1     n)
                        y~1 (1) =                 =
                                                                                   +   +
                                                                          2    2
Here, we have substituted for b [cf. (25)] as well as mv =          (1 n) [cf. (17)]. Note
that this also implies y~1 (1) 2 (0; ). Then, Eq. (23) implies the asset price gap converges
to a steady state given by:

                                                  1        n
                                    q~1 (1) =                  y~1 (1) > 0.
                                                      m

This establishes Eq. (26) completes the proof of the …rst part.

Part (ii). Suppose y1 (0) < y1 (1), which implies the output gap starts below its
steady state, y~1 (0) < y~1 (1). Absent transition, Eq. (A:7) implies that the output
gap monotonically increases toward its steady state. Combining this with Eq. (A:6), we
also obtain that the asset price gap starts above its steady state, q~1 (0) > q~1 (1), and
monotonically declines toward its steady state. This also implies the normalized output
y1 (0) monotonically increases towards its steady state y1 (1); and the normalized asset
price monotonically decreases toward its steady state.
    Next consider the time t0 at which the economy transitions to the recovery (starting
with y1 (0) < y1 (1)). Normalized output remains unchanged. It is below its new poten-
tial because, y2 (t0 ) = y1 (t0 ) < y1 (1) < 0. The asset price gap after transition is given
by Eq. (15) whereas the asset price gap before transition is given by Eq. (A:6). That is:

                                                       m
                       q~2 (t0 ) = q2 (t0 ) =             y1 (t0 )
                                                        v
                                                      m         1
                                   q~1 (t0 ) =            b        (y1 (t0 )               y1 )
                                                               v

After taking the di¤erence, and substituting y1 =                         , we obtain:

                                             m                          m              +
                  q~2 (t0 )   q~1 (t0 ) =                  b =                                    > 0.
                                                  v                           v +          +

Here, the second equality substitutes b from (25). Since q1 < 0, we also have q~1 (t0 ) >

                                                          30
q1 (t0 ). Thus, we obtain q~2 (t0 ) = q2 (t0 ) > q~1 (t0 ) > q1 (t0 ). At the time of transition, the
normalized asset price as well as its gap increases. This completes the proof.


 A.2.      Overshooting with rational consumers
Consider the baseline model analyzed in Sections 2 and 3. In the main text, we assume
adjusting consumers exogenously follow the rule in (4) with parameters m 2 (0; ) ; n 2
(0; 1). In this appendix, we generalize the analysis to the case with fully rational adjusting
consumers that incorporate the fact that they will get to readjust in the future with
Poisson probability .
    The analysis proceeds in three steps. First, we characterize the (linearized) optimal
consumption rule for an arbitrary path of (linearized) future income and interest rate
gaps, [y (t) ; r (t)]1
                     t=0 . Second, we show that, along the equilibrium path in which y (t)
and r (t) converge to zero at an exponential rate > 0, consumption rule is given by
Eq. (19), which implies Eq. (4) for endogenous coe¢ cients m ( ) ; n ( ). Third, we prove
Proposition 3 that generalizes our main overshooting result to this setting.

Optimal consumption with Poisson adjustment. Consider a consumer with as-
sets a (0) that gets to adjust her consumption. For now, we take the initial asset level
as exogenous (from the interest rate) and endogenize it subsequently. The consumer’s
recursive problem is given by:
                                    Z     1               Z     T
                                                      T                 t                     T
              V (a (0)) = max                 e                     e       log cdt + e           V (a (T )) dT   (A.8)
                                c     0                     0
                                    Z     1                             T
                                                      T    1        e                     T
                          = max               e                              log c + e        V (a (T )) dT
                                c     0
           where a_ (t) = R (t) a (t)             c

Here, we write the consumer’s problem as an integral over adjustment times T . The
probability that adjustment takes place at time T is e T . Conditional on adjustment
at time T , the consumer receives the utility in the brackets.
    Suppose consumption is strictly positive along the optimal path (this will be the case
since we focus on small deviations from the steady state). Then, the value function has
the homogeneity property:

                                                          log a (t)
                                    V (a (t)) =                         + v (t) .



                                                           31
Note also that we can integrate the budget constraint forward to solve for the value of
assets at time T . In particular, the present value of a (T ) is equal to the initial assets net
of the present value of the …xed consumption path until time T :
                                                                       Z    T            Z       t
                      a (T )
                     RT                          = a (0)           c            exp                  R (s) ds dt
                 exp 0 R (s) ds                                         0                    0
                                                                       Z    T            Z       t
                                                 = a (0)           c            exp          (r (s) + ) ds dt
                                                                        0                    0
                                                                       Z    T                       Z t
                                                 = a (0)           c            exp (    t) exp         r (s) ds dt
                                                                        0                                   0


The last line writes the solution in terms of the interest rate gap, r (s) = R (s) .
    Substituting these observations into (A:8), we obtain the following optimality condi-
tion:
                 2                                                RT                   Rt                   3
Z    1                           T                                      exp ( t) exp      r (s) ds   dt
         e   T   41       e              exp (    T)               0
                                                                         RT
                                                                                        0
                                                                                            Rt              5 dT = 0.
 0                       c                              a (0)          c 0 exp ( t) exp        r (s) ds dt.
                                                                                             0


After rearranging terms, we have:

                                 Z                            RT                   Rt
             1 1                     1
                                                              0
                                                                    exp ( t) exp    0
                                                                                      r (s) ds dt
                                             ( + )T
                             =           e                           RT                 Rt              dT:
             c +                 0                    a (0)        c 0 exp ( t) exp        r (s) ds dt.
                                                                                         0

The solution scales with initial wealth. Thus it can be written as

                                                      c = (1 +                  (0)) a (0)                            (A.9)

for some         (0). After substituting, we further obtain

                     Z                                           Rt    RT
    1                    1
                                               0
                                                 exp (    t) exp  0
                                                                    r (s) ds dt
          =         ( + ) e ( + )T                    R                   Rt              dT:
1 + (0)        0                      1
                                                        T
                                           (1 + (0)) 0 exp ( t) exp          r (s) ds dt.
                                                                           0
                                                                                      (A.10)
    Consider the potential steady state, R (t) = for each t, which corresponds to r (t) =
0 for each t. In this case, it is easy to check (0) = 0 and thus c = a (0). Consider also
the special case ! 1. It can be checked that this also gives the same solution (0) = 0
and c = a (0).
    Beyond these special cases, the solution is complicated. In particular, (0) depends


                                                                       32
on the whole future path of interest rates. To make progress, we view (A:10) as an im-
plicit function of the variables (0) ; [r (t)]1
                                              t=0 . We then linearize this function around the
potential steady state (0) = 0 and r (t) = 0 for each t. This gives:
                                                       8                       RT                            RT       t dt
                                                                                                                                              9
                                                       >                                       t                  e                           >
                                                       >
                                                       >                 (0)   e dt
                                                                                  0         R           2+
                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                              >
                                                                                                                                              >
                  Z                                    >
                                                       <                                (1 0T e t dt)                                         >
                                                                                                                                              =
                          1                                        RT          Rt
     (0) =                    ( + )e          ( + )T
                                                                    0
                                                                       e t       0
                                                                                    r (s) ds dt 1 R T1 e t dt          dT
                      0                                >
                                                       >          RT           Rt                  R   0            >
                                                                                                                    >
                                                       >
                                                       >
                                                                                                     T
                                                                                                     0 e
                                                                                                           t dt     >
                                                                                                                    >
                                                       :           0
                                                                      e t       0
                                                                                   r (s) ds dt        RT          2 ;
                                                                                                (1 0 e dt)    t

                  Z                                    (                       2     RT       R                 )
                                                                                            t t
                          1
                                              ( + )T                1 e T                e       r (s)   dsdt
          =                   ( + )e                           (0)                + 0          0
                                                                                                                  dT .
                      0                                                (e T )2              (e T )2

Here, the …rst line uses the chain rule to evaluate the derivatives and cancels the constant
terms from both sides (since the equation holds for (0) = r (t) = 0). The second line
calculates the integrals. After rearranging terms, we further obtain
          Z       1                                                               Z        1                                      Z   T           Z   t
                          ( + )       (       )T                 T 2                                                  (      )T               t
 (0) 1                            e                1       e            dT =                       ( + )e                                 e               r (s) dsdtdT
              0                                                                        0                                          0               0


Calculating the integrals and simplifying further, we obtain:
                                          Z   1                               Z    T               Z    t
                              3                                     (    )T                    t
           (0)                        =            ( + )e                              e                    r (s) dsdtdT .                        (A.11)
                                          0                                    0                    0


    Recall that c = (1 + (0)) a (0). Hence, Eq. (A:11) illustrates that the slope of
the consumption function deviates from the usual slope i¤ the interest rates are di¤erent
from their steady state levels. As long as > 3 (which we assume), keeping current
wealth constant, greater interest rate increases (resp. decreases) spending. Intuitively,
since consumer cannot reoptimize in the future (in some states), the substitution e¤ect
becomes weaker. Therefore, despite log preferences, the substitution and income e¤ects
do not net out. Instead, the income e¤ect dominates and implies— keeping the wealth
constant— increasing the interest rate increases spending. Intuitively, a higher interest
rate makes it cheaper to …nance a steady consumption stream (c), which induces the
consumer to spend more.
    As before, there is also a wealth e¤ect once we endogenize the initial wealth a (0). In
particular, note that the wealth of the representative adjusting consumer is equal to the




                                                                    33
price of the market portfolio, a (0) = Q (0). This implies:

                        C adjust (0) = (1 + (0)) Q (0)
                                       Z 1             Rt
                       where Q (0) =       e t Y (t) e 0 r(s)ds dt.
                                                   0


Linearizing these expressions around the steady state (Y                        = C = 1; Q = 1= ), we
obtain:

                      cadjust (0) =        (0) + q (0)                                          (A.12)
                                       Z   1                        Z   t
                                                       t
                           q (0) =             e            y (t)           r (s) ds dt         (A.13)
                                       0                            0


As usual, increasing the interest rate reduces the value of the market portfolio. All else
equal, this reduces spending.

Optimal consumption along the equilibrium path. We next calculate consump-
tion along the equilibrium path and prove Eq. (4). In equilibrium, we have:

                                               t                                 t
                          y (t) = y (0) e          and r (t) = r (0) e               .

Substituting these expressions, we solve for the asset price along the equilibrium path:

                                            y (0)               r (0)
                                q (0) =                               .                         (A.14)
                                              +                ( + )

As expected a greater initial output increases the price and a greater initial interest rate
decreases the price.
   Next, we de…ne n  ~ such that:
                                             r (0)
                                       (0) =       ~.
                                                   n                                 (A.15)
                                               +
This normalization is useful since it leads to a simple consumption function. Speci…cally,
combining this with Eqs. (A:12) and (A:13), we obtain:

                                           r (0)
                       cadjust (0) =             n
                                                 ~ + q (0)
                                            +
                                               y (0)
                                   =                     q (0) n~ + q (0)
                                                 +
                                                                  y (0)
                                   =          (1 n  ~ ) q (0) + n
                                                                ~                               (A.16)
                                                                   +


                                                       34
Here, the second line substitutes r(0)
                                    +
                                        =     y(0)
                                               +
                                                    q (0) from Eq. (A:13) to express the
consumption function in terms of y (0) ; q (0) (instead of y (0) ; r (0)).
   It remains to solve for n~ along the equilibrium path. Combining Eqs. (A:11) and
(A:15), and substituting r (s) = r (0) e s , we calculate:
                            Z   1                             Z   T                             t
             ( + )(     )                       (        )T                   t1        e
     n
     ~ =                        ( + )e                                e                             dtdT
                   3         0                                0
                                   Z
             ( + )(     )    ( + ) 1 (                   )T       1       e    T
                                                                                            1       e (    + )T
         =                             e                                                                          dT
                    (   3   )       0                                                                +
             ( + )(     )    ( + ) 1       1                      1                1                1             1
         =
                    (   3   )                                                      +                              +
             ( + )(     )    ( + )       1                                    1
         =
                    (   3   )        (     )                  (               )( + )
               +    +
         =            .                                                                                                (A.17)
                3 +

The …nal expression has intuitive comparative statics. For instance, as ! 1, we have
~ ! 0. That is, when the consumer adjusts very rapidly, we recover the standard rule.
n
   Combining Eqs. (A:16) and (A:17), we prove the consumption rule in Eq. (19) (see
the main text for intuition). This rule also implies Eq. (4) with coe¢ cients

                                     n
                                     ~          +
                        n =              =                                                                             (A.18)
                                     +           3            +
                                                                      +        +
                       m =          (1   n
                                         ~) =        1                                          .                      (A.19)
                                                                       3       +

Overshooting with rational consumers. Note that the slope coe¢ cients depend on
the equilibrium convergence rate, that is, m = m ( ) and n = n ( ). Conversely, our
analysis in the main text shows the convergence rate, , depends on m; n. Speci…cally,
Proposition 1 implies [cf. (A:2)]:
                                q                                                  2
                                                                                       m( )2
                                 ( + 2 (1            n ( )))2 + 4
                    =F( )                                                                             .                (A.20)
                                                              2

Therefore, the equilibrium with rational consumers corresponds to the …xed point of
function F ( ). We next establish the following lemma, which shows that (as long as
is su¢ ciently large) there exists an interior …xed point that satis…es the properties we
assumed in the main text. We then use the lemma to prove Proposition 3, which shows
that our main overshooting result also applies with fully rational consumers.


                                                35
Lemma 2. Suppose > 9 . Then, the function F ( ) has an interior …xed point 2 ( ; )
that satis…es n
              ~ ( ) 2 (0; 1) (and thus m ( ) 2 (0; ) and n ( ) 2 (0; 1)). There is a …nite
upper bound on this …xed point given by:

                                      (        )( + )
                                  =                             > .                    (A.21)
                                               4

Proof. Rewriting Eqs. (A:18       A:19), we have:

                          +       1
           n( ) =                    ,
                           3      +
                                  +    +                         (    )( + )
           m( ) =         1                         =                          4   .
                                    3 +                    3          +

Thus, as long as > 3 , the functions m ( ) and n ( ) are both strictly decreasing in .
Note also that the upper bound in (A:21) ensures m ( ) = 0. As long as > 9 , this
upper bound also satis…es > > 0. We claim F ( ) > and F ( ) < , which implies
there exists a …xed point that satis…es, 2 ( ; ).
    To prove the claim, …rst consider F ( ). We have m ( ) = 0 and n ( ) > 0. Combining
this with Eq. (A:20), we obtain:

                               F ( ) = (1           n ( )) <    < .

Next consider F ( ). We have:

                              n( ) =                 2 (0; 1)
                                                3
                              m( ) =                 (    5 ) 2 (0; ) .
                                                3

Combining this with Eq. (A:20), we obtain:

                                                                4
                           F( )           (1   n ( )) =           > .
                                                                3

Here, the last inequality follows since > 5 . This proves the claim.
   It remains to check that the …xed point satis…es n   ~ ( ) 2 (0; 1). Note that n~( ) =
1 m= . Since m ( ) is decreasing in , n  ~ ( ) is increasing in . In addition, Eq. (A:17)
                  2
implies n
        ~ ( ) = 3 > 0 and m ( ) = 1 implies n    ~ ( ) = 1. This establishes n
                                                                             ~ ( ) 2 (0; 1),
completing the proof.



                                                    36
Proof of Proposition 3. Let denote the …xed point characterized by Lemma 2. Our
analysis in this section shows that, given the convergence rate , the optimal consumption
rule is given by (4) with m ( ) 2 (0; ) and n ( ) 2 (0; 1). Proposition 1 implies that, given
this consumption rule, the optimal policy induces the equilibrium variables to converge
to zero at rate > 0.




                                             37
