                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    WHO PROFITS FROM AMATEURISM? RENT-SHARING IN MODERN COLLEGE
                              SPORTS

                                      Craig Garthwaite
                                       Jordan Keener
                                   Matthew J. Notowidigdo
                                   Nicole F. Ozminkowski

                                      Working Paper 27734
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27734


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          August 2020, Revised October 2020




We thank Peter Bergman for sharing high school catchment area data with us, and we are grateful
to Erin Buzuvis, Michael McCann, and Raymond Yasser for discussing Title IX regulations with
us. We thank David Berri, Patrick Kline, Kory Kroft, Steve Levitt, Dan Sacks, Carolyn Stein, and
Eric Zwick for useful comments. We acknowledge financial support from the NSF GRFP under
award number DGE-1842165. Any opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors, and
do not necessarily reflect any official positions of the University of Chicago, the University of
Michigan, or Northwestern University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Craig Garthwaite, Jordan Keener, Matthew J. Notowidigdo, and Nicole F.
Ozminkowski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Who Profits From Amateurism? Rent-Sharing in Modern College Sports
Craig Garthwaite, Jordan Keener, Matthew J. Notowidigdo, and Nicole F. Ozminkowski
NBER Working Paper No. 27734
August 2020, Revised October 2020
JEL No. J3,Z2

                                           ABSTRACT

Intercollegiate amateur athletics in the US largely bars student-athletes from sharing in any of the
profits generated by their participation, which creates substantial economic rents for universities.
These rents are primarily generated by men’s football and men’s basketball programs. We
characterize these economic rents using comprehensive revenue and expenses data for college
athletic departments between 2006 and 2019, and we estimate rent-sharing elasticities to measure
how rents flow to women’s sports and other men’s sports and lead to increased spending on
facilities, coaches’ salaries, and other athletic department personnel. Using complete roster data
for every student-athlete playing sports at these schools in 2018, we find that the rent-sharing
effectively transfers resources away from students who are more likely to be black and more
likely to come from poor neighborhoods towards students who are more likely to be white and
come from higher-income neighborhoods. To understand the magnitude of the available rents, we
calculate a wage structure for college athletes using the collective bargaining agreements in
professional sports leagues as a benchmark. We also discuss how our results help understand how
universities have responded to recent threats to these rents arising from litigation, legislation, and
the global coronavirus pandemic.

Craig Garthwaite                                  Matthew J. Notowidigdo
Kellogg School of Management                      Northwestern University
Northwestern University                           Department of Economics
2211 Campus Drive                                 2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208                                Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER                                          and NBER
c-garthwaite@kellogg.northwestern.edu             noto@northwestern.edu

Jordan Keener                                     Nicole F. Ozminkowski
University of Michigan                            Northwestern University
Department of Economics                           ozminkowskin@gmail.com
jordkeen@umich.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27734
A Data Page is available at http://users.nber.org/~notom/research/ncaa.html
I. Introduction
          The first intercollegiate football game was a six to four victory by Rutgers over Princeton in 1869.
This was followed 30 years later by the first intercollegiate basketball game, when Hamline University lost
to the Minnesota State School of Agriculture in 1895 by a score of nine to three. It is likely that few people
watching or participating in those early amateur contests understood they were witnessing the birth of
what would become a modern economic powerhouse. What began primarily as a series of student
activities has grown into a multi-billion-dollar commercial enterprise that continues to grow to this day. In
2006, National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division 1 Football Subdivision (FBS) schools
earned $4.4 billion in revenue.1 Over the next decade, these revenues grew to $8.5 billion.
          Where does this revenue come from? While FBS schools typically field men’s and women’s teams
in approximately 20 different sports, 58 percent of the total athletic department revenue comes directly
from only two sports: men’s football and men’s basketball.2 All other sports directly account for only
about 15 percent of total revenue. Direct revenue is likely an underestimate of the total funds generated by
football and men’s basketball. The remaining 27 percent of athletic department revenue comes from other
sources such as the sale of media rights. Even a cursory review of those contracts demonstrates that most
of the value stems from the ability to broadcast football and men’s basketball programs (Sanderson and
Siegfried 2018). Given this stark difference in revenue generation, football and men’s basketball are often
referred to as “revenue sports,” with all other sports being referred to as “non-revenue sports” – a
convention we will adopt throughout this paper.3
          Despite the commercial success of these athletic endeavors, they ostensibly remain amateur athletic
activities, with the student-athletes largely barred from sharing in the profits generated by their
participation. Athlete compensation is strictly limited to academic scholarships that cover the cost of
attendance and a modest stipend for living expenses. We estimate that less than 7 percent of football and
men’s basketball revenue is paid to athletes through these two forms of compensation.4 To put this
number in perspective, under their respective collective bargaining agreements, professional football and
men’s basketball players in the US receive approximately 50 percent of the revenue generated by their

1 The FBS is the most competitive division of intercollegiate athletics. It was formerly described as “Division 1-A.” This division includes 130
teams that are organized in 10 athletic conferences. Teams that are not in the FBS compete in the Football Championship Subdivision (FCS).
We do not include data from the FCS schools in our analysis except for Figure 1.
2 Men’s football refers to American football, and we will drop “men’s” in the rest of the paper, since the sport is only played competitively by
men in the FBS.
3 It should be noted that the actual distinction between these two sets of sports is not that “non-revenue” sports actually generate zero
revenue for the athletic department directly, but instead is meant to highlight the economically significant differences in the average level of
revenue and ratio of revenue and expenses across these categories of sports. We discuss the reasons for this distinction between “revenue”
and “non-revenue” sports extensively in Section II.
4 Even this number is likely an overestimate, since the value of the scholarships are based on the list price of tuition and not the percentage of

the list price paid by the average student, which would likely be a more accurate measure of what the athletes would have paid had they not
participated in amateur athletics. Full-time students at public and private non-profit universities on average have a net tuition and fees price
that is 40-45 percent of the list price (Urban Institute 2017). Separately, it is possible to view lavish spending on facilities for intercollegiate
athletes as a fringe benefit that should be counted as compensation. That said, such spending is also common for professional football and
men’s basketball leagues and is paid in addition to the approximately 50 percent of revenue that is paid as salary. We discuss both of these
issues in more detail below.
                                                                         1
athletic activities as salary (NBA and NBPA 2017; NFL and NFLPA 2020).5 Because of the strict limits on
player compensation, amateur athletes playing football and men’s basketball generate substantial economic
rents for the athletic departments in FBS schools.
          In this paper, we characterize the economic rents in intercollegiate athletics, estimate rent-sharing
elasticities using a variety of empirical approaches, and investigate the distributional consequences of
existing limits on player compensation. To do this, we collect comprehensive data covering revenue and
expenses for FBS schools between 2006 and 2019 and combine this information with a newly assembled
data set of complete rosters for every sport matched to neighborhood socioeconomic characteristics.
          We begin by characterizing the distinct “business models” across FBS schools. Athletic
departments have two primary revenue sources: (1) revenue-generating activities such as ticket sales,
apparel licensing, and the selling of media rights, and (2) institutional support from their universities. Using
a standard k-means clustering algorithm, we identify two distinct clusters of schools, with the athletic
departments in one cluster primarily having low revenues and relying on transfers from the university, and
a second cluster of high-revenue schools where the vast majority of athletic department revenue is
generated directly by the activities of the athletic department.
          Interestingly, this second cluster corresponds exactly to the set of schools in the so-called “Power
Five” athletic conferences.6 The athletic departments in these schools have traditionally operated
successful athletic programs, participated in lucrative postseason activities, and negotiated valuable media
rights packages (i.e., the ability of television networks to broadcast athletic contests). The clustering
analysis demonstrates that Power Five conference schools operate under a largely self-sustaining business
model that closely represents a commercial enterprise generating economic rents. This model is distinct
from the other FBS schools, and therefore the Power Five conference schools serve as the main sample
for our rent-sharing analysis. When we refer to college sports in this paper we are primarily referring to
schools operating under this business model. Thus, our estimates cannot speak to the economics of other
intercollegiate athletic programs, but our analysis avoids conflating important differences in rent-sharing
across schools operating under very different business models.
          While rent-sharing is theoretically possible in any commercial venture, the potential for rent-
sharing in college sports is particularly great because of the NCAA rules limiting the amount of
compensation athletes can earn. These constraints create a setting where football and men’s basketball




5 Appendix Section IV contains excerpts of the relevant parts of the collective bargaining agreement for each league.
6 Teams in the FBS are each members of conferences. These conferences are the primary organizing vehicle for schedules, rules, refereeing
and other features related to athletic competition. As we discuss below, they also negotiate post-season championship participation, media
rights, and other economically meaningful financial issues. Teams play the majority of their games against teams in their conference and for
many conferences there is an annual championship There are 10 conferences in total and they are generally grouped in the “Power Five”
conferences and the “Group of Five” conferences. The Power Five conferences, which serve as the basis of our analysis include the Big Ten,
Pac-12, Big 12, Southeastern Conference (SEC), and the Athletic Coast Conference (ACC).
                                                                     2
programs can generate excess rents compared to what would likely occur in equilibrium if athletic
departments were required to pay a market wage to one of their most valuable inputs.7
          What is the ultimate incidence of these economic rents? To study this, we estimate rent-sharing
elasticity regressions following the recent literature in labor economics (Lamadon, Mogstad, and Setzler
2019; Kline et al. 2019). We focus on rents flowing to other sports in the athletic department (in the form
of higher spending on these other sports), spending on athletic facilities, and salaries for coaches and other
allied personnel who (unlike the players) are not subject to any compensation constraints set by the
NCAA.
          Our main results are based on a series of panel fixed effects OLS regressions that include school
and year fixed effects, and we measure changes in rents using within-school-over-time variation in the total
revenue generated from football and men’s basketball programs. We find that increases in revenue
generated by the football and men’s basketball programs are partly reinvested directly into those sports as
increased spending, with an estimated own-sport elasticity of 0.82, which corresponds to $0.31 of every
additional dollar brought in by football and men’s basketball programs spent on these programs. The
income limits for athletes imply that very little of the increased own-sport spending directly flows to the
athletes. Instead, we expect that much of this increased spending within the football and men’s basketball
programs to be on other factors such as facilities spending and coaches’ salaries, which we empirically
document below.
          Using the same rent-sharing specification, we find that the rents not reinvested in football and
men’s basketball programs are instead transferred to other parts of the athletic department. We estimate
cross-sport rent-sharing elasticities for all other sports, women’s sports, and other men’s sports of 0.42,
0.41, and 0.42, respectively.8 These results imply that for every additional dollar of football and men’s
basketball revenue, $0.11, $0.07, $0.04 are spent on all other sports, women’s sports, and other men’s
sports, respectively. We also estimate rent-sharing elasticities using data covering salaries for football
coaches, salaries for non-football coaches, administrative compensation, and spending on facilities. For
each of these outcomes, we also find meaningful rent-sharing elasticities of 0.40, 0.31, 0.45, and 0.86,
respectively, which imply that $0.03, $0.03, $0.09, and $0.20 of every additional dollar of football and
men’s basketball revenue are spent on each of these outcomes.9
          Finally, we explore effects on institutional support – the amount of money transferred from the
university to the athletic department. We find elasticities close to zero (ranging from -0.2 to 0.01
depending on the exact specification), which correspond to shares between -$0.01 and $0.01 per dollar of


7 This potential for meaningful rent-sharing may be further exacerbated by the fact that athletic departments are legal non-profit enterprises
that may find it undesirable or unseemly to show large and persistent excess revenue on their balance sheets.
8 The all other sports category is the sum of women’s sports and all other men’s sports (excluding football and men’s basketball).
9 When comparing the magnitude of the estimates across football and non-football coaches, it is important to remember that there are a far
greater number of non-football coaches in an athletic department. Therefore, the equal spending in aggregate does not reflect equal benefits to
each individual coach.
                                                                      3
football and men’s basketball revenue. This demonstrates that increased revenues are not simply reducing
the institutional support from the university, a fact that is not surprising since the Power Five conferences
in our sample are largely self-contained enterprises.
        To interpret these estimates as rent-sharing elasticities, we must assume that the within-school-
over-time variation in revenue is plausibly exogenous with respect to other determinants of outcomes such
as expenses and salaries. Including school and year fixed effects accounts for some of the most obvious
threats to the validity of this assumption (such as national trends or shocks affecting all schools), but there
is also the possibility of confounding common shocks that affect revenue across an entire athletic
department. Without accounting for such common shocks, we might erroneously conclude there is rent-
sharing from football and men’s basketball to other sports, while in reality our estimates would simply
reflect the impact of the common shocks.
        We address this challenge in two ways. First, we extend our panel fixed effects specification and
implement the difference-in-differences strategy developed in the rent-sharing analysis in Lamadon et al.
(2019). This exercise supports our causal interpretation given the absence of pre-trends in any of the other
outcomes leading up to a sharp change in football and men’s basketball revenue. Immediately after the
increase in revenue from football and men’s basketball, we see sharp increases in spending for those sports
as well as sharp increases in spending on all other sports, but no clear change in the revenue of other
sports. These results support our interpretation that the causal chain runs from the change in economic
rents generated by the revenue sports causing changes in spending on both revenue and non-revenue
sports. We see a similar pattern for facilities spending and coaches’ salaries. The lack of any clear changes
in revenue generated by other sports provides evidence against substantial bias arising from school-wide
“common shocks” in our main OLS results.
        Our second approach is to directly address endogeneity concerns by exploiting the fact that
“Power Five” schools receive lump-sum payments from their respective athletic conferences. Variation in
these conference payments is largely based on either the athletic success of the football and basketball
programs at other schools or changes in conference media payments. We demonstrate this using as a case
study the University of Utah moving into a Power Five athletic conference in 2012. This case study
provides clean “event study” visual evidence (comparing Utah to other Power Five FBS schools), and the
estimates from this case study largely mirror the main panel fixed-effects estimates. We then build on this
case study by using conference payments as an instrumental variable (IV) for the revenues generated by
football and basketball programs, and we find IV estimates that are broadly similar to our panel fixed-
effects OLS estimates. We interpret the broad similarity of the results across the different empirical
approaches as supporting a clear causal interpretation: greater rents generated by football and men’s
basketball increase spending on those sports and on the non-revenue sports, facilities, and coaches’


                                                        4
salaries. The increased spending does not lead to additional compensation for football and men’s
basketball players.
          We next build on the rent-sharing estimates by studying the distributional consequences of rent-
sharing in college sports. One group benefitting from this rent-sharing are athletes playing in non-revenue
sports at the school. As a result of the rent-sharing we estimate, these athletes likely benefit on both the
intensive and extensive margin. That is, in some cases the very existence of these sports may be dependent
on revenues from football and men’s basketball (or on transfers from the university), since most of these
other sports consistently operate with losses. In addition, athletes in these sports likely enjoy more
generous facilities and other amenities as a result of the increased spending. Rent-sharing in college sports
thus creates additional athletic opportunities and increases spending available for sports that do not
consistently generate enough revenue to cover their costs.
          There are a variety of mechanisms supporting such transfers within athletic departments. Title IX
regulations require (among other things) that schools provide equal opportunities for athletics across
genders.10 This creates an effectively mechanical relationship between spending on scholarships for
football and men’s basketball and spending on scholarships for women’s sports. The relationship for other
types of spending on women’s sports (e.g., coaches’ salaries and facilities) is less mechanical but could also
be influenced by Title IX. However, the connection between the spending on other men’s sports, coaches’
salaries overall, and total spending on athletic facilities is well outside of the scope of Title IX, and these
results represent rent-sharing that we do not believe to be related to any prevailing regulations. In fact,
given the requirements of equality of opportunity across sports by gender it might be reasonable to expect
less rent-sharing between football and men’s basketball and other men’ sports, since such rent-sharing
“uses up” resources that could otherwise be used to help meet the requirements of Title IX.11
          Regardless of the underlying mechanism, rent-sharing across the various parts of the athletic
department creates distributional concerns if there are meaningful differences in the economic
circumstances of athletes across sports. To examine this question, we gathered complete roster data on the
high school and hometown of every athlete at the “Power Five” FBS schools in 2018, and we merge this
data with neighborhood socioeconomic characteristics. We estimate that the average football and men’s
basketball athlete went to a high school with a median family income at the 49th percentile of all high
schools, while for other sports the average athlete’s high school was at the 60th percentile. In addition, we


10 Title IX requires athletic departments to provide equal accommodation and opportunities in three broad areas: student interests and
abilities, athletic benefits and opportunities, and financial assistance. It does not, however, require an equal number of men’s and women’s
sports or athletes. For financial assistance, it similarly requires reasonable opportunities for proportionate awards of financial aid given the
composition of athletes in men’s and women’s sports, but does not require an equal number of scholarships to be awarded to men and
women (U.S. Department of Education 2020).
11 Based on our roster data, women’s sports have an average of 25.7 players per team compared to 22.9 players per team for men’s sports
other than football or basketball. Along with our main rent-sharing elasticity estimates, the rough similarity of these numbers suggests that
while women’s sports receive larger transfers from football and men’s basketball activities in the aggregate, transfers on a per athlete basis are
similar between women’s and men’s non-revenue sports.
                                                                         5
show that football and men’s basketball players come from school districts with a higher fraction of
students living in poverty and a higher fraction of students who are black. This is not surprising since
roughly half of all athletes in football and men’s basketball are black, compared to only 11 percent of
athletes in other sports. We thus conclude from these socioeconomic differences that rent-sharing in
intercollegiate athletics effectively involves a transfer from students who are more likely to be black and
more likely to be from poor neighborhoods to students who are more likely to be white and from higher-
income neighborhoods.12
          To understand the scope of available rents in modern sports, we next calculate a potential wage
structure for football and men’s basketball players. As a benchmark for this analysis we use collective
bargaining agreements in professional sports leagues, following the prior work of Berri (2016) and Goff,
Kim, and Wilson (2016). We find that such a system would result in substantial payments to these athletes.
We estimate that if football and men’s basketball players all split the 50 percent of revenue equally, each
football player would receive $360,000 per year and each basketball player would earn nearly $500,000 per
year.
          These averages mask substantial heterogeneity since certain types of players are more valuable to
the athletic success of schools than others. Therefore, we also calculate payments across positions in a
manner that mirrors the average professional team for each sport. Under such a system, the two highest
paid football positions (starting quarterback and wide receiver) would be paid $2.4 and $1.3 million,
respectively. Similarly, starting basketball players would earn between $800,000 and $1.2 million per year.
The existing compensation to athletes (scholarships plus stipends) would be subtracted from these totals
to arrive at the appropriate cash compensation to players, and we calculate this value separately for every
school in our sample. We argue that these compensation estimates represent a plausible benchmark of
what athletes could negotiate if they could engage in collective bargaining.
          We conclude by discussing the recent responses of universities to various threats to the rents that
we have characterized in this paper. These threats include recent litigation relating to the constraints on
player compensation, recent legislation that removes some of the limits on player compensation, and the
ongoing global coronavirus pandemic. We discuss how university responses to all of these threats are
consistent with our rent-sharing analysis.
          The next section provides background on intercollegiate sports in the US, discusses the related
literature, and describes the various potential recipients of rent-sharing. Section 3 describes the data
sources used in our empirical analysis. Section 4 reports the rent-sharing elasticity estimates. Section 5
discusses the distributional consequences that we estimate using roster data. Section 6 reports our player

12 This paper presents the distributional consequences, but does not carry out a normative (welfare) analysis. Such a welfare analysis would
need to consider (among other things) the potential economic benefits of the estimated rent-sharing. For example, Stevenson (2007)
documents that the Title IX program caused an increase in college attendance and labor force participation for women. To the extent that
such an impact is partly related to increased opportunities for college athletes, changes to rent-sharing could have far-reaching implications
that we treat as outside of the scope of this paper.
                                                                        6
compensation benchmarks. Section 7 discusses university responses to recent litigation, legislation, and the
global coronavirus pandemic. Section 8 concludes.


II. Background
    While intercollegiate sports are often described as student activities undertaken by amateurs, the
economic reality is that athletic departments have developed into complex commercial enterprises that
look far more like professional sports organizations than extracurricular endeavors. Kahn (2007) and
Sanderson and Siegfried (2015) provide comprehensive overviews of the economic development of this
enterprise. What is immediately apparent is that these sports represent meaningful economic activity that is
on par with a wide variety of other commercial ventures. Kahn (2007) notes that as far back as 1999 the
total ticket revenues for college football and men’s basketball exceeded the total ticket sales of professional
baseball, football, and hockey. Since that time, the commercial activities of athletic departments have
continued to expand. In the remainder of this section we describe the economic landscape of
intercollegiate sports and provide more information about the specific categories where rent-sharing may
be occurring.


II.A. Intercollegiate Sports Business Models
         We begin by characterizing the distinct “business models” within the set of FBS schools. In Figure
1, we use data from 2018 to summarize the business model of modern athletics departments across two
dimensions: (1) the share of athletic department revenues that comes from the University (as opposed to
commercial ventures) and (2) overall athletic department revenues. The figure indicates two clear
“clusters” of schools. One cluster of schools has generally low revenues overall and a large fraction of
revenue coming in the form of transfers from the University and/or the student body. The other cluster in
the lower-right corner contains schools with meaningfully larger overall athletic department revenues. For
these schools, the vast majority of overall revenue is generated by the direct activities of the athletic
department.
         To formally determine the clusters of schools, we use a standard k-means clustering algorithm, and
the dashed line in Figure 1 represents a hyperplane that divides the sample of FBS schools into two
distinct clusters based on this algorithm. As discussed above, the schools in the lower-right cluster
correspond exactly to the subset of FBS schools that are members of the so-called “Power Five” athletic
conferences: the Big Ten, Pac-12, Big 12, Southeastern Conference (SEC), and the Athletic Coast
Conference (ACC). Based on the results of the clustering analysis in Figure 1, we focus our empirical




                                                       7
analysis on the schools in the Power Five conferences, since these are the schools where intercollegiate
athletics are likely to generate meaningful economic rents.13
           Athletic conferences serve a variety of functions including scheduling, establishing rules and
regulations, organizing officials, etc. Of greatest relevance to the questions in this paper, conferences also
serve as an organizing body for various economic activities. Conferences collectively sell broadcast rights
for all member schools and receive payments from the NCAA based on the performance of member
schools in postseason tournaments (Hobson 2014). These revenues are then generally split evenly between
member schools. In 2017, each Power Five conference had more than $250 million in annual revenue
from football and men’s basketball postseason tournament disbursements and media rights alone
(Sanderson and Siegfried 2018).
           To see the importance of conferences to athletic departments, consider the case of the Big Ten
athletic conference. In its 2018 fiscal year, the conference earned nearly $760 million in revenue and paid
out over $50 million to each of its conference members.14 This revenue came from many sources but
among the largest were television contracts for broadcasting sports and the conference’s television
network, the Big Ten Network. There is widespread understanding that the value of these contracts is
largely driven by the football and men’s basketball programs, which can be seen by comparing the value of
these contracts based on which sports are covered. In 2012, ESPN signed a 12-year contract to broadcast
the three College Football Playoff games and four of the other most popular bowl games for $7.3 billion,
an average annual rate of $608 million (Sanderson and Siegfried 2018).15 Similarly, the CBS network
contract for the sole broadcast rights to the NCAA men’s basketball tournament was renewed at the
annual rate of $1.1 billion in 2017 through the 2032 tournament. By contrast, the 14-year deal that ESPN
signed to broadcast NCAA post-season tournaments for 22 other sports as well as the international rights
to the men’s basketball tournament and other smaller tournaments was worth roughly $500 million, or $36
million annually (Shaw 2011).
           The massive growth in the value of television rights and bowl payments can be seen in changes in
athletic conference revenues. Based on IRS-990 filings, the combined revenue of Power Five conferences
increased by nearly 260 percent from 2008 to 2018. By comparison, over the same time period revenues
for the NFL and NBA grew by approximately 90 and 110 percent, respectively, (albeit from a higher
base).16


13 This is similar in spirit to the sample restriction that is made in the recent rent-sharing paper by Kline et al. (2019). In that paper, the authors
focus primarily on the firms receiving the most valuable patents; similarly, we focus on the most “profitable” athletic departments, which are
the ones most likely to engage in substantial rent-sharing.
14 While the Big Ten was the most financially successful conference in that year, it was not extraordinary within the Power Five conferences.

For example, the Southeastern Conference (SEC) took in $660 million and paid out approximately $44 million in 2018 (Berkowitz 2019).
15 Historically, at the end of every season, the top teams across all conferences play in a series of post season games known as Bowl Games.
These are generally paid on or around January 1st. In more recent years, teams have also engaged in a four team College Football Playoffs
(CFP) that pits the top 4 teams against each other in an attempt to identify a national champion. Both the bowl games and the CFP generate
large amounts of revenue for participating schools.
16 The growth in NBA and NFL revenues comes from the Forbes team valuations for each league.

                                                                          8
          Most of these conference revenues are distributed to the teams in the form of direct transfers, and
these transfers make up a meaningful portion of the budgets for the average department. However,
individual athletic departments also earn money in other ways such as gate receipts (i.e., ticket revenues)
for sporting events, endorsement deals, and merchandise sales. Ticket sales and donations generate the
most revenue of the on-campus activities.17 In 2019, there were 19 schools that reported at least $20
million in ticket revenue from football alone (Berkowitz 2020). In addition to ticket sales, the individual
school endorsement deals with apparel manufacturers such as Nike, Adidas, and Under Armour can be
quite valuable – with the top teams receiving several millions dollars per year in both cash and
merchandise (Kleinman 2019). For example, the contract for Auburn University is the 10th most valuable
current contract, with an estimated value of $3.61 million in cash and $2.25 million in products per year. In
our finances data for public Power Five schools, we find that ticket sales and donations account for
roughly 40 percent of total revenue across all schools in 2018, with corporate sponsorships, advertising,
and licensing around 10 percent.
          Examining athletic department revenue in addition to conference revenue provides a more
complete picture of the scale and growth of this commercial enterprise. Based on our data on athletic
department finances at public schools in the Power Five conferences, average athletic department revenue
in our sample grew over 60 percent from 2008 to 2018 and now stands at nearly $125 million. Most of this
revenue comes from football, men’s basketball, and “non-sport revenue” – a category that often includes
valuable things such as television contracts and other media rights. As suggestive initial evidence of
meaningful rent-sharing, over that time period the net-income from revenue sports has increased as has
the spending on all other sports, coaches’ salaries, and administrative compensation. The increased
spending on non-revenue sports caused a 71 percent increase in the losses generated in those sports –
losses that (at least in the time series) appear to be funded by the rents generated by the two revenue
sports (football and men’s basketball).
          Despite this growth in the commercial success of modern college athletics, the players are largely
prohibited from profiting from their participation. According to NCAA regulations, financial support for
players was historically limited to the official costs of tuition, fees, room and board, and books. Estimates
of these costs are dictated by the university’s financial aid office and apply to all students. Partly driven by
the controversy over the lack of payments for college players, in 2015 schools in the Power Five
conferences allowed these aid packages to also include an additional stipend that was meant to cover the
“cost of attendance.” Again, this amount was dictated by the financial aid office and there was some
variation in the value of these packages across the schools. In 2015 the additional stipend at Boston



17 A large fraction of donations to athletic departments has historically come from programs that require donations to purchase football
season tickets, so these donations should largely be thought of analogous to ticket revenue. This pricing system was common because prior to
the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, 80 percent of the price paid in the form of a donation was tax deductible (Berman 2018).
                                                                     9
College was $1,400 while at the University of Tennessee the stipend was $5,666.18 These additional cost of
attendance stipends are paid to all scholarship athletes and not just those in football and men’s basketball,
with athletes in other sports on partial scholarships receiving partial cost-of-attendance stipends.
          Beyond these stipends and scholarships, athletes are not allowed to profit in any way from their
participation in these sports. This includes restrictions on athletes profiting from the use of their image,
likeness, or signatures. Several athletes and their schools have been sanctioned by the NCAA for
infractions such as selling signatures and memorabilia for relatively small dollar amounts and services such
as tattoos (Schlabach 2011). Penalties for schools involve, among other things, the forfeiture of games,
returning revenue, bans on future post season play, and the removal of scholarships. In rare circumstances,
coaches can be sanctioned with a “show cause” penalty that makes it meaningfully harder for other
schools to hire them in the future (Auerbach 2014). Players can also have their eligibility revoked, which
means they are unable to play for any NCAA program.
          Recently, the potential scope of penalties and enforcement has increased. In 2017, 10 individuals
were charged with a variety of federal crimes including bribery and wire fraud for their roles in a system to
pay high school and college basketball players to steer them towards particular schools (Staples 2019).
During the course of the trial, tape recordings were introduced that either documented or suggested that
college coaches were aware of payments goings to these athletes.


II.B. Previous Research Examining Economic Rents in College Athletics
          There is some previous research examining related questions about the economic rents generated
by college athletes. Of particular relevance to our questions regarding rent-sharing and potential
compensation for athletes, a number of studies have attempted to calculate the marginal revenue product
(MRP) for each football player. These efforts mostly follow the methods proposed by Scully (1974) and
date as far back as Brown (1993), which attempts to calculate the MRP of elite college football players.
Using a small sample of schools, this paper finds that each NFL draft pick was associated with $500,000 in
extra revenue for a school. Brown (2011) updates this estimate to include more schools and finds that by
2005 an NFL draftee was worth around $1 million for a school on an annual basis. Lane, Nagel, and Netz
(2014) take a similar approach in estimating marginal revenue products of men’s college basketball players.
More recently, a series of papers have used recruiting rankings to estimate the MRP of college football and
basketball players (Borghesi 2017; 2018; Bergman and Logan 2020). An advantage of this approach is that
it leverages a metric of skill that is measured prior to an athlete entering college and is available for all
players. These studies provide consistent evidence that the estimated MRP for players exceeds the
scholarship value for all recruits of the quality that typically attend Power Five schools – with an even


18A recent study on the impact of these cost-of-attendance stipends found that higher additional allowance amounts were positively correlated
with average football recruit quality in the year following the rule change (Bradbury and Pitts 2018).
                                                                    10
larger gap for the highest-skilled athletes. One difficulty in interpreting these studies is the potential for
reverse causality -- that is, do high-revenue schools attract good athletes, or do good athletes increase
revenues for schools? Including school fixed effects can address this difficulty if the school-specific factors
are time-invariant, but this reduces the estimated MRP by roughly 70 percent (Bergman and Logan 2020).
Additionally, there are several time-varying factors such as new coaches or better facilities that could
simultaneously increase revenue and attract higher-skilled athletes – which could bias estimates of the
athlete’s MRP.
        An additional difficulty discussed in the literature is that contemporaneous revenue is a function of
both current success and past performance (in the form of television revenues). As discussed in Berri,
Leeds, and Von Allmen (2015), this means that efforts to calculate the MRP of athletes using their impact
on overall revenue will likely underestimate how much they would likely be paid under collective
bargaining – since payment is a function of both their MRP and their ability to bargain for a portion of the
fixed revenues. For our analysis of player compensation we use the realized outcome of negotiations in the
professional sports leagues as a benchmark to guide how much revenue the players would capture in the
absence of current constraints. Similarly, we use data on the distribution of salaries in the professional
leagues to estimate a potential distribution of salaries for college players. Berri (2016) and Goff, Kim, and
Wilson (2016) are some examples of earlier work that takes a similar approach to estimating salaries for
college athletes.
        Other authors have also attempted to calculate whether certain parts of the college sports value
chain are capturing excess rents. These studies primarily focus on a single part of the value chain in
isolation and lack the complete financial data that we have gathered in this paper. For example, Leeds,
Leeds, and Harris (2018) examines whether coaches capture a greater share the economic rents than would
be expected given their on-the-job performance. Similar to our results, they find that coaches capture a
portion of the rents that exceed their on-the-job performance.
        Finally, other authors have hypothesized that the existing system of rent-sharing results in a
shifting of resources between athletes with meaningfully different economic backgrounds. Perhaps the
clearest example of this would be Sanderson and Siegfried (2015), who discuss this possibility in their
argument for paying college athletes. However, we are not aware of existing research that empirically
examines the distributional consequences of the existing rent-sharing system. We are able to directly
address this question using our novel athlete-level data matched to neighborhood characteristics.


I.C. Potential Recipients of Rent-Sharing
Our primary goal of the rent-sharing analysis is to determine the ultimate economic incidence of the rents
created by football and men’s basketball programs. We focus on the following potential recipients: (1)
non-revenue sports (i.e., women’s sports and other men’s spots); (2) salaries for coaches and spending on

                                                       11
other administrative personnel in the athletic department; and (3) spending on athletic facilities. We
provide background on each of these categories before discussing our data.


II.C.1 “Non-Revenue” Sports
          While the financial health of athletic departments is clearly tied to football and men’s basketball,
these two sports comprise a minority of the intercollegiate sports played at universities. The Power Five
schools in our sample offer 8.2 men’s and 10.8 women’s sports on average. While each school chooses
different sports, the most commonly offered sports for men (other than football and men’s basketball) are
golf and baseball. For women, the most commonly offered sports are basketball, soccer, and tennis.
          Figure 2 shows trends in average net revenue over time for football, men’s basketball, women’s
sports, and other men’s sports. Net revenue is defined as revenue minus expenses, and the average that is
reported is averaging across the Power Five schools in our sample. Figure 3 reports various panels that
depict histograms of the net revenue by these same categories of sports for the same sample of schools.
Profitable activities are largely limited to two sports: football and men’s basketball. While the spending for
these revenue sports is meaningfully higher, they still generate large surpluses with an average net income
in 2019 of $16.9 million. By contrast, the non-revenue sports have average net incomes that are
meaningfully negative with an average net income in 2019 of $-1.4 million.19
          Non-revenue sports lose money despite the fact that athletes in these sports receive less financial
support per athlete than the revenue sports. For each sport there is a maximum number of full scholarship
equivalent scholarships that can be awarded at each school. For most sports (i.e. nearly all sports except
for the revenue sports), this number is significantly less than the typical roster size and most athletes
receiving aid are on partial scholarships. Schools are also limited by a maximum number of athletes than
can receive any athletics-related aid per sport. For example, in baseball there is a limit of 11.7 full
scholarship equivalents that can be divided among up to 27 athletes. Football, men’s basketball, and a few
women’s sports (basketball, gymnastics, tennis, and volleyball) are what the NCAA call equivalency sports.
This means that the number of full scholarship equivalents is equal to the maximum number of athletes
that can receive athletics related aid (National Collegiate Athletic Association 2017).
          The clear distinction in net income across the categories of sports provides prima facie evidence of
rent-sharing across these activities. This is particularly true in light of Figure 1, which shows that very little
of the support for Power Five conference athletic department comes from the university. This runs
contrary to the belief of many that these sports are largely financed by the university.20 Given the lack of


19 These net incomes are adjusted by the imputation procedure to fix misreported revenue values described in Section III and Appendix
Section II. The average unadjusted net income of non-revenue sports was $-1.15 million
20 There are of course questions about whether donations to athletic departments would otherwise go to the University and therefore
represent a subsidy from the school to the athletic department. The direction of this effect is unclear. Both Meer and Rosen (2009) and
Anderson (2017) demonstrate that athletic success leads to increased donations to the University. Similarly, Tabakovic and Wollmann (2019)
find that unexpected athletic success leads to more donations and research productivity for the University. While this does not definitively
                                                                     12
institutional support, the only way for schools to continue to offer unprofitable sports is through a transfer
of the rents generated by the profitable sports.


II.C.2 Salaries for Non-Athletes
          The athletes participating in non-revenue sports are not the only likely beneficiaries of rent-sharing
in college athletics. Coaching salaries have grown substantially along with athletic department budgets. As
an illustrative example, consider the case of football coaches at Texas A&M University. In 1982, Texas
A&M attempted to hire famed University of Michigan Coach and Athletic Director Glenn “Bo”
Schembechler, for the then-record sum of $3 million over a 10-year period (Henning 2020). Fast forward
to 2017, when Texas A&M hired Florida State Coach Jimbo Fisher at a fully guaranteed salary of $75
million over 10 years. In addition, Texas A&M was forced to pay out approximately $10 million to Kevin
Sumlin, the coach who was fired to make room for Fisher.21
          In our data, we find that average salaries of Power Five football coaching staffs at public schools
grew from $4.8 to $9.8 million from 2008 to 2018. Football coaches, however, are not the only coaches
enjoying large salary increases. Coaches for all other sports at Power Five schools have also seen their
salaries increase from $7.3 to $12.5 million, which is roughly a 70 percent increase in just a decade.
Similarly, there have been corresponding increases in spending on non-coaching administrative salaries as
well. From 2008 to 2018 these increased from $12.1 to $22.3 million. Over this same time period, the
support for athletes in revenue sports increased from $3.6 million to $5.3 million – an increase of only 47
percent.22


II.C.3 Athletic Facilities
          The final category of rent-sharing that we examine is spending on athletic facilities. Unable to lure
athletes with competitive compensation packages, schools have increasingly invested in lavish athletic
facilities containing a variety of amenities. For example, the University of Central Florida built a $25
million facility that included a lazy river (Hobson 2017). Clemson University built a “football-only” facility
at a cost of $55 million that includes features such as laser tag and miniature golf (Hobson and Rich 2015).
Describing the facility, the athletic department spokesman said, “it’ll be their home on campus, when
they’re not in class.” In an analysis of 48 schools in the Power Five conferences, the Washington Post found
that the schools spend $772 million on athletic facilities, which represents a nearly 90 percent increase in
spending from 2004 (Hobson and Rich 2015).


answer the question of donations would change if schools stopped participating in sports altogether – it does suggest that the story is more
complicated than a subsidization of athletics by the University.
21 There was no language in Sumlin’s contract that lowered that buy-out amount if he went on to get another coaching job – which he did as
the coach of the University of Arizona (Kirshner 2018).
22 This support is based on an average aid book value of $36,889 in 2008 and $54,271 in 2018. The increase in this the value of the aid reflects

both rising tuition and an increase in the generosity for non-tuition items.
                                                                      13
          While it could easily be argued that these lavish facilities constitute a meaningful fringe benefit (i.e.,
compensation through non-wage amenities) – it is worth noting that professional athletes also enjoy access
to many luxurious facilities. That said, there has been a meaningful increase in the spending on college
facilities in recent years – much of which appears to be an attempt to compete for athletes who cannot be
paid a market wage. Describing the spending, a member of the University of Colorado Board of Regents
said, “By the time we’re done … we’ll be right back behind them all again. It’s a never-ending arms race to
build shiny objects that appeal to 17-year-olds so they’ll pick us instead of someone else” (Hobson and
Rich 2015).
          The largest facility expenditures are certainly for the revenue sports. However, all sports appear to
benefit from this spending. Describing the growth of facility spending, the Washington Post said that schools
“have built baseball stadiums, volleyball courts, soccer fields, golf practice facilities and ice hockey arenas
with money largely derived from powerhouse football teams and, to a lesser degree, men’s basketball
teams” (Hobson and Rich 2015).23


III. Data
          To fully explore rent-sharing and its distributional consequences, we combine athletic department
financial data with roster data matched to neighborhood socioeconomic characteristics.


III.A. Athletic Department Financial Data
          Our data on athletic department finances comes from two primary data sources: (1) EADA and (2)
the Knight Commission. We discuss each of these in turn.


III.A.1. Equity in Athletics Data Analysis (EADA)
          The EADA data set covers 2003-2019, but we omit all years prior to 2006 from any analysis
because of data quality issues.24 Over this time period, we have data on 64 of the 65 teams in Power Five
conferences for all years, and coverage of all schools for the final 11 years.25 The EADA contains a
complete accounting of revenue for the athletic department. This includes sport-specific data as well as




23 Beyond the athlete’s enjoyment of these facilities, this spending benefits the multitude of architects, construction companies, and other
vendors that plan and build these facilities. The construction of numerous indoor training facilities has developed a growing cottage industry
of firms catering to this business. Consider the very existence of SportsPLAN – a firm that “provides specialized architectural master
planning, programming, design and personal services to architects, universities, colleges, and municipalities.” Describing the increase in
business over time, Joel Leider a SportsPLAN architect discussed that historically few teams had indoor practice facilities outside of the
Midwest. Now, most major schools have indoor practice facilities, and more than 20 firms have entered the design space for such facilities
(Hobson and Rich 2015).
24 Academic years split the calendar year. For ease of discussion, throughout the paper we adopt the convention of referring to years by the
end of the academic year, so 2003 refers to the 2002-03 academic year while 2018 refers to the 2017-18 academic year.
25 Prior to 2009, the University of Maryland does not report EADA or Knight Commission data. Data for Maryland is included when

available.
                                                                      14
spending that cannot be directly attributed to a sport. However, these data do not provide any information
about the nature of spending or revenues within a sport.
        Schools are required to contribute to the EADA to receive Title IV funding (which includes Pell
Grants and direct federal student loans), but they maintain some discretion in how these data are reported.
We observe revenue and expenses separately for each sport, covering the 2005-2006 through 2018-2019
school years. Schools also report additional “non-sport” revenue and expenses that are not allocated to a
specific sport, which complicates some of our analysis. Examining the data carefully reveals that schools
allocate non-sports revenue using different rules. This is most apparent when it comes to the treatment of
revenue received from conferences, which some schools count as entirely non-sport revenue while others
allocate either all or in part to specific sports. Such funds include payments for media rights as well as
revenue-sharing for post-season activities. The amount of revenue sharing is at the discretion of the
conference. For example, revenue sharing in the Big Ten is quite expansive and even includes large
portions of each school’s football gate receipts (Dochterman 2013). In addition, in some conferences the
newer members receive only partial payments, and some members who are banned from postseason play
(e.g., for rules violations in previous years) do not partake in revenue sharing over bowl payments
(Schlabach 2017).
        While schools exhibit variation in how they account for this money, it seems readily apparent that
it is primarily attributable in some way to football and men’s basketball. This can be verified by looking at
school accounting. Using external data on the annual value of conference and TV payments, Appendix
Table OA.19 shows that fluctuations in these funds are associated with changes in either non-sports
revenue or sport specific revenue for football or men’s basketball. We find no change in the revenue for
the non-revenue sports. We also find evidence that these differences reflect accounting practices rather
than substantive differences in sources of revenue. Appendix Table OA.20 shows that identical changes in
conference revenue appear almost entirely in football and men’s basketball revenue for schools that have
low non-sport revenue shares on average, while for schools with high average non-sport shares these
revenues appear in the non-sport category. Therefore, when we consider fluctuations in revenue generated
by revenue sports, we consider a composite variable that combines football, men’s basketball, and non-
sport revenue reported in the EADA. This provides the most accurate measure of the economic rents
available for sharing.
        One concern with the EADA is data quality (Dosh 2017). While recent work finds that the data
performs well under simple data quality tests (Jones 2020; Tatos 2019), we find one significant data quality
issue that is particularly relevant for our rent-sharing analysis. Close examination of the EADA data reveals
numerous school-sport-year observations where the revenue and expenses are exactly equal for non-
revenue sports. While it is possible these data reflect actual economic circumstances, we find this
explanation highly unlikely for several reasons. Sport-specific spending includes categories such as bills for

                                                      15
travel, medical services, and other services that exhibit unpredictable variation across years. In addition, the
revenue includes things such as gate receipts – which also vary meaningfully across years in ways that are
difficult to exactly forecast. The odds that these variable revenues and expenses will exactly equal each
other at the end of the year is unlikely, even in sports that are intended to break even. In addition,
observations with zero net income are highly concentrated in particular school-years. Of the 907 total
EADA school-year observations, 137 have a sport with zero net income, and 121 of these have eight or
more sports with zero net income.
        Given our interest in rent-sharing, the nature of data manipulation is important to understand.
Obviously, a sport can achieve zero net income by either an artificial change in revenue or in spending. In
Appendix Section II, we present a variety of pieces evidence that support the argument that schools are
inflating revenue rather than deflating costs. Specifically, we find that instances where a school reports
exactly zero net income for a sport is associated with a meaningful change in the within-sport revenue for
the year. We do not detect a similar relationship with a change in spending. Therefore, we interpret a
sport-specific observation with zero net income as a likely misreporting of revenue and not costs, and to
address this problem, we impute revenue for the small subset of observations where the reported net
income leads to concerns about data manipulation. More information about the inclusion criteria and the
imputation methods are contained in Appendix Section II. Our procedure leaves school-level total revenue
unaffected as we make corresponding changes to the “non-sport” revenue of each school after every
sport-level imputation. Overall, revenue is imputed for only 9.6 percent of all school-sport-year
observations, and our main rent-sharing elasticity results are robust to not imputing any data, dropping all
imputed observations, and dropping any school that has any school-sport-year observations ever imputed.
We thus do not believe imputation is important for any of our main results, and we are reassured that we
find similar rent-sharing elasticity estimates for other outcomes such as non-football coaches’ salaries that
relay on a distinct data source -- the Knight Commission data described below.


III.A.2. Knight Commission data
        The EADA data set has the advantage of wide availability across both school and years, but the
data does not have specific accounting variables beyond the aggregate revenue and spending by sport,
which limits what we can observe regarding the internal operations of athletic departments. We therefore
supplement the EADA financial data with data from the Knight Commission – an organization formed in
1989 with a mission to “strengthen the educational mission of college sports.” As part of this mission, the
Knight Commission maintains the College Athletics Financial Information (CAFI) database. This database
is a compilation of financial information submitted by public universities – which are required to disclose
information about their underlying economics. An advantage of these Knight Commission data is that they
provide a far more granular view of the revenues and expenditures of modern college athletic departments.

                                                      16
However, only public universities are required to disclose the information that underlies the database. For
this reason, our Knight Commission data only contain information from 46 of the 65 Power Five schools
that are in the EADA data.26 These excludes some influential private schools such as Stanford University,
the University of Notre Dame, and Northwestern University. These data are available from 2005-2018 and
contain 595 total school-year observations.
            Despite the limited coverage in terms of the number of schools, the Knight Commission data
contain a number of important financial variables that are critical to our analysis, including detailed
revenue categories such as ticket sales, donations, sponsorship and advertising, institutional support
(student fees and general university/government funds), and a revenue category that includes NCAA and
conference disbursements from postseason tournaments and TV contracts. The data on conference
disbursements form the basis for our instrumental variables strategy. The Knight data have similarly
detailed information on expenditures including total compensation for coaches and administrators,
spending on facilities, and total student aid for athletes.


II.A.3 Athletic Department Financial Data Summary Statistics
            Summary statistics for variables from both the EADA and Knight Commission datasets are
displayed in Table 1. It is clear that football and men’s basketball sports bring in far more revenue than all
other sports, with an average of about $60 million for football and men’s basketball (or $90 million,
including non-sport revenue) compared to about $7 million for other sports. Table 2 displays average
revenues and expenditures as a share of athletic department revenue. Football, men’s basketball, and non-
sport revenue account for 92% of total athletic department revenue, with about 34% of total revenue
being spent directly on football and men’s basketball. By contrast, women’s sports and men’s non-revenue
sports account for only 7% of the athletic department revenue, with 25% of the overall revenue being
spent on these sports. Turning to additional measures from the Knight commission, the largest categories
of expenditure in the Knight database are on facilities spending, administrative compensation, and coach
compensation, which account for 21%, 18%, and 18% of athletic department revenue, respectively.


III.B. Student Roster and Demographic Data
            Our second main category of data measures the demographics and socioeconomic characteristics
of athletes participating in each sport. We obtained complete roster data from each school in our sample
by scraping athletic department websites in October 2018. While each school differs in the format of their
roster, a consistent and valuable feature is that the hometown and previously-attended school (most often
the athlete’s high school) are both typically listed. Using the scraped roster data, we match athletes to their



26   Data are available from the University of Maryland from 2009-2018.
                                                                      17
respective Census Designated Place (CDP) and county. 27 Our matching procedures for CDP and county
matches 93.4 percent of athletes where a U.S. hometown is listed.28 Appendix Table OA.17 shows sample
statistics on the number of athletes observed with each characteristic and the number matched to specific
cities/counties and public high schools.
          For our distributional analysis, it is also important to match athletes to their specific high school –
which for many athletes would provide a better measure of their neighborhood.29 Due to data constraints,
matching high schools for athletes is far more difficult than matching to CDP and county. For example,
the “previous school attended” is most often a high school but at times is a previous college. In addition,
some students attend preparatory schools, private schools, or training academies – none of which provide
accurate information about the family income student to the same degree as a local public school.
Therefore, we only attempt to match athletes to the set of public high schools in the county or counties of
their hometown. This both improves the match quality and limits our sample to high schools that provide
geographic information that is relevant to proxying for family income. Our final analysis sample results in
29,556 athletes matched to a CDP/county, with 16,794 of these athletes matched to a public high school.30
More discussion of the matching procedure and details on the match rate can be found in Appendix
Section I.
          We use the matched roster data to compute a variety of socioeconomic statistics from the Census.
Except for the constructed variable of mean household income, all variables come from the 2000 Census
SF3 and SF1 files, imputed to 2010 census tract geographies.31 Just 0.7 percent of the observations in the
census dataset are missing, which is due to data suppression. We then aggregate this tract-level census data
to the school level using a school catchment area to tract crosswalk described below.32
          We are left with a dataset of 15,184 athlete-sport observations for which all census variables are
matched, from an original roster dataset of 35,721 athlete-sport observations. Of the 35,721, 18,927
athlete-sports were not able to be matched to NCES IDs, leaving 16,794 possible matches. Of the possible
matches, 1,610 observations are missing from the crosswalk/census file, leaving us with our sample of
15,184. Only 64 unique colleges are represented in the final dataset because Clemson's online roster does
not include high school information.




27 This is done using fuzzy text matching for the hometown listed for the athlete. We also match by hand any listed hometowns that appear in
the roster data 10 or more times but are not matched by the algorithm. This solves problems such as matching common alternative names,
e.g. this matches all athletes with “Brooklyn, NY” listed as their hometown to the New York, NY CDP.
28 The fraction not matched is largely consistent with the share of foreign athletes participating in NCAA sports.
29 High school catchment areas are often geographically smaller than CDP and counties. An obvious exception to this being a better match for

family income are athletes that attend private high schools or sports training academies.
30 Clemson did not have previous school listed on any of the rosters, so the high school sample of schools comes from only 64 colleges.
31 The mean household income variable is derived by dividing aggregate household income by the number of households, in a calculation
done by Social Explorer.
32 99.98% of schools have census information for at least one census tract in the catchment area, and 96.9% of schools have census

information for all tracts.
                                                                    18
            For students whose hometowns are reported in the roster dataset, we also match to city-level
demographics. Since doing this does not require matching to NCES ID, the dataset is much larger (27,737
observations); however, matching at the city level rather than school level is coarser and aggregates over
the economically meaningful heterogeneity that exists within a city between schools. We choose school-
based matching as our preferred estimates, but the patterns we find are all robust to instead matching
based on hometown as shown in Appendix Table OA.11.


III.C. Other Data
            Our data on public high schools comes from the Stanford Education Data Archive school
directory (Reardon et al. 2018). The crosswalk between census tracts and high schools is created using data
on the intersection of census tracts with high school catchment areas in 2017.33 Data on professional
football and basketball salaries from the National Football League (NFL) and National Basketball
Association (NBA) come from the website Spotrac. Finally, all data on college athlete
race/ethnicity/nationality and graduation rates comes from publicly available data provided by the NCAA.
All dollar figures are converted to 2018 USD using the CPI-U.


IV. Rent-Sharing in Intercollegiate Athletics
            In order to fully understand the scope of rent-sharing in intercollegiate athletics, we examine the
relationship between the revenue earned by football and men’s basketball and a variety of economic
outcomes. We begin by estimating a series of panel data regressions examining how changes in the revenue
generated by football and men’s basketball impact non-revenue sport spending, non-athlete salaries, and
facility spending. We assess the validity of a causal interpretation of these estimates by examining shocks to
football and men’s basketball revenue that are plausibly unrelated to other factors that could drive changes
in our other economic outcomes of interest.


IV.A. Panel Data Estimates
            If other parts of the athletic department are sharing in the economic rents earned by football and
men’s basketball, then we should observe a systematic relationship between the spending on these other
outcomes and the revenue earned by football and men’s basketball
            A first question is which data represents the revenue generated by football and men’s basketball.
As described above, schools have a variety of means of accounting for revenues. The most obvious
revenue generated by football and men’s basketball are those that are directly earned by those sports such
as ticket revenues and concessions sales. However, a large fraction of the revenue for modern athletic
departments comes from the sale of television rights, merchandise, athletic sponsorships, etc. While some

33   These data were provided by Peter Bergman, with the original data coming from Maponics (2017).
                                                                     19
schools account for that revenue under a sport-specific category, others classify this as “non-sport”
income. The most logical interpretation is that the revenue from conference payments and television
contracts are generated by the revenue sports – which are the assets that largely determine the value of
these payments. Therefore, in our panel data specifications we consider football and men’s basketball
revenue to be the sum of sport-specific revenue (for revenue sports) plus non-sport revenue. Using this as
our key right-hand side variable, we estimate the following panel fixed effects regressions:


                      log(𝑦&' ) = 𝛾& + 𝛿' + 𝛽 log(FB/MBB revenue + non-sport revenue)&' + 𝜀&'                   (1)


where 𝑖 indexes schools and 𝑡 indexes years, and 𝛾& and 𝛿' are school and year fixed effects, respectively.
The outcome variable 𝑦&' is included in logs so that the key coefficient 𝛽 can be interpreted as a rent-
sharing elasticity. The key assumption for the estimate to represent a causal rent-sharing elasticity is that
the error term is uncorrelated with unobserved determinants of 𝑦&' conditional on school and year fixed
effects.
           Table 3 reports OLS estimates of equation (1) for a range of different outcomes. Standard errors
are clustered at the college level throughout. The first column of Panel A contains the estimated effect on
logged football and men’s basketball spending. This estimate suggests a relatively large “own-sport”
elasticity of 0.82. Columns (2) through (4) provide estimates that help to understand the amount of
revenue sharing with other sports. For example, the estimate in column (2) describe the change in logged
spending for all other sports and finds an elasticity of 0.416. Breaking out all other sports into women’s
sports and other (non-revenue) men’s sports leads to similar elasticity estimate (columns (3) and (4)).
           In Table OA.2, we convert the estimated elasticities to effective shares of football and men’s
basketball plus non-sport revenue. To do this, we multiply each elasticity by its respective category’s
spending as a share of total athletic department revenue. We then divide by the share of total athletic
department revenue which is accounted for by football, men’s basketball, and non-sport revenue. Using
this method, the own-sport elasticity of 0.82 corresponds to $0.31 of each additional dollar brought in by
football and men’s basketball being spent on these sports. Since 92% of athletic department revenue is
accounted for by football, basketball, and non-sport revenue, the share of total athletic department
revenue spent on football and men’s basketball is nearly the same: $0.28 of each additional dollar of
athletic department revenue is spent on football and men’s basketball. About $0.11 of every marginal
dollar brought in by revenue-generating sports is spent on non-revenue generating sports.
           An immediate concern with interpreting these results causally is that there could be school-level
shocks that affect spending in all sports, which has nothing to do with rent-sharing from football and
men’s basketball to other sports. One way to address this concern is to include conference-by-year fixed
effects. This throws away some variation that we may think is plausibly exogenous (such as variation in
                                                        20
conference payments over time), but if school-wide shocks are correlated across schools within a
conference, then this specification can assess bias from common shocks. Panel B of Table 3 contains the
estimates from a specification that also includes conference-year fixed effects, and the results are
remarkably similar to those without these additional controls.34
          Another way to investigate this concern is to estimate the direct relationship between football and
men’s basketball revenue and the revenue generated by other sports. To do this, we include revenue
generated by other sports as the outcome in equation (1). If a confounding factor is increasing revenue
across all sports simultaneously, then this analysis will estimate a positive and statistically significant
estimate of 𝛽. These estimates are reported in Table 5. For both specifications with and without
conference-year fixed effects, we find no evidence of a statistically or economically significant relationship
between the revenue generated by football and men’s basketball and the revenue generated by the other
sports in an athletic department. This provides additional evidence that our estimates in Table 3 are not
simply reflecting a general economic improvement across sports in the athletic department, but rather
genuine rent-sharing within the athletic department.
          To further assess the validity of a causal interpretation of our main results, we next implement the
difference-in-differences methodology for rent-sharing developed in Lamadon et al. (2019). This
procedure provides a clear visual depiction of the variation in the data underlying our panel fixed effects
estimates. It does so by exploiting variation in the changes in revenue over time to create treatment and
control groups and then presents an event study figure based on averages of these treatment-control
comparisons. Specifically, for every year in our data we measure the annual change in the revenue for the
summation of football, men’s basketball, and non-sport revenue. In any year, schools with an above-
median increase in this change are classified as a treatment group and the remaining schools serve as the
control group. Using this framework, we estimate an event study regression for each year; i.e., we redefine
the treatment and control groups based on each annual change. This results in a series of event study
coefficients. We then graph the average of these coefficients for the four years before and after the
“treatment year,” i.e. the year in which we calculated the revenue change to assign groups.
          The procedure results in a graphical summary of the variation underlying our main rent-sharing
results. For example, Figure 4 contains these estimates for rent-sharing between revenue and non-revenue
sports. Panel A contains the estimates for the change in revenue for football and men’s basketball. As
would be expected if the procedure was accurately identifying revenue shocks, the trend in revenue prior
to the treatment year is largely flat and then swiftly increases for schools that experience a revenue shock
compared to those that do not. For panels B through E, we provide estimates for the same procedure for
expenses for football and men’s basketball, all other sports, women’s sports, and non-revenue men’s


34Appendix Table OA.1 reports the robustness of the main results in Table 3 to adding school-specific linear time trends, removing non-sport
revenue from the main independent variable, and various other decisions regarding data imputation and sample inclusion.
                                                                    21
sports, respectively. To ease interpretation, in each figure we include a dashed line representing the change
in revenue from Panel A.35 Consistent with the results in Table 3, Panel A of Figure 4 shows that the
increase in revenue leads to an increase in spending for football and men’s basketball. However, as in
Table 3, this increase is again not one-for-one. The other panels show there was also a meaningful increase
in spending for the non-revenue sports.
          Importantly, the estimated event study coefficients for spending on these sports prior to the
treatment year were largely flat and very close to zero. The pattern of these estimates combined with the
lack of a relationship between revenue from football and men’s basketball and the other sports supports a
causal interpretation of our panel data estimates rather than simply a continuation of pre-existing trends in
spending. Further supporting the causal interpretation are the patterns in Figure 5, which show no
similarly-clear increase in revenue for the other categories of sports. Thus, increases in football and men’s
basketball revenue are not associated with increases in revenue of other sports, and lead to increases in
spending on these other sports
          The discussion in Section II.C and the descriptive statistics in Appendix Table OA.21 suggest that
rent-sharing is not limited to the non-revenue sports but also extends to salaries for salaries for football
coaches, salaries for all non-football coaches, salaries for administrative personnel, and facilities spending.
Table 4 reports rent-sharing elasticity estimates for these additional outcomes, and we find meaningful
rent-sharing elasticities of 0.40, 0.31, 0.45, and 0.86, respectively. As in Table 3, these results are robust to
conference-year fixed effects.36 These elasticities imply that $0.03, $0.03, $0.09, and $0.20 are spent on each
of these outcomes per additional dollar of football, men’s basketball, and non-sport revenue, as reported in
Table OA.3. These marginal spending shares are roughly the same as the average share for facilities
spending reported in Table 2, but are smaller than the average spending shares for all other measures.
          To explore whether revenue from football and men’s basketball affects the university’s finances,
we also study the rent sharing with total institutional support: the amount of money transferred from the
university to the athletic department. There is no evidence that institutional support is impacted by
football and men’s basketball. The elasticities we estimate change signs based on the specification used,
and the associated shares reported in Table OA.3 are small and not significantly different from zero. They
range from -$0.01 to $0.01 received per dollar of football, men’s basketball, and non-sport revenue. The
negligible effect suggests that the additional revenue brought in by football and men’s basketball is either
spent on other sports, in other years, or is possibly redirected to the university through something other
than a change in institutional support. To further demonstrate this point, the final column of Table OA.3
contains an estimate of the change in the athletic department surplus (defined as the log of the ratio of


35 We present bootstrapped confidence intervals for Figure 4 based on 1,000 bootstrap iterations, resampling schools with replacement and
taking the same simple average across regression models (as described in the main text) in each bootstrap iteration.
36 Note that the sample of schools changes slightly because these measures are not available for all schools, so Appendix Table OA.1, Panel C

confirms that the main results in Table 3 continue to hold within the subsample of schools where we can measure these additional outcomes.
                                                                     22
total revenue to total expenses). We find that an increase in revenue from football and men’s basketball
results in greater total surplus for the department, but the estimated elasticity and the implied change in
surplus are both small. These results all point to the same conclusion that most of the additional revenue
from football and men’s basketball is spent within the athletic department in the year it is generated.
          Figure 6 contains the estimates from the same Lamadon et al. (2019) difference-in-differences
procedure as in Figure 4 for some of these additional categories. Across all spending categories, the
estimated change in spending prior to the increase in football and men’s basketball revenue is both flat and
close to zero, and there is clear visual evidence of increases in spending on these categories following
increases in revenue from these sports. This continues to provide evidence supporting the causal
interpretation of our rent-sharing elasticities and indicates additional recipients of rent-sharing within the
athletic department.
          Finally, we also examine the robustness of our rent-sharing estimates to alternative measures of
spending. As we note above, there are some concerns with EADA sport-specific financial data where
schools appear to manipulate data to result in exactly zero dollars of net income for many years. There
could be a concern that our attempts to correct these data do not fully account for potential manipulation
of spending data and therefore may bias our estimates of rent sharing across sports. While we believe our
efforts appropriate adjust the data, we supplement our main estimates with alternative measures of
spending that do not use the EADA sport-specific spending variables and therefore avoid the concerns
over measurement or reporting error associated with these variables.
          Results using these alternative spending data are shown in Appendix Table OA.4 alongside our
baseline specification from Table 3. The alternative expense measures from the Knight data used as
dependent variables are total football spending, non-football spending, and a proxy for other sport
spending that subtracts the various categories used in Table 4 from total spending in the Knight data.37
The measure is intended to approximate the amount of spending on athletes outside of football and can be
created without using the EADA data. The estimated elasticity for football spending is 0.69, which is
slightly smaller than our baseline specification in Column 1 of Table 3.38 The elasticities for non-football
spending and the proxy for other sport spending are 0.53 and 0.42, respectively. These are very similar to
the elasticity reported in Column 2 of Table 3, which measures non-revenue sport spending directly using
the EADA data.




37 Since we do not observe sport-specific expenses in the Knight data for any other sports besides football, this proxy includes men’s
basketball spending.
38 This is unsurprising given this measure excludes spending on men’s basketball and the relative amount of overall spending between these

sports.
                                                                     23
IV.B. Instrumental Variable Analysis
          The supportive visual evidence leads us to interpreting our panel fixed effects estimates as valid
rent-sharing elasticity estimates. However, to further support the causal interpretation of our panel data
estimates, we also report complementary results from an instrumental variables strategy that exploits
variation in revenues generated by the substantial transfers from conferences to athletic departments.
These revenues primarily accrue from payments to the conference resulting from bowl game participation
by all members, NCAA tournament revenue, and revenue from media rights contracts (i.e. television
rights). In this way, these revenues are not directly related to the success of any individual school’s team –
but are clearly the result of that school participating in football and men’s basketball.
          Consider the case of bowl revenue. Conferences receive substantial payments when football teams
qualify for post-season bowl games – and therefore by definition this revenue varies by year.39 As an
example of the sources of variation in these payments consider the case of the Big Ten and Pac-12
conference in 2019. In that year, the Big Ten conference received an additional $6 million in payments
because Ohio State earned a spot in the Fiesta Bowl and an additional $4 million for Penn State’s berth in
the Cotton bowl (Dosh 2019). These payments were in addition to the annual $40 million the conference
receives each year as part of its ongoing contract with the Rose Bowl and its $66 million base payment
from the College Football Playoffs (CFP). By contrast, in the same year teams in the Pac-12 had less
successful seasons and did not receive invitations for any additional high-revenue bowl games. Therefore,
the conference only received its regular $40 million for its contract to take part in the Rose Bowl and its
$66 million CFP base payment from the College Football Playoffs. Given that the Big Ten shares all bowl
revenue equally, this means each Big Ten athletic department received over $700,000 in additional revenue
simply because of the successful seasons of the Ohio State and Penn State football teams. Conferences
also receive payouts for participation in the annual “March Madness” men’s basketball tournament – with
part of the payments being based on the number of teams that qualify for the tournament.40 In addition to
payments related to the success of other teams, schools also receive substantial payments from their
conferences for media rights. These payments are not explicitly tied to the decisions of any one school and
vary both over time and across conferences. In modern athletics, these media payments have grown
substantially in value (Sanderson and Siegfried 2018).
          To demonstrate the importance of conferences in the revenue generated by football and men’s
basketball we begin with a case study of the University of Utah – which moved from the relatively small
Mountain West athletic conference to the larger and more financially sophisticated Pac-12 conference in
2012 (the decision was announced in June 2010). Figures 7 and 8 show the changes in revenue and

39 College football bowl games are post-season contests that are played primarily by NCAA FBS schools. Bowl games pay the teams for
participation, and the money is shared within the conference. Roughly half of all FBS schools play in a bowl game each year.
40 Conferences receive payments based on the success of their members in the men’s postseason basketball tournament. Conferences earn
“units” based on each stage of the tournament that their teams advance to. Each year’s payments are based on a six-year rolling average of
NCAA tournament performance.
                                                                     24
spending from various categories from Utah’s athletic department over this time period. For comparison
we also provide the average for all other Power Five teams over this time period. The top-left panel
contains Utah’s revenue from conference payments and shows a marked increase that begins immediately
after its transition into the Pac-12 conference. Similarly, the top-right panel shows a swifter increase in
revenue for football and men’s basketball after joining the conference. Admittedly, this increase follows an
already-increasing trend, but the figure shows clear “convergence” in football and men’s basketball
revenue for the University of Utah after joining the Pac-12. This trend reflects Utah’s success in these
sports, and it was arguably this success that made Utah an attractive target for moving to the Pac-12 in the
first place.
         All of the spending variables in Figures 7 and 8 follow the pattern established by our panel data
estimates – i.e., increases in revenue generated by the activities of the football and men’s basketball teams
causing higher spending for all of the other sports, higher salaries for coaches and other personnel, and
higher spending on facilities. To provide some sense of the magnitude of these changes, Appendix Tables
OA.8 and OA.9 report difference-in-differences estimates of the change in revenue and spending before
and after the conference transition, and the estimates are similar in magnitude to the OLS estimates in
Tables 2 and 3.
         While the Utah estimates are only a single case study of a school switching conferences, they
provide visual and empirical evidence that supports our main panel data estimates. Additionally, the case
study demonstrates the economic importance of conference payments. This motivates our instrumental
variables analysis under the assumption that changes in these payments cause an increase in available
revenue for an athletic department that is not directly related to other factors that would cause increased
spending. Thus, we argue that we can use conference payments directly as an instrumental variable to
estimate the following two stage least squares (2SLS) regression model:


       log(FB/MBB revenue+non-sport revenue)&' = ∝& + 𝜆' + 𝜋 log(Conference payments)&' + 𝜐&' (2)
                    log(𝑦&' ) = 𝛾′& + 𝛿′' + 𝛽 78 log(FB/MBB revenue+non-sport revenue)&' + 𝜀′&'                (3)


where 𝑖 indexes schools and 𝑡 indexes years (as above), and log(Conference payments) is the excluded
instrument that is in the first stage (equation (2)) but not in the second stage (equation (3)). As with the
OLS model in equation (1), the outcome variable 𝑦&' is included in logs so that the key coefficient 𝛽 78 can
be interpreted as a rent-sharing elasticity. In this model, the key assumption is that the excluded instrument
is exogenous conditional on the fixed effects and only affects the outcome through its effect on football
and men’s basketball revenue.
         Table 6 reports the 2SLS estimates of equations (2) and (3). Column (1) contains the first stage
estimates of equation (2), which demonstrates that conference payments have a strong effect on the
                                                      25
revenue generated by football and men’s basketball, with an associated first-stage F-statistic of 37.34.
While our instrument is strongly correlated with the endogenous right-hand side variable, our instrument
bears little relationship to the revenue in other sports as can be seen in Appendix Figure OA.2. The only
strong relationship in the data is between conference payments and the revenue for football and men’s
basketball. This supports our assumption that these conference payments largely reflect factors related
specifically to football and men’s basketball, rather than a department-wide change in economic prospects.
          Columns (2) through (5) of Table 6 report the IV estimates for spending on various sports,
analogous to the main results in Table 3. 41 These estimates provide additional evidence of rent-sharing
across the sports, and the magnitude of these estimates is similar to our panel data estimates – further
supporting the causal interpretation of our main panel data results. Appendix Table OA.4 reports
analogous results for non-athlete and facilities spending, which are also broadly similar to the OLS results.
Since coaches do not have control over conference payments, the fact that these payments lead to higher
coaches’ salaries is consistent with our rent-sharing interpretation and rules out simple “pay-for-
performance” explanations for panel data estimates.


V. Distributional Consequences of Rent-Sharing
     The previous section reported a wide range of rent-sharing elasticities in intercollegiate athletics. We
next consider the potential distributional consequences of this rent-sharing. We view this analysis as an
important input into any normative analysis of the existing constraints on player compensation.
          Our rent-sharing estimates suggest that one group of beneficiaries is the participants in non-
revenue sports, which includes a variety of individuals. For example, our analysis shows meaningful rent-
sharing with the coaches of these non-revenue sports – which will be accounted for in the data as
spending on that sport. Beyond the coaches, the athletes of these sports also benefit. At a minimum, a
large fraction of these athletes receive scholarships that offset some or all of their cost of attending college.
Although preferential admission for athletes is not confined to these sports, recent events around the
“Varsity Blues” college admissions scandal reveals that athletes for these sports can receive preferential
admission to colleges they would otherwise not be academically qualified to attend.42




41 For completeness, Appendix Table OA.7 reports IV estimates for a specification that includes conference-year fixed effects, to reproduce
Panel B of Table 3. The estimates are broadly similar magnitude as the results in the main tables, but we view these estimates as conceptually
inappropriate since conference-year fixed effects account for much of the variation in our instrument. Our instrument is ideally capturing
conference payments that come from conference-wide factors that are not specific to any one school. Consistent with this interpretation, the
first stage F-statistic with conference-year fixed effects is a much smaller in magnitude (F-statistic = 9.19), which creates additional issues
interpreting these 2SLS estimates.
42 In 2019, the Justice Department uncovered a scheme in which at least 50 people were charged with cheating on standardized tests and
paying or accepting bribes in order to help children gain admission to selective colleges, including the University of Southern California which
is one of the “Power Five” schools in our main sample. As part of the “Varsity Blues” scheme, wealthy parents paid bribes to coaches to
recruit their children who did not play sports so that the children could be evaluated against athlete-specific admission criteria, which often
require lower grades and test scores (Medina, Benner, and Taylor 2019).
                                                                      26
        To understand the distributional consequences of rent-sharing across sports, we next examine
whether there are systematic differences in the economic circumstances of athletes. To do this, we use
available roster information matched to athletes’ hometowns and high schools to approximate the
socioeconomic characteristics of where they grew up and went to school. We begin in Figure 9 by showing
the cumulative distribution function of the athletes’ median family income (in the school district
containing their high school), broken down by whether the athlete participated in a revenue or a non-
revenue sport. This figure shows clear visual evidence that athletes in the non-revenue sports attended
high schools where the students had higher median family incomes. A Wilcoxon rank-sum test confirms
the visual evidence that these distributions are statistically significantly different (p < 0.001). Panel B of
Figure 9 shows the CDF with the non-revenue sports further broken down into women’s sports and non-
revenue men’s sports. This figure suggests that female athletes come from high schools with slightly higher
average incomes than their counterparts in the non-revenue men’s sports (p = 0.009).
        Table 7 contains more detailed data on the economic circumstances of athletes based on their high
school. Column (1) contains data for all sports while columns (2) through (5) contain the data for football
and men’s basketball, all other sports, women’s sports, and non-revenue men’s sports, respectively. On
average, athletes attend high schools with a median family income of $67,500 and a mean family income of
$112,400. However, as would be expected by the CDF presented in Figure 9, athletes participating in
football and men’s basketball attended high schools with a median family income, on average, of $58,400
and a mean family income of $99,800. In contrast, the average non-revenue sport athlete attended a high
school with a median family income of $80,000 and a mean family income of $116,800. Columns (4) and
(5) show that female athletes attended high schools with slightly higher incomes than did male athletes in
non-revenue sports – with both groups attending high schools with much higher incomes than football
and men’s basketball participants. To place these numbers in context, we estimate that the average revenue
sport athlete went to a high school with a median family income at the 49th percentile (in our sample of
high schools), while the average non-revenue sport athlete went to a high school at the 60th percentile.
        We next examine whether these socioeconomic differences vary based on the selectivity of the
university. Table 8 contains the average family income at the high schools attended by athletes based on
their sport and the selectivity of their University. The university tiers are taken from the Opportunity
Insights data (Chetty et al. 2020). These income statistics demonstrate that the gap in estimated family
income between athletes in revenue and non-revenue sports is greater for the more selective universities.
For example, for both the “Ivy Plus” and “Elite” tiers the gap in income is approximately $30,000
compared to only $20,000 for highly selective and approximately $11,000 for selective schools.
        There are other dimensions upon which the athletes in revenue sports appear to systematically
differ from those in non-revenue sports. The remaining rows in Table 7 provides information on several
other socioeconomic outcomes. For example, the average football and men’s basketball players attended

                                                        27
high schools where approximately 13 percent of the students were black. By contrast, non-revenue sport
athletes attended high schools where only 5 percent of their fellow students were black. Given the
distribution of athletes by race across sports, this should not be surprising. Appendix Table OA.15 uses
data from the NCAA about athlete demographics at the conference-sport level for schools in the Power
Five conferences. Panel A contains the breakdown of athletes within a sports category by race. It shows
that while nearly 50 percent of the athletes participating in revenues sports are black, only 11 percent of
the non-revenue sports athletes are black. Panel B details which sports black athletes within an athletic
department play. Nearly 60 percent all black athletes in Power Five schools take part in revenue sports. By
contrast, only 14 percent of white athletes participate in revenue sports while the remainder take part in
non-revenue sports.43
          Taken together, these data provide clear evidence that the rent-sharing across sports we identify in
this paper shifts resources from athletes that come from poorer families to those from richer families (as
estimated by the average family income of attended high schools). Additionally, the excess rents appear to
flow from participants in sports where athletes are disproportionately black to sports where athletes are
more likely to be white.
          A similar dynamic applies to rent-sharing for coaches and administrators as well – where the
majority of beneficiaries of the rents generated by the activities of revenue sport athletes are white.
According to the NCAA, in 2019 78 percent of the head coaches for men’s sports and 79 percent of the
head coaches for women’s sports in the Power Five conferences were white (National Collegiate Athletic
Association 2020). For men’s sports only 12 percent of the coaches are black and for women’s sports this
number was only 9 percent. Similarly, 75 percent of University athletic directors are white and only 16
percent are black. This demographic profile is meaningfully different from the athletes participating in
revenue sports – which suggests that rent-sharing in the form of non-athlete compensation also involves a
transfer from athletes that are poorer and more likely to be black to coaches and administrators that are
more likely to be white.
          In the case of coaches, the economic benefits are startlingly large. In 2018, the average Power Five
conference football coaching staff was paid approximately $9.6 million. This was a marked increase since
2006, when the average staff earned only $4 million. Some of this increase can be explained by an increase
in total athletic department revenue. However, coaching staffs have also captured a large fraction of overall
revenue. In 2006, coaches were paid approximately 5.9 percent of revenue. This number steadily increased
and by 2018 coaches captured approximately 7.75 percent of overall revenue. To help place this amount in
perspective, consider the data in Appendix Table OA.22 which contains the percentage of total revenue
captured by the top executives in ExecuComp database. This percentage varies over the years, but the


43 Harper (2018) provides a detailed analysis of the racial composition of revenue sport athletes compared to non-revenue sports for the

Power Five conferences.
                                                                     28
average amount of revenue paid to the top 5 executives in the database was 1.32 percent with a low of 0.43
percent and a high of 2.9 percent. The large rent-sharing elasticities we estimate for football coaches’
salaries are consistent with Leeds et al. (2018). We speculate that the existing limits of player compensation
cause excess rents to be transferred to coaches.


VI. Player Compensation Analysis
          In order to provide some evidence of the potential magnitude of rents being shared in modern
college sports, we next consider what the distribution of rents might looks like under an alternative system
where the athletes no longer face restrictions on the compensation for their efforts. There have been
several proposals and efforts that would limit such restrictions. Perhaps the most successful has been an
attempt to allow players to receive compensation from individuals or firms that would like to use their
image (or “likeness”) for marketing or endorsement purposes (G. Anderson 2020). Such proposals would
effectively allow athletes to earn income based on their athletic success but would not directly give them
access to the revenue currently received by their universities. That said, in equilibrium this would likely
affect the distribution of rents since athletic departments earn meaningful income from the sale of
merchandise – at least part of which is related to the athletes. This has been a particular point of
frustration for some college athletes (Hagy 2003).44
          Another interesting proposal for changing the distribution of rents occurred in 2014 at
Northwestern University where the athletes attempted to form a labor union. While this effort was
ultimately unsuccessful, it provides an interesting potential scenario for considering a different distribution
of the rents generated by revenue sport athletes might look like (Nocera and Strauss 2016).45 After all, in
the major professional football and basketball leagues in the US (the NFL and NBA), the players are
unionized and their collective bargaining agreements dictate (among other things) the percentage of
revenue that must be paid as salary to the athletes (Rosen and Sanderson 2001). As described in Berri et al.
(2015), in professional sports these percentages reflect not only the direct contributions of players to their
team’s athletic success but their ability to capture a portion of the fixed revenues earned as a result of




44 Perhaps one of the most famous discussions of this fact relates to the University of Michigan Basketball team’s “Fab Five.” This team was
the first to start five Freshman players in a championship game and was immensely popular and responsible for a meaningful surge in
merchandise sales for the University. The most heralded member of that team, Chris Webber, left college after his sophomore year to play
professional basketball. Describing this decision, the New York Times wrote, “Michigan collected almost $19 million in royalties from apparel
sales when members of the Five ruled the roost. When Webber went pro in ‘93, the first college sophomore to be the No. 1 pick since his idol
Magic Johnson, the decision was a financial one. He said that he could no longer bear witnessing the $75 sale of his No. 4 jersey when he
couldn't afford to buy a pizza.” It was later alleged that Webber received payments from a booster (i.e. a supporter of the athletic department)
totaling nearly $300,000. This was a violation of current NCAA rules that resulted in, among other things, all games Webber played in being
forfeited, a ban on postseason play for the basketball team in 2002-03, and the school returning $450,000 to the NCAA. The types of
payments received by Webber and other many other athletes would be allowed under a policy where athletes could sell their image and
likeness and could affect how much revenue was available for athletic departments.
45 In August 2015, the National Labor Relations Board turned down the athlete’s petition, citing that due to its novelty the petition would not

have promoted “stability in labor relations.”
                                                                      29
television contracts. Such features could be reasonably expected to be present in college athletics if players
were able to collectively organize and negotiate their compensation.
          As a result, we next consider the implications of athlete compensation if athletes could capture
various percentages of the revenue generated by their sports.46 Berri (2018) outlines a method for
estimating college salaries under this framework and finds that the average salary for players on the
national champion Duke men’s basketball team of 2015 would have been over $1.4 million, with salaries
for top players exceeding $3 million. We follow this method and calculate potential salaries for players in
all Power Five conferences assuming some form of revenue sharing between schools using the most
recently available revenue data available.
          We first calculate this for all Power Five conferences as a group and then assume conferences
share revenue only between member schools individually. While we primarily do this to address issues of
how schools report football and basketball revenue, we note that if salaries were to be paid to athletes it is
quite reasonable that for equity or parity reasons there would be some degree of revenue sharing between
schools.47 This is particularly likely within conferences, many of which already exhibit a strong preference
towards the sharing of revenues from activities such as bowl participation payments, NCAA tournament
revenues, and at times even gate receipts from on-campus events.
          Table 9 contains a summary of potential player salaries under various revenue sharing percentages.
Panel A contains calculations if every scholarship player received the same salary while Panel B contains
estimates if each school designated a set of players that matched the roster sizes of the professional sports.
Panel A shows that football players could receive an annual salary of nearly $220,000 if they shared only 30
percent of their sport specific revenue. This salary rises to over $360,000 if they shared 50 percent of
revenue, as is currently done in the NFL.48 Similarly, men’s basketball players could earn between $300,000
and $500,000. These estimated salaries are significantly higher than the current average value of full
scholarships these athletes are currently receiving, which are shown in Appendix Table OA.16.49


46 An immediate question is which revenues are generated by the activities of the football and men’s basketball athletes. Examining the
collective bargaining agreements for professional sports reveals that athletes share in “football-related” and “basketball-related” revenues. The
definitions of these categories are quite broad and therefore support using the EADA category of football and men’s basketball sport-specific
revenue. If anything, this would be a conservative approach, since many schools account for their conference payments in the “non-sports”
category. This means that valuable media rights that exist primarily because of the efforts of the revenue sports would not be accounted for in
the sport specific revenue category. Such revenues would be considered sport-related revenue under the professional collective bargaining
agreements.
47 Both the NFL and NBA have some form of revenue-sharing between teams. The NFL directly shares more than 60 percent of total

revenue, most of which comes from national television contracts (Bloom 2014). The NBA’s revenue sharing is smaller and more targeted at
transferring revenue from teams in large local media markets to small-market teams, as a large share of NBA media rights revenue is from
local rather than national networks (Wertheim 2018). As both leagues have salary caps, the dispersion in player wage bills between teams is
even less than dispersion in post-revenue sharing revenues.
48 Interestingly, in August 2020 a coalition of Pac-12 student-athletes threatened to opt out of participating in any practices and games during

the COVID-19 pandemic unless a series of demands were guaranteed in writing, including the distribution of 50 percent of conference
revenue to the players (Players of the Pac-12 2020).
49 A similar analysis for women’s college basketball players finds that the average salaries with 50 percent revenue sharing would be greater
than $80,000 for players in the largest conferences for the 2016 season (D. Berri 2017). This exceeds the estimated value of full scholarships
for every Power Five school in 2019; however, most women’s basketball teams currently have negative net income so such salaries would
require meaningful restructuring of the current sports-related spending for most women’s basketball teams.
                                                                       30
          If we consider revenue sharing that is within rather than across conferences, there would be
meaningful variation in the potential salaries. This reflects that fact that either conferences have varied in
their ability to capture the value generated by their revenue sports or in their ability to create value in the
first place. For example, the Big Ten conference was a forerunner in creating a television network and has
successfully expanded its footprint to increase the value of that offering. By contrast, the Pac-12 has been
less successful at negotiating large payouts – a fact that results in meaningfully lower annual payments to
its conference members (Wilner 2020). Examining potential conference level salaries for players (and
assuming a 50 percent revenue sharing) shows the lowest football salary in the Atlantic Coast Conference
(ACC) of nearly $270,000 and the highest salary in the Big Ten at nearly $440,000. For basketball, the
lowest salary would be in the Pac-12 at approximately $300,000 and the highest would be in the ACC at
just over $600,000.50
          Discussion of paying college athletes often moves quickly to whether “third or fourth string”
players would receive the same salaries as the more prominent starting players who often go on to play
professional football and basketball. One way to proceed is to note that any comparison to the salaries and
revenue sharing of professional sports teams would likely need to account for variation in the degree to
which players uniquely impact the success of teams. Even a casual perusal of salaries in the NFL and NBA
reveals systematic differences in payments across positions. Since all salaries are individually negotiated in
these professional sports leagues, these persistent patterns likely reflect the unique contributions of
particular positions to the success of teams. These differences by position are far greater in football than in
basketball.
          To understand how differences in payments across positions would impact potential player salaries
for college athletes, we use salary data from professional sports leagues to estimate the distribution of
potential salaries in two ways. We first look at the distribution of salaries for each sport assuming the
distribution of salaries relative to the average salary matches the professional league. We then calculate
average salary shares for starters and backup players at each position and use these percentages to allocate
salaries across positions for college athletes while holding total compensation fixed, following the method
developed by Goff, Kim, and Wilson (2016).51 More information on this procedure can be found in
Appendix Section III.
          Figure 10 shows our estimated distribution of salaries for football and men’s basketball using the
distribution of relative compensation in the NFL and NBA, respectively. Potential position-based salaries
are contained in Table 10. Both sets of distributional results are based on roster sizes that match the
average number of players under contract in the professional salary data (66 for football and 13 for

50 The fact that the ACC has the highest basketball and the lowest football salaries should not be surprising. Many teams in that league, such as
Duke University and the University of North Carolina operate highly successful basketball programs and relatively less competitive football
programs.
51 The starters are the players who are chosen to play at the start of the game and are typically the better players on the team; backup players

are substitute players who are sometimes used during the game, but do not typically play at the start of the game.
                                                                      31
basketball), and we assume that athletes share in roughly 50 percent of sport-specific revenue.52 Under
such assumptions, the two highest-paid football positions would be the starting Quarterback and Wide
Receiver, who would earn $2.4 and $1.3 million, respectively. Even the lowest-paid players (the backup
running back and starting long snapper) would receive approximately $140,000. The value of tuition and
the stipend that students receive would be subtracted from these amounts to calculate additional cash
compensation, but even the minimum compensation for backup players is more than double the value of
the tuition and other aid that players receive today as their only form of compensation.
           Defining the compensation that athletes receive under the current system as the book value of the
scholarship is clearly incomplete in a variety of ways. As a measure of resource costs, this is clearly an
overestimate. Even if we consider the opportunity cost to the school of a particular seat in a class, it is
unlikely that many athletes would be required to pay the list price of tuition if they were not on
scholarship. That said, it is also unclear that absent participation in athletics any particular athlete would
gain admission to their respective school. In this way measuring compensation as the book value may be
an underestimate of the actual value enjoyed by athletes. A key additional benefit that athletes receive that
is not captured with this definition is favorable admission practices for athletes, potentially allowing many
athletes to attend more selective universities than they would otherwise be admitted to. Our rent-sharing
results imply that the financial incentive to improve athletic performance by relaxing admission standards
is particularly large for football and men’s basketball, so these athletes could disproportionately benefit
from preferential admission. However, athletes may face constraints on major choice, class enrollment,
and time that are not faced by most students at these universities (Office of Senator Chris Murphy 2019).
Football and men’s basketball players also have significantly lower graduation rates than the general
student body at Power Five schools, as shown in Appendix Table OA.16. By contrast, athletes in non-
revenue sports have graduation rates that are more similar to the overall student body – suggesting that the
value of preferential admission may be greater for this students. Finally, it is important to consider that
there are statutory NCAA limits on minimum admissions standards and therefore the value that can be
provided by preferential admission is constrained in a way that is not true for the growth in revenue.
           These salary estimates provide a plausible benchmark for the amount of surplus conceivably
available for salaries for college athletes. That said, there are several important caveats that should be
discussed regarding how salaries might evolve under a regime where athletes could be compensated for
their efforts. The salaries that would ultimately emerge in equilibrium if the NCAA allowed athletes to be
paid would be a function of the relative bargaining weights of the respective parties and the amount of
surplus that would be available under such a system. We discuss both issues in the remainder of this
section.

52We use a labor share of 48.5 percent for football and a labor share of 51 percent for men’s basketball. These are the maximum possible
shares in the current collective bargaining agreements for each league. The NFL labor share must fall between 47 and 48.5 percent and the
NBA labor share must fall between 49 and 51 percent in each season.
                                                                     32
          While there are many factors that would impact the relative bargaining weights, perhaps the most
important is that the salaries which are observed in the NFL and the NBA are the result of a collective
bargaining process with athletes part of a formal labor union.53 Therefore, even if the NCAA removed
restrictions on schools paying athletes, it is unlikely they would receive a similar share of revenue in
absence of a labor union.
          The other issue is whether the economic surplus generated by college sports would be disrupted by
a move to pay players. As is discussed in Sanderson and Siegfried (2015) there are a few ways this could
occur. For example, uncapped compensation across schools could lead to a competitive imbalance that
favors a smaller number of teams. That said, the current system allows schools to pay unlimited amounts
to coaches and spend unlimited amounts on facilities – both of which are often described as recruiting
tools intended to improve on-field success. Schools with more economic success have a greater ability to
spend on such resources – which leads to its own degree of competitive imbalance. Mills and Winfree
(2018) argue that enhanced athlete compensation or unionization is unlikely to negatively impact
competitive balance in college football or men’s basketball. Sanderson and Siegfried (2015) also point out
that athletic departments may respond to a relaxation of compensation limits by reducing roster sizes,
particularly for football. We attempt to reflect the potential for adjustment on this dimension by using
different roster size assumptions in Table 9. However, we do not consider the potential spillover effects
this could have on athletes currently playing other non-Power Five schools.
          Another potential outcome affecting equilibrium payments is whether demand for college sports is
partly a function of the amateur nature of the endeavor. It is unclear whether demand for television rights
or in-person attendance would decrease as a result of the athletes being paid. This could result in schools
be unable or unwilling to continue participating in these sports. Ultimately, it is an open question of
whether even after such a reduction in demand players would be better off under a system where they
were paid compared to the current system where compensation is effectively limited to the direct costs of
attending college.
          Our rent-sharing estimates suggest that one group that would likely be harmed by a movement to
pay revenue sport athletes would be the participants in the non-revenue sports. If meaningful funds that
are currently dedicated to non-revenue sports are instead used as compensation for athletes, then that
could cause schools to either offer fewer non-revenue sports or decrease the amenities offered to
participants in those sports. The actual equilibrium outcome is unclear and would be a function of whether
and how colleges value these non-revenue sports. In addition, schools would need to navigate the
regulatory landscape of Title IX which requires that schools provide equal opportunities to athletes across
genders. It is outside the scope of this paper to comment on how Title IX would apply to paying revenue


53The history of professional sports suggests that unions have been largely successful in both increasing salaries and improving non-wage job
aspects such as working conditions and player mobility (Rosen and Sanderson 2001).
                                                                     33
sport athletes. However, our results demonstrate that the efforts of athletes in revenue sports generate
meaningful economic rents that in turn contribute to coaches’ salaries and spending on other sports. The
athletes generating the rents are more likely to be black and come from lower-income neighborhoods, and
the rents are shared with a set of athletes and coaches that are more likely to be white.54


VII.      Discussion
          Our estimates provide evidence of rent-sharing in intercollegiate athletics. The recent responses of
universities to various threats to the magnitude of available rents further can be understood as a natural
consequence of our results. These threats have come in two main forms. First, the increasing commercial
success of intercollegiate athletics combined with the lack of compensation for players has led to a number
of efforts to increase the share of the surplus available to athletes, including recent litigation and
legislation. Second, the COVID-19 pandemic has largely halted athletic activities as of mid-March 2020 –
including the canceling of “March Madness” – the annual postseason tournament for Division 1 men’s
basketball. In addition, as the pandemic spread throughout the United States, it created uncertainty about
whether schools would be able to hold football games in the Fall 2020 – which would result in a loss of
both television revenue and gate receipts for these events. The commentary and response of schools to
these events provides additional anecdotal evidence supporting our rent-sharing analysis.
          Consider first questions about compensating revenue sport athletes. While this question has been
debated over many years, recent litigation and legislation has made some form of compensation likely.
Perhaps the most well-known and successful litigation was O’Bannon vs. NCAA which was a class action
lawsuit attempting to allow student athletes to enjoy financial returns from the use of their image and
likeness after they graduate. This dispute stemmed from the use of these athletes in a popular video game
marketed by EA Sports.55 During the legal proceedings, the NCAA ended its partnership with the video
game manufacturer. The NCAA ultimately lost this case, which paved the way for the increased cost of
attendance payments made by Power Five conferences. In 2019, the NCAA lost an additional case that
further increased the ability of schools to provide additional education-related funds to students (Kirshner
2019).
          These legal actions have been followed by legislation allowing athletes to earn income based on the
sale of their image and likeness. This would include permitting activities such as individual athletes signing
endorsements deals, selling memorabilia, and/or being compensated for the sale of merchandise related to
the athlete (i.e. a jersey with the athlete’s name and number). In 2019, the State of California enacted the
“Fair Pay to Play Act,” which required college athletes be allowed or receive compensation for their image

54 Recent work in political science by Druckman and Sharrow (2019) highlights how the segregated nature of college sports along racial and
gender lines has been an impediment to reform, which is consistent with the stark racial differences we see between athletes in revenue sports
and the athletes, coaches, and administrators that currently benefit from rent-sharing.
55 In May 2014 the players and EA Sports settled for $40 million dollars, leaving the NCAA as the only party to the class action lawsuit (Farrey

2014).
                                                                      34
or likeness – earnings that are currently barred under NCAA regulations. This law is scheduled to go into
effect in 2023 and would effectively eliminate restrictions on the ability of student athletes at California
schools to engage in commercial activity that is directly related to their participation in intercollegiate
athletics (Murphy 2019). Similar legislation is being actively debated in the United States Congress and
many state legislatures.
          While the equilibrium of such legislation is hard to predict, many involved in the existing business
model of rent-sharing have expressed concerns about the impact of such a change. Many of these
concerns center on the impact of reduced sponsorship revenue for the athletic department. An article
describing the impact of this noted the negative impacts would be felt by “athletic directors, coaches, and
those who own stock in the firms that build big locker rooms and athletic training facilities” (Schatz,
2020).
          The only Power Five conference that is directly affected by California’s act is the Pac-12 which
includes 4 teams located in that state. In a statement reacting to the passage of the law, the conference said
“The Pac-12 is disappointed in the passage of SB 206 and believes it will have very negative consequences
for our student-athletes and broader universities in California … [it] will likely reduce resources and
opportunities for student-athletes in Olympic sports and have negative disparate impact on female
student-athletes” (Rollins 2019).56 Similar sentiments have been expressed by the NCAA and other
conferences and likely would be shared about efforts to actually pay players with funds from athletic
departments.
          Another recent example that illustrates the consequences of the rent-sharing we estimate in this
paper comes from the loss of revenues caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. At a minimum, the canceling
of the annual men’s basketball tournament caused the forfeiture of a large amount of television revenue
and as a result the NCAA decreased its aggregate payout to conferences by $375 million. Given our
estimates below, this reduction in conference payments should result in fewer resources being transferred
to other parts of the athletic department. Such reductions would increase dramatically if schools are unable
to play football games in the Fall of 2020 – an activity that generates meaningfully more economic surplus.
          Commenting about this possibility, Big 12 commissioner Bob Bowlsby said, “it’s a whole new
ballgame if we find ourselves not playing football because it affects everything we do. … It affects the
largest portion of our TV contract. It was the largest source of campus revenue, which is live gate.
Anything I say regarding finances, we have to make the assumption that we’re going to be back playing
football in the fall. And if that doesn’t happen, then the underpinning of what we’ve known as normal
goes away and we’ll have major changes to make” (Auerbach 2020).




56 We interpret the “Olympic sports” in the statement to refer to a subset of the non-revenue sports, even though men’s basketball is

technically an Olympic sport.
                                                                     35
        The response of schools to the current and existing revenue declines has resulted in reductions for
each category where we empirically identify rent-sharing: non-revenue sports, facilities, and non-athlete
salaries. Schools such as the University of Akron, Appalachian State University, the University of
Cincinnati, and Old Dominion University and many other non-Power Five schools have eliminated non-
revenue sports in response to the economic damage from the pandemic (Associated Press 2020). In
perhaps the largest such move to date, in July 2020 Stanford University announced they would be cutting
11 non-revenue sports (Scarborough 2020). Discussing the decision Stanford noted that they had long
offered far more sports than other schools (36 compared to an average of 20 at other schools) and this had
been increasingly difficult over time. The pandemic was cited as a “breaking point” for the economics of
their athletic department.
        Schools made adjustments along other dimensions where we have identified rent-sharing. For
example, Indiana University has deferred any non-essential athletic building and maintenance projects
(Blau 2020). At the University of Colorado, the athletic director, football coach, and both head basketball
coaches agreed to take 10 percent pay cuts (Schlabach 2020). Similar pay cuts have been announced at
schools such as Iowa State, Kansas, Louisville, Michigan, and Missouri (Layberger 2020). All of these
responses are consistent with our rent-sharing estimates.


VIII. Conclusion
        Intercollegiate amateur athletics in the US bars student-athletes from sharing in any of the profits
generated by their participation, which creates substantial economic rents for universities. The economic
rents from amateur athletics are primarily generated by men’s football and men’s basketball programs. In
this paper, we characterize the economic rents in intercollegiate athletics, estimate rent-sharing elasticities
using a variety of empirical approaches, and investigate additional distributional consequences of the
existing limits on player compensation.
        We estimate that rent-sharing leads to increased spending on women’s sports and other men’s
sports as well as increased spending on facilities, coaches’ salaries, and other athletic department personnel.
The player-level analysis reveals that the existing limits on player compensation effectively transfers
resources away from students who are more likely to be black and more likely to come from poor
neighborhoods towards students who are more likely to be white and come from higher-income
neighborhoods.
        Our results are based on comprehensive data covering revenue and expenses for FBS schools
between 2006 and 2019, and we assemble new data using rosters of students matched to neighborhood
socioeconomic characteristics. We have made all of the data in this paper publicly available online at
users.nber.org/~notom/research/ncaa.html, and we hope the data is useful for future researchers
studying the economics of college sports.

                                                       36
References

Anderson, Greta. 2020. “College Athlete Pay Structure Takes Form.” Inside Higher Ed. 2020.
    https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2020/04/30/ncaa-board-governors-approves-name-image-
    likeness-guidelines.
Anderson, Michael L. 2017. “The Benefits of College Athletic Success: An Application of the Propensity
    Score Design.” Review of Economics and Statistics 99 (1): 119–34.
    https://doi.org/10.1162/REST_a_00589.
Associated Press. 2020. “List of College Teams Cut Because of Coronavirus Pandemic.” The Washington
    Post, July 8, 2020. https://www.washingtonpost.com/sports/colleges/list-of-college-teams-cut-
    because-of-coronavirus-pandemic/2020/07/08/02ecc450-c158-11ea-8908-68a2b9eae9e0_story.html.
Auerbach, Nicole. 2014. “The Perception and Reality of NCAA Show-Cause Penalties.” USA Today, May
    27, 2014. https://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/college/2014/05/27/ncaa-show-cause-penalty-
    bruce-pearl-kelvin-sampson/9632273/.
———. 2020. “Cuts to NCAA Revenue Distribution Carry a Ripple Effect for Athletic Departments.”
  The Athletic. 2020. https://theathletic.com/1703417/2020/03/26/ncaa-tournament-revenue-
  distribution-athletic-departments/.
Bergman, Stephen A., and Trevon D. Logan. 2020. “Revenue per Quality of College Football Recruit.”
    Journal of Sports Economics 21 (6): 571–92. https://doi.org/10.1177/1527002520921223.
Berkowitz, Steve. 2019. “Big Ten Conference Had Nearly $759 Million in Revenue in Fiscal 2018, New
    Records Show.” USA Today, 2019. https://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/2019/05/15/big-ten-
    revenue-hit-nearly-759-million-fiscal-2018/3686089002/.
———. 2020. “Major Public College Football Programs Could Lose Billions in Revenue If No Season Is
  Played.” USA Today, April 14, 2020.
  https://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/ncaaf/2020/04/14/college-football-major-programs-
  could-see-billions-revenue-go-away/2989466001/.
Berman, Jillian. 2018. “Trump’s Tax Code Could Hurt Donations to Lucrative College Sports Programs.”
    MarketWatch. 2018. https://www.marketwatch.com/story/trumps-tax-code-could-hurt-donations-
    to-these-lucrative-college-sports-progams-2018-02-06.
Berri, David. 2017. “Women Are Also Exploited By College Basketball.” Forbes. 2017.
     https://www.forbes.com/sites/davidberri/2017/11/05/women-are-also-exploited-by-college-
     basketball/#689e7f167848.
Berri, David J. 2016. “Paying NCAA Athletes.” Marquette Sports Law Review 26 (2): 480–91.
———. 2018. Sports Economics. New York, New York: Worth Publishers/Macmillan Education.
Berri, David J., Michael A. Leeds, and Peter Von Allmen. 2015. “Salary Determination in the Presence of
     Fixed Revenues.” International Journal of Sport Finance 10 (1): 5–25.
Blau, Jon. 2020. “IU Shuts off Athletics Facilities Due to COVID-19 Concerns.” Bloomington Herald-Times,
     March 17, 2020. https://www.indystar.com/story/sports/college/indiana/2020/03/17/iu-shuts-off-
     athletics-facilities-due-covid-19-concerns/5073495002/.
Bloom, Howard. 2014. “NFL Revenue-Sharing Model Good for Business.” Sporting News. 2014.
    https://www.sportingnews.com/us/nfl/news/nfl-revenue-sharing-television-contracts-2014-season-
                                                   37
     business-model-nba-nhl-mlb-comparison-salary-cap/gu0xok7mphu01x3vu875oeaq6.
Borghesi, Richard. 2017. “Pay for Play: The Financial Value of NCAA Football Players.” Applied Economics
    49 (46): 4657–67. https://doi.org/10.1080/00036846.2017.1287865.
———. 2018. “The Financial and Competitive Value of NCAA Basketball Recruits.” Journal of Sports
  Economics 19 (1): 31–49. https://doi.org/10.1177/1527002515617510.
Bradbury, John Charles, and Joshua D. Pitts. 2018. “Full Cost-of-Attendance Scholarships and College
    Choice: Evidence From NCAA Football.” Journal of Sports Economics 19 (7): 977–89.
    https://doi.org/10.1177/1527002517696958.
Brown, Robert. 2011. “Research Note: Estimates of College Football Player Rents.” Journal of Sports
    Economics 12 (2): 200–212. https://doi.org/10.1177/1527002510378333.
Brown, Robert W. 1993. “An Estimate of the Rent Generated By a Premium College Football Player.”
    Economic Inquiry 31 (4): 671–84. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1465-7295.1993.tb00898.x.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Emmanuel Saez, Nicholas Turner, and Danny Yagan. 2020. “Income
    Segregation and Intergenerational Mobility Across Colleges in the United States.” The Quarterly Journal
    of Economics 135 (3): 1567–1633. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjaa005.Advance.
Dochterman, Scott. 2013. “In Big Ten Conference, They Split the Gate.” The Gazette, October 25, 2013.
    https://www.thegazette.com/2013/10/25/in-big-ten-conference-they-split-the-gate.
Dosh, Kristi. 2017. “The Biggest Misconceptions About the Finances of College Sports.” Www.Forbes.Com,
    1–7. https://www.forbes.com/sites/kristidosh/2017/06/12/the-biggest-misconceptions-about-the-
    finances-of-college-sports/print/.
———. 2019. “College Football Playoff Payouts For 2019 Season.” Forbes. 2019.
  https://www.forbes.com/sites/kristidosh/2019/12/28/college-football-playoff-payouts-for-2019-
  season.
Druckman, James, and Elizabeth Sharrow. 2019. “How Institutions and Social Identity Affect Policy
    Change : The Case of College Sports Elizabeth Sharrow.” Northwestern Institute for Policy Research
    Working Paper Series WP-19-22. https://www.ipr.northwestern.edu/our-work/working-
    papers/2019/wp-19-22.html.
Farrey, Tom. 2014. “Players, Game Makers Settle for $40M.” ESPN.Com. 2014.
     https://www.espn.com/espn/otl/story/_/id/11010455/college-athletes-reach-40-million-
     settlement-ea-sports-ncaa-licensing-arm.
Goff, Brian L., H. Youn Kim, and Dennis P. Wilson. 2016. “Estimating the Market Value of Collegiate
    Football Players from Professional Factor Shares.” Applied Economics Letters 24 (4): 233–37.
    https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1080/13504851.2016.1178842.
Hagy, Alyson. 2003. “Webber’s World.” The New York Times Magazine, February 23, 2003.
    https://www.nytimes.com/2003/02/23/magazine/webber-s-world.html.
Harper, Shuan R. 2018. “Black Male Student Athletes and Racial Inequities in NCAA Division 1 College
    Sports: 2018 Edition.” University of Southern California, Race and Equity Center.
Henning, Lynn. 2020. “Behind the Scenes: When Texas A&M Came Calling, Bo Schembechler Chose
    Michigan over Money.” The Detroit News, May 6, 2020.
    https://www.detroitnews.com/story/sports/college/university-michigan/2020/05/06/when-texas-
    a-m-came-calling-bo-schembechler-chose-michigan-over-money/5174860002/.
                                                 38
Hobson, Will. 2014. “Fund and Games.” The Washington Post, March 18, 2014.
    https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/sports/ncaa-money/.
———. 2017. “One School’s Formula for Athletic Success: Build a Lazy River and (Hope) the Recruits
  Will Come.” The Washington Post, March 31, 2017.
  https://www.washingtonpost.com/sports/colleges/one-schools-formula-for-athletic-success-build-
  a-lazy-river-and-hope-the-recruits-will-come/2017/03/31/e1b7f5c8-1568-11e7-833c-
  503e1f6394c9_story.html.
Hobson, Will, and Steven Rich. 2015. “The Latest Extravagances in the College Sports Arms Race? Laser
    Tag and Mini Golf.” The Washington Post, December 21, 2015.
    https://www.washingtonpost.com/sports/colleges/for-college-athletic-departments-building-the-
    best-is-never-ending-task/2015/12/21/e8384dd4-a558-11e5-9c4e-be37f66848bb_story.html.
Jones, Willis A. 2020. “A Benford Analysis of National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I Finance
     Data.” Journal of Sports Economics 21 (3): 234–55. https://doi.org/10.1177/1527002519887430.
Kahn, Lawrence M. 2007. “Markets: Cartel Behavior and Amateurism in College Sports.” Journal of
    Economic Perspectives 21 (1): 209–26. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.21.1.209.
Kirshner, Alex. 2018. “Jimbo Fisher’s $75 Million A&M Contract Is Even More Hilariously One-Sided
     than You Thought.” SB Nation. 2018. https://www.sbnation.com/college-
     football/2018/8/22/17769874/jimbo-fisher-texas-a-m-contract.
———. 2019. “Why the NCAA’s Mounting Court Losses Will Only Matter so Much.” SB Nation. 2019.
  https://www.sbnation.com/college-football/2019/3/11/18258562/ncaa-court-case-fallout.
Kleinman, Daniel. 2019. “The Most Valuable College Apparel Deals: UCLA Leads As Gear Companies’
     New Mindset Thwarts Rivals.” Forbes. 2019.
     https://www.forbes.com/sites/danielkleinman/2019/09/13/ucla-most-valuable-college-apparel-
     deals/#6b9312236762.
Kline, Patrick, Neviana Petkova, Heidi Williams, and Owen Zidar. 2019. “Who Profits from Patents?
     Rent-Sharing at Innovative Firms.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (3): 1343–1404.
     https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjz011.
Lamadon, Thibaut, Magne Mogstad, and Bradley Setzler. 2019. “Imperfect Competition, Compensating
    Differentials and Rent Sharing in the U.S. Labor Market.” NBER Working Paper No. 25954.
    https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3400197.
Lane, Erin, Juan Nagel, and Janet S. Netz. 2014. “Alternative Approaches to Measuring MRP: Are All
    Men’s College Basketball Players Exploited?” Journal of Sports Economics 15 (3): 237–62.
    https://doi.org/10.1177/1527002512453144.
Layberger, Tom. 2020. “Several College Football Coaches Taking Pay Cuts During Coronavirus Sports
    Shutdown.” Forbes. 2020. https://www.forbes.com/sites/tomlayberger/2020/05/04/several-
    college-football-coaches-taking-pay-cuts-during-coronavirus-sports-shutdown.
Leeds, Michael A., Eva Marikova Leeds, and Aaron Harris. 2018. “Rent Sharing and the Compensation of
    Head Coaches in Power Five College Football.” Review of Industrial Organization 52 (2): 253–67.
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s11151-017-9604-x.
Maponics. 2017. “Maponics School Boundaries.” Pitney Bowes.
Medina, Jennifer, Katie Benner, and Kate Taylor. 2019. “Actresses, Business Leaders and Other Wealthy
                                                    39
     Parents Charged in U.S. College Entry Fraud.” The New York Times, March 12, 2019.
     https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/12/us/college-admissions-cheating-scandal.html.
Meer, Jonathan, and Harvey S. Rosen. 2009. “The Impact of Athletic Performance on Alumni Giving: An
    Analysis of Microdata.” Economics of Education Review 28 (3): 287–94.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2008.06.003.
Mills, Brian, and Jason Winfree. 2018. “Athlete Pay and Competitive Balance in College Athletics.” Review
      of Industrial Organization 52 (2): 211–29. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11151-017-9606-8.
Murphy, Dan. 2019. “What California Bill Means for NCAA Image and Likeness Debate.” ESPN.Com.
    2019. https://www.espn.com/college-football/story/_/id/27585301/what-california-bill-means-
    ncaa-image-likeness-debate.
National Collegiate Athletic Association. 2017. “Division 1 Manual.”
     http://www.ncaapublications.com/productdownloads/D118.pdf.
———. 2020. “NCAA Demographics Database.” http://www.ncaa.org/about/resources/research/ncaa-
  demographics-database.
NBA and NBPA. 2017. “Collective Bargaining Agreement.” https://nbpa.com/cba.
NFL and NFLPA. 2020. “Collective Bargaining Agreement.” https://operations.nfl.com/football-
   ops/2020-nfl-nflpa-cba-need-to-know/.
Nocera, Joe, and Ben Strauss. 2016. “Fate of the Union: How Northwestern Football Union Nearly Came
    to Be.” Sports Illustrated, February 2016. https://www.si.com/college/2016/02/24/northwestern-
    union-case-book-indentured.
Office of Senator Chris Murphy. 2019. “Madness, Inc: How Colleges Keep Athletes On the Field and Out
     of the Classroom (Report 2).” https://www.murphy.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/FINAL_Sen.
     Murphy NCAA Madness Inc. Report 2 - How Colleges Keep Athletes on the Field and Out of the
     Classroom.pdf.
Players of the Pac-12. 2020. “#WeAreUnited,” August 2, 2020. https://www.theplayerstribune.com/en-
     us/articles/pac-12-players-covid-19-statement-football-season.
Reardon, Sean F., Andrew D. Ho, Benjamin R. Shear, Erin M. Fahle, Demetra Kalogrides, and Richard
    DiSalvo. 2018. “Stanford Education Data Archive.”
Rollins, Khadrice. 2019. “Pac-12 Claims New California Law ‘Will Have Very Significant Negative
     Consequences.’” Sports Illustrated. 2019. https://www.si.com/college/2019/09/30/pac-12-
     response-california-fair-pay-to-play-law.
Rosen, Sherwin, and Allen Sanderson. 2001. “Labour Markets in Professional Sports.” The Economic Journal
    111 (469): 47–68. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2667957.
Sanderson, Allen R., and John J. Siegfried. 2015. “The Case for Paying College Athletes.” Journal of
    Economic Perspectives 29 (1): 115–38. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.29.1.115.
———. 2018. “The Role of Broadcasting in National Collegiate Athletic Association Sports.” Review of
  Industrial Organization 52 (2): 305–21. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11151-017-9593-9.
Scarborough, Alex. 2020. “Stanford to Cut 11 Varsity Sports, Cites Pandemic as Breaking Point.”
     ESPN.Com. 2020. https://www.espn.com/college-sports/story/_/id/29429478/stanford-cut-11-
     varsity-sports-cites-pandemic-breaking-point.
                                                     40
Schlabach, Mark. 2011. “NCAA Sends Message to Ohio State.” ESPN.Com. 2011.
     https://www.espn.com/college-football/story/_/id/7373708/ncaa-sends-message-sanctions-ohio-
     state-buckeyes.
———. 2017. “NCAA Hits Ole Miss with Additional Year of Bowl Ban, Scholarship Restrictions.”
  ESPN.Com. 2017. https://www.espn.com/college-football/story/_/id/21629060/ole-miss-rebels-
  get-two-year-bowl-ban-scholarship-reductions-ncaa.
———. 2020. “Colorado Athletic Director, 3 Head Coaches to Take 10% Pay Cuts.” ESPN.Com. 2020.
  https://www.espn.com/college-sports/story/_/id/29088433/colorado-athletic-director-3-head-
  coaches-take-10-pay-cuts.
Scully, Gerald W. 1974. “Pay and Performance in Major League Baseball.” The American Economic Review 64
     (6): 915–30.
Shaw, Lucas. 2011. “ESPN, NCAA Extend Deal through 2023-24.” Reuters. 2011.
    https://www.reuters.com/article/us-espn-ncaa/espn-ncaa-extend-deal-through-2023-24-
    idUSTRE7BE2FM20111215.
Staples, Andy. 2019. “What Has the NCAA—or Anyone—Learned From the College Basketball Black
     Market’s Time on Trial?” Sports Illustrated, May 2019. https://www.si.com/college/2019/05/09/ncaa-
     trial-fbi-bribery-corruption-mark-emmert.
Stevenson, Betsey. 2007. “Title IX and the Evolution of High School Sports.” Contemporary Economic Policy
     25 (4): 486–505. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1465-7287.2007.00080.x.
Tabakovic, Haris, and Thomas G. Wollmann. 2019. “The Impact of Money on Science: Evidence from
    Unexpected NCAA Football Outcomes.” Journal of Public Economics 178: 104066.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2019.104066.
Tatos, Ted. 2019. “An Empirical Evaluation of EADA and NCAA College Sports Financial Data:
    Applications for Research and Litigation.” Marquette Sports Law Review 29 (2): 411.
U.S. Department of Education. 2020. “Requirements Under Title IX of the Education Amendments of
     1972.” https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/interath.html.
Urban Institute. 2017. “Understanding College Affordability.”
    http://collegeaffordability.urban.org/prices-and-expenses/net-price/.
Wertheim, Jon. 2018. “How Do NBA Franchises Spend Their Revenue? Team Executives Reveal
    Financial Info.” Sports Illustrated. 2018. https://www.si.com/nba/2018/09/21/nba-teams-revenue-
    spending-breakdown-small-large-market.
Wilner, Jon. 2020. “Pac-12 Revenue Gap: We Ran the Numbers, and the Conference Could Fall so Far
    behind the SEC and Big Ten That It Can’t Catch up.” The Mercury News, February 4, 2020.
    https://www.mercurynews.com/2020/02/04/the-pac-12-revenue-gap-we-ran-the-numbers-the-
    conference-could-fall-so-far-behind-the-sec-and-big-ten-that-it-cant-catch-up/.




                                                    41
                                                      Table 1
                                                Descriptive Statistics
                                                                                         10th         50th         90th
                                                    N            Mean     Std. Dev.    percentile   percentile   percentile
                                                    (1)           (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)

Revenue:
Total revenue                                      851         93.714      33.108       55.852       88.615      140.420
Total sport revenue                                851         66.535      28.786       35.063       60.948      105.856
Total non-sport revenue                            851         27.179      14.568       11.091       25.017       46.512
Men's Football + Men's Basketball revenue          851         59.499      26.685       30.648       53.353       95.565
Women's sports revenue                             851         4.028       3.417        0.821        3.011        8.014
Other men's sports revenue                         851         3.008       2.439        0.572        2.380        6.697


Expenses:
Men's Football + Men's Basketball expenses         851         31.623      11.145       19.159       29.956       45.635
Women's sports expenses                            851         15.201      5.031        9.036        14.543       22.285
Other men's sports expenses                        851         8.029       3.531        4.089        7.550        12.637


Revenue - Expenses (Net Revenue):
Men's Football + Men's Basektball                  851         27.876      19.649        7.126        23.507      55.085
Women's sports                                     851        -11.173      4.578        -17.342      -10.897      -5.510
Other men's sports                                 851         -5.021      2.570         -8.367       -4.601      -2.256


Additional athletic department measures (from Knight commission):
Salaries paid to all coaches                     569      15.808           5.452        9.438        14.944       23.000
Salaries paid to football coaches                569      6.651            2.824        3.535        6.222        10.729
Salaries paid to non-football coaches            569      9.192            3.190        5.485        8.857        13.257
Total administrative compensation                569      16.364           6.881        9.395        15.135       24.980
Facilities spending                              569      19.824           9.479        7.882        18.803       32.465
Total revenue from conference, bowls, TV         569      25.747           12.187       11.635       24.918       41.887
Institutional support (e.g., student fees, state 569      5.220            5.571        0.000        3.754        11.874
funding, general funding from university)


Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics for 61 (of the 65) schools in the "Power 5" athletic conferences. The data
exclude 4 schools with sport-level accounting data that is not usable for the statistical analysis (Baylor, Boston College,
Rutgers, and West Virginia). All values are in millions of (nominal) dollars, and cover years 2006-2019. The school-
level revenue and expenses data come from the EADA reports provided by the Department of Education. The salary,
compensation, facilities, and conference revenue variables come from reports from the Knight commission, and cover 46
of the 65 Power 5 schools. Variables form the Knight data cover years 2006-2018. See Data Appendix for more details.




                                                            42
                                              Table 2
                   Revenue and Expenses Share of Total Athletic Department Revenue
               Panel A: Sport Revenue Share of Total Athletic Department Revenue
                         Football and
                       Men's Basketball Women's Sports
                         + Non-Sport     and Other Men's Women's Sports         Other Men's
                           Revenue        Sports Revene         Revenue       Sports Revenue
Average Share                 0.924              0.076               0.044              0.032
Standard Deviation           (0.050)            (0.050)             (0.035)            (0.022)

                      Panel B: Sport Expenditures Share of Total Athletic Department Revenue
                         Football and     Women's Sports                                               Other Athletic
                       Men's Basketball and Other Men's Women's Sports            Other Men's           Department
                           Expenses       Sports Expenses        Expenses       Sports Expenses          Expenses

Average Share                 0.344              0.252               0.166              0.086              0.348
Standard Deviation           (0.067)            (0.048)             (0.033)            (0.023)            (0.089)

           Panel C: Salaries, Facilities Spending, and Institutional Support Share of EADA Total Revenue
                           Salaries for     Salaries for Non- Administrative          Facilities    Institutional
                       Football Coaches Football Coaches Compensation                 Spending        Support
Average Share                 0.073              0.102              0.179               0.218              0.063
Standard Deviation           (0.017)            (0.021)             (0.03)             (0.081)            (0.064)


Notes: This table reports average shares of total athletic departmen revenue (measured in the EADA data). Panel C
reports shares constructed by dividing variables from Knight Commission data by total revenue from the EADA
reports. Table OA.5 displays alternative shares for those in Panel C which use a measure of total athletic department
revenue from the Knight Commission data, and the average shares are very similar.




                                                              43
                                                    Table 3
                                     Rent-Sharing Elasticities Across Sports
                                                                 Women's Sports
                                           Football and          and Other Men's                          Other Men's
Dependent Variable is Total Expenses for: Men's Basketball           Sports         Women's Sports          Sports
                                                    (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)

                   Panel A: OLS Estimates Including School Fixed Effects and Year Fixed Effects
Football and Men's Basketball Revenue +         0.820            0.416              0.410                    0.424
Total Non-Sport Revenue                        (0.093)          (0.074)            (0.080)                  (0.099)
R2                                              0.893            0.941              0.934                    0.933


               Panel B: OLS Estimates Including School, Year, and Conference-by-Year Fixed Effects
Football and Men's Basketball Revenue +        0.839             0.437             0.417                     0.471
Total Non-Sport Revenue                       (0.102)           (0.083)           (0.091)                   (0.101)
R2                                             0.903             0.945             0.938                     0.939

Notes: N = 851 for all regressions, and the unit of observation is a school-year. All variables are included in logs so
that the coefficients can be interpreted as elasticities. The sample covers 61 schools in "Power 5" conferences between
2006 and 2019. The standard errors are clustered by school and are reported in parentheses.




                                                           44
                                                      Table 4
                                        Additional Rent-Sharing Elasticities:
             Salaries for Coaches, Administrative Compensation, Facilities Spending, Institutional Support
                                                     Salaries for  Salaries for Non-      Administrative       Facilities      Institutional
Dependent Variable:
                                                  Football Coaches Football Coaches       Compensation         Spending          Support
                                                         (1)                 (2)                 (3)               (4)              (5)

                          Panel A: OLS Estimates Including School Fixed Effects and Year Fixed Effects
Football and Men's Basketball Revenue +           0.397             0.311             0.452             0.861                     -0.196
Total Non-Sport Revenue                          (0.125)           (0.086)           (0.108)           (0.252)                   (0.620)
  2
R                                                 0.764             0.896             0.902             0.779                     0.855


                       Panel B: OLS Estimates Including School, Year, and Conference-by-Year Fixed Effects
Football and Men's Basketball Revenue +            0.322             0.310             0.367            0.821                     0.092
Total Non-Sport Revenue                           (0.121)           (0.104)           (0.092)          (0.285)                   (0.627)
R2                                                 0.795             0.911             0.915            0.806                     0.899


Notes: N = 569 for all regressions, and the unit of observation is a school-year. All variables are included in logs so that the coefficients
can be interpreted as elasticities. The sample covers 46 schools in "Power 5" conferences between 2006 and 2018. The standard errors are
clustered by school and are reported in parentheses.




                                                                     45
                                      Table 5
              Testing for Common Shocks Using Revenue for Other Sports
                                              Women's Sports
                                              and Other Men's                          Other Men's
Dependent Variable is Total Revenue for:          Sports         Women's Sports          Sports
                                                       (1)               (2)                (3)

          Panel A: OLS Estimates Including School Fixed Effects and Year Fixed Effects
Football and Men's Basketball Revenue +       -0.099             -0.166              0.017
Total Non-Sport Revenue                       (0.246)            (0.306)            (0.257)
R2                                             0.776              0.740              0.789


      Panel B: OLS Estimates Including School, Year, and Conference-by-Year Fixed        Effects
Football and Men's Basketball Revenue +       -0.072             -0.167                    0.155
Total Non-Sport Revenue                       (0.248)           (0.321)                   (0.253)
R2                                             0.808              0.766                    0.821


Notes: N = 851 for all regressions, and the unit of observation is a school-year. All variables are
included in logs so that the coefficients can be interpreted as elasticities. The sample covers 61
schools in "Power 5" conferences between 2006 and 2019. The standard errors are clustered by
school and are reported in parentheses.




                                                  46
                                                        Table 6
                      Instrumental Variables Estimates of Rent-Sharing Elasticities Across Sports
                                                 [First Stage]                             Total Expenses for:
                                              Football and Men's                        Women's
                                             Basketball Revenue +      Football and    Sports and
Dependent Variable:
                                               Total Non-Sport            Men's        Other Men's     Women's          Other Men's
                                                   Revenue              Basketball       Sports         Sports            Sports
                                                      (1)                   (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)

Football and Men's Basketball Revenue +                                    0.799           0.390           0.432            0.378
Total Non-Sport Revenue                                                   (0.152)         (0.116)         (0.097)          (0.197)

Total revenue from conference payouts,                0.239
football bowls, and TV contracts                     (0.039)

First Stage F-statistic                               37.34


Notes: N = 569 for all regressions, and the unit of observation is a school-year. All variables are included in logs so that the
coefficients can be interpreted as elasticities. The sample covers 46 schools in "Power 5" conferences between 2006 and 2018.
Columns (1) reports OLS estimates of the First Stage regression, while columns (2) through (5) report Instrumental Variables
estimates using conference/bowls/TV revenue as an instrument. The standard errors are clustered by school and are reported in
parentheses.




                                                                  47
                                                        Table 7
                      Neighborhood Characteristics for Athletes Using High School Catchment Area
                                                                                Women's Sports
                                                             Football and       and Other Men's                          Other Men's
           Sample of Athletes:              All Athletes    Men's Basketball        Sports          Women's Sports         Sports


Income
Median Household Income                     67,459.02           58,361.24          70,997.70          71,719.43           69,899.15
Mean Household Income                       112,355.95          99,786.33          116,736.76         118,139.51          114,265.24
Average High School Catchement
Income Percentile                               0.57               0.49               0.60                0.61               0.59
Share in   1st Quartile                         0.12               0.17               0.11                0.11               0.12
Share in   2nd Quartile                         0.22               0.30               0.19                0.19               0.20
Share in   3rd Quartile                         0.26               0.26               0.26                0.25               0.27
Share in   4th Quartile                         0.39               0.27               0.43                0.45               0.41
Education
Share with Grad School                          0.13               0.10               0.14                0.14               0.13
Share with Bachelor's Degree                    0.23               0.20               0.24                0.24               0.23
Share with Some College                         0.29               0.29               0.29                0.29               0.29
Share with High School Degree                   0.23               0.26               0.23                0.22               0.23
Share with Less than High School                0.12               0.15               0.11                0.11               0.11
Poverty Status
Share in Poverty                                0.08               0.09               0.07                0.07               0.07
Race/Ethnicity
Share Black                                     0.07               0.13               0.05                0.05               0.06
Share White                                     0.84               0.78               0.86                0.86               0.86
Share Hispanic                                  0.07               0.08               0.07                0.07               0.07
Observations
Number of Schools                               60                 60                  60                 60                  60
Number of Athlete-Sports                      14,293              3,694              10,599              6,223               4,270
Notes: This table reports various statistics broken down by sport, using athlete-sport level data that combines the athlete’s sport to
census demographic information. The census information is linked through the athlete’s high school’s catchement area overlap with
census tracts, and is aggregated to the high school level. Students who play multiple sports are represented in multiple rows in the data
- once for each sport. Column one reports statistics for all student-sports, while columns two through five report statistics just for
Football/Men’s Basketball, Non- Football/Men’s Basketball Sports, Womens sports, and Men’s non-Football/Men’s Basketball
sports. The first set of statistics reported reflect median and mean household income. The next set of statistics shows the share of
students in each quartile of the overall US household income distribution, created from 2000 Census SF3 files. The next set of
statistics shows the proportion of the population associated with each high school of various educational attainments and various
race/ethnicities. Finally, we report the number of colleges represented in the sample, as well as the number of athlete-sport rows.
Income is reported in 2018 dollars.




                                                                   48
                                                            Table 8
                           Tract-Matched Mean and Median Household Income for Athletes by Selectivity Tier
                                                                                 Women's Sports
                                                             Football and        and Other Men's                        Other Men's         Number of
                   Tier                    All Athletes     Men's Basketball         Sports        Women's Sports         Sports             Schools


                                                     Panel A: Tract-Matched Mean Houshold Income
Ivy Plus                                    137,043.16         112,379.26          142,820.29        148,293.88         135,375.23              2
Other Elite Schools                         129,897.43         107,439.14          137,461.28        138,207.91         134,537.65              9
Highly Selective                            115,872.12         101,357.73          121,106.73        122,705.17         118,861.24              15
Selective                                   104,794.76         96,680.36           107,715.78        109,257.00         105,276.72              33
All                                         112,272.45         99,752.81           116,676.21        118,085.68         114,160.12              59

                                                    Panel B: Tract-Matched Median Houshold Income
Ivy Plus                                    84,304.12          60,535.47           89,585.83          92,891.46          82,010.26              2
Other Elite Schools                         73,447.48          59,086.44           81,195.74          83,338.04          75,449.43              9
Highly Selective                            71,401.94          58,306.26           76,177.89          77,821.28          74,213.99              15
Selective                                   64,169.22          57,844.47           66,305.47          67,106.04          65,576.76              33
All                                         67,121.87          58,186.81           70,910.90          71,637.14          69,745.95              59


Notes: This table reports the census tract level median household income from the roster data, broken down by sport type and selectivity tier, where
selectivity tier is defined by Opportunity Insights data. Ohio State Unviversity is not accounted for in the Opportunity Insights dataset. Income is
reported in 2018 dollars.




                                                                            49
                                          Table 9
                       Estimates of Mean Counterfactual Compensation
                               Football                                    Men's Basketball

Labor Share      30%             40%            50%               30%            40%            50%
of Revenue
                          Panel A: Professional Roster Sizes (FB=66, MBB=14)
Overall         289,047        385,396        481,745           327,588        436,784         545,980
ACC             210,287        280,382        350,478           403,810        538,413         673,017
Big 12          315,847        421,129        526,412           303,005        404,007         505,008
Big Ten         355,490        473,987        592,483           399,058        532,078         665,097
Pac-12          225,615        300,820        376,025           215,249        286,999         358,749
SEC             322,682        430,243        537,804           317,825        423,766         529,708
                     Panel B: Current Scholarhsip Roster Sizes (FB=85, MBB=13)
Overall           224,436        299,248        374,061             352,787       470,383         587,978
ACC               163,282        217,709        272,136             434,872       579,830         724,787
Big 12            245,246        326,995        408,743             326,313       435,084         543,855
Big Ten           276,028        368,037        460,046             429,755       573,007         716,258
Pac-12            175,183        233,578        291,972             231,807       309,076         386,345
SEC               250,553        334,071        417,589             342,273       456,364         570,455
Notes: Table shows the mean compensaton per player for football and men's basketball under the
counterfactual that players receive a fixed share of total sport revenue. These estimates are calculated
using sport-specific revenue values in the EADA data from the 2018-2019 school year. These estimates
assume revenue sharing to equalize player budgets across schools, either by between all schools in the
sample ("Overall") or by conference. The sample is the 61 (of the 65) schools in the "Power 5" athletic
conferences. The data exclude 4 schools with sport-level accounting data that is not usable for the
statistical analysis (Baylor, Boston College, Rutgers, and West Virginia). All numbers reported are
2018 US dollars.




                                                    50
                                     Table 10
                       Compensation Heterogeneity by Position
                                           Starter                         Reserve
                                      Panel A: Football
Quarterback                              2,716,070                         220,250
Wide Receiver                            1,518,866                         158,428
Defensive Line                           1,291,102                         154,294
Offensive Line                           1,122,824                         138,206
Linebacker                               1,110,909                         138,151
Defensive Back                           1,044,334                         151,792
Tight End                                 943,847                          158,053
Running Back                              822,036                          160,040
Kicker                                    433,065                             -
Punter                                    323,332                             -
Long Snapper                              168,670                             -
                                  Panel B: Men's Basketball
Point Guard                              1,211,149                         247,107
Small Forward                            1,086,771                         266,973
Shooting Guard                            996,813                          249,123
Center                                    963,601                          335,109
Power Forward                             819,989                          260,034
Notes: Table shows the mean compensation per player by position, which is defined as a
combination of playing position in each sport and whether or not the player is a starter or
reserve. These values are calculated using the Spotrac data on NFL and NBA contracts. We
assume that the labor share of revenue and the number of players per team matches that
observed in the professional league for each sport, and that the average relative compensation
between positions matches that observed in the Spotrac data. The sample for calculating average
revenue is the 61 "Power Five" schools used in Table 9. All numbers reported are 2018 US
dollars.




                                              51
                                         Figure 1: Athletic Department Financing for NCAA Division 1 Schools, 2018




                               1             .8
                 Institutional Support Share
                         .4    .2
                               0   .6




                                                  0       50            100              150           200           250
                                                                  Total Athletics Revenue (millions)

                                                         Power Five Conferences       Other NCAA Division 1



Notes: This figure reports the total athletic department revenue and the share of athletic department revenue that is
institutional support – the sum of student fees, state funding, and other general funding from the university. The remainder
of the revenue (excluding institutional support) is revenue that is generated directly by the athletic department. The
sample is 229 NCAA division 1 universities, which includes 52 (of the 65) universities in the so-called “Power Five” athletic
conferences where we have institutional support data; see text for more details. The dashed line shows a hyperplane
dividing the sample into the two clusters calculated from a standard k-means clustering algorithm (set to find k = 2
clusters). Both variables are standardized before running the algorithm, and the clustering is perfectly correlated with
the Power Five definition shown in the figure. Searching for additional clusters (k = 3, k = 4) preserves these two clusters
and divides the sub-samples into additional clusters (within each sub-sample).




                                                                             52
   Figure 2: Average Net Revenue for Men’s Football, Men’s Basketball, Other Men’s Sports, and Women’s Sports,
                                                    2005-2018




                                     30
                                    5 10 15 20 25
                        Average Net Revenue (millions)
                 -15 -10 -5 0




                                                         2005           2010                    2015           2020
                                                                                    Year

                                                                Men's Football             Men's Basketball
                                                                Other Men's Sports         Women's Sports



Notes: This figure reports the average net revenue (revenue minus expenses) for different college sports (or groups of
sports), averaging across 61 universities in the so-called “Power Five” Athletic conferences. For “Other Men’s Sports” we
exclude Football and Basketball, and we take sum of net revenue across sports within a school and then average across
schools; we do analogous calculations for Women’s sports, as well.




                                                                               53
Figure 3: Distribution of Net Revenue for Men’s Football, Men’s Basketball, Other Men’s Sports, and Women’s Sports,
                                                        2018

                                                 Men's Football                                                                                         Men's Basketball
          15




                                                                                                               25
                                                                                                               20
          10




                                                                                                                   15
  Frequency




                                                                                                           Frequency
                                                                                                               10
          5




                                                                                                               5
          0




                                                                                                               0
                -10    0     10    20    30      40    50      60    70   80       90   100     110                     -10 -8 -6 -4 -2    0   2   4    6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30
                                              Net Revenue (millions)                                                                                   Net Revenue (millions)


                                                Women's Sports                                                                                         Other Men's Sports
          15




                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                               15
          10
  Frequency




                                                                                                           Frequency
                                                                                                              10
          5




                                                                                                               5
          0




                                                                                                               0




               -30 -28 -26 -24 -22 -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2    0    2    4   6     8 10                      -30 -28 -26 -24 -22 -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2   0   2   4   6   8 10
                                              Net Revenue (millions)                                                                                   Net Revenue (millions)



Notes: This figure reports histograms of the average net revenue (revenue minus expenses) for different college sports (or
groups of sports), covering 61 universities in the so-called “Power Five” Athletic conferences. For “Other Men’s Sports”
we exclude Football and Basketball, and we take sum of net revenue across sports within a school; we do analogous
calculations for Women’s sports, as well.




                                                                                                      54
                                                                        Figure 4: Difference-in-difference representation of main rent-sharing elasticity estimates

                                                                                                                     Panel A: Football and Men’s Basketball Revenue




                                                                                                                                                      .2
                                                                                                Log Change in Revenue for Football and Men's Basketball
                                                                                              -.1     -.05       0       .05        .1      .15




                                                                                                                                                           -4   -3   -2   -1       0                                                             1       2     3    4
                                                                                                                                                                               Event time


                      Panel B: Football and Men’s Basketball Expenses                                                                                                               Panel C: Women’s and Other Men’s Sports Expenses
                                                             .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .2
       Log Change in Expenses for Football and Men's Basketball




                                                                                                                                                                                      Log Change in Expenses for Football and Men's Basketball
                                                   .15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .15
                                           .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .1
                                .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                               .05
                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
              -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                             -.05
      -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                     -.1




                                                                  -4    -3   -2    -1       0                                                              1    2    3    4                                                                      -4      -3   -2    -1       0        1   2   3   4
                                                                                        Event time                                                                                                                                                                       Event time


                                                                       Panel D: Women’s Sports Expenses                                                                                                                                               Panel E: Other Men’s Sports Expenses
                                                             .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .2
       Log Change in Expenses for Football and Men's Basketball




                                                                                                                                                                                      Log Change in Expenses for Football and Men's Basketball
                                                   .15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .15
                                           .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .1
                                .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                               .05
                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
              -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                             -.05
      -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                     -.1




                                                                  -4    -3   -2    -1       0                                                              1    2    3    4                                                                      -4      -3   -2    -1       0        1   2   3   4
                                                                                        Event time                                                                                                                                                                       Event time




Notes: This figure reports a difference-in-difference representation of the rent-sharing elasticities reported in Table 2. The
figure is constructed following the procedure in Lamadon, Mogstad, Setzler (2019). Specifically, for each outcome, the
figure displays the mean differences in the log value between schools that receive an above-median versus below-median
change in “Football and Men’s Basketball Revenue + Non-Sport Revenue”. The ratio of the magnitude of the solid line
relative to the dotted line can be interpreted as a rent-sharing elasticity that should be similar to magnitude of the OLS
estimates in Table 2 if the model is specified correctly. Each panel includes bootstrapped 95-percent confidence intervals.
The bootstrap samples are based on sampling schools with replacement, and each bootstrap iteration calculates each
regression and takes simple average of event study coefficients. See main text for more details.

                                                                                                                                                                               55
                       Figure 5: Difference-in-difference representation of revenue for other sports

                             Panel A: Revenue for Women’s Sports and Other Men’s Sports




                                                          .2
                                   Log Change in Revenue for Other Sports
                                        -.1          0    -.2    .1




                                                                                     -4       -3   -2    -1       0        1   2   3   4
                                                                                                              Event time




                                                                                           Panel B: Revenue for Women’s Sports
                                                          .2
                                   Log Change in Revenue for Women's Sports
                                         -.1          0   -.2    .1




                                                                                     -4       -3   -2    -1       0        1   2   3   4
                                                                                                              Event time




                                                                                          Panel C: Revenue for Other Men’s Sports
                                                                                .2
                                   Log Change in Revenue for Other Men's Sports
                                           -.1          0 -.2       .1




                                                                                     -4       -3   -2    -1       0        1   2   3   4
                                                                                                              Event time




Notes: This figure reports a difference-in-difference representation of the rent-sharing elasticities reported in Table 3. See
notes to Figure 4 for more details.




                                                                                                              56
                                                       Figure 6: Difference-in-difference representation of additional rent-sharing elasticity estimates

                        .2                             Panel A: Salaries for All Coaches                                                                       Panel B: Salaries for Football Coaches




                                                                                                                                 .2
                                                                                                            Log Change in Salaries for Football Coaches
                                          .15




                                                                                                                                                   .15
      Log Change in Salaries for All Coaches
                                  .1




                                                                                                                                          .1
                       .05




                                                                                                                                .05
             0




                                                                                                                      0
    -.05




                                                                                                             -.05
                        -.1




                                                                                                                                 -.1
                                                -4      -3    -2    -1       0        1   2   3    4                                                      -4     -3      -2    -1       0        1   2   3   4
                                                                         Event time                                                                                                 Event time




                                                     Panel C: Administrative Compensation                                                                             Panel D: Facilities Spending



                                                                                                                                 .4
                        .2
    Log Change in Administrative Compensation
                                        .15




                                                                                                                                              .3
                                                                                                            Log Change in Facilities Spending
                                 .1




                                                                                                                                      .2
                      .05




                                                                                                                           .1
              0




                                                                                                                 0
     -.05




                                                                                                                                 -.1
                        -.1




                                                                                                                                 -.2




                                                -4      -3    -2    -1       0        1   2   3    4                                                      -4     -3      -2    -1       0        1   2   3   4
                                                                         Event time                                                                                                 Event time




Notes: This figure reports a difference-in-difference representation of the rent-sharing elasticities reported in Table 3. See
notes to Figure 4 for more details.




                                                                                                       57
                                                                                                Figure 7: Rent-Sharing in the University of Utah Case Study




                                                                                                                                                               16.6 16.8 17 17.2 17.4 17.6 17.8 18 18.2
                                                     18




                                                                                                                                                                  Log of Revenue from Football and Men's Basketball
                                                                                                                                   Full revenue sharing
        Log of Revenue from Conference, Bowls, and TV



                                                                     Utah joins Pac-12 conference
             15.5    16     16.5  15 17     17.5




                                                           2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018                                                                                           2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

                                                                          Utah                      Other Power Five Colleges (excl. Utah)                                                                                          Utah          Other Power Five Colleges (excl. Utah)
                                        17.2 17.4 17.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                               17.2
                                                                                                                                                                Log of Expenses for Women's and Other Men's Sports
       Log of Expenses for Football and Men's Basketball




                                                                                                                                                                            16.2 16.4 16.6 16.8         17
    16.2 16.4 16.6 16.8          17




                                                                                                                                                               15.8   16




                                                           2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018                                                                                           2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

                                                                           Utah                     Other Power Five Colleges (excl. Utah)                                                                                          Utah          Other Power Five Colleges (excl. Utah)
                                  16.9




                                                                                                                                                                                        16.2
                                                                                                                                                               14.4 14.6 14.8 15 15.2 15.4 15.6 15.8 16
                                                                                                                                                                      Log of Expenses for Other Men's Sports
                                       16.7
         Log of Expenses for Women's Sports
        15.9    16.1    16.3   16.5
                                  15.7




                                                           2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018                                                                                           2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

                                                                          Utah                      Other Power Five Colleges (excl. Utah)                                                                                          Utah          Other Power Five Colleges (excl. Utah)




Notes: This figure reports raw trends in outcomes comparing the University of Utah to all of the other “Power 5” schools
in our analysis. Beginning in 2012, Utah moved from the Western Athletic Conference (not a “Power 5” conference) to
the Pac-12 (which is one of the “Power 5” conferences). Over the next 3 years, the conference payments to Utah were
“phased in”.




                                                                                                                                                          58
                                                                          Figure 8: Additional Outcomes for University of Utah Case Study




                                                                                                                                                16.2
                            17
                      16.2 16.4 16.6 16.8




                                                                                                                            14.8 15 15.2 15.4 15.6 15.8 16
                                                                                                                              Log of Salaries Paid to Football Coaches
         Log of Total Salaries Paid to Coaches
       15.8   16            15.6




                                                                                                                                                14.6
                                                  2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018                                                       2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

                                                               Utah          Other Power Five Colleges (excl. Utah)                                                                    Utah          Other Power Five Colleges (excl. Utah)




                                                                                                                                                17.2
                         17
    15.2 15.4 15.6 15.8 16 16.2 16.4 16.6 16.8




                                                                                                                                                           16.8
             Log of Administrative Compensation




                                                                                                                            Log of Expenses for Facilities
                                                                                                                               15.6     16      16.4
                                                                                                                                                15.2
                                                                                                                                                14.8




                                                  2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018                                                       2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

                                                                Utah          Other Power Five Colleges (excl. Utah)                                                                   Utah          Other Power Five Colleges (excl. Utah)




Notes: This figure reports raw trends in outcomes comparing the University of Utah to all of the other “Power 5” schools
in our analysis. See notes to Figure 6 for more details on this case study




                                                                                                                       59
                            Figure 9: Distribution of Median Household Income by Sport

                             Panel A: Football and Men’s Basketball versus Other Sports




                                    Panel B: Separating Other Sports by Gender




Notes: This plot shows the CDF of each player’s high school-matched median household income from the 2000 census
SF3 files. Athlete-sport observations are sorted based on matched median household income at the high school level,
and players that play multiple sports are counted once per each sport. In Panel A, the CDFs are broken down into two
separate categories of sports: Football and Men’s Basketball, and everything else. A Wilcoxon rank-sum test comparing
the two distributions has a p-value of less than 0.001. In Panel B, the CDFs are broken down into three separate
categories of sports: Football and Mens’ Basketball, and all other sports broken down by gender. Wilcoxon rank-sum
tests are run comparing distributions pairwise. The P-values of the test are less than 0.001 for comparisons of FB/MBB
vs Women’s sports and FB/MBB vs Men’s Non-FB/MBB sports. The P-value for a comparison between Women’s and
Men’s Non-FB/MBB is 0.009.




                                                         60
                                     Figure 10: Estimated Distribution of Athlete Compensation


                                                                   Football




                          .2
                          .15
                     Fraction
                        .1.05
                          0




                                    60,000      163,000          442,000          1,203,000         3,269,000
                                                          Counterfactual Compensation



                                                              Men's Basketball
                          .1
                          .08 .06
                       Fraction
                     .04  .02
                          0




                                     60,000         163,000             442,000               1,203,000
                                                          Counterfactual Compensation



Notes: This figure plots the distribution of our (logged) counterfactual compensation estimates. We assume the labor
share of revenue and number of players per team matches the professional league for each sport, and that the distribution
of relative compensation matches the distribution observed in the Spotrac contracts data for each professional league.
These estimates are calculated using sport-specific revenue values in the EADA data from the 2018-2019 school year. The
sample is the 61 (of the 65) schools in the “Power 5” athletic conferences. The data exclude 4 schools with sport-level
accounting data that is not usable for the statistical analysis (Baylor, Boston College, Rutgers, and West Virginia). In
each figure the blue solid line marks the average current scholarship value across schools ($54,271) and the red dashed
line marks the maximum current scholarship value ($83,960).




                                                                   61
