                          NBER WORXING PAPER SERIES




                  CURRENT ACCOUNT AND BUDGET DEFICITS IN AN
         INTERTEMPORAL MODEL OF CONSUMPTION AND TAXATION SMOOTHING.
               A SOLUTION TO THE "FELDSTEIN-HORIOKA PUZZLE"?




                               Nouriel Roubini




                           Working Paper No. 2773




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                November 1988




This research is part of NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                     NBER Working Paper #2773
                                     November 1988


                CURRENT ACCOUNT AND BUDGET DEFICITS IN AN
       INTERTEMPORAL MODEL OF CONSUMPTION AND TAXATION SMOOTHING.
             A SOLUTION TO THE ' FELDSTEIN-HORIOKA PUZZLE?


                                ABSTRACT




     This paper presents an infinite horizon model of consumption and
taxation " smoothing" that implies a simple relation between current

accounts, budget deficits, investment rates and transitory output
shocks. It is argued that such a model could explain the "Feldstein-
Horioka puzzle" of the apparent lack of international capital mobility.
Traditional regressions of the savings rate on the investment rate, as

performed in the literature, are shown to be incorrect tests of the
hypothesis of capital mobility because they do not control for the
independent role of budget deficits and temporary output shocks in the

current account and savings equations. Empirical tests of the model for

a sample of 18 OECD countries present good evidence that international
capital markets are widely integrated and that the "Feldstein—Horioka
puzzle" might be explained by the important role of fiscal deficits in

the determination of the current account and the saving behavior.




                                     Nouriel Roubini
                                     Department of Economics
                                     Yale University
                                     P.O. Box 1972, Yale Station
                                     New Haven, CT 06520
                                   1

1. Introduction
     The relation between the current account and budget deficits in

open economies has been for a long time a central topic of open econony

macroeconomics. The traditional "absorption approach" 1   to   the current

account determination was subject to criticism for the absence of
intertemporal considerations that are central in the determination of

the trade balance and the current account. The recognition of these
dynamic aspects has led to a wide literature on "the intertemporal
approach to the current account" that has significantly increased our

understanding of the process of current account determination 2

     This   intertemporal approach applies the "consumption smoothing"
idea of Modigliani, Friedman and Hall (1978) to the optimal external
borrowing problem of open economies and derives relations between the

current account and temporary versus permanent economic disturbances.

In particular, transitory shocks to public expenditures and the output
level are shown to affect the current account while permanent
disturbances are usually adjusted through movements in private
consumption that leave the current account unaffected. From a normative

point of view, this intertemporal approach suggests that countries
should finance temporary shocks through external borrowing while they




     1For recent surveys of this approach see Kenen (1985) and
Frenkel and Razin (1988).
     2
       This approach, pioneered in the studies of optimal external
borrowing by Bardhan (1969), Hamada (1969) and Bruno (1976), has
been developed more recently by Svennson and Razin (1981, 1983),
Sachs (1981, 1982), Buiter (1981), and extended by Lucas (1982),
Persson and Svensson (1985), Frenkel and Razin (1986, 1988),
Stockman and Svensson (1987) and Buiter (1988) among the others.
                                    2

should adjust to permanent ones.

     In spite of its theoretical appeal, systematic empirical tests of

the intertemporal current account model have been very preliminary

because hampered by the necessity to distinguish correctly between
transitory and permanent components of spending and output. In fact,
a standard formulation of these models expresses the current account

as a function of temporary versus permanent components of government

spending and output leaving open the complex econometric issue of
distinguishing between these temporary and permanent components .
     In   coincidence with the development of the intertemporal approach

to the current account, the idea of "smoothing" has been fruitfully
applied to another optimization problem: the issue of the optimal
choice of taxation and deficits in the presence of distortionary
taxation. The so—called "equilibrium approach to fiscal policy",
developed by Barro (1979, 1981, 1985, 1986) for a closed economy and
recently summarized by Aschauer (1988), argues that actual tax rates

and deficit policies are a reflection of an intertemporal optimization

over a long horizon by the budgetary authorities, who choose their
policies to reduce the excess burden of taxation for any given path of

government expenditures. This "tax smoothing" hypothesis of government
budgetary policy implies that budget deficits will be the optimal
outcome of the government decision to smooth distortionary taxes in the




      Ahmed (1986, 1987) tests a version of the intertemporal
theory of the current account for the United Kingdom by considering
only the optimal "consumption smoothing" part of the problem. This
leads him to the complex exercise of separating public expenditures
in permanent and temporary components.
presence of temporary shocks to public expenditures and output .
Empirical   tests of the "tax smoothing" hypothesis depend on the correct

distinction between temporary and permanent components of public
spending .
     The "tax smoothing" model has been derived for the case of a
closed economy and the open economy implications of the hypothesis have

not been discussed. At the same time, the "consumption smoothing" model

of the current account has taken as given exogenously the path of
public spending and taxes without analyzing the optimal borrowing
choices of a government faced with distortionary taxes.
     The objective of this paper is to bridge the two approaches by
presenting a model of an open economy where the current account is
determined by the "consumption smoothing" objective of the social
planner and the budget deficit is the result of the "tax smoothing"
problem of the fiscal authority. It will be shown that the joint
consideration of the two optimization problems leads to a very simple
relation between the current account, the budget deficit and the
investment rate that can be tested empirically without recourse to




        For a critical empirical test of the tax smoothing
hypothesis see Roubini and Sachs (1988 a, b).
      Barro (1981, 1982, 1985) and Sahasakul (1986) test the "tax
smoothing" theory in a closed economy setting and have to
distinguish between temporary and permanent components of spending.
Some of the results of Sahasakul, however, leave the doubt that
these two components might have not been correctly identified
econometrically.
                                      4

unobserved variables such as transitory expenditure shocks 6
     The   approach   taken in this paper might also shed some additional

light on the paradox of the lack of international capital nobility
first found by Feldstein and Horioka (1980) and Feldstein (1983) and

then confirmed in numerous other studies of the issue     .   These studies
have systematically found a lack of correlation between the current
account and the investment ratio for the OECD countries in a number of

periods (or equivalently, a very high correlation between savings rates
and investment rates) leading to the paradoxical suggestion that
international capital mobility might be very low 8       However, in all

these studies, the independent (and exogenous) role of the budget



     6 Razin and Svensson (1983) consider a consumption and
taxation smoothing problem in a two period model and show the
optimal response of the current account and the government debt to
a permanent and temporary real disturbance (a productivity shock).
Anderson and Young (1988) considers a similar problem in a finite
horizon setting. Here, instead, we will stress the role of
temporary versus permanent fiscal disturbances and derive a
explicit relation between budget deficits and current accounts in
an infinite horizon framework.

       See, among the others, Caprio and Howard (1984), Fieleke
(1982), Frankel, Dooley and Mathieson (1987), Murphy (1984),
Obstfeld (l986a, 1986b), Penati and Dooley (1984), Sachs (1981,
1983), Summers (1985). See also the comments of Tobin (1983) and
Westphal (1983) to Feldstein (1983) and the critical observations
of Harberger (1980) on the Feldstein-Horioka puzzle.

       As observed by Obstfeld (1986 a), among others, the
substantial evidence in favor of the equalization of domestic and
foreign (or on—shore and off—shore) interest rates for the
industrial countries is also at odds with the idea of a large
degree of capital immobility. Frankel (1985) and Frankel, Dooley
and Mathieson (1986), however, argue that equalization of the
returns on financial assets might not be equivalent with the
integration of the markets for physical capital and interpret the
high correlations between saving and investment rates as evidence
of an "apparent isolation of national markets physical capital".
                                              5

deficits, that we will derive in this paper, has been disregarded and
regressions equations have estimated only the relation between the
current account (or the savings rate) and the investment rate . The
solution of the model presented in this paper suggests, however, that

the traditional estimated current account equations might be
misspecified because they do not control for the independent role of
budget deficits (in addition to the investment rate) in determining the

current account. Estimated savings equations present the sane problem
since they do not control for the effects of fiscal deficits on the
level of national savings. The "Feldstein—Horioka paradox" might then
be due to this misspecification of the equation determining the current

account (and/or the savings behavior). This observation suggests that

the hypothesis of international capital mobility can be tested by
estimating the coefficients of the investment rate and the budget
deficit in a current account equation. Alternatively, the hypothesis
that savings are not correlated with investment rates can be tested
only after controlling for the role of fiscal deficits.

      The plan of the paper is the following. Section 2 presents the
model of the intertemporal choice of the current account and the budget

deficit. Section 3 introduces investment in the model. Section 4 tests

empirically the theoretical implications of the model. Section 5
presents some conclusions.

2. The Model

      Consider a small open economy producing one tradeable good and
able to borrow in the international capital markets. It is convenient

to begin the analysis from an accounting framework where the dynamic
                                                            6

budget constraints of the private and public sector are described.
           The change in the external indebtedness of the private sector (D
-
    tft_1)    is given by:


       —
           D"t_1
                   =   I° — (Q      —
                                        T   —
                                                C   —   r   D"t.1 )   =I   —          (1)


where          represents private investment,                         is GDP, T are taxes, C is
private consumption, r is the exogenously given world real interest
rate and               -T       -   r   DPt1 - C) are private savings. The similar
expression for the public sector budget constraint is



Bt-Bt1                                                                  -G-rB_1)

                   =   I    —                                                               (2)




       It is assumed for accounting simplicity that the government
finances its budget deficits through external borrowing and does
not issue domestic bonds. This simplification does not change any
result of the model because in the consolidation of the budget
constraint for the entire economy (equation (3) below) domestic
bonds issued by the government and held by the private sector would
cancel out leaving the budget constraint identical to expression
(3). Including domestic bonds in the model would modify equations
(1) and (2) in the following way:
       —           ='                                                          —
           t—l             — (Q —T —Ct —r Dt_1 —r B1t_1) +                   Bdt_l (1')
(Edt_Bdt.l)+(Bft _Bf..1)=I+G+r 8tl —T =I9                              —(T —G —r 8t—l (2 fl
where (Bd -      — ) represents the domestic bond finance of the
public sector äehcit and (8 -
component.
                                         )
                                                                &tl
                                            the foreign financing
                                                    7

Here S represents the current account savings of the public                                  sector,
G    are exhaustive public expenditures on goods and services, and (I —

    S9) gives the overall fiscal deficit (or surplus) of the public
sector. Adding up (1) and (2) we get the change in the net external
debt for the country that is equivalent to the current account deficit:




                                                                                            —
    CA = Dt—Dt_1 =   I —(Q - T
-                                          —
                                               rD'_1
                                                          —
                                                              C) +     —(Tt —       rB_1         G)
                                                                                                      (3)

In other terms the current account deficit, that is equivalent to the

change in the net external indebtedness of the country, is equal to the

excess of total (private and public) investment over savings:


-
    CA = Dt—Dt_1 =   It   —
                              (Q   —
                                       T   —
                                                   rD_1
                                                          —
                                                              C)   =   I   —
                                                                               S           (4)


Imposing   the standard transversality (solvency) condition that insures

that the country has the resources to service its debt and is not
borrowing forever to pay the interest on it we get the budget
constraint of the economy where the discounted value of its future
consumption is less than or equal to its productive wealth minus
initial external debt or:



            (1-f r'                            —
                                                   1t+j
                                                          —
                                                              Gt+l+rY —            (l+r)   Dt_i       (5)
jO
In order to concentrate on the role of the fiscal variables investment

(both private and public) is disregarded for the moment and the time
                                      8

path of output is taken as exogenously given 10

     Imposing a similar solvency condition on the public sector budget

constraint (2) we get that the discounted value of public expenditure
on goods and services must be-equal to the present value of taxes minus

the initial stock of public debt:




jO Gt+
            (l+rY       Ti (l+rY — (l+r)             Bt_1                 (6)




     In this economy the social planner has to solve two maximization

problems:
     (a) Maximize an intertemporal social welfare function in the
consumption level subject to the overall budget constraint of the

economy ("consumption smoothing" problem).
     (b) Choose an optimal path of taxes and public debt such that the

distortionary effects   of income taxation are minimized ("tax smoothing"

problem.

     The "consumption smoothing" problem is represented by 11:

Max Z = E E         (l+r) U(Ct+1)                       (7)
              j=O

subject to:



     Ct+ (l+r)                   —
                                     Gt÷)(l+rY
                                                 —    (l+r)   Dt_i (5')


     10 Investment will be introduced in section 3.

     11See Sachs (1982) for a presentation of this problem in the
continuous time.
                                           9




where Z is an intertemporal time separable social welfare function
dependent on the level of consumption 12 and E is the expectational

operator.
      The second "tax smoothing" problem is given by 13



Mm    Z =    E                                                           (8)
                  •E         K(rt+j)
t+j

subject     to:                                                                      -




      Gt+j (l+rY                       (l+rY —   (l+r)       Bt_i          (6)




where the function K(rt+) that represents the distortionary effects
of income taxation is assumed to be a convex function of the tax rate.

The first order conditions for the first problem are:

                    =                                                          (9)
E tJ'(Ct+)


              (l+r) =
                                t+j
                                      —
                                          Gt+)(l+r)
                                                         —    (l+r)   Dt_1 (5')

where M is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the economy's budget

constraint.

The first order conditions for the second problem are:




      12For simplicity, the private rate of time preference is
assumed to be equal     to   the real interest rate.

      13 See Barro (1981, 1982) for a presentation of this "tax
smoothing" problem in a closed economy.
                                     10


E K'(rt+) =                                                  (10)




               (1+r)            (1+rY — (1+r) Bt_i           (6')
j0 Gt+j                 0Tt+j

where 0 is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the public sector

budget constraint.
The first order conditions (9)        (10) are the classic martingale
conditions for consumption and tax rates in these smoothing problems

(see Hall (1978) and Barro (1979, 1986)). In order to get explicit
solutions for our problem we assume particular functional forms for
U(Ct+) and K(rt+1). In particular we assume that U is a logarithmic
function of consumption and K is a quadratic function of the tax rate:



U(Ct+) =    log                                (11)




K(r÷)      = (rt+)2                            (12)



Given assumption (11) is straightforward to show that C will be equal
to:

           r
  =               =w                          (13)
          1+r
where W or national wealth is equal to:


      =
          o (+     — Gt+1)(1+r) —   (1+r)   Dt_i      (14)
                                       11


The implications of this model are clear:

        (a) The consumption path is determined by the "smoothing
principle" according to which external borrowing and lending should be

used to smooth the marginal utility of consumption over time.

        (b) Condition (5') implies that the private sector internalizes
the government intertemporal budget constraint when choosing its
consumption path. In this sense "Barro—Ricardian" ecp.iivalence holds:

the optimal consumption path depends on the present value of government

expenditures but not on the path of government taxes and borrowing.
       The major normative implication of the model is that a country

should finance transitory shocks through current account deficits
(external borrowing) and adjust to permanent shocks.
        To highlight the implications for the current account of this
distinction between transitory and permanent shocks, it is convenient

to define the permanent values of output (QP)                and government

expenditures (G):
                                                     l+r
   E          (l+r) =    E     QP   (l+r) =   QP   _______
                                                        r
                                                                    (15)
  j=O                    j=O


and:


                                                     1+r
   E Gt+. (l+r) =        E     GF (1+r) =     G'   _______           (16)
  j=O                    j=O                            r



Substituting (15) and (16) in (14) we get:
                                                        12

   = (QP — G)
                     l+r           —   (l+r)    Dt_i                 (17)
                         r

By definition the current account is:


CA= Q—C—G—rD1                                                         (18)


that can be rewritten as:


CA =    (Q   — QP)   +   (QP
                                   —   G   —
                                               C)   —
                                                        (G — G) —   r Dt_i    (18')


substituting (17) in (13) and (13) in (18') we obtain:


CA (Q —       QP) — (G         —
                                   G)                                  (19)


Equation (19) is the basic equation of the intértemporal approach to
the current account. According to this equation:

       (1) If the output falls temporarily below its permanent level it

is optimal to borrow abroad in order to maintain a smooth path of

consumption; temporary negative (positive) shocks to output will
therefore cause current account deficits (surpluses). Conversely,
permanent changes in the level of output will have no effect on the
current account.

       (2) Given the output and optimal consumption path, transitory
increases in public expenditures will cause a deterioration of the

current account. Conversely permanent changes in                                      governnent
expenditures will lead corresponding and equivalent reductions in
consumption (because of debt neutrality) with no effects on the current

account. In other terms, the implication of the "Barro-Ricardian
                                        13

equivalence" for the current account is that the current account will

be invariant to the path of taxes, given the path of government
expenditure.
       Equation (19) show a link between the current account and the
temporary components of public expenditure and output but it is not yet

a relation between the current account and the budget deficit. In order

to get such a relation we have to consider again the second leg of our

"smoothing model", the smoothing of taxes.

       Given the quadratic assumption (12)                about the costs of
distortionary taxation we can easily show that the tax rate will be

equal to:



E Tt+j =            for    i   = 0,   l. ...,                     (10')
or:

E     r1 =          for    j   = 1                                (10'')


In other terms the tax rate will follow a random walk without drift.

Take now the government budget constraint (6) where total taxes are
equal to the tax rate times output (T =           r Q)
E         Tt+j
                      (1+r) =          Gt÷        (1+r) ÷ (l+r) B_ )              (6')

From (10') the best forecast of future tax rates is equal to the
current tax rate; then (6') becomes:




      E            (l+rY       =                (l+r) +   (l+r)    Bt_i    (6")
                                                      14


We can then use our definitions of permanent income and permanent

spending in (15) and (16) and substitute them in (6") to obtain:

     l+r                         1+r
                       QP   =                    + (1      +   r)
          r                        r                                Bt_i                 (20)



that implies:



     =
                   +    r Bt—l
                                                                                    (21)
                       QP



In   other terms, smoothing of taxes will imply that the optimal tax rate

is constant and equal to the permanent value of expenditures plus the
interest       payments on the debt divided by the permanent value of output
(i.e. the constant tax rate is equal to the permanent spending to
output ratio).
         Then,     given the government budget constraint:


DEFT =        (B   —
                        Bt_l)
                                 = G +     r   Bt_1 —   T                         (2')



and the definition of total taxes (T =                         r    Q) we can substitute (21) in
(2') to obtain:


                                       —
                                                           G +      r   B
                                                                            t—l
DEFT =        (B   —
                        Bt_l)     (G       G)   + (                               ) (QP — Q)       (22)

                                                                     QP
                                         15



where DEFT is the real budget deficit (equal to the change in the stock

of public debt held by the public). According to (22), temporary shocks
to public expenditures will lead to budget deficits because the tax

rate will be smoothed while permanent changes in expenditures will be
adjusted with higher taxes and no deficits. Similarly, temporary
negative shocks to output will result in budget deficits (because the

fixed tax rates will lead to lower tax collections following an output
fall) while permanent output shocks will leave the deficit unchanged.

       We can finally combine the equilibrium solution for the current
account (equation (19)) with the solution for the budget deficit
(equation (22)) to obtain the following relation:

                                         G +   rBt_1
CA =   — DEFT   +   (   Q — QP) (1   — ________________ )    (23)

                                               QP

or:

CA = — DEF      +       ( Q — QP) (1 —   )                   (24)




Equation (24) is the crucial equation of the model and implies that,

if "consumption smoothing"               "tax smoothing" are holding, there
will be a simple one—to—one relation between current accounts and

budget deficits. In particular:
       (1) A budget deficit will lead to a corresponding and equivalent

worsening of the current account because the same temporary spending
                                     16

disturbance that leads to a budget deficit in (22) will worsen the
current account as in (19).

       (2) Temporary positive (negative) output shocks will lead to a
current account surplus (deficit). In fact, according to (22) a
temporary output shock, improves the budget balance by a fraction of
the shock (     r)   while it improves the current account by the full
amount of the shock. On net the current account will improve by a share

(1 —   r)   of the output shock, for any given level of fiscal deficits.

       In the particular case in which output follows a random walk , we

obtain from the definition of permanent income (equation (15)) that
permanent output will be equal to the current output (QP =    Q) so   that

(24) simplifies to:



CA =   — DEFT             (25)



i.e. if output follows a random walk, current account and budget
deficit will have a perfect negative relation.

       Equation (24) or (25) simplifies by a large degree the problem of
testing the intertemporal theory of the current account. In the
traditional formulation (equation (19)) the current account is
expressed as a function of temporary versus permanent components of

government spending leaving open the complex econometric issue of
distinguishing between these temporary and permanent components; in
particular, systematic tests of the intertemporal current account model

have been very preliminary because hampered by the necessity to
distinguish correctly between transitory and permanent component of
                                  17

spending 14 Here, instead, the joint consideration of the two smoothing

problems allows to derive a relation between current account and budget

deficits that can be tested without any recourse to a distinction
between permanent and temporary components of expenditure 15; this
because the underlying, and unobserved temporary shock to expenditures
that leads to an observable budget deficit will also lead to a current

account imbalance.
     Econometric tests of equation (24) will then be joint tests of the

intertemporal model of the current account and the equilibrium approach

to fiscal policy. Rejection of equation (24) might be caused by the
failure of either one of the two hypothesis 16•



3. Introducing investment


     In order to simplify the analysis we disregarded the role of
capital accumulation in the previous section. We now introduce
investment in the model to see how the relation between the current

account and the budget deficit is modified by the presence of capital


     14 Ahnied (1986, 1987) tests a version of the intertemporal
theory of the current account for the United Kingdom by considering
only the optimal "consumption smoothing" part of the problem. This
leads him to the complex exercise of separating public expenditures
in permanent and temporary components. Similarly, Barro (1981,
1982, 1985) and Sahasakul (1986) test the "tax smoothing" theory
in a closed economy setting and have to distinguish between
temporary and permanent components of spending.
     15 However, the problem of distinguishing between permanent and
transitory components of output remains in this approach.

     16 Roubini and Sachs (1988 a, b) find strong evidence against
the "tax smoothing" model in the experience of the OECD countries.
                                         18
formation 17

          In   the presence of investment the consumption smoothing problen
can rewritten as:



Max Z = E E   (1+r)' U(Ct+)                               (7)
ct+j
          J=o

subject        to:



                  (l+r)             —
                                        Gt÷
                                              —
                                                  It÷)(l+rY1
                                                               —   (l+r)   Dt_i (5)
jO
  =       F    (Kr)                                                                (26)


      —         =     —
                                                                                  (27)

where (26) represents the production function for the tradeable good
produced in the country (labor supply is normalized to one); and (27)
defines net capital accumulation as investment minus depreciation of
capital (8 is the coefficient of geometric depreciation).
          Then, the first order condition of this problem become:



E tJ'(Ct+) =                                                               (9)

F'(K) =         r+    6                                                    (28)


                 (l+rY    =         - Gt÷     -
                                                  It+1+rr      -   (l+r)   Dt_i (5'')
jO

     171n this section we lump together private and public capital
formation.
                                     19


(9) replicates the consumption smoothing rule seen in the previous
section;     (28) states that in each period investment should be
undertaken so as to equate the marginal product of capital with the
world cost of capital (r+6).
       These first order condition lead to the same consumption function

as in (13) but now national wealth W in (14) must be redefined as



   =         (+ —          - It+)(1+rY    —   (1+r)   Dt..i           (14')
        jO
       (14') can be rewritten in terms of permanent values of Q and G by

observing that, given the optimal investment rule (28), present and
future changes in investment do not change the present value of W as
expressed in (14'). Then (14') can be rewritten as:



   =                   —          (l+r — (1+r)
              t÷jS)        Gt+)                   Dt_i          (14'')



and (14'') can be expressed in terms of permanent output and spending

as in (17).

The current account is now defined as:



CA= Q—C—I—G—rDt1                                              (18')

Then, combining (13), (17), (18') we can write the final expression
for current account as:
                                      20



CA = (Q — QP) — (G   —   G)   —
                                  I                   (19')



The main difference between (19') and the previous expression for the
current account is the presence of investment in addition to the
temporary shocks to output and spending. (19') implies that any change

in investment will be fully financed through a current account deficit.

     Combining this solution for the current account with the solution

for the budget deficit derived from the "tax smoothing" probler
(equation (22)) , we finally get:




CA = — DEF    +   ( Q — QP) (1 —           —            (29)


The main difference between equation (29) and (24) is the presence of
the investment variable among the determinants of the current account.

As in the case the budget deficit, the investment rate has a one-to-
ore negative effect on the current account, i.e. investment shocks are

financed through capital inflows.
     Equation (29) is important because it highlights the potential
shortcomings of the empirical studies of the degree of international
capital mobility following the seminal contributions of Feldstein and




     18
       The tax smoothing problem is not modified in the presence
of investment.
                                        21

Horioka (1980) and Feldstèin (1983). In all these studies 19, the
independent role of the budget deficits has been disregarded and
regressions equations have estimated only the relation between the
current account (as a share of GDP) and the investment rate (as a share

of GDP). These studies have systematically found a lack of correlation

between the current account and the investment ratio for the QECD
countries in a number of periods. Equation (29), however, suggest that

the traditional specification of the estimated equation night be
misspecified because it does not control for the independent role of
budget deficits (in addition to the investment rate) in determining the

current account. The "Feldstein—Horioka puzzle" might then due to this

inisspecification of the equation determining the current account. In

fact, equation (29) suggest that the hypothesis of international
capital mobility can be tested by estimating the coefficients of the
investment rate and the budget deficit in a current account equation.

      An alternative way to test the theory is to derive a saving
equation and show that, in the presence of international capital
mobility, saving rates are uncorrelated with the investment rate. This

approach, rather than the estimation of a current account equation, has

been preferred (starting from the contributions of Feldstein and
Horioka) by most studies of the, capital mobility puzzle 2O However, the


     19 See, among the others, Caprio and Howard (1984), Fieleke
(1982), Frankel, Dooley and Mathieson (1987), Murphy (1984),
Obstfeld (1985, 1986), Penati and Dooley (1984), Sachs (1981,
1983) ,   Summers (1985)

      20 See, for example, Caprio and Howard (1984), Fieleke (1982),
Frankel, Dooley and Mathieson (1987), Murphy (1984), Obstfeld
(1985, 1986) ,   Penati    and Dooley (1984) , Summers (1985)
                                              22

model presented in this paper suggests that the standard savings
equations used in these studies might be inisspecified as well. To show

this point, one can derive the savings equation implied by the model
above. We know that national savings are equal to investment plus the

current account:



S =            + CA                                   (30)



Then, combining (29) with (30) we obtain that:


       —
               DEF     +   ( Q — QP) (1   —
                                              r)      (31)



Equation (30) implies that total savings are a negative function of
the budget deficit and a positive function of transitory shocks to
output. In particular, budget deficits have a one—to—one negative
effect on total savings or, in other terms, that private savings (S)
are solely a function of transitory output shocks, i.e.:



S=         (      — QP) (1 — r)               (32)


where private savings are by definition:


S=S+             DEF                           (33)



      It then follows that, the relation between national savings and
investment should be zero only after we control for the effects on
                                               23

savings of budget deficits and temporary output shocks. Equation (31)
then suggests that traditional test of the capital mobility hypothesis

night be misspecified because they simply regress the savings rate on
the investment rate only without controlling for the fiscal and
cyclical determinants of the savings rate. The equation also suggests
that an alternative test is to regress the savings rate on the budget

deficit, the temporary components of output and the investment rate:



St =     a   DEF +         ( Q — QP) + a2       1                            (34)



Then the null hypothesis of "smoothing" and capital mobility intplies
that:

           a0 = — 1           al =      (1 —   r)        a2 = 0



i.e. the coefficient on the investment rate should be equal to zero
only after having controlled for the effects of budget deficits and

transitory output. Alternatively, the model might be tested, under the

maintained assumption of tax smoothing, by regressing private savings
on transitory output and investment:


    —      a0 (      — QP) + a1 1                                     (35)


Then the null hypothesis of "smoothing" and capital mobility implies
that:



             aO =      (1 —   r)               a1 = 0
                                   24



i.e. private savings should not be affected by the investment rate.



4. Empirical Tests
     In this section we will test the theoretical results obtained in

the previous sections. we will first start with the estimation of
current account equations like (29) and then move to the estimation of

savings equations like (31).
     As seen in the previous section, equation (29) suggests that one
should regress current account equations on measures of budget
deficits, investment rate and transitory output. In particular, the

joint hypothesis of "consumption smoothing", "tax smoothing" and
"international capital mobility"        implies that the      estimated

coefficients of these two variables should be equal to minus one in the

estimated equations.
     To begin with, current account equations are regressed on the
investment rate and the budget deficits disregarding the role of
transitory shocks to output. Given the wide empirical evidence on the

existence of unit roots in output and GNP 21, the estimation of equation

(29) without a measure of transitory output is correct (under the
random walk hypothesis output shock are all permanent and the
transitory output term in equation (29) disappears).




     21 See Nelson and Plosser (1982), Campbell and Mankiw (1987,
1988), Cochrane (1988), Mankiw and Shapiro (1985) for some tests
of unit roots in GNP.
                                  25

     Table 1 present the results of regressions of the current account

to GDP ratio on the budget deficit to GDP ratio and the investment to
GDP ratio for 18 OECD countries in the 1960—1985 period. Some
observations on the data used in the regressions are useful before the

discussion of the results. First, as derived in the theoretical part
of the paper, the correct measure of deficit to be used in the
regressions is the real inflation adjusted budget deficit that is
equivalent to the change in the net debt of the public sector. Data on

net debt for the OECD countries have been obtained from the OECD for
limited periods of time (for most of the 18 countries considered the
data go back only to 1970 and are available since the early l960s for

only eight countries). The sample period of the regressions in table
1 is therefore limited by the availability of the figures for the
public sector net debt. Second, the investment to CDP ratio used in the

regressions includes the fixed capital formation and the change in
inventories, i.e. inventories are considered a form of investment.

     We can now discuss the results of the regressions presented in
table 1. In 12 out of the 18 countries considered, the coefficient on

the deficit variable has the right sign (negative) and is significant:

budget deficits lead to a current account worsening. Also, the
coefficient on the investment ratio has the right sign and is
significant in 13 out of 18 countries : increases in investment ratios

cause current account deficits. One can also observe that in 11
countries both variables are significant, i.e. the sample of 18
countries can be almost precisely divided between countries in which
the model works better (both variables are significant) and countries
                                  26

in which the theory does not work at all (both variables are
insignificant). However, even in the group of countries where the
explanatory variables are significant,         the estimates of the
coefficients on the deficits and investment are almost always different

from the theoretical value- of minus one. The exceptions are Italy,
Norway, Ireland, Greece and Spain where the coefficient on the
investment ratio is not significantly different from minus one. In no

country, however, the coefficient on the budget deficit variable gets

close to the theoretical value of minus one.
     If one compares these results with previous tests of
"international capital nobility" for the OECD countries 22       ,   one
observes some striking differences. Table 2 summarizes the results of
previous studies on the relation between the current account and the
investment rate for the OECD countries. As the table shows Penati and

Dooley (1984), Frankel, Dooley and Mathieson (1987) found no relation
between current accounts and investment rates for the OECD countries
while Sachs (1981, 1983) finds a weak and almost not significant
relation. Our results in Table 1, instead show a strongly negative and

significant relation for most of the countries in the sample and
suggest that international capital mobility might be much higher than
assumed on the basis of the previous studies of this issue.
     How to reconcile the differences in results between table 1 and

table 2 ? There are two main explanations:




     22 See Feldstein and Horioka (1980), Feldstein (1983), Sachs
(1981, 1983), Penati and Dooley (1984), Frankel, Dooley and
Mathieson (1987) for example.
                                    27

     1) Many of the previous studies considered only cross—section
regressions for a set of OECD countries while table 1 presents single
                                   23
country time series regressions          This means that previous studies

mixed in the same regressions countries for which the theory appears
to work with countries in which the theory is not supported reducing
therefore the fitness of the regressions. If one considers that
countries might differ in their degree of capital mobility (either
because of capital controls and/or other capital markets imperfections)

cross—section studies will bias downward the degree of capital nobility

for the entire sample. The time series approach followed in table 1,

instead, allows to estimate for each country separately the degree of

capital mobility.
     2) All the previous studies have disregarded the separate and
independent role of budget deficits in affecting the current account
in addition to the investment rate. In this sense, previously estimated

equations were misspecified in that the role of fiscal deficit was not

considered. This might have been an independent cause of the weak
relation between current account and investment rate. This explanation

is supported by the results of table 3 where the current account is

regressed on the investment rate            ,   the   equation traditionally
estimated in the literature. Compared to the results in table 1 where

the investment variable was significant in 13 countries, in table 3

this variable is significant        in 5 countries. In other 8 countries



     23   The main cross—section studies are those by Feldstein and
Horioka   (1980), Feldstein (1983), Fieleke (1982), Penati and Dooley
(1984),   Murphy (1984), Caprio and Howard (1985), Summers (1985) and
Frankel   Dooley and Mathieson (1986).
                                    28

(U.S., Japan, Germany, France, Italy, Belgium, Sweden and Spain) the
investment variable does not appear as significant in the simple
bivariate (and incorrectly specified) regressions of table 3 while is

significant in the table 1 regressions that include the fiscal deficit.

This means that disregarding the role of budget deficits creates a
serious specification error and significantly bias downward the
estimates of capital mobility obtained through the exclusive
consideration of investment rates
      The above results suggest that the lack of international capital

nobility obtained in previous studies of the issue might be seriously

biased by the cross—section technique used and the incorrect exclusion

of the fiscal variable from the current account equation.

      The results obtained here, while being consistent with the
hypothesis of greater degree of capital mobility than previously
thought do not, however, completely confirm the joint hypothesis of
"consumption smoothing", "taxation smoothing" and "international
capital mobility". In particular, the theory does not work for a number

of countries and, even in the countries where both explanatory
variables are significant, the estimated coefficients diverge from
their theoretically expected values. Which one of the three components

of the joint hypothesis is the source of these results ?

      One might suspect that the "tax smoothing" hypothesis is the weak

link in the model. Barro (1979, 1985, 1986) has found evidence in favor

of the tax smoothing model for the United States and the United Kingdom

but   the tax smoothing model has been substantially rejected for most
of the other OECD countries by Roubimi and Sachs (1988 a, 1988 b). One
                                  29

can also observe that, while the investment variable is not
significantly different from its theoretical value in a number of
countries (Italy, Norway, Ireland, Greece and Spain) and very large in
many others, only one country (Spain) shows a coefficient of the
deficit variable close to the theoretical value of minus one.
     We can now move to the estimates of the savings equation. As shown

in the previous section, under the joint hypothesis of consumption and

taxation smoothing and international capital mobility, national savings
should be related only to the budget deficit and the transitory
components of output with no additional effect of the investment rate

(see equation (34)). Alternatively, and equivalently, private savings
should be only a function of transitory shocks to output with no role

of the investment rate (equation (35)). As discussed in the previous
section, simple bivariate regressions of national savings on the
investment rate, as usually performed in the literature, are not
correct tests of the hypothesis of international capital nobility
because they do not control for the effects on savings of fiscal
deficits and temporary output shocks. In this sense the high and
positive correlations between total savings and investment rates found

in the literature do not provide evidence for the absence of capital

mobility.
     We will start the empirical test of the savings equation by
regressing the Drivate saving rate (as a share of GDP) on the
                                  30

investment rate (as a share of GDP) 24 This is the specification
suggested by equation (35) where the theoretical restriction of a minus

one coefficient on the budget deficit in the saving equation (see
equation (34)) is imposed 25• Under the null hypothesis, we expect that

investment rate is not correlated with the savings rate. Table 4
presents the results of the regressions of the private saving rate on
the investment rate for 18 OECD countries. The results of the table
strongly confirm the hypothesis of no correlation between private
savings and investment rates: in 13 out of 18 countries the coefficient

on the investments rate is not significant and/or has a negative sign.

Only in 5 countries in the sample (Japan, Germany, France, Austria,
Norway) there is a statistically significant positive correlation
between private savings and investment. Moreover, even in the 5
countries where a statistically significant correlation is found the
estimated coefficient on the investment rate is significantly below
minus one (usually in the —0.30 to —0.40 range 26), i.e. the estimated

coefficient is much smaller (in absolute value) than the one found in

the numerous studies on the degree of international capital immobility.

These results suggest that the degree of international capital mobility

might be much larger than the one implied by previous studies and that
the "Feldstein—Horioka puzzle" might be the partial result of an


     24 As explained above in the discussion of the current account
equation, we disregard for the moment the role of transitory output
shocks in the saving equation.
     25 We will test below whether this restriction is confirmed by
the data.
     26 France is the only exception with a coefficient of -0.70.
                                  31

incorrect specification of the savings equation. Once we control for
the role of budget deficits, the correlation between savings and
investment disappears in most of the OECD countries considered in our

sample.
     The regressions in table 4 have imposed the theoretical
restriction of a minus one coefficient on the deficit variable in the

savings equation instead of testing it     .   Is   such a restriction
warranted ?    We can test this restriction by estimating directly
equation (34) that relates total savings to the budget deficit rather
than equation (35) that imposes a priori the above restriction.
     The results of the regressions of total savings on the budget
deficit are presented in table 5. As shown in the table, in 16 out of

the 18 countries, the deficit variable has the correct negative sign
and is significant (the only exceptions being the U.K. and Australia
where the sign is correct but not statistically significant at the 5%

confidence level).    Also, in 10 out of the 16 countries with a
significant coefficient, the estimated of the fiscal deficit
coefficient is not statistically different from its theoretical value
of minus one. In the other 6 countries, the estimate significantly
differs from the one implied by the maintained hypothesis. These
results then provide support for the restriction imposed in equation
(35) and the saving equation tested in table 4 only for over half of
countries in the sample.

     The results in table 5 then suggests that we should estimate a
saving function as in equation (34) where the restriction on the
deficit variable is not imposed a priori and the assumed zero effect
                                  32

of investment is tested explicitly as well. Table 6 present the results

of the regressions of the total savings rate on the budget deficit and
the investment rate. The results in table 6 can be summarized as

following:
     (a) in 12 out of 18 countries the deficit variable is significant

and has the correct negative sign; in the other 6 countries the sign
is correct but statistically not significant at the 5% confidence
level.

     (b) In all the countries, with the exception of Spain, the
coefficient on the deficit variable is statistically different from its

theoretical value of minus one.

     (c) The investment variable enters significantly in the savings
in 11 countries out of 18 even after controlling for the effects of

fiscal deficits.

     (d) However, only in 5 countries (Italy, Norway, Ireland, Greece
and Spain) the coefficient on the investment rate is close to positive

one (the case of "capital immobility") 27 In the other countries the

coefficient is either insignificant (7 countries) or significant but

much smaller than unity (6 countries) suggesting a large degree of

capital mobility .


    27
       With the exception of Norway, these are also the OECD
countries in the sample with the highest degree of capital
controls.
     28 It should be remembered that studies in the Feldstein-
Horioka tradition have usually found correlation coefficients
between savings and investment rates above 0.80. See, for example,
Caprio and Howard (1984), Frankel, Dooley and Mathieson (1987),
Murphy (1984), Obstfeld (1985, 1986), Penati and Dooley (1984),
Summers (1985)
                                   33

        The implications of the results in table 6 are twofold. On one

side, they confirm the hypothesis of a large degree of capital mobility
for most OECD countries and contrast with earlier results in the
literature about a low degree of international mobility of capital. On

the other side, the results are partially at odds with those found in

table 4 where a much smaller number of countries showed a positive
relation between the private savings rate and the investment rate

(evidence of a very high degree of capital mobility) .   Also,   the large
negative coefficients on the deficit variable found in table 4 are not

replicated in table 6 where the number of countries with a deficit
coefficient equal to the theoretical value of minus one is much
smaller.

        How to explain the persistent, even if modest, effect of
investment rate on savings, residually found in table 6 ? One
explanation, that substantially rejects the optimizing and Ricardian
paradigm of the paper, is to suppose that investment rates are
negatively correlated with budget deficits, i.e. budget deficits crowd—

out investment. Under the Ricardian and tax smoothing assumption,
temporary expenditure shocks that generate fiscal deficits should have

no effect on the real interest rate and therefore on the investment

rate.

        Suppose now, instead, that budget deficits actually crowd-out
investment. In this case, fiscal deficit would on one side generate

directly a fall in national savings (public savings become negative)
and would also cause a fall in the investment rate. We would then
observe that, in correspondence with fiscal shocks, there will be a
                                  34

positive correlation between savings and investment rates even under

the assumption of perfect capital mobility.
     This explanation stresses again the important role of fiscal
disturbances in explaining the capital mobility puzzle and allows to
reconcile the results in table 4 with those in table 6. If budget
deficits crowd—out investment estimates of the savings equation like
(34) where savings are regressed on budget deficits and an endogenous
investment rate will bias downward the estimates of the deficit
coefficient and will show a positive correlation between investment and

saving rates even under the hypothesis of perfect capital mobility.
     How likely is such an hypothesis of a crowding-out ? While this
study cannot answer specifically such a question, it is possible to
test the hypothesis of a negative correlation between investment rate

and budget deficits. Table 7 presents the results of simple bivariate
regressions of the investment rate on the budget deficit for the 18
OECD countries in the sample. In 14 out of 18 countries table 7 shows

a strong negative and significant relation between budget deficits and

investment rates (the coefficients are usually above 0.50 (in absolute

value) and in a number of countries close to negative one).
     One interpretation of this strong result is, as suggested above,

the crowding-out hypothesis. This hypothesis could explain the
significant role of the investment rate in some of the results in table

6 and the weakening of the coefficient on the budget deficits in that
table compared to the results of table 4. An alternative view could

interpret the negative correlation between budget deficits and
investment rates in terms of common underlying disturbances (such as
                                   35

negative real shocks) that lead simultaneously to budget deficits

falls   in the investment rate. This alternative explanation would also
be consistent with the hypothesis of capital mobility and interpret the

correlation between savings and investment in terms of this common

underlying disturbances.


5. Conclusions.

     This paper presented an infinite horizon model of consumption and

taxation smoothing that implies a simple relation between current
accounts, budget deficits, investment rates and transitory output
shocks. It was argued that such a model could explain the "Feldstein-

Horioka puzzle" of the apparent lack of international capital mobility.

Simple regressions of the savings rate on the investment rate were
shown to be incorrect tests of the hypothesis of capital mobility
because they do not control for the independent role of budget deficits

and temporary output shocks in the current account and savings
equations.    Empirical tests of the model for a sample of 18 OECD
countries present good evidence that international capital markets are

widely integrated and that the "Feldstein—Horioka puzzle" might be
explained by the important role of fiscal deficits in the determination

of the current account and the saving behavior.
                                         36



                                      References


Ahmed, S. (1986), "Temporary and Permanent Government Spending in an Open
     Economy", Journal of Monetary Economics, 17, 197—224.

_________ (1987) "Government Spending, The Trade Balance and the Terms of
    Trade in British History", Journal of Monetary Economics, 20, 195-220.


Anderson, J. and L. Young (1988) "Optimal Taxation and Debt in an Open
    Economy", Working paper no.170, Boston College.
Aschauer, D.(1988), The Equilibrium Approach to Fiscal Policy, Journal of
     Money. Credit and Banking, February, 41-62.
Bardhan, P.K. (1967), "Optimum Foreign Borrowing", in K. Schell ed. Essays
     in the Theory of Economic Growth, MIT Press, Cambridge.

Barro, R. (1979), On the Determination of Public Debt, Journal of Po1itic1
     Economy, 87, October, 940—971.

________    (1981), Output Effects of Government Purchases, Journal of
     Political Economy, 89, December, 1086—1121.

________ (1985), Government Spending, Interest Rates, Prices and Budget
     Deficits in the United Kingdom, 1730—1918, working Paper No.1 Rochester
     Center for Economic Research, March.

_________ (1986) "U.S. Deficits since World war I", Scandinavian Journal of
     Economics, 88, 195—222.
Bruno, M. (1976) "The Two—Sector Open Economy and the Real Exchange Rate",
     American Economic Review, 66, 566—577.
Buiter, W. (1981), "Time Preference, and Intergenerational Lending and
     Borrowing in an Overlapping Generations Model", Journal of Political
     Economy, 89, no.4, 768—797.

________   (1988) Budgetary Policy. International and Intertemporal Trade in
     the Global Economy, forthcoming, North Holland.
Campbell, J. and G. Mankiw (1988) "Are Output Fluctuations Transitory ?',
     quarterly Journal of Economics.
________________________     (1987)   "Permanent and Transitory Components in
     Macroeconomic Fluctuations", American Economic Review, May 111-117.

Caprio, G. and D.    Howard (1984) "Domestic Saving, current Accounts, and
     International   Capital Mobility", International Finance Discussion Papers
                                        37

     no.244, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C., June.
Cochrane, J. (1988) "How Big is the Random Walk in GNP ?",        Journal   of
     Political Economy.

Feldstein, M. (1983) "Domestic Saving and International Capital movements in
     the Long Run and the Short Run", Eurooean Economic Review, 21, 129-151.

Feldstein, M. and C. Horioka (1980), "Domestic Saving and International
     Capital Flows", Economic Journal, no.90, 314—329.
Fieleke, N. (1982) "National Saving and International Investment", in Saving
     and Government Policy, Conference Series no.25, Federal Bank of Boston,
     Boston.

Frankel, J. (1985) "International Capital Mobility and Crowding Out in the
     U.S. Economy: Imperfect Integration of Financial Markets or of Goods
     Markets 7", in How Ooen is the U.S. Economy ?, R. Hafer, ed., Lexington
     Books, Lexington.
Frankel, J., M. Dooley and D. Mathieson (1986) "International Capital
    Mobility in Developing Countries vs. Industrial Countries: What Do
     Saving—Investment Correlations Tell Us 7", NBER Working Paper no. 2043,
     October.


Frenkel, J. and A. Razin (1986) "Fiscal Policies in the World Economy",
     Journal of Political Economy, 94, June, 564—594.

_______________________ (1988) Fiscal Policies and the World Economy: An
     Intertemporal Approach, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Hall, R. (1978) "Stochastic Implications of the Life—Cycle Permanent Income
     Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence", Journal of Political Economy, 86, 971—
     988.

Hamada, K. (1969) "Optimal Capital Accumulation by an Economy Facing an
     International Capital Market", Journal of Political Economy, 77, 684—
     697.

Kenen, P. (1985) "Macroeconomic Theory and Policy: How the Closed Economy was
     Opened", in R. Jones and P. Kenen, eds., Handbook of International
     Economics, vol.11, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Lucas, R.E. Jr. (1982) "Interest Rates and Currency Prices in a Two—Country
     World", Journal of Monetary Economics, 10, 355—359.

Mankiw, G. and M. Shapiro (1985) "Trends, Random Walks and Tests of the
     Permanent Income Hypothesis", Journal of Monetary Economics, 16, 165-
     174.

Murphy, R. (1984) "Capital Mobility and the Relationship between Savings and
                                        38

     Investment in the OECD Countries", Journal of International Money and
     Finance, vol.3, 327—342.
Nelson, C. and C. Plosser (1982) "Trends and Random Walks in Macroeconomic
     Time Series", Journal of Monetary Economics, 10, 139-162.

Obstfeld, M. (1986 a) "Capital Mobility in the World Economy: -Theory and
     Measurement", in Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
     Vol.24, 55—103.

____________ (1986 b) "How Integrated Are World Capital Markets 7 Some New
     Tests", NBER Working Paper no.2075, November.
Penati, A. and M. Dooley (1984) "Current Account Imbalances and Capital
     Formation in Industrial Countries, 1949—1981" IMF Staff Papers, vol.31,
     1—24.

Persson, T. and L. Svensson (1985) "Current Account Dynamics and the Terms
     of Trade: Harberger—Laursen—Metzler Two Generations Later", Journal of
     Political Economy, 94, 43—65.
Razin, A. and L. Svensson (1983) "The Current Account and Optimal Government
     Debt", Journal of International Money and Finance, 2, 215—224.
Roubini, N. and J. Sachs (1988 a) "Political and Economics Determinants of
     Budget Deficits in the Industrial Economies", NBER working Paper
     no.2682, forthcoming in European Economic Review

______________________    (1988 b) "Government Spending and Budget Deficits
     in the Industrial Countries" presented at the Economic Policy panel fall
     1988 meeting, October 20—21, Turin, Italy.
Sachs, J. (1981) "The Current Account and Macroeconomic Adjustment in the
     1970s", Brookings Papers on Economlc Activity, Vol.12, 201-268.

_________ (1982) "The Current Account in the Macroeconomic Adjustment
     Process", Scandinavian Journal of Economics

_________ (1983) "Aspects of the Current Account Behavior of OECD Economies",
     in E. Classen and P. Salin, eds., Recent Issues in the Theory of
     Flexible Exchange Rates, Amsterdam, North Holland.

Sahasakul, C. (1986) "The U.S. Evidence on Optimal Taxation over Time",
     Journal of Monetary Economics, 18, November, 251—275.
Stockman, A. and L. Svensson (1987) "Capital Flows, Investment and Exchange
     Rates", Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.19, no.2, 171-201.

Summers, L. (1985) "Tax Policy and International Competitiveness", in
     International Asoects of Fiscal Policies, J. Frenkel, ed., University
     of Chicago Press.
                                        39

Svensson, L. and A. Razin (1983) "The Terms of Trade and the Current Account:
     The Harberger—Laursen—Metzler Effect", Journal of Political Economy, 91,
     97—125.

Tobin, J. (1983) "Comments on Domestic Saving and International Capital
     movements in the Long Run and the Short Run", Eurooean Economic Review,
     vol.21, 153—156.
                                  40

Table 1.
Regressions Results.
Dependent Variable: Current Account to GDP Ratio.


                              Independent Variables

Country          Sample          DEFY         INVY      R      D.W.
                 Period



U.S              61—85          —0.61         —0.51     0.42
                                (4.00)         (3.06)

                 66—85          —0.36         —0.33     0.38   1.18
Japan
                                (2.61)         (3.23)

Germany          61—85          —0.44         —0.35     0.39   0.80
                                (3.31)         (3.70)

France           61—85          —0.65         —0.11     0.47   2.15
                                (3.84)         (1.31)

U.K.             61—85          —0.14         —0.57     0.54   0.92
                                (2.19)         (5.14)

Italy            61—85          —0.51         —1.00     0.71   1.62
                                (5.83)         (5.56)

Canada           66—85          —0.23         —0.57     0.78   1.71
                                (4.33)        (7.78)

Belgiuii         61—85          —0.51         —0.41     0.53   0.53
                                 (4.22)        (2.10)

Austria          71—85          —0.37         —0.30     0.27   1.44
                                 (1.73)        (2.04)

Denmark          71—85          —0.27          —0.28    0.21   1.75
                                 (1.43)        (0.99)

Finland          71—85          —0.18          —0.62    0.77   1.54
                                 (0.91)        (5.92)

Netherlands      71—85          —0.51          —0.54    0.19   0.43
                                 (1.23)        (1.69)

Norway           71—85          —0.45          —0.97    0.96   1.71
                                 (5.19)        (9.76)
                                     41

Sweden           71—85             —0.49            —0.61      0.61     0.87
                                   (4.21)           (2.71)

Ireland          71—85             —0.32            —0.91      0.69     1.42
                                   (2.63)           (4.14)

Australia        71—85             —0.15             0.31      0.09     0.72
                                   (0.30)           (0.005)

Greece           71—85             —0.25             0.90      0.36     1.65
                                   (1.44)           (0.04)

Spain            71—85             —0.89           —0.86       0.37     0.62
                                   (2.07)                             (2.59)


Definitions:

DEFY   General Government Deficit as a Share of GDP = Change in the Net
Debt of the General Government as a share of GDP.

INVY = Investment to GDP Ratio =   Fixed    Capital Formation plus Change in
Inventories as a Share of GDP.

Data Source: OECD National Inconie Accounts.
             OECD Data for Net Debt figures.
All equations include a constant term whose value is omitted.
t—statistics in parentheses.
                                  42
                      -

Table 2.
Cross Section Studies of International Capital Mobility.
Dependent Variable: Current Account to GOP Ratio.

                                                                   2
Number of   Source of         Sample         Coefficient on       R
OECD        the results       Period         the Investment
Countries                                    Variable



19          Penati and       (1949—1959)       —0.04            0.005
            Dooley (1984)                      (0.30)

19          Penati and       (1971—1981)       —0.19            0.11
            Dooley (1984)                      (1.66)

19          Penati and       (1974—81)         —0.24            0.12
            Dooley (1984)                      (0.93)

19          Penati and       (1949—59)—        0.05             0.01
            Dooley (1984)    (1971—81)         (0.46)

19          Penati and       (1949—59)—        —0.02            0.01
            Dooley (1984)    (1974—81)         (0.19)

19          Penati and       (1960—74)         0.02 *           0.01
            Dooley (1984)                      (0.27)
15          Sachs (1983)     (1971—79)         —0.20            0.21
                                               (1.89)
15          Sachs (1981)     (1968—73)—        —0.64 *          0.72
                             (1974—79)         (6.2)


Source: Data in Table 1 of Frankel, Dooley and Mathieson (1987)
* : This equation was estimated in first differences.

All equations include a constant term whose value is omitted.
t—statistics in parentheses.
                                   43

Table 3.
Regressions Results.
Dependent Variable: Current Account to GDP Ratio.


                                Independent
                                Variable:
                                                   2
Country          Sample         INVY           R       D.W.
                 Period




U.S              61—85          —0.08         0.01     0.31
                                (0.47)

Japan            66—85          —0.13         0.13     0.70
                                (1.69)

Germany          61—85          —0.11         0.09     0.84
                                (1.50)

France           61—85          —0.09         0.05     1.32
                                (1.20)

U.K.             61—85          —0.56         0.48     0.75
                                (4.67)

Italy           61—85           —0.46         0.14     0.42
                                (1.77)

Canada          66—85           —0.39      0.53        1.11
                                (4.58)

Belgiuni        61—85            0.28      0.15        0.53
                                (2. 10)

Austria         71—85           —0.13      0.08        1.03
                                (1.12)

Denmark         71—85            0.10      0.08        2.03
                                (1.09)

Finland         71—85           —0.58      0.75        1.38
                                (6.32)

Netherlands     71—85           —0.23      0.09        0.54
                                (1. 14)

Norway          71—85           —1.31      0.88        1.10
                                (10.1)
                                     44


Sweden              71—85           0.15      0.04     1.23
                                   (0.76)

Ireland             71—85          —0.98      0.51     0.70
                                   (3.69)

Australia           71—85           0.07      0.001    0.72
                                   (0.15)

Greece              71—85           0.26      0.25     1.37
                                   (2.08)

Spain               71—85          —0.23      0.15     0.66
                                   (1.52)



Definition:
INVY =    Investment to GDP Ratio = Fixed Capital Formation plus
          Change in Inventories as a Share of GDP.

Data Source: OECD National Income Accounts.
All equations include a constant term whose value is omitted.
t—statistics in parentheses.
                                  45

Table 4.
Regressions Results.
Dependent Variable: Private Savings to GDP Ratio (PSAV).


                                Independent
                                Variable:

Country          Sample         INVY           R     D.W.
                 Period




U.S              61—85           0.20         0.08   1.28
                                (1.40)

Japan            66—85           0.31      0.34      1.08
                                (3.06)

Germany          61—85           0.33      0.44      1.23
                                (4.29)

France           61—85           0.70      0.78      1.64
                                (9.49)

U.K.             61—85           0.36      0.05      1.07
                                (1.13)

Italy            61—85          —0.46      0.14      1.05
                                (1.77)

Canada           66—85          —0.18      0.04      0.51
                                (0.84)

Belgium          61—85          —0.09      0.02      0.57
                                (0.72)

Austria         71—85            0.42      0.40      1.46
                                (2.97)

Denmark         71—85          —0.26       0.23      0.99
                                (2.02)

Finland         71—85            0.16      0.10      1.62
                                (1.19)

Netherlands     71—85           0.16       0.05      0.63
                                (0.80)

Norway          71—85           0.42       0.40      1.78
                                (2.96)
                                     46


Sweden              71—85          —0.40        0.22        0.81
                                   (1.95)

Ireland             71—85           0.21        0.02        1.56
                                   (0.53)

Australia           71—85           0.18        0.008       0.71
                                   (0.32)

Greece              71—85           0.26         0.14       1.96
                                   (1.46)

                    71—85           0.06         0.02       0.64
Spain
                                   (0.47)



Definition:
PSAV =    Private Savings to GDP Ratio =    National    Savings + Deficit
          of the General Government.
INVY =    Investment to GDP Ratio = Fixed Capital Formation plus
          Change in Inventories as a Share of GDP.

Data Source: OECD National Income Accounts.
             OECD Data for Change in Net Debt (General Government
              Deficit) figures.
All equations include a constant term whose value is omitted.
t—statistiCS in parentheses.
                                  47

Table 5.
Regressions Results.
Dependent Variable: National Savings to GDP Ratio (SAVY).


                                Independent
                                Variable:
                                                  2
Country          Sample         DEFY          R       D.W.
                 Period



U.S              61—85          —0.92
                                (7.08)

                 66—85          —1.00         0.65    0.72
Japan
                                (5.86)

                 61—85          —1.14         0.73    0.83
Germany
                                (7.99)

France           61—85          —1.60         0.54    0.42
                                (5.25)

U.K.             61—85          —0.15         0.13    0.66
                                (1.84)

                 61—85          —0.47         0.74    1.43
Italy
                                (7.31)

Canada           66—85          —0.39         0.60    0.83
                                (5.29)

                 61—85          —0.80         0.83    0.59
Belgium
                                (10.7)

Austria          71—85          —1.03         0.52    0.46
                                (3.79)

Denmark          71—85          —0.74         0.87    0.98
                                (9.62)

Finland          71—85          —0.53         0.27    1.69
                                 (2.22)

Netherlands      71—85          —0.97         0.49    0.61
                                 (3.56)

Norway           71—85          —0.44         0.79    1.65
                                      48

Sweden               71—85          —0.65    0.85     0.77
                                    (8.85)

Ireland              71—85          —0.31    0.36     1.37
                                    (2.70)

Australia           71—85           —0.38    0.05     0.48
                                    (0.83)

Greece              71—85           —0.94    0.71     1.72
                                    (5.76)

Spain               71—85           —1.05    0.74     0.63
                                    (6.23)



Definitions:
DEFY = General Government Deficit as a Share of GDP = Change in the Net

         Debt of the General Government as a share of GDP.
SAVY =   National   Savings to GDP Ratio.


Data Source: OECD National Income Accounts.
             OECD Data for Net Debt figures.
                                  49


Table 6.
Regressions Results.
Dependent Variable: National Savings to GDP Ratio (SAVY).

                              Independent Variables
                                                           2
Country          Sample        DEFY        INVY        R       D.W.
                 Period


U.s              61—85        —0.67         0.43      0.75     0.94
                              (4.38)       (2.57)
                 66—85        —0.36         0.66      0.89     1.18
Japan
                              (2.61)       (6.37)

                 61—85        —0.47         0.62      0.91     0.80
Gernany
                              (3.52)       (6.55)

France           61—85        —0.48         0.87      0.92     1.92
                              (2.91)       (10.5)

U.K.             61—85        —0.14         0.42      0.47     0.89
                              (2.16)       (3.81)

                 61—85        —0.45         0.10      0.75     1.61
Italy
                              (5.84)       (0.68)

Canada           66—85        —0.22         0.42      0.85     1.51
                              (3.93)        (5.47)

                 61—85        —0.49         0.58      0.87     0.58
Belgium
                              (4.18)        (3.06)

Austria          71—85        —0.36         0.70      0.83     1.42
                               (1.65)       (4.71)

Denmark          71—85        —0.24         0.76      0.92     1.75
                               (1.22)       (2.60)

Finland          71—85        —0.18          0.36      0.64    1.55
                               (0.93)       (3.52)

Netherlands      71—85        —0.51          0.45      0.56    0.42
                               (1.24)       (1.42)

                 71—85        —0.46          0.03      0.79    1.71
Norway
                                      50

Sweden               71—85        —0.49         0.38      0.88        0.88
                                  (4.22)       (1.72)

Ireland              71—85        —0.32         0.07      0.36        1.42
                                  (2.63)       (0.35)

Australia            71—85        —0.16         0.59      0.12        0.37
                                  (0.32)       (1.00)

Greece               71—85        —0.25         1.00      0.90        1.65
                                  (1.42)       (4.77)

Spain                71—85        —0.87         0.15      0.75        0.63
                                  (2.03)       (0.46)



Definitions:
DEFY =   General Government Deficit as a Share of GDP = Change  in
         the Net Debt of the General Government as a share of GDP.
INVY =   Investment to GDP Ratio = Fixed Capital Formation plus
         Change in Inventories as a Share of GDP.
SAVY =   National   Savings (Private and Public) as a Share of GDP.

Data Source: OECD National Income Accounts.
             OECD Data for Net Debt figures.
                                  51

Table 7.
Regressions Results.
Dependent Variable: Investment to GDP Ratio (INVY).

                                Independent
                                Variable:
                                                  2
Country          Sample         DEFY          R       D.W.
                 Period




U.S              61—85          —0.58         0.41    1.16
                                (4.04)

                 66—85          —0.97         0.52    0.44
Japan
                                (4.46)

                 61—85          —1.08         0.59    0.90
Germany
                                (5.79)

France           61—85          —1.27         0.41    0.47
                                (4.02)

U.K.             61—85          —0.03         0.002   0.65
                                (0.21)

                 61—85          —0.25         0.26    0.81
Italy
                                 (2.52)

Canada           66—85          —0.41         0.32    0.64
                                 (2.92)

                 61—85          —0.52         0.70    0.71
Belgium
                                 (7.47)

Austria          71—85          —0.94         0.41    0.33
                                 (3.04)

Denmark          71—85          —0.65         0.879   1.33
                                 (10.6)

Finland          71—85          —0.94         0.24    1.39
                                 (2.02)

Netherlands      71—85          —1.00         0.59    1.59
                                 (4.40)

                 71—85            0.58        0.43    1.15
Norway
                                 (3.15)
                                         52


Sweden                71—85            —0.41      0.65     1.46
                                       (4.91)
Ireland               71—85             0.06     0.01      0.92
                                       (0.39)

Australia             71—85            —0.36     0.18      3.01
                                       (1.69)
Greece                71—85            —0.68     0.67     1.56
                                       (5.22)

Spain                 71—85            —1.17     0.83     0.99
                                       (8.09)



Definitions:

INVY   = Investment   to GDP Ratio =   Fixed Capital Formation plus Change in
         Inventories as a Share of GDP.
DEFY =   General Government Deficit as a Share of GDP = Change in the Net
         Debt of the General Government as a share of GDP.
Data Source: OECD National Income Accounts.
             OECD Data for Net Debt figures.
