                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             INTERGENERATIONAL EFFECTS OF EARLY-LIFE ADVANTAGE:
                       LESSONS FROM A PRIMATE STUDY

                                            Amanda M. Dettmer
                                             James J. Heckman
                                                Juan Pantano
                                                Victor Ronda
                                              Stephen J. Suomi

                                           Working Paper 27737
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w27737


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       August 2020


The authors are particularly indebted to Lauren Wooddell and Stefano Kaburu for their contributions
to the social dominance data, and to Angela Ruggiero, Courtney Shannon, and the countless research
assistants, animal care staff , and veterinary staff for their contributions to data collection, record-keeping,
and care of the animals. We also gratefully acknowledge helpful comments from participants at the
Griffin Applied Economics Incubator Conference in September 2019, and the research community
at the Center for the Economics of Human Development at the University of Chicago. This research
was funded by the Division of Intramural Research at the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development, NIH grant NICHD R37HD065072, the American Bar Foundation,
and the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1749548. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions
or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Science Foundation or National Institutes of Health. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Amanda M. Dettmer, James J. Heckman, Juan Pantano, Victor Ronda, and Stephen J. Suomi.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Intergenerational Effects of Early-Life Advantage: Lessons from a Primate Study
Amanda M. Dettmer, James J. Heckman, Juan Pantano, Victor Ronda, and Stephen J. Suomi
NBER Working Paper No. 27737
August 2020
JEL No. I12,Y80

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper uses three decades of studies with Rhesus monkeys to investigate the intergenerational
effects of early life advantage. Monkeys and their offspring were both randomly assigned to be
reared together or apart from their mothers. We document significant intergenerational effects of
maternal presence. We also estimate, for the first time, the intergenerational complementarity of
early life advantage, where the intergenerational effects of maternal rearing are only present for
offspring that were mother-reared. This finding suggests that parenting is the primary mechanism
driving the intergenerational effects. Our paper demonstrates how studies of primates can inform
human development.

Amanda M. Dettmer                               Victor Ronda
Yale University                                 Aarhus University,
Yale Child Study Center                         Department of Economics and Business Economics
Nieson Irving Harris Building                   Fuglesangs Alle 4, Office C9
230 S. Frontage Road                            Aarhus, 8210
New Haven, CT 06519                             Denmark
amanda.dettmer@yale.edu                         ronda@econ.au.dk

James J. Heckman                                Stephen J. Suomi
Center for the Economics of                     NICHD
Human Development                               suomis@mail.nih.gov
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and IZA
and also NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu

Juan Pantano
Eller College of Management
University of Arizona
1130 East Helen Street
Tucscon, AZ 85721
jpanta.uchicago@gmail.com


A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27737
1       Introduction


This paper presents experimental evidence on the intergenerational impact of early advantage
on the health and social status of Rhesus monkeys. Rhesus monkeys have a close biological
and behavioral resemblance to humans. Rhesus monkeys share 93% of the same DNA with
humans (Gibbs et al., 2007), develop attachment behaviors at infancy and naturally form
hierarchical social structures in the same way as humans (Dettmer and Suomi, 2014). Rhesus
monkeys can be reared in highly controlled and experimentally manipulated environments
in ways that are not possible with humans.

        We use a decades-long study of Rhesus monkeys conducted at the Laboratory of Compar-
ative Ethology (LCE) at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) to investigate the impacts
on health and social status of multi-generational experimentally assigned adversity and non-
adversity. Following the classic study of Harlow and Zimmermann (1959), generations of
Rhesus monkeys are exposed at random to adverse or normal rearing conditions. Normally
reared monkeys are reared by their mothers. Adversely reared monkeys are separated from
mothers after birth and reared in a nursery by human caregivers during the first 40 days. At
that point they are assigned to two rearing conditions that involve different amounts of peer
contact. This is the primate analog of early life adversity.1 The monkeys remain in these
arrangements until weaning, which occurs when they are approximately 8 months old. After
weaning they are moved to larger social groups where monkeys from all treatment groups
live together. The study protocol is graphically depicted in Figure 1.

        The multigenerational rearing experiment creates variation in family rearing sequences.
This variation allows us to estimate a variety of new treatment effects, including the intergen-
erational complementarity (supermodularity) of early-life advantage, and to experimentally
quantify the mechanisms of intergenerational transmission of early-life advantage. Consider
two generations - what we analyze in this paper. Let R = 0 denote nursery-rearing (NR), or
    1
    Research by Rutter and O’Connor (2004) and Nelson, Fox, and Zeanah (2014) highlights the importance
of child-caregiver interactions in the early years in fostering child development.


                                                  1
                                Figure 1: LCE Study Protocol




reared in adversity, while R = 1 denotes mother-rearing (MR), or reared in normal condi-
tions. Let si,j denote the rearing sequence of the monkey’s family, where i ∈ {0, 1} denotes
the rearing of the monkey’s mother (generation 1) and j ∈ {0, 1} the monkey’s own rearing
(generation 2). The two-generation study creates four possible sequences depicted in Table
1.
                    Table 1: Multigenerational Rearing Assignment
                  XXX
                       XXX Gen. 2             Mother-reared     Nursery-reared
                          XXX
                   Gen. 1    XXX                 (R=1)             (R=0)

                  Mother-reared     (R=1)           s1,1              s1,0

                  Nursery-reared    (R=0)           s0,1              s0,0



     The difference in the outcomes of monkeys assigned to the four rearing sequences reveals
the many treatment effects of the intervention. Let Ψ(si,j ) be the outcome of a monkey
when the mother and the monkey are assigned to rearing sequence si,j , holding everything
else constant. The difference, Ψ(s0,1 ) − Ψ(s0,0 ) reveals the benefit of MR rearing for offspring
of disadvantaged (NR) mothers and tells us about whether it is possible to compensate for
maternal disadvantage. Similarly, Ψ(s1,1 ) − Ψ(s1,0 ) reveals the benefit of sustained interven-
tion across generations.


                                                2
       The difference in outcomes across rearing sequences also reveals the intergenerational ef-
fect of the intervention for offspring assigned to the two rearing conditions: Ψ(s1,0 ) − Ψ(s0,0 )
reveals the intergenerational effect of intervention on disadvantaged (NR) offspring and
Ψ(s1,1 ) − Ψ(s0,1 ) the intergenerational benefit on non-disadvantaged (MR) offspring. The
difference between the two intergenerational effects [Ψ(s1,1 ) − Ψ(s0,1 )] − [Ψ(s1,0 ) − Ψ(s0,0 )]
reveals the intergenerational complementarity (supermodularity) of rearing conditions. It de-
scribes how the effect of offspring rearing depends on parent rearing. Lastly, Ψ(s1,0 )−Ψ(s0,1 )
tell us about the relative benefits of investing in the parental generation, in comparison to
investing in the offspring generation.

       This multi-generational randomization allows us to learn more than the benefit of the
intervention in a given generation. It also allows us to learn about the importance of sus-
tained interventions and the importance of investing early in the parental generation versus
compensating the environments of offspring.

       The specific design of the intervention in the form of maternal separation allows us
to experimentally quantify the relative importance of pre and post-birth mechanisms in
the intergenerational transmission of early-life advantage. Nursery-reared monkeys do not
interact with their mothers (and fathers) after birth, so any and all transmission of early-life
advantage on NR monkeys operate via pre-birth factors, such as in-utero investments and
transgenerational epigenetic effects. For mother-reared monkeys, early-life advantage can
be transmitted via mother-offspring interactions after birth (parenting) in addition to the
pre-birth factors. The difference in the intergenerational effects of the intervention across
MR and NR offspring reveals the relative importance of the parenting mechanisms from
in-utero or transgenerational epigenetic mechanisms, which are two alternative pathways
driving intergenerational treatment effects that do not involve parent-offspring interaction
after birth.2
   2
    See Gluckman and Hanson (2005), Almond and Currie (2011) and Almond and Mazumder (2013) for
three detailed reviews of the fetal-origins hypothesis. Also, see Jablonka and Raz (2009) and Heijmans et al.
(2008) for a detailed discussion of the transgenerational epigenetic mechanism.



                                                     3
    This paper makes three main contributions to the literature. First, using the data col-
lected over four decades at LCE, we document significant intergenerational effects of early
life advantage on offspring outcomes. We show the intergenerational effects start at birth
and persist until adulthood. Second, we present the first evidence of intergenerational com-
plementarities of early life advantage. We show that the benefits of the intervention (mother-
rearing) are only positive for the offspring of mothers that also received the positive inter-
vention. This highlights the value of sustained intervention across generations. Third, we
present evidence that parenting is the primary channel of intergenerational transmission of
early-life advantage.

    The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides background on research
using non-human primates and describes the study conducted at the LCE along with its
main lessons for human development. Section 3 describes the data and outcomes used in
this paper in more detail. Empirical findings are presented in Section 4. Section 5 concludes.


2   Non-Human Primate Research


Non-human primates (NHPs), particularly macaques, have been utilized for decades as mod-
els for the study of child development. Harlow’s early experiments in the 1950s and 1960s
demonstrated that infant monkeys develop attachments to contact comfort figures and de-
pend on attachments to thrive (Harlow, 1958, 1959; Harlow and Zimmermann, 1959; Harlow
and Harlow, 1962, 1965). These studies transformed child-rearing practices in the U.S.,
which previously emphasized little physical contact in order to provide clean, sterile en-
vironments for infants. Since Harlow’s initial studies, decades of research has repeatedly
demonstrated the value of NHPs for child development research. NHPs, and macaques, in
particular, are biologically similar to humans (we share approximately 93% of the same DNA
Gibbs et al., 2007), they possess neurological, anatomical, and physiological systems that are
present in humans but are lacking in other animal models (Phillips et al., 2014), and they
engage in highly complex social interactions with a period of infancy in which the young

                                              4
are highly dependent on their mothers and other caregivers (Suomi, 2005). Moreover, NHPs
satisfy criteria for attachment (see Dettmer and Suomi, 2014 for a review), with infants ex-
hibiting predictable behavioral and physiological stress responses when separated from their
caregivers that subside when reunited.

   Besides demonstrating attachment behaviors, and myriad other social behaviors, that
are similar to those of humans, NHPs exhibit similar neurological development to human
infants. They are capable of learning complex cognitive tasks that assess brain functions in
ways similar to human children. For instance, the Primate Neonatal Assessment (PNNA;
Schneider and Suomi, 1992; Schneider, Champoux, and Moore, 2006) was developed on the
basis of the Brazelton Neonatal Assessment Scale for human infants (Brazelton, 1973), and
considerable experience using this instrument has demonstrated similar reflex, motor skill,
and sensorimotor development across humans and NHPs (Schneider, Roughton, and Lubach,
1997; Schneider et al., 1999, 2001, 2007; Schneider and Moore, 2000). In addition, cognitive
tasks for human children developed by Jean Piaget (Piaget, 1954) have been modified for
the study of cognitive development in NHPs (Dettmer et al., 2009; Diamond and Goldman-
Rakic, 1989; Filion, Washburn, and Gulledge, 1996; Sackett et al., 1981), as have other
complex cognitive tasks that measure learning, cognitive flexibility, and impulsivity (Clarren
et al., 1992; Dettmer et al., 2007; Dettmer, Murphy, and Suomi, 2015; Sackett et al., 2006)

   Rhesus monkeys naturally form rigid dominance hierarchies, and social rank is transmit-
ted via the maternal line, with mothers, siblings, and aunts caring for and reinforcing a young
monkey’s place in the hierarchy. From infancy, both human and macaque infants are able to
understand asymmetric relationships in social dominance, with fully-developed dominance
relationships among peers present at toddlerhood (see Wooddell et al., 2017a for a review).
Similar to humans, high-ranking monkeys have greater access to resources – namely, preferred
social partners, high-value food items, and mating opportunities. Low-ranking monkeys ex-
hibit detrimental alterations in stress reactivity pathways, disease resistance, and other key
biological pathways (see Boyce and Hertzman, 2018 for a review; Hoffman et al., 2010;


                                              5
Snyder-Mackler et al., 2016; Zumpe and Michael, 1987). Such social stratification manifests
as socioeconomic status (SES) in humans (Boyce and Hertzman, 2018), thereby making the
study of macaque social rank yet another strength of this model species.

      Several advantages to the NHP model of child development make them ideal for the
scientific study of development. First, as previously noted, NHPs develop about four times
faster than humans, making long-term follow-up and intergenerational analyses easier than
in humans. Second, NHPs can be reared in highly controlled environments, allowing for
experimental control over specific variables such as the amount of adult social interaction
individuals receive early in development. Third, NHPs can be randomly assigned to differen-
tial rearing conditions from birth. The randomizations can be repeated across generations.
Finally, repeated and long-term collection of biological samples and behavioral data is much
more feasible in NHPs, allowing for detailed analyses of developmental processes. All of these
features enhance our understanding of primate and human development. In this paper, we
rely on the repeated randomization of early rearing conditions across generations to estimate
intergenerational complementarities of early-life advantage for the first time.


2.1     The LCE Study

Randomization of early rearing conditions in NHPs has most often been achieved by com-
paring infants reared with their mothers, either in mother-infant dyads or in social groups
(i.e., mother-rearing or MR), to those hand-reared in a nursery by human caregivers with
differing amounts of peer-contact (i.e., nursery-rearing or NR). The LCE conducted such
comparative studies for over 30 years as part of the National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development (NICHD) Intramural Research Program. In these studies, infant
macaques were randomly assigned to be either MR or NR beginning within the first days of
life through about 6-8 months of age. The rearing assignment only depended on the mother’s
primiparous status, where first-born monkeys were more likely to be assigned to the MR con-
dition. Thereafter MR and NR infants were “weaned,” whereby they were removed from

                                              6
their mothers or the nursery and then housed in similar conditions. Thus, behavioral or
biological differences observed after the first 6-8 months can be attributed to the differential
early social experiences infants received prior to that time.

      In the NR paradigm, infants were randomly assigned to be reared in one of two conditions.
The first is peer-rearing (PR), where, after the first 40 days of life being hand-reared by
human caregivers, groups of four or five infants were housed together permanently for the
duration of their NR (i.e., 8-10 months). The second is surrogate-peer-rearing (SPR), in
which, after the first 40 days of life being hand-reared by human caregivers, infants were
reared in single cages with mobile cloth-covered surrogates and also given daily two-hour play
sessions with three other SPR peers.3 . These play groups remained constant throughout the
duration of their nursery rearing. The two groups of nursery-reared infants (SPR and PR)
never physically socialized with each other, although they did live in the same housing room
where they could see, hear, and smell each other.

      Importantly, every study with animals must undergo a rigorous review process prior to
the approval of the study and the collection of any data. This review is conducted by the
institutional animal care and use committee (IACUC), which is comprised of experts in the
field, non-expert scientists, veterinarians, and members of the general public. Unlike any
other use of animals (i.e., food, clothing, entertainment, etc.), the research must be ethically
justified in the application process and approved prior to the onset of any study. In each
study, scientists make meticulous considerations of the potential benefits of the research
versus the potential harms to the animals. These considerations are based on many factors
and are also evaluated in the study application and approval processes (Tardif et al., 2013).
  3
     It has been shown that infant rhesus monkeys form attachments to the surrogate mothers Harlow and
Zimmermann (1959). However, research also demonstrates that they develop stronger attachments to bio-
logical mothers than to inanimate surrogate ones Meyer et al. (1975)




                                                  7
3        Data


The LCE studied close to fifteen-hundred Rhesus monkeys over three decades. Many of the
monkeys in the study were offspring of mothers that also participated in the study, allowing
us to study the intergenerational effects of the rearing intervention.

         In this paper, we consider all offspring-mother pairs that participated at any point in time
in the LCE study. In total, we follow 728 pregnancies from about 371 females that were part
of the rearing experiment. Of the 728 pregnancies, 656 monkeys grew up to be part of the
rearing experiment. Some of the pregnancies ended up in stillbirths, some offspring died after
birth, and some were assigned to alternative rearing conditions.4 Importantly the rearing
assignment was randomized in both generations. As a result, the rearing assignment of
offspring monkeys (generation 2) did not depend on the rearing assignment of their mothers
(generation 1). We describe the rearing allocation for the 656 offspring-mother pairs in Table
2.
                         Table 2: Multigenerational Rearing Assignment
                 XXX
                    X   XXX Gen. 2          Mother-reared      Nursery-reared       Total
                  Gen. 1   XXX
                                XX             (R=1)              (R=0)
                                                 158                152               310
                 Mother-reared     (R=1)
                                              [24.09%]           [23.17%]          [47.26%]
                                                 189                157               346
                 Nursery-reared    (R=0)
                                              [28.81%]           [23.93%]          [52.74%]
                                                 347                309               656
                           Total
                                              [52.90%]           [47.10%]           [100%]


         We analyze a series of different outcomes to understand the intergenerational impacts
of the rearing intervention. In order to understand the initial intergenerational impacts
of the intervention on the second generation, we study pregnancy outcomes obtained from
birth records. In order to study the long-lasting intergenerational effects of the intervention,
we consider health outcomes measured after the end of the intervention, in adolescence,
     4
    Among the small number of live births that we exclude, the majority were reared by a different mother,
in a cross-fostering experiment.



                                                    8
and measures of social status measured during adulthood. Table 3 provides the summary
statistics for the outcomes of interest (Elo ranking is a measure of social status discussed
further below).

   We consider three pregnancy outcomes: whether the pregnancy resulted in a birth,
whether the offspring survived the first month of life, and the offspring’s birth-weight. Out
of the 728 pregnancies, 700 (96.2%) resulted in a live birth. Also, out of the 700 births,
674 (96.3%) offspring survived the first month of life. Out of the 700 births, we only have
birth-weight information on 474 births since birth-weight only started being collected in
2004.
                                Table 3: Generation 2 Outcomes

                                          # Obs   Mean Std. Dev. Min Max
              Live birth                 700/728 0.962    0.192    0    1
              Survived 1st month         674/700 0.963   0.189     0    1
              Birthweight (g)              474   491.902 78.230   278  820
              % in Good Health             109    0.904   0.127  0.375  1
              Elo Percentile rank          106    0.540  0.291   0.053  1
    Notes: This table provides summary statistics for the generation 2 monkeys. Live birth and
    Survived 1st month were coded as 0 (no) and 1 (yes). We define these outcomes in detail in the
    text. Elo Percentile rank is a measure of social status capturing a macaque’s position in the social
    hierarchy.




   We have access to health records from veterinary exams between 2003 and 2009. Vet-
erinary exams occurred on a quarterly basis. We are interested in health outcomes after
the end of the rearing experiment, at ten months, and before monkeys joined larger social
groups, at age 3. This period corresponds to the period from late early childhood through
early adolescence for humans. For that reason, in the analysis, we include all monkeys born
between 2002 and 2006, for which we have complete health records for ages ten months to
3 years. Also, we restrict the analysis to monkeys where the monkey and its mother were
mother-reared or nursery-reared. In total, we have health information on 121 monkeys.

   Our outcome of interest is the proportion of veterinary exams in which the monkey was


                                                     9
in good health and did not exhibit a health problem. The most common health problems
included diarrhea (not uncommon in captive primate colonies) and having a wound requir-
ing treatment and monitoring (typically resulting from fights with other animals). Other,
infrequent health issues included skin rash or dermatitis, periodic surgeries such as cesarean
section or ovariectomy, spontaneous abortions, and vaginal or rectal prolapses. During the
two-year period, monkeys experienced an average of 8.4 health visits from a veterinarian,
ranging from 6 to 9. On average, the monkeys exhibited no health problems in 90% of the
visits. Moreover, 54% of the monkeys did not exhibit a health problem in any of the visits
in the two-year window.

   Social status in Rhesus monkeys is often measured by position in the dominance hierarchy.
Rhesus monkeys exhibit a rigid linear dominance hierarchy, in which the top-ranking monkey
outranks the next-ranking monkeys, and so on down the line. In general, once formed, the
dominance hierarchy remains stable. Methods for assessing dominance rank typically rely
on observations of dyadic interactions in which wins and losses are recorded. For example,
if monkey A successfully displaces, threatens, chases, or physically attacks another monkey
without “losing” the interaction (i.e., showing submissive behaviors such as moving out of
the way, fear-grimacing, screaming, or being wounded) every time against monkey B, then
monkey A will outrank monkey B. Monkey B will only “lose” to monkey A, but not to
monkey C, and so on.

   Social status is often measured via Elo-ratings. These ratings were first developed to rank
chess players in 1978 (Elo, 1978), and have since been adapted for use in animal hierarchies
(Albers and Vries, 2001; Neumann et al., 2011; Wooddell et al., 2016, 2017b). Elo-ratings are
calculated based on the expectation of winning an interaction. Points are given to the winner
and loser after each interaction. More points are attributed to the interactions where the
outcome was unexpected. For example a low-rating animal winning an interaction against
a high-rating animal receives more points than a high-rating animal winning against a low-
rating animal. This numerical system tracks rank changes over time by constantly updating


                                             10
values according to wins and losses. We rely on Elo-ratings computed for adult female
monkeys from >4,000 dominance interactions in 30-min observation sessions between 2013
and 2016, following previously established methods (Wooddell et al., 2016, 2017a; Wooddell,
Kaburu, and Dettmer, 2019).

    Our measure of interest is the within-cohort Elo-rating percentile rank. Dominance was
measured seven times between 2013 and 2016. The age at measurement varied significantly
from 21 months to 15 years of age. Elo-rating ranges from negative 100 (low ranked) to 2400
(high ranked). Our preferred measure is the within-cohort Elo-rating percentile rank, which
ranges from 0.05 (lowest-ranked) to 1 (highest-ranked), and adjusts for differences in size
between the different rearing groups (Dettmer et al., 2017; Wooddell et al., 2017a, 2019).


4   Empirical Results


We now examine the intergenerational effects of early life advantage, and complementarities
between maternal and offspring rearing assignment. The experimental rearing assignment,
including independence in treatment assignment across generations, makes identification
of treatment effects straightforward. We report augmented-inverse probability weighting
(AIPW) estimates of the various treatment effect parameters in the main body of the paper.
The AIPW estimator is “doubly-robust.” It is consistent for the average treatment effect
(ATE) if either the propensity score model or the outcome regression is properly specified
(Robins, Rotnitzky, and Zhao, 1994; Lunceford and Davidian, 2004; Kang and Schafer, 2007;
Cattaneo, 2010). We perform a variety of robustness exercises in Appendix A.




                                            11
4.1      Effects of Maternal Rearing on Maternal Fertility

We first explore the effects of rearing assignment on fertility for generation 1 (mothers).5
Understanding the impact of maternal rearing on fertility is important, as selection into
fertility may lead to selection bias into the outcomes of the second generation. We consider
four outcomes constructed from birth and pregnancy records: whether the female monkey
had ever been pregnant, the total number of pregnancies, the total number for those with at
least one pregnancy, and the age at first birth. Table 4 reports the average treatment effect
of the intervention on the fertility outcomes of generation 1.

                      Table 4: Fertility Effects on Generation 1 Females

       Generation 1 Outcome:      Any Offspring?     Age at 1st Birth     # Pregnancies     # Preg. (> 0)
       Ψ(s∗,1 ) − Ψ(s∗,0 )            0.025             -0.332**              0.008             -0.209
                                     (0.052)             (0.135)             (0.300)           (0.436)


       Mean:                            0.469               5.530              1.984             4.229
       Obs.                              371                 174                371               174
       Notes: This table provides AIPW estimates for average treatment effects of generation 1 mother-
       rearing on fertility outcomes of generation 1 monkeys. The inference is under the null that the
       parameter of interest is zero. The notation is such that Ψ(s∗,j ) describes the outcome under the
       jth rearing assignment of females in generation 1 irrespective of their mothers’ rearing assignment.
       j = 1 if the monkey was assigned to the MR condition and zero otherwise. Standard errors are
       reported in parentheses. The * correspond to the following p-value levels: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05,
       *** p < 0.01.


       We find no significant impacts of maternal rearing on the probability of ever being preg-
nant. Females assigned to the MR and NR conditions both have about a 50% probability of
ever being pregnant. We also do not find any differences across the two rearing groups on
the number of pregnancies, with females in both groups having, on average, two offspring.
However, we do find significant differences in the age of the generation 1 female at first birth.
   5
    Our data are not rich enough to allow us to analyze the impact of a father’s rearing status. First, for a
few offspring we don’t know anything about the identity of the father. Second, for some offspring we know
of two potential fathers, without knowing for sure which one it was. Third, for the fathers that we can
identify, some did not participate in the experiment (they were brought in for mating but were not born
in the colony). Finally, among the fathers that we identify and were part of the experiment, a few alpha
macaques are often responsible for fathering many of the animals in our offspring generation. There was no
explicit sorting strategy. Exploring the impact of assortative mating on child outcomes is a topic left for
future research.

                                                       12
We find that MR females have the first offspring 0.332 years (or 4 months) earlier than NR
females. The difference in fertility timing could be problematic when estimating the inter-
generational effects. For this reason, we re-estimate our main parameters under different
specifications in Appendix A. We find that our results are robust to different specifications,
including when controlling for sample selection.


4.2     Intergenerational Effects of a Mother’s Rearing Assignment on Offspring’s

        Pre-Treatment Outcomes

Next, we estimate the intergenerational effects of the mother’s rearing condition on the
offspring’s birth outcomes. This intergenerational effect could operate through the effect
of the mother’s rearing assignment on the pre-birth (in-utero) investments received by the
offspring (see Almond and Currie, 2011; Gluckman and Hanson, 2005), and the impact of
these investments on offspring early outcomes. Alternatively, it could operate through some
form of intergenerational epigenetic transmission (see Jablonka and Raz, 2009). We report
the estimated intergenerational effects in Table 5.
                      Table 5: Birth Outcomes of Generation 2 Monkeys

               Generation 2 Outcome:       Live birth    Survived 1st month      Birthweight (g)

               Ψ(s1,∗ ) − Ψ(s0,∗ )            0.005            0.029**                -15.352
                                             (0.015)           (0.015)               (10.850)


               Outcome mean:                  0.962              0.963               491.902
               Generation 2 obs.               728                700                  474
               Generation 1 obs.               174                171                  140
      Notes: This table provides AIPW estimates for average treatment effects of generation 1 mother-
      rearing on birth outcomes of generation 2 monkeys. The inference is under the null that the
      parameter of interest is zero. The notation is such that Ψ(si,∗ ) describes the outcome of generation
      2 monkeys with mothers assigned to the ith rearing condition irrespective of their own eventual
      assignment. i = 1 if the monkey’s mother was assigned to the MR condition and zero otherwise.
      Standard errors clustered at the mother level are reported in parenthesis. The stars correspond to
      the following p-value levels: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.


      We find no intergenerational effects on the probability that a pregnancy ends in a live
birth. Pregnancies of both MR and NR females have about a 3.8% chance of resulting in a

                                                        13
stillbirth. However, we find significant intergenerational effects of a mother’s MR assignment
on the probability of offspring survival in the first month of life. The first-month survival for
the offspring of MR mothers is 2.9 percentage points higher than that for the offspring of NR
mothers. These findings are consistent with Zipple et al. (2019), which shows that maternal
early life adversity is associated with offspring’s early mortality in wild baboons.6 At the
same time, we find that offspring with MR mothers are born with about 15g lower birth-
weight than offspring of NR mothers. Even though this effect is not statistically significant,
the negative impact on birth-weight is interesting and could signal a mechanism for possible
intergenerational transmission of resilience to adversity.


4.3      Intergenerational Effects of a Mother’s Rearing Assignment on Offspring’s

         Post-Treatment Outcomes

We explore the intergenerational effects of rearing conditions assigned to generation 1 moth-
ers on outcomes for generation 2 offspring. The offspring outcomes studied here are measured
after the offspring’s own treatment with alternative rearing conditions has concluded. There-
fore, unlike the outcomes examined in the previous subsection, these offspring outcomes can
be affected not only by the mother’s rearing condition but also by the offspring’s own rearing
condition. The outcomes we analyze are health and social rank.

       Health: We first discuss our estimates of the intergenerational effects of alternative
rearing conditions in generation 1 mothers on the frequency with which the offspring is found
to be in good health between 1 and 3 years of age. We report the estimated intergenerational
effects in Table 6. We present intergenerational effects separately for offspring assigned to
the nursery-reared Ψ(s1,0 ) − Ψ(s0,0 ) and mother-reared Ψ(s1,1 ) − Ψ(s0,1 ) conditions in rows 3
and 4 respectively. Note that Ψ(s1,1 ) − Ψ(s0,1 ) reveals the benefit of a sustained intervention
   6
     The intergenerational effect on early mortality could potentially lead to selection bias in the other
offspring outcomes. In the accompanying appendix (Appendix A), we estimate a version of the IPW estimator
that accounts for sample selection to estimate the ATE among survivors. We find that controlling for sample
selection bias does not substantially change our findings.



                                                    14
across generations whereas Ψ(s1,0 )−Ψ(s0,0 ) reveals the intergenerational effect of intervention
on disadvantaged (NR) offspring.

                Table 6: Long-term Outcomes of Generation 2 Monkeys

          Generation 2 Outcome:       % in Good Health (1-3y)       Elo Percentile Rank (2-15y)


          Ψ(s0,1 ) − Ψ(s0,0 )                    -0.019                          -0.109
                                                (0.034)                         (0.071)


          Ψ(s1,1 ) − Ψ(s1,0 )                   0.078**                        0.134**
                                                (0.033)                        (0.066)


          Ψ(s1,0 ) − Ψ(s0,0 )                    -0.030                          -0.075
                                                (0.031)                         (0.068)


          Ψ(s1,1 ) − Ψ(s0,1 )                   0.067**                        0.168**
                                                (0.034)                        (0.079)


          Ψ(s1,0 ) − Ψ(s0,1 )                    -0.011                          0.034
                                                (0.040)                         (0.076)

          Outcome mean:                          0.904                           0.540
          Generation 2 obs.                       109                             106
          Generation 1 obs.                        59                              68
    Notes: This table reports AIPW estimates of the different treatment effects of maternal vs. nursery
    rearing on long-term outcomes of Generation 2 monkeys. The inference is under the null that the
    parameter of interest is zero. The notation is such that Ψ(si,j ) describes the outcome of generation
    2 monkeys when assigned to the jth rearing condition and with mothers assigned to the ith rearing
    condition. i = 1 (j = 1) if the monkey (monkey’s mother) was assigned to the MR condition and
    zero otherwise. Standard errors clustered at the mother level are reported in parenthesis. The
    stars correspond to the following p-value levels: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.


   We find a positive and statistically significant intergenerational effect on the frequency
of time in good health. However, this significant intergenerational effect is only present
for offspring that were assigned to be reared with their mother (row 4). Indeed, for MR
offspring, having a mother who was MR instead of NR increases the frequency of time in
good health between ages 1 and 3 years by 6.7 percentage points.

   In addition to intergenerational effects, we also explore the effects of alternative con-

                                                     15
figurations of mother-offspring multi-generational assignment. In particular, we estimate
the effects of the offspring’s rearing condition on the offspring’s own health, while keep-
ing constant the mother’s rearing condition. We do this separately for offspring with NR
Ψ(s0,1 ) − Ψ(s0,0 ) and MR Ψ(s1,1 ) − Ψ(s1,0 ) mothers. The estimates are presented in rows
1 and 2. We find strong, statistically significant positive effects of offspring’s assignment
to maternal rearing on own health outcomes, but only for those whose mothers were also
maternally-reared (row 2).

       We also report estimates of the effects of changing the dynastic timing of advantage and
disadvantage, Ψ(s1,0 ) − Ψ(s0,1 ). We do this by comparing offspring outcomes in families
assigned to mother advantage followed by offspring disadvantage Ψ(s1,0 ) with offspring out-
comes in families that, conversely, were assigned to mother disadvantage followed by offspring
advantage Ψ(s0,1 ). Note that Ψ(s1,0 )−Ψ(s0,1 ) = Ψ(s1,0 )−Ψ(s0,0 )−[Ψ(s0,1 )−Ψ(s0,0 )] informs
us about the relative benefits of investing in the parent of a disadvantage child compared to
investing in the child itself.7 There is no statistically significant difference (see row 5).

       Social Status: We find similar patterns when we explore the intergenerational effects
of mother’s early-life advantage on offspring social dominance. We report the estimated
effects in the second column of Table 6 for the within-cohort Elo percentile rank. We find
a positive and significant intergenerational effect on the percentile rank measure for MR
offspring. Among MR offspring, having a mother who was MR, instead of NR, increases the
offspring’s percentile rank measure of social status by 0.168 points (row 4)

       Similarly to our findings for health outcomes, we find strong, significant effects of off-
spring’s own rearing condition on offspring’s social status only for offspring whose mothers
were also maternally-reared (row 2). Our estimates in row 5 indicate no statistically signifi-
cant effects from permutating advantaged/disadvantaged rearing conditions within mother-
offspring pairs.
   7
    Note that this parameter is equivalent to the difference in the parameters estimated in rows 3 and 1.
This is not equivalent to the concept of intergenerational complementarity which we discuss in the section,
and that involves a comparison between the parameters estimated in rows 3 and 4.


                                                    16
      It has recently become feasible to document intergenerational effects like Ψ(s1,∗ )−Ψ(s0,∗ ),
measuring the impact of parental treatment in early childhood on offspring life outcomes.
The advantage of our research design stems from its ability to estimate, in addition, the
intergenerational complementarity Ψ(s1,1 ) − Ψ(s0,1 ) − [Ψ(s1,0 ) − Ψ(s0,0 )] and to unpack the
different mechanisms of intergenerational influence. We turn to this next.


4.4     Intergenerational Complementarity

The difference in intergenerational effects provides an estimate of the intergenerational com-
plementarity of early life advantage (maternal rearing). Therefore, rejecting the null of zero
differences would indicate a statistical significant intergenerational complementarity. Recall
that Ψ(s1,0 ) − Ψ(s0,0 ) denotes the intergenerational effect of mother’s rearing assignment
on NR offspring whereas Ψ(s1,1 ) − Ψ(s0,1 ) denotes the intergenerational effect of mother’s
rearing assignment on MR offspring. The difference between these two intergenerational
effects [Ψ(s1,1 ) − Ψ(s0,1 )] − [Ψ(s1,0 ) − Ψ(s0,0 )] identifies the intergenerational complementar-
ity (supermodularity) of the treatment. It describes how the effectiveness of the offspring
intervention depends on parental exposure to the intervention.

      Table 7 reports point estimates and statistical inference for the intergenerational com-
plementarity in our two post-treatment outcomes. We document a strong and significant
intergenerational complementarity of early life advantage for both health and social rank
outcomes. This represents the first evidence of intergenerational complementarities of early
life advantage. The estimates imply that the effect of maternal advantage is more beneficial
for offspring who themselves experienced early life advantage.

      In Table 7, we report that the intergenerational complementarity effect on the frequency
in good health is 0.097. That means that the difference in the intergenerational effect of the
mother’s MR assignment on MR vs. NR offspring outcomes is 0.067 − (−0.030) = 0.097.
Similarly, we find that the intergenerational complementarity for the percentile rank is 0.244,
meaning that the mother’s MR assignment increases the relative social rank for MR offspring

                                                 17
                             Table 7: Intergenerational Complementarity

          Generation 2 Outcome:                           % in Good Health (1-3y)   Elo Percentile Rank (2-15y)

          [Ψ(s1,1 ) − Ψ(s0,1 )] − [Ψ(s1,0 ) − Ψ(s0,0 )]            0.097**                   0.244**
                                                                   (0.047)                   (0.103)

          Generation 2 obs.                                         109                        106
          Generation 1 obs.                                          59                         68
      Notes: This table reports AIPW estimates of the intergenerational complementarity of maternal
      vs. nursery rearing on long-term outcomes of Generation 2 monkeys. The inference is under the
      null that the difference in the intergenerational effects is zero. The notation is such that Ψ(si,j )
      describes the outcome of generation 2 monkeys when assigned to the jth rearing condition and
      with mothers assigned to the ith rearing condition. i = 1 (j = 1) if the monkey (monkey’s mother)
      were to be assigned to the MR condition and zero otherwise. Standard errors clustered at the
      mother level are reported in parenthesis. The stars correspond to the following p-value levels: *
      p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.


by 0.244 points more than for the NR offspring (0.168 vs. -0.075).


4.5     Mechanisms of Intergenerational Transmission

The positive intergenerational effects of a mother’s advantageous rearing condition on her
offspring outcomes may arise through two possible mechanisms. One mechanism operates
through the effect of the mother’s rearing assignment on offspring pre-treatment outcomes
(e.g., via in-utero effects) coupled with the effect of these induced changes in early outcomes
on later outcomes through the self-productivity of early skills. A second mechanism operates
via parenting, whereby the mother’s rearing assignment influences maternal parenting skills,
which in turn impact the offspring outcomes via improved parental investments after birth.

      As it turns out, the difference in intergenerational effects across NR and MR offspring
groups can also inform about the relative importance of alternative mechanisms of inter-
generational transmission. Our findings in Section 4.3 suggest that parenting is the primary
mechanism of intergenerational transmission, as the intergenerational effects we find are only
significant for MR offspring. However, to formally assess whether parenting is the key in-
tergenerational pathway, we must test whether the difference in these two intergenerational
effects is statistically significant. This is precisely what the tests in Section 4.4 accomplish.


                                                              18
    Given that the complementarities are positive and significant, we interpret the intergen-
erational effects as driven mainly by MR mothers having superior skills and the fact that
these skills can be more easily transmitted to their offspring via maternal-offspring inter-
actions after birth, which are only possible for MR monkeys. This interpretation is in line
with results in Sproul Bassett et al. (2020), which shows that nursery-reared mothers exhibit
higher rates of premature infant rejection than maternal-reared mothers.

    Since NR monkeys do not interact with their mothers after birth, any intergenerational
effect on their outcomes has to operate only via pre-birth factors. Similarly, any evidence of
positive intergenerational effects that is present for MR monkeys but not for NR monkeys
has to be attributed to parenting effects, since parenting effects are only possible for MR
monkeys, and in-utero effects should be present for both. Therefore, we conclude that
improved parenting is the principal channel through which early life advantage in the parent’s
generation is transmitted to the next generation.


5   Discussion and Conclusion


This paper uses three decades of studies with Rhesus monkeys conducted at the Laboratory
of Comparative Ethology (LCE) at NIH to investigate the magnitude and mechanisms of
the intergenerational effects of early life advantage in the form of maternal rearing relative
to a more disadvantaged rearing condition.

    Using the data collected at LCE, we document positive intergenerational effects of a
mother’s early life advantage on her offspring outcomes. We find the positive intergenera-
tional effects start very early on and persist until adulthood. Moreover, early life maternal
presence (or separation) influences different dimensions of offspring development, including
health and social outcomes. In short, we find that the offspring of females that experienced
early life advantage via maternal presence are more likely to survive in the first month of life
than offspring of females reared apart from their mothers. Moreover, the offspring of females



                                              19
that experience early life advantage are less likely to suffer from health problems between
ages 1 and 3 years and more likely to achieve a high social rank in adulthood.

      Our findings are in line with results from a social experiment on humans. Heckman and
Karapakula (2019) document the intergenerational effects of the Perry Preschool Project,
which was a randomized social experiment in the 1960s that provided high-quality preschool
experiences to socially disadvantaged children. They find that the positive effects of the
preschool program were transmitted into the next generation. The offspring of the treated
participants were more likely to have better health, achieve higher education, and were more
likely to be employed than the offspring of the non-treated participants. In the same way
that early-life advantage via maternal presence for rhesus-monkeys led to improved health
and higher social rank for their offspring, early-life advantage via high-quality preschool in
humans led to better health and social outcomes for their children.

      The particular feature of the LCE study also allows us to cleanly identify the mechanisms
through which early-life conditions are transmitted across generations by controlling for each
generation’s environments and treatment status. We find strong evidence that parenting is
the main channel of intergenerational transmission. This follows from the finding that the
positive effects of maternal early-life advantage are only present for MR offspring. The
insignificant intergenerational effect on NR offspring is evidence that in-utero investments
cannot explain the intergenerational effects. This finding, combined with the large inter-
generational effects for the MR offspring, is indicative that parenting is the main channel
of intergenerational transmission of advantage. These results are also in line with the Perry
study. Heckman and Karapakula (2019) provide evidence that the intergenerational effects
of the preschool program were mainly driven by an improvement in the family environment
experienced by the children of the Perry participants. This evidence is also in line with
studies of extreme deprivation in humans, such as the study on Romanian orphans after
the fall of the Ceaucescu regime.8 The studies of the Romanian orphans demonstrate the
  8
      It is important to mention that while the findings are related, the treatment in the LCE study is not



                                                     20
importance of early life interactions and social attachment for the development of cognitive
and social skills and a variety of health outcomes (see Rutter, 1998; O’Connor et al., 2000;
Cunha et al., 2006).9

    The repeated randomization of early rearing conditions across generations in the LCE
study allows us – for the first time – to experimentally estimate the intergenerational com-
plementarity of an intervention. We document strong and statistically significant intergener-
ational complementarities of early life advantage on health and social status. The estimated
complementarities highlight the importance of sustained intervention for monkeys’ health
and social status. Future work should explore, perhaps using more feasible non-experimental
approaches, whether the complementarities we document in Rhesus monkeys are also present
in similar interventions in humans.

    NHPs have been utilized for decades to understand child development within a generation.
This paper demonstrates that they can also be used to study the intergenerational effects
of early life advantage. Monkeys and humans share many common features: they share
with us approximately 93% of the same DNA, demonstrate attachment behaviors, and have
hierarchical social structures. Monkeys are similar enough in biology and social structure to
be informative about human development. Studies with NHPs present several advantages
that make them essential complements to human studies. We have shown that NHP studies
provide a way to cleanly identify mechanisms in a way that is not possible in human studies
and to identify parameters never previously estimated.




equivalent or comparable to what happened with the Romanian orphans. NR monkeys were not extremely
deprived and had constant contact with human caregivers in their first month of life, and daily contact with
peers during the rest of their developmental period.
   9
     In the future, as the Romanian children complete their fertility, it will also be possible to study the
intergenerational effects of extreme deprivation in humans. However, even then it will not be possible to
estimate intergenerational complementarities because the children of the Romanian orphans are unlikely to
be exposed to extreme deprivations like those of their parents.


                                                    21
References

Albers, Paul C.H. and Han de Vries. 2001. “Elo-rating as a tool in the sequential estimation
  of dominance strengths.” Animal Behaviour :489–495.

Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie. 2011. “Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis.”
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 25 (3):153–172.

Almond, Douglas and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2013. “Fetal Origins and Parental Responses.”
  Annual Review of Economics 5:37–56.

Boyce, W. Thomas and Clyde Hertzman. 2018. “Early Childhood Health and the Life
  Course: The State of the Science and Proposed Research Priorities.” In Handbook of Life
  Course Health Development. Springer, Cham, 61–93.

Brazelton, T Berry. 1973. “Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale.” In Clinics in Develop-
  mental Medicine, vol. 50. London: William Heinemann Medical Books. Philadelphia: J.
  B. Lippincott.

Cattaneo, Matias D. 2010. “Efficient semiparametric estimation of multi-valued treatment
  effects under ignorability.” Journal of Econometrics 155 (2):138–154.

Clarren, Sterling K., Susan J. Astley, Virginia M. Gunderson, and Dee Spellman. 1992. “Cog-
  nitive and behavioral deficits in nonhuman primates associated with very early embryonic
  binge exposures to ethanol.” The Journal of Pediatrics 121 (5):789–796.

Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, Lance Lochner, and Dimitriy V. Masterov. 2006. “Inter-
  preting the evidence on life cycle skill formation.” Handbook of the Economics of Education
  1:697–812.

Dettmer, Amanda M., Lisa A. Houser, Gerald C. Ruppenthal, Saverio Capuano, and Laura
  Hewitson. 2007. “Growth and developmental outcomes of three high-risk infant rhesus
  macaques (Macaca mulatta).” American Journal of Primatology 69 (5):503–518.


                                             22
Dettmer, Amanda M., Ashley M. Murphy, and Stephen J. Suomi. 2015. “Development of a
  cognitive testing apparatus for socially housed mother-peer-reared infant rhesus monkeys.”
  Developmental Psychobiology 57 (3):349–355.

Dettmer, Amanda M., Matthew F.S.X. Novak, Melinda A. Novak, Jerrold S. Meyer, and
  Stephen J. Suomi. 2009. “Hair cortisol predicts object permanence performance in infant
  rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta).” Developmental Psychobiology 51 (8):706–713.

Dettmer, Amanda M and Stephen J Suomi. 2014. “Nonhuman Primate Models of Neuropsy-
  chiatric Disorders: Influences of Early Rearing, Genetics, and Epigenetics.” ILAR Journal
  55 (2):361–370.

Dettmer, Amanda M., Lauren J. Wooddell, Kendra L. Rosenberg, Stefano S.K. Kaburu,
  Melinda A. Novak, Jerrold S. Meyer, and Stephen J. Suomi. 2017. “Associations between
  early life experience, chronic HPA axis activity, and adult social rank in rhesus monkeys.”
  Social Neuroscience 12 (1):92–101.

Diamond, Adele and Patricia S. Goldman-Rakic. 1989. “Comparison of human infants and
  rhesus monkeys on Piaget’s AB task: Evidence for dependence on dorsolateral prefrontal
  cortex.” Experimental Brain Research 74 (1):24–40.

Elo, Arpad E. 1978. The Rating of Chessplayers: Past and Present. New York, NY: Arco
  Publishing.

Filion, Christine M., David A. Washburn, and Jonathan P. Gulledge. 1996. “Can monkeys
  (Macaca mulatta) represent invisible displacement?” Journal of Comparative Psychology
  110 (4):386.

Gibbs, Richard A., Jeffrey Rogers, Michael G. Katze, Roger Bumgarner, George M. We-
  instock, Elaine R. Mardis, Karin A. Remington, Robert L. Strausberg, J. Craig Venter,
  Richard K. Wilson et al. 2007. “Evolutionary and Biomedical Insights from the Rhesus
  Macaque Genome.” Science 316 (5822):222–234.


                                             23
Gluckman, Peter D. and Mark A. Hanson. 2005. The Fetal Matrix: Evolution, Development,
  and Disease. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Harlow, Harry F. 1958. “The Nature of Love.” American Psychologist 13 (12):673.

———. 1959. “Love in Infant Monkeys.” Scientific American 200 (6):68–75.

Harlow, Harry F and Margaret K. Harlow. 1962. “Social Deprivation in Monkeys.” Scientific
  American 207 (5):136–150.

Harlow, Harry F. and Margaret K. Harlow. 1965. “The Affectional Systems.” Behavior of
  Nonhuman Primates 2:287–334.

Harlow, Harry F. and Robert R. Zimmermann. 1959. “Affectional Responses in the Infant
  Monkey.” Science 130 (3373):421–432.

Heckman, James J and Ganesh Karapakula. 2019. “Intergenerational and Intragenerational
  Externalities of the Perry Preschool Project.” NBER Working Paper (w25889).

Heijmans, Bastiaan T., Elmar W. Tobi, Aryeh D. Stein, Hein Putter, Gerard J. Blauw,
  Ezra S. Susser, P. Eline Slagboom, and L. H. Lumey. 2008. “Persistent epigenetic differ-
  ences associated with prenatal exposure to famine in humans.” Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences 105 (44):17046–17049.

Hoffman, Christy L., James E. Ayala, Adaris Mas-Rivera, and Dario Maestripieri. 2010.
  “Effects of reproductive condition and dominance rank on cortisol responsiveness to stress
  in free-ranging female rhesus macaques.” American Journal of Primatology 72 (7):559–
  565.

Huber, Martin. 2014. “Treatment Evaluation in the Presence of Sample Selection.” Econo-
  metric Reviews 33 (8):869–905.

Jablonka, Eva and Gal Raz. 2009. “Transgenerational Epigenetic Inheritance: Prevalence,
  Mechanisms, and Implications for the Study of Heredity and Evolution.” The Quarterly


                                            24
  Review of Biology 84 (2):pp. 131–176. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/
  598822.

Kang, Joseph D.Y. and Joseph L. Schafer. 2007. “Demystifying double robustness: A com-
  parison of alternative strategies for estimating a population mean from incomplete data.”
  Statistical Science 22 (4):523–539.

Lunceford, Jared K. and Marie Davidian. 2004. “Stratification and weighting via the propen-
  sity score in estimation of causal treatment effects: a comparative study.” Statistics in
  Medicine 23 (19):2937–2960.

Meyer, Jerrold S., Melinda A. Novak, Robert E. Bowman, and Harry F. Harlow. 1975.
  “Behavioral and hormonal effects of attachment object separation in surrogate-peer-reared
  and mother-reared infant rhesus monkeys.” Developmental Psychobiology 8 (5):425–435.

Nelson, Charles A., Nathan A. Fox, and Charles H. Zeanah. 2014. Romania’s Abandoned
  Children: Deprivation, Brain Development, and the Struggle for Recovery. Cambridge,
  MA: Harvard University Press.

Neumann, Christof, Julie Duboscq, Constance Dubuc, Andri Ginting, Ade Maulana Irwan,
  Muhammad Agil, Anja Widdig, and Antje Engelhardt. 2011. “Assessing dominance hi-
  erarchies: validation and advantages of progressive evaluation with Elo-rating.” Animal
  Behaviour 82 (4):911–921.

O’Connor, Thomas G., Michael Rutter, Celia Beckett, Lisa Keaveney, Jana M. Kreppner,
  English, Romanian Adoptees Study Team et al. 2000. “The effects of global severe priva-
  tion on cognitive competence: Extension and longitudinal follow-up.” Child Development
  71 (2):376–390.

Phillips, Kimberley A., Karen L. Bales, John P. Capitanio, Alan Conley, Paul W. Czoty,
  Bert A. ´t Hart, William D. Hopkins, Shiu-Lok Hu, Lisa A. Miller, Michael A. Nader et al.
  2014. “Why Primate Models Matter.” American Journal of Primatology 76 (9):801–827.


                                            25
Piaget, Jean. 1954. The Construction of Reality in the Child. Volume 82 of International
  Library of Psychology. New York, NY: Basic Books.

Robins, James M, Andrea Rotnitzky, and Lue Ping Zhao. 1994. “Estimation of regression
  coefficients when some regressors are not always observed.” Journal of the American
  Statistical Association 89 (427):846–866.

Rutter, Michael. 1998. “Developmental Catch-up, and Deficit, Following Adoption after
  Severe Global Early Privation.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 39 (4):465–
  476.

Rutter, Michael and Thomas G. O’Connor. 2004. “Are There Biological Programming Ef-
  fects for Psychological Development? Findings From a Study of Romanian Adoptees.”
  Developmental Psychology 40 (1):81–94.

Sackett, Gene, Gerald Ruppenthal, Laura Hewitson, Calvin Simerly, and Gerald Schatten.
  2006. “Neonatal behavior and infant cognitive development in rhesus macaques produced
  by assisted reproductive technologies.” Developmental Psychobiology: The Journal of the
  International Society for Developmental Psychobiology 48 (3):243–265.

Sackett, Gen.e P, Arnold J. Sameroff, Robert B. Cairns, and Stephen J. Suomi. 1981. “Con-
  tinuity in behavioral development: Theoretical and empirical issues.” Behavioral develop-
  ment :23–57.

Schneider, Mary L., Maribeth Champoux, and Colleen F. Moore. 2006. “Neurobehavioral
  assessment of nonhuman primate neonates.” In Nursery rearing of nonhuman primates in
  the 21st century. Springer, 215–247.

Schneider, Mary L and Colleen F Moore. 2000. “Effect of prenatal stress on development: A
  nonhuman primate model.” In Minnesota Symposium on Child Psychology, The Effects of
  Early Adversity on Neurobehavioral Development, vol. 31, edited by C.A. Nelson. Lawrence
  Erlbaum Associates Publishers, 201–244.


                                              26
Schneider, Mary L., Colleen F. Moore, Lisa L. Gajewski, Nellie K. Laughlin, Julie A. Larson,
  Cynthia L. Gay, Andrew D. Roberts, Alexander K. Converse, and Onofre T. DeJesus. 2007.
  “Sensory processing disorders in a nonhuman primate model: evidence for occupational
  therapy practice.” American Journal of Occupational Therapy 61 (2):247–253.

Schneider, Mary L., Colleen F. Moore, Andrew D. Roberts, and Onofre Dejesus. 2001.
  “Prenatal stress alters early neurobehavior, stress reactivity and learning in non-human
  primates: a brief review.” Stress 4 (3):183–193.

Schneider, Mary L., Elizabeth C. Roughton, Alyssa J. Koehler, and Gabriele R. Lubach.
  1999. “Growth and development following prenatal stress exposure in primates: an exam-
  ination of ontogenetic vulnerability.” Child Development 70 (2):263–274.

Schneider, Mary L., Elizabeth C. Roughton, and Gabriele R. Lubach. 1997. “Moderate
  alcohol consumption and psychological stress during pregnancy induce attention and neu-
  romotor impairments in primate infants.” Child development 68 (5):747–759.

Schneider, Mary L. and Stephen J. Suomi. 1992. “Neurobehavioral assessment in Rhesus
  monkey neonates (Macaca mulatta): developmental changes, behavioral stability, and
  early experience.” Infant Behavior and Development 15 (2):155–177.

Snyder-Mackler, Noah, Joaquı́n Sanz, Jordan N Kohn, Jessica F. Brinkworth, Shauna Mor-
  row, Amanda O. Shaver, Jean-Christophe Grenier, Roger Pique-Regi, Zachary P. Johnson,
  and Mark E. Wilson. 2016. “Social status alters immune regulation and response to in-
  fection in macaques.” Science 354 (6315):1041–1045.

Sproul Bassett, Ashley M., Elizabeth K. Wood, Stephen G. Lindell, Melanie L. Schwandt,
  Christina S. Barr, Stephen J. Suomi, and James D. Higley. 2020. “Intergenerational
  Effects of Mother’s Early Rearing Experience on Offspring Treatment and Socioemotional
  Development.” Developmental Psychobiology .

Suomi, Stephen J. 2005. “Mother-infant attachment, peer relationships, and the development


                                            27
  of social networks in Rhesus monkeys.” Human Development 48 (1-2):67–79.

Tardif, Suzette D., Kristine Coleman, Theodore R. Hobbs, and Corrine Lutz. 2013. “IACUC
  review of nonhuman primate research.” ILAR Journal 54 (2):234–245.

Wooddell, Lauren J., Stefano S.K. Kaburu, and Amanda M. Dettmer. 2019. “Dominance
  rank predicts social network position across developmental stages in Rhesus monkeys.”
  American Journal of Primatology :e23024.

Wooddell, Lauren J., Stefano S.K. Kaburu, Ashley M. Murphy, Stephen J. Suomi, and
  Amanda M. Dettmer. 2017a. “Rank acquisition in Rhesus macaque yearlings following
  permanent maternal separation: The importance of the social and physical environment.”
  Developmental Psychobiology 59 (7):863–875.

Wooddell, Lauren J., Stefano S.K. Kaburu, Kendra L. Rosenberg, Jerrold S. Meyer,
  Stephen J. Suomi, and Amanda M. Dettmer. 2016. “Matrilineal behavioral and phys-
  iological changes following the removal of a non-alpha matriarch in Rhesus macaques
  (Macaca mulatta).” PLOS One 11 (6):e0157108.

Wooddell, Lauren J., Stefano S.K. Kaburu, Stephen J. Suomi, and Amanda M. Dettmer.
  2017b. “Elo-rating for Tracking Rank Fluctuations after Demographic Changes Involv-
  ing Semi-free–ranging Rhesus Macaques (Macaca mulatta).” Journal of the American
  Association for Laboratory Animal Science 56 (3):260–268.

Wooddell, Lauren J., Elizabeth A. Simpson, Ashley M. Murphy, Amanda M. Dettmer, and
  Annika Paukner. 2019. “Interindividual differences in neonatal sociality and emotionality
  predict juvenile social status in Rhesus monkeys.” Developmental Science 22 (2):e12749.

Zipple, Matthew N., Elizabeth A. Archie, Jenny Tung, Jeanne Altmann, and Susan C.
  Alberts. 2019. “Intergenerational Effects of Early adversity on Survival in Wild Baboons.”
  bioRxiv :591248.

Zumpe, Doris and Richard P. Michael. 1987. “Relation between the dominance rank of

                                            28
female rhesus monkeys and their access to males.” American Journal of Primatology
13 (2):155–169.




                                      29
                                   Online Appendix
                                  “New Title”
 Amanda M. Dettmer, James J. Heckman, Juan Pantano, Victor Ronda, and Stephen J.
                                    Suomi.


Appendix A       Additional Specifications

In the main text, we report intergenerational treatment effects estimated by augmented
inverse probability weighting (AIPW) estimates. In this section, we test for the robustness
of our results under different assumptions. We focus on two main issues. One concern
is selection into treatment. This shouldn’t be a significant issue in our study since the
researchers at the lab had complete control over the treatment assignment. Differently than
human studies, the monkeys could not select out of the assignment treatment. However, we
know that researchers were more likely to assign first-born monkeys to the maternal-rearing
condition. It is also possible for the treatment assignment to change over the years. A second
concern is that of sample selection. We do not observe the outcomes of every monkey in the
study. For example, we only observe the health outcomes for 109 out of the 656 offspring
in our sample. Often, the reason for the missing outcomes is that the outcome was only
collected for a subset of the cohorts or during a restricted period. For example, we only have
access to veterinarian health records from 2002 to 2009, limiting the sample with observable
health outcomes. While this is not a cause for concern, it is also possible for the treatment
assignment to influence the sample selection. For example, we find that the offspring of
maternal-reared females were more likely to survive the first month of life than offspring of
nursery-reared females.
    For these reasons, we check for the validity of the results presented in Section 4. We re-
estimate the parameters in Table 6 under four alternative specifications. We present these
in Tables A1-A2. In column (1), we present unconditional mean estimates by comparing
the outcomes between monkeys assigned to two different rearing sequences. This approach
exploits the random assignment to the rearing sequences to compute the treatment effects
of interest but does not account for selection into treatment or sample selection. In column
(2), we present conditional mean estimates, where we control for sex, birth order, and cohort
effects in the outcome regression. In column (3), we present inverse probability weighting
(IPW) estimates, where we control for sex, birth order, and cohort effects in the propensity
score model. In column (4), we present augmented inverse probability weighting (AIPW)
estimates, where we control for sex, birth order, and cohort effects in the outcome regression
and the propensity score model. The AIPW combines the advantages of the IPW and


                                             30
conditional mean estimates. The AIPW estimator had the advantage of being ‘doubly-
robust,’ and it is consistent for the ATE if either the propensity score model or the outcome
regression is properly specified. We report the AIPW estimates in the main paper. These
latter three methods account for the presence of selection into treatment. To account for
the possibility of sample selection, in column (5), we estimate a modified version of the
IPW estimator proposed by Huber (2014). The approach weights the observations by the
inverse of a nested propensity score that characterizes both the selection probability into the
treatment and the observable sample. This approach accounts for both the fertility selection
and mortality selection discussed in Sections 4.1 and 4.2.
    We do not find any systematic differences in the estimates across the five models. Param-
eter estimates across the five models are not statistically different from each other. These
results are reassuring. The results provide evidence that the estimates presented in Section
4 are not driven by either selection into treatment or sample selection.




                                              31
            Table A1: Alternative Specifications: % in Good Health

         Generation 2 Outcome:                         % in Good Health
         Specification                  (1)          (2)      (3)       (4)          (5)


         Ψ(s0,1 ) − Ψ(s0,0 )           -0.019     0.007       -0.009     -0.019     -0.009
                                      (0.033)    (0.034)     (0.031)    (0.034)    (0.029)


         Ψ(s1,1 ) − Ψ(s1,0 )         0.122***    0.102**    0.100***    0.078**   0.099**
                                      (0.039)    (0.040)     (0.037)    (0.033)   (0.039)


         Ψ(s1,0 ) − Ψ(s0,0 )         -0.088**     -0.034      -0.054     -0.030     -0.053
                                      (0.041)    (0.037)     (0.040)    (0.031)    (0.042)


         Ψ(s1,1 ) − Ψ(s0,1 )          0.053*     0.061*      0.055*     0.067**    0.054*
                                      (0.029)    (0.034)     (0.029)    (0.034)    (0.028)


         Ψ(s1,0 ) − Ψ(s0,1 )           -0.068     -0.041      -0.045     -0.011     -0.044
                                      (0.044)    (0.043)     (0.042)    (0.040)    (0.043)

         Outcome mean:                 0.904      0.904       0.904      0.904      0.904
         Generation 2 obs.              109        109         109        109        109
         Generation 1 obs.               59        59           59         59        59
Notes: This table compares the treatment effects estimates for the probability of being in good
health under different specifications. Column (1) presents unconditional mean estimates. Column
(2) presents conditional mean estimates, where we control for the offspring’s sex, primiparous sta-
tus and birth cohort, and maternal primiparous status and birth cohort. Column (3) presents IPW
estimates, where we allow the offspring sex and maternal or offspring year of birth trends and prim-
iparous status to influence the propensity score for intergenerational and intragenerational models,
respectively. Column (4) AIPW estimates, where we control for the offspring’s sex, primiparous
status, and birth cohort in the regression model in addition to the propensity score controls. Model
(5) presents IPW estimates that control for sample selection. We report the AIPW estimates in
the main paper. In model (5), we allow for the probability of having the outcome observed to
influence the propensity score, in addition to the other controls. The inference is under the null
that the parameter of interest is zero. Standard errors clustered at the mother level are reported
in parenthesis. The stars correspond to the following p-value levels: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01.




                                                32
          Table A2: Alternative Specifications: Elo Percentile Rank

          Generation 2 Outcome:                       Elo Percentile Rank
          Specification                  (1)         (2)      (3)      (4)          (5)


          Ψ(s0,1 ) − Ψ(s0,0 )          0.008      -0.101    -0.127*    -0.109    -0.155**
                                      (0.093)    (0.074)    (0.070)   (0.071)     (0.066)


          Ψ(s1,1 ) − Ψ(s1,0 )         0.216*** 0.142*       0.135*    0.134**     0.142*
                                       (0.076) (0.077)      (0.074)   (0.066)     (0.079)


          Ψ(s1,0 ) − Ψ(s0,0 )          -0.062     -0.077     -0.067    -0.075      -0.075
                                      (0.074)    (0.071)    (0.069)   (0.068)     (0.066)


          Ψ(s1,1 ) − Ψ(s0,1 )          0.147     0.167*     0.196**   0.168**    0.222***
                                      (0.090)    (0.087)    (0.078)   (0.079)     (0.077)


          Ψ(s1,0 ) − Ψ(s0,1 )          -0.069     0.025      0.060     0.034       0.080
                                      (0.083)    (0.080)    (0.079)   (0.076)     (0.075)

          Outcome mean:                0.540      0.540      0.540     0.540       0.540
          Generation 2 obs.             106        106        106       106         106
          Generation 1 obs.              68        68          68        68          68
Notes: This table compares the treatment effects estimates for the within-cohort percentile social-
rank under different specifications. Column (1) presents unconditional mean estimates. Column
(2) presents conditional mean estimates, where we control for the offspring’s sex, primiparous sta-
tus and birth cohort, and maternal primiparous status and birth cohort. Column (3) presents IPW
estimates, where we allow the offspring sex and maternal or offspring year of birth trends and prim-
iparous status to influence the propensity score for intergenerational and intragenerational models,
respectively. Column (4) AIPW estimates, where we control for the offspring’s sex, primiparous
status, and birth cohort in the regression model in addition to the propensity score controls. Model
(5) presents IPW estimates that control for sample selection. We report the AIPW estimates in
the main paper. In model (5), we allow for the probability of having the outcome observed to
influence the propensity score, in addition to the other controls. The inference is under the null
that the parameter of interest is zero. Standard errors clustered at the mother level are reported
in parenthesis. The stars correspond to the following p-value levels: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01.




                                                33
