NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PORTFOLIO CHOICE AND ASSET PRICING
WITH NONTRADED ASSETS

Lars E.O. Svensson

Working Paper No. 2774

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1988

I am grateful for comments by Bernard Dumas, Elhanan Helpman, Peter Sellin,
Philippe Weil, Ingrid Werner, and participants in seminars at lIES and NBER
Summer Institute. I thank Maria Gil for secretarial and editorial
assistance. This research is part of NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2774
November 1988

PORTFOLIO CHOICE AND ASSET PRICING
WITH NONTRADED ASSETS

ABSTRACT

This

paper examines portfolio choice and asset pricing when some assets are

nontraded, for instance when a country cannot trade claims to its output on world capital
markets, when a government cannot trade claims to future tax revenues, or when an
individual cannot trade claims to his future wages. The close relation between portfolio
choice with and implicit pricing of nontraded assets is emphasized. A variant of Cox,
Ingersoll and Ross's Fundamental Valuation Equation is derived and used to interpret the
optimal portfolio. Explicit solutions are presented to the portfolio and pricing problem for
some special cases, including when income from the nontraded assets is a diffusion process,

not spanned by traded assets, and affected by a state variable.

Lars E.O. Svensson

Institute for International Economic
Studies

University of Stockholm
5-106 91 Stockholm, SWEDEN

1

I. INTRODUCTION
The literature on portfolio choice in finance and international finance generally

assumes that all income arises from traded assets, and that there are no nonmarketable or
nontraded assets. In the real world, however, the existence of income from nontraded

assets seems to be the rule rather than exception. Nontraded assets would not present a
problem if traded assets provided perfect hedges against income from nontraded assets, but

that seems again to be the exception. Income from nontraded assets that can only be
imperfectly hedged by traded assets will affect portfolio choice as well as consumption and
saving decisions.

The existence of nontraded assets could be a result of asset market imperfections,

which in turn are caused by the usual reasons: transactions cost, moral hazard, legal
restrictions like capital controls, etc. As examples we can think of an individual who
cannot trade claims to his future wages (his human capital) for obvious moral hazard
reasons, a government which cannot trade claims to future tax receipts, or a country which

cannot trade claims to its GDP in world capital markets.
The literature has mostly avoided the problem of income from nontraded assets, with
a few exceptions. The literature on segmented markets (see for instance the survey by

Adler and Dumas (1983)) may come to mind, but that deals with assets traded in markets
separate from each other and not with the effect of nontraded assets on traded assets
portfolios. I have found few references on nontraded assets proper. Mayers (1972, 1973)

deals with nonmarketable assets and portfolio choice in the static Capital Asset Pricing
Model.1 Merton (1971) solves an individuals portfolio problem in a continuous time model

when the income from nontraded assets is a Poisson process, but not for the more
interesting case when the income is a diffusion process. Fischer's (1975) article on the
demand for indexed bonds in a continuous-time model also includes the case when there is

Mayers (1972) emphasizes that the notion of investors including other than just
marketable assets in their portfolio decision is not a new one and gives references to
Markowitz (1967) and Hirshleifer (1970) where the possibility of income from
nonmarketable assets are mentioned.
1

2

a nontraded wage income that follows a diffusion process. A discussion and interpretation
of the case is provided but no analytical solution is presented.2 Modest (1984) uses a model

similar to Fischer's and presents an analytic solution, but only under the assumption that
traded assets provide a perfect hedge against wages (that is, wages are spanned by traded
assets).3 Losq (1978) solves the consumption and portfolio problem with nontraded wage
income both in a two-period CAPM and in a continuous time model for some special cases,

and that paper is a major source of inspiration for the current work.4 Breeden (1979) in his
derivation of a single beta Capital Asset Pricing Model in continuous time includes a
riskiess wage income in the portfolio problem but no explicit solutions are presented.
Persson and Svensson (1987), in discussing capital flows and exchange rate variability,

solves the general equilibrium in a two-country two-period CAPM where the countries in
some cases cannot trade claims to their own output.5
Two papers by Stulz (1984) and Adler and Detemple (1988) consider firms' optimal

hedging against a nontraded asset (a claim to uncertain cash payments at a given future

date). They assume that the implicit value of, and hence the implicit rate of return on, the
nontraded assets is a known exogenous stochastic process, and then solve the portfolio

problem. In contrast, we determine the implicit value of and rate of return on the
nontraded asset endogenously. In general, as we shall see, the implicit value of the

nontraded asset depends on both the available set of nontraded assets and the investor's
preferences, and hence the value will in general differ for different investors. Only when

the return from the nontraded asset is spanned by traded assets is the value of the

2

Fischer (1974) does present an analytic solution for the case with constant relative
risk aversion. As far as I can see, the solution is correct only under the additional
assumption of the wage being spanned by the traded assets (see footnote 13).
3
Richard (1975) examines portfolio choice and life insurance in a model with
nontraded human capital and uncertain length of life, but income from human capital is
assumed to be sure if the investor is alive.
4
I am grateful to Bernard Dumas who showed me Losq's unpublished paper.
5
Dumas (1988) discusses pricing of physical assets and the Law of One Price in a
situation when physical capital can be moved internationally only at a cost, but where
international financial markets are complete. Since all relevant assets (including claims on
physical capital) are internationally traded, there are no nontraded assets.

3

nontraded asset independent of preferences and may be taken to be exogenously given to

the individual investor. Duffie and Jackson (1988) present explicit solutions in several
special cases to the finite-horizon portfolio problem of a single agent maximizing the

expected utility of the terminal value of a fixed portfolio of nontraded assets and a portfolio
of traded assets. As noted below, the solution to one of their cases corresponds to one of
our solutions, although the solution from the finite horizon terminal wealth maximization
cannot directly be meaningfully extended to an infinite horizon.

This paper, then, will discuss and present solutions to the portfolio problem in a
continuous time model when there is some income from nontraded assets. It can be seen as
an extension of Losq (1978). The model used is the standard one, from Merton (1971),
except that there is an additional exogenous stochastic income from some nontraded assets.

The model has several interpretations. It can be interpreted as a model of an individual
investor/consumer who can trade in a given set of assets with given stochastic rates of

return. The investor/consumer has a stochastic wage income, and claims on future wages
are nontradeable (due to moral hazard problems, for instance); or other income from
nontraded assets (which are nontraded due to regulation, legal restrictions, transactions
costs, etc.). The model can also be interpreted as a model of a closed economy with

representative consumers and firms in general equilibrium. Then the set of traded assets

corresponds to a set of constant-returns-to-scale no-adjustment-cost physical investment
activities with given stochastic rates of return. In addition there is, corresponding to
income from nontraded assets, stochastic income from some primary factors of production
in fixed supply (labor or land, for instance).
The model can also be interpreted as one of a small open economy, with a set of

internationally traded assets and possibly some domestic constant-returns-to-scale
no-adjustment-cost investment activities. In addition some or all domestic investment
production activities are not constant-returns-to-scale or have significant adjustment costs
(due to some factors in relatively fixed supply, for instance). In particular, the set of
internationally traded assets does not, for one reason or another, include claims on

4

domestic GDP, or all domestic no constant-returns-to-scale no-adjustment-cost
investment activities; also the internationally traded assets are only imperfect hedge
against the above domestic sources of income. (This is actually the interpretation I first
had in mind when I got interested in the problem, because of dissatisfaction with the
existing work on actual and optimal international portfolio composition, especially
currency composition, where income from internationally nontradecl assets is consistently
disregarded. (See for instance the survey by Adler and Dumas (1983).)

There are, I believe, several new elements in the present paper. First, we emphasize
the close relation between the problem of portfolio choice with income from nontraded

assets (nontraded income, for short) to the problem of finding the implicit price of and

rates of return on the nontraded assets, that is, the price of the nontraded asset at which it
would be willingly held in case trade in that asset was possible. We shall see that it is
indeed very clarifying to solve for the implicit price and interpret its components. We shall
apply a modified form of the "fundamental valuation equation" of Cox, Ingersoll and

Ross (1985) to find the implicit price and rates of return. Second, we extend Losq's (1978)
analysis by solving the problem not only when the nontraded income is an ordinary

Brownian motion but also when its drift and standard deviation is affected by a stochastic

state variable. In the latter case it is helpful to distinguish nontraded income from from

the traditional state variables that affect traded assets rates of return and generate a
"stochastic investment opportunity set" in the usual terminology, since nontraded income

enter separately in the wealth equation. In line with this, it is also helpful to distinguish a
separate "nontraded-income hedge" portfolio in addition to the traditional "state-variable
hedge" portfolios.

We shall present explicit solutions to the portfolio problem in three different special
cases, each with one specific simplification. The three simplifications are spanning,
independence of a stochastic state variable, and instantaneous riskiessness, each considered

one at a time. Hence we consider the cases: (A) The nontraded income is restricted to be
spanned by the traded assets, whereas the nontraded income may depend on a state

5

variable and be instantaneously risky. Then the implicit price of the nontraded asset can
be found by a simple no-arbitrage relation, and the solution to the portfolio problem is
easy to get from the solution to the problem when all assets are freely traded. (B) The

nontraded income is restricted not to depend on any state variable, whereas the nontraded
income need not be spanned and may be instantaneously risky. (This is the case
Losq (1978) solves.) Then the implicit price of the traded asset includes a term
corresponding to the value of unhedgeable variance of the nontraded income. (C) The
nontraded income is restricted to be instantaneously riskless, whereas it need not be

spanned and may be a function of a stochastic state variable. (In Fischer (1974, 1975) and
Breeden (1979) the exogenous income is actually instantaneously riskiess.) Then there is

no nontraded income hedge portfolio, only a state hedge portfolio. The implicit priceof the
nontraded assets in this case then includes a term corresponding to the value of the
unhedgeable state variable variance. In particular, even if the nontraded income is riskiess,

the nontraded asset is

riskiess since there are implicit stochastic capital gains. In cases

(B) and (C) the utility function is restricted to have constant absolute risk aversion.
Section II lays out the model, presents the general problem, and interprets the

optimal portfolio. Section III derives the partial differential equation for the implicit price
of the nontraded asset. Section IV presents explicit solutions to the portfolio problem and
the pricing problem for the special cases (A), (B) and (C). Section V contains conclusions
and a discussion of some limitations of the analysis and possible directions for future

research. An appendix includes some technical details.

For a more detailed presentation of the analytical methods used in this paper, see
Merton (1971), Fischer (1975), Chow (1979) or Ingersoll (1987).

II. THE GENERAL PROBLEM
Consider an investor in an economy with one consumption good. Time is continuous.

The investor has preferences at time t over uncertain consumption paths {C(r)}...
represented by the expected utility integral

6

(2.1)

EfU(C(r),r)dr,

where Et denotes the expected value operator conditional upon information available at

time t, and U(C,r) is a standard instantaneous utility function.
The investor can continuously trade n+1 different assets, denoted i = 0, 1, ..,

n.

Asset 0 has an instantaneously riskiess real rate of return, r(s,t)dt, during an interval dt.
The real rate of return may be a function of a stochastic state variable, s(t), to be
specified below, and of time. Assets i = 1, ..,n have (instantaneously) risky rates of

return. Let q(t) denote the price of asset i in terms of goods, and let the returns occur
in the form of capital gains. The price of asset i is generated by an Ito process,
(2.2)

dq(t)Iq(t) = Pqi(5(t)t)dt + Sqi(S(t)t)dw(t)•

Here Pqi(5t) which may be a function of the state variable and time, is the expected

instantaneous rate of return on asset i. Furthermore, Sqi(St) is a row rn-vector, and the
(column) rn-vector w(t) =

(w(t))T

denotes a vector of rn independent Wiener processes

(the number m of Wiener processes must be at least as large as the number of risky assets
plus the number of state variables in order to allow for linearly independent risky assets

and state variables). That is, the increments dw(t) j = 1, .., m, are serially independent
no matter how short the interval dt, and they fulfill
(2.3)

E[d(t)] = 0, Var[d(t)} = dt,

Cov[dwJ(t)dwk(t)} = 0

j, k = 1, .., m.

Hence, the stochastic component of the rate of return, the second term on the right-hand

side in (2.2), is a weighted sum of the increments of m independent Wiener processes. It

follows that the instantaneous variance of the rate of return of asset i is given by the inner
denotes transpose. For convenience, we shall call
where
Ej(Sqjj)2
Sqi the standard deviation vector of the rate of return on asset i. (The (instantaneous)

product SqiSqi' =

standard deviation of the rate of return on asset i is the scalar (SqjSqj)1/2•)
For the case when the expected rate of return and the standard deviation vector are
constant, (2.2) is a geometric Brownian motion and it implies that (i) the rate of return on

asset i is normally distributed and (ii) the price of asset i is lognormally distributed.6
6

Equation (2.2) is an equivalent way of writing the integral

7

With more compact notation, we shall write
(2.4)

D1dq(t) = izq(s(t)t)dt + Sq(S(t)t)d(4'(t)

where Dq denotes the diagonal nxn-matrix with the n-vector q(t) =

(q(t))

as the

diagonal, dq(t) and /q(St) are column n-vectors, and Sq(5t) is an nxm-matrix.
Hence D1dq(t) denotes the column n-vector with components dq/q(t), etc.
At each instant t the investor chooses the rate of consumption C(t) and the

composition of his wealth, W(t), into the different assets. Let X(t)

0 be the amount

of wealth held in asset i, 1 = 0, 1, .., n. The investor's portfolio X0(t) of the riskless

asset and X(t)
(2.5)

(X(t))._i of the risky assets fulfills

X0(t) + 1'X(t) = W(t),

where 1 denotes an n-vector of ones and 1'X(t) denotes the inner product (and sum)

The present setup differs from the standard continuous-time portfolio problem in

that the investor is assumed to have an exogenous stochastic income, in addition to the
return on his portfolio. This exogenous income corresponds to an implicit nontraded asset,
the claim to the exogenous income. We shall refer to the exogenous income simply by

(nontraded) income. The stochastic income during an interval dt is denoted dy(t) and
follows the Ito process
(2.6)

dy(t) =

(s(t)t)dt + S(s(t)t)dw(t).

The drift coefficient (the instantaneous expected value) (st) and the (instantaneous)
standard deviation m-vector S(st) may be functions of the state variable and time.

During an interval dt the change in wealth, dW(t), for given X0(t) = X0, X(t) =

=

q(t0) + Jqj(r)pqj(s(r),r)dr + Jq(s(r),r)Sq(s(r)r)dw(r).
To see that the price of asset i are lognormally distributed when qi and S are
constant, let z = in q1. From Ito's lemma it follows that dz qi + 7qjqj2)dt +
q1(t)

Sdw that is, z is generated by a Brownian motion. Then z(t) is normally
distributed with mean z1(t0) + ( +
•/2)(t t0) and variance 0q.q.(t - t0).
q

q1q1

11

8

X, and C(t) = C, is given by7
dW(t) = X0r(s,t)dt +
(2.7)

X'Ddq(t) + dy(t) -

Cdt.

The change in wealth consists of four terms, the return on the riskiess asset, the return on
the risky assets, the exogenous income, and (with a negative sign) consumption. With

(2.4)-(2.6), equation (2.7) can be written as
d'W(t)

(2.8)

EX'l1q(5t) + W(t)r(s,t)

+ (st) - C]dt + EX'Sq(St) + S(st)]d'(t)

where we have introduced the n-vector of expected excess rates of return for the risky

assets, I/q(St) defined by
Vq(St) = iiq(St)

(2.9)

—

r(s,t)1.

In the general case the expected returns and the standard deviation vectors of the
assets and the exogenous income may be affected by a set of exogenous stochastic state

variables. To simplify the notation we assume that there is only one state variable, s(t).
It is also generated by an Ito process, namely
(2.10)

ds(t) = p5(s(t),t)dt + S5(s(t),t)dw(t).

We note that (2.6) and (2.10) imply that the special case when nontraded income is a

geometric Brownian motion, dy/y = ydt + Sda is included, since we may choose

Py(St) = p5(s,t) = JLs

S(st) = S5(s,t) = Sy5 and indentify y with s.

The optimization problem of the investor is now to choose, for given current levels of

wealth and the state variable, W(t) = W and s(t) =

s,

and contingent upon future

realizations of wealth and the state variable, the consumption path {C(r)}_ and
portfolio path {X(r)_} for risky assets so as to maximize (2.1) subject to (2.8) and

(2.10). The portfolio path for the riskless asset {X0(r)}_ then follows from (2.5). We
let J(W,s,t) denote the corresponding indirect utility function, and C*(W,s,t) and
X*(W,s,t) the corresponding optimal solution.8
See Merton (1971) for a detailed derivation.
8
We assume that a solution exists and is unique, and that we may disregard
bankruptcy (that is, we assume either that consumption is always positive and
nonnegativity constraints on consumption are never binding or that negative consumption
is allowed). Karatzas, Lehoczky, Sethi and Shreve (1986) rigorously demonstrate existence
and discuss bankruptcy in the standard model without nontraded assets and state
variables.

9
The Bellman equation is

0 = max {U(C,t) + + Jw[X'V (s,t) + Wr(s,t) + p (s,t) - C]
q
(C,X)

(2.11)

+ Jww[X't7qq(st)X + 2X'o(st) +
+ J5p8(s,t) + JwsX qst) +

aqq o aqs and

Here

are the (instantaneous) covariances

matrices/vectors/scalars for and between q, y and s, given by SqSq' SqSy'

SqSs' and SS5t, respectively.
The first-order conditions are

(2.12) U (2.13)

= 0 and

W'q + Jww[aqqX + Oqy]

+ Ws°qs =

The first-order conditions can be solved for the consumption function and optimal

portfolio,

(2.14a)

C*(W,S,t) Uj1(J) and

(2.14b)

X*(W,s,t) =

(w/Jww)aq'vq 'q'qy -

The optimal portfolio is the sum of three terms and may be interpreted as the combination
of three different portfolios, the "tangency" portfolio
(2.15a)

Xt =

—1

(ww/w)qq

"q'

the "income hedge" portfolio
(2.15b)

xhy =

O'qq'CTqy

and the "state variable hedge" portfolio

(2.15c)

=

The tangency portfolio is the portfolio that corresponds to the point of tangency of the
mean-variance efficient locus and the borrowing-lending line. A hedge portfolio against a
random variable is the portfolio (i) whose return has the maximum negative correlation

with the variable, or, equivalently, (ii) that minimizes the variance of the sum of the
random variable and the return on the portfolio.9 (See Ingersoll (1987) for further
9

The income hedge portfolio (2.15b) is the solution to

10

discussion.) The term

in the tangency portfolio is the absolute tolerance to

wealth risk (the reciprocal of the absolute aversion to wealth risk). Similarly, we can call

the term

the absolute tolerance to the state variable risk (the reciprocal of

the absolute aversion to the state variable risk). Then the term

in the state

variable hedge portfolio can be interpreted as the ratio of the absolute tolerance to wealth

risk to the absolute tolerance to state variable risk (or the ratio of the absolute aversion to
state variable risk to the absolute aversion to wealth risk).
The consumption function and the optimal portfolio in (2.14) are expressed in terms

of the partial derivatives of the indirect utility function. In order to get a complete
solution, equations (2.14a,b) are substituted into the Bellman equation (2.11) which results

in a partial differential equation for the indirect utility function (see (A.1) in the
appendix). Solution of this partial differential equation gives the explicit indirect utility
function which can then be substituted back into (2.14) to get the explicit consumption

function C*(W,s,t) and optimal portfolio X*(W,s,t).
We note that if nontraded income and the state variable are uncorrelated with the
returns on traded assets, the corresponding hedging portfolios will be zero. Even in this

case the existence of the nontraded asset affects the solution. We will see this in detail
below, but we can realize this already at this stage since the variances of nontraded income

and the state variable still enter the partial differential equation (A.1) for the indirect
utility function.

III. PRICING A CLAIM TO INCOME
Let us consider the (implicit) value of a claim to the exogenous stochastic income dy.
The value of the claim is the price at which the claim would be willingly held by the

investor if the claim was freely traded. The problem of finding the value of a claim to a
given stochastic income is a problem of independent interest. The problem is however of

(i) rninx[XI ,/(XIcqqX7yy)h/2] as well as to (ii) minVar[X'Dq'd + dy]/dt =
+ 2X, +

11

particular interest here, since it is closely related to the problem of finding the optimal
portfolio of traded assets when the claim to income is nontraded. Indeed, knowing the

implicit value of the claim facilitates very much the interpretation of the optimal portfolio
of traded assets.

The value of the claim, F, will in general be a function of the level of wealth, the

state variable, and time. It is practical to consider it a function of the investors
comprehensive (implicit) wealth, W, including the value of the claim and therefore given
by
(3.1)

W=W+F.

Let us hence denote the value of the claim by F(W,s,t).
Finding the implicit price at which the claim is willingly held also involves finding its

implicit rate of return. To see this, we shall write the rate of return in two ways. First, in

analogy with (2.2) we let dq(t)/q(t) denote the (implicit) rate of return on the claim
during an interval dt, we let PF(W,s,t) denote the expected rate of return, and we let
SF(W,s,t) denote the standard deviation vector for the rate of return. Then we can write
the rate of return as the Ito process
(3.2)

dq(t)/q(t) = F('W'(t),8(t),t)d1t + SF(W(t),S(t),t)dW(t),

where F() and SF(.) remain to be determined. Second, we note that return on the claim
during an interval dt consists of a stochastic (explicit) dividend, dy(t), and a stochastic

(implicit) capital gain, dF(t) = dF(W(t),s(t),t). Therefore, we have the identity
(3.3)

dq(t)/q(t) (dy(t) + dF(t))/F(W(t),s(t),t),

where F(.) and dF remain to be determined.

The expected rate of return pF(W,s,t) and the standard deviation of the rate of
return SF(w,s,t) can now be identified from (2.6), (3.2) and (3.3). More precisely, Ito's
lemma is used to develop the differential dF in (3.3) (see appendix B for details). Then
we can identify the terms multiplying dt to get the expected return in terms of the
partials of F,
(3.4)

FPF /iy + Ft + F(t - C*) + F5p5 + F*a* +

12

+

1

where we use the notation

X'Z/q + FVF + Wr

(3.5a)

for the expected change in comprehensive wealth, and

Ii h\

C*—
—V*'Q
"

_'

for the standard deviation vector of comprehensive wealth. Furthermore,

and

denote, respectively, the variance of comprehensive wealth and the covariance

between comprehensive wealth and the state variable. Similarly, by identifying the terms

multiplying d we get the standard deviation vector in terms of partials of F,

FSF S. +

(3.6)

+ F5S5.

Combining these identities with the relevant equilibrium conditions, either a

no-arbitrage condition (when the claim to income is spanned by the traded assets) or an
implicit first-order condition with respect to the amount of implicit wealth invested in the
claim (when the claim to income is not spanned by the traded assets), gives a partial

differential equation in F(W,s,t), the nontraded asset's Fundamental Valuation Equation,
to which a solution will have to be found.

IV. SPECIAL CASES
We shall present solutions to the portfolio problem and the pricing problem only for
selected special cases. First, we make some simplifying assumptions throughout the

analysis. We assume that the rates of return on the traded assets are independent of the

state variable and time (that is, they are constant),

(4.la)

r(s,t) = r, Pq(St) =

and

Sq(St) =

Sq•

We also assume that the drift and standard deviation of the state variable are independent
of time,

(4.lb)

p3(s,t) = p5(s) and S5(s,t) = S5(s).

We moreover assume that the instantaneous utility function has an exponential discount
factor,

13

U(C,t) eV(C), 8> 0.
(4.lc)
Under these assumptions it is easy to show that the indirect utility function also has an
exponential discount factor and can be written

J(W,s,t) = etI(W,s).

(4.2)

Then the optimal solution and the value of the claim to income will be independent of
time.
Second, we consider some specific simplifications. In section IV.A we assume that

both income and the state variable are spanned by the traded assets. In section IV.B we
relax the assumption of income being spanned, but assume that there is no state variable.
In section IV.C we assume that income is instantaneously riskless but allow for a

non-spanned state variable. Throughout section IV.B and IV.C the instantaneous utility
function is restricted to have constant absolute risk aversion.

A. Income and the State Variable Spanned By Traded Assets

We assume now that both income and the state variable are spanned by the n+1
traded assets. Spanning here means that there exist linear combinations of the traded
assets which have the same risk characteristics as income and the state variable. This can

be precisely defined in several equivalent ways: First, the hedge portfolios XT and
in (2.15) are perfect hedges, that is, the returns on them are perfectly negatively correlated

with income and the state variable, respectively. Second, the standard deviation vectors

Sr(s) and S5(s) are linear combinations of the rows of the standard deviation matrix Sq.
The weights in the linear combination are given by the hedge portfolios. More precisely,
0

and

(4.3a)

Sy(S) + XhY(s)ISq =

(4.3b)

S5(s) + aqqaqs'5q = 0.

Third, the "unhedgeable" variances of income and the state variable conditional upon the

set of traded assets, c q(S) and s q(S) defined by
(4.4a)
(4.4b)

Oyq(S) = a(s) - 7yq(S)Cqq'Uqy(S) and
75q(S) =
o8(s)

14

are both zero,'0
(4.5)

7yq(S) = O•sq(5) = 0.

Spanning obviously excludes the possibility that income and the state variable are

uncorrelated with the rates of return on traded assets.
One way to find the optimal portfolio is to directly solve the partial differential

equation (A.1) in the appendix, taking (4.5) into account. Another way is to first find the
implicit price of a claim to income. We shall use the latter way, which we find useful and

illuminating. Then we have to derive a partial differential equation for the value of the

claim to income, F(W,s,t), and solve that.
First, it is easily seen that if income and the state variable are spanned by the traded
assets, so is the claim to income (see appendix C). If the claim to income is spanned, the

'F hedge" portfolio xh' of traded assets, given by
(4.6)

xhF = - qqOqFF

has its return perfectly negatively correlated with the return on the claim to income. This
means that the combination of the F hedge portfolio and the claim to income has an
instantaneously riskless return. Absent arbitrage, the combination must pay the riskless

rate of return. That is, we have the no-arbitrage relation
(4.7)

FPF + XhFPq = (F

+ X'l)r.

On the left side we have the expected return on the combination of the claim and the hedge

portfolio; on the right hand side we have the riskless return on the investment.
Let us now combine this no-arbitrage relation with (3.4), the expression for expected

returns on the claim in terms of the derivatives of F. This gives us a partial differential
equation in F, the fundamental valuation equation with a no-arbitrage condition, which
after some manipulations (see appendix D) can be written
10
The unhedgeable variance of income is the minimum variance of the sum of income
and the return on a portfolio of the trade assets, that is, the variance of the sum of income
and the return on the income hedge portfolio.
A fourth equivalent definition of that income is spanned by the risky assets is that

the variance/covariance matrix

qq qy
yq yy

is singular.

15

+ F5c5 + F5555 + F(i - C - jq7qq1Vq)

(4.8)

+ F5(p5 -

Fr
sqqq Uq) + F -

+-

Cyq7qq1Vq

= 0.

This is the partial differential equation we need to solve. Under the assumption of
spanning, we may guess that the value of nontraded income is independent of wealth.

Then all terms in (4.8) involving derivatives with respect to wealth drop out. We then

note that parameters of the utility function do not enter, neither directly via derivatives of
the indirect utility function nor indirectly via wealth and consumption. This is an example
of "preference-free" pricing of assets, which results when the asset in question is spanned

and a no-arbitrage relation like (4.7) can be used instead of a first-order condition.

Let us restrict the drift and standard deviation of income to be linear in the state
variable,
(4.9a)

(s) =

where

and

and Si(s) =

iLyS

SyS

are constant. Furthermore, we restrict the state variable to have

constant drift and standard deviation,
(4.9b)

and S5(s) = S.

p5(s) =

This formulation implies that the state variable is normally distributed and can take
negative values, making income negative. Hence our analysis is symmetrical in the sense

that it also covers the case when the nontraded asset is a liability with a negative value.
Indeed, this symmetry is used below when "extraneous" solutions to the fundamental

valuation are eliminated.

As mentioned, under the assumption of spanning we may guess that F is

independent of W. Also, under the assumptions (4.la)-(4.lc) we may guess that F is
independent of t. Therefore all terms in (4.8) involving derivatives of F with respect to

W and t

vanish, and (4.8)

becomes a second order ordinary differential equation.

Finally, we guess that F is linear in s. Then it is easy to see that a solution to F is
(4.lOa)

F(s) =

-

(Jigs

yqTq1vqs)/r

+ {[( - &yqq'vq)/r]Ps
[( -

where •yq =

SySq'•

ayqq1vqr1sqcqvq

16

The solution (4.lOa) is a particular solution to the second order linear ordinary

differential equation that results after restricting F to be independent of wealth and time.
The general solution the that differential equation is the sum of the particular solution and
the homogeneous solution, the solution to the homogeneous part of the equation. With

reference to reasonable asymptotic properties of F, namely that F should be roughly
proportional to the state variable for large values of the state variable, the extraneous
homogeneous solution can be eliminated. The reason why F should be asymptotically
proportional to the state variable is that for large values of the state variable, the relative
variance of the state variable becomes insignificant, since the variance of the state variable

is constant (see appendix E).

Before interpreting the expression for F, we shall see what the rest of the solution

looks like. Let J(W,t) denote the indirect utility function to the portfolio problem when
the claim to income is freely traded. The indirect utility function J(W,t) will not depend
on the state variable for given levels of comprehensive wealth W since the state variable
is spanned by the traded assets and all assets, including the claim to income, are in that

case freely traded. Then we may conjecture that the indirect utility function J(W,s,t) for
the problem when the claim to income is not traded will fulfill
(4.lOb)

J('W,s,t) = J('W + F(s),t)

That is, the effect on utility of the state variable enters only through the effect on

comprehensive wealth W = W + F(s). (Solving the partial differential equation (A.1) in
the appendix confirms that (4.lOb) holds.)

It follows from (4.lOb) that the term in the state variable hedge portfolio xhs in
(2.15c), the ratio of absolute tolerances to wealth risk and the state variable risk, fulfills
(4.11)

WS''WW = J

F5/JX = F,

where, by (4.lOa),
(4.12)

F8 =

- yqq'Vq)/r.

Hence the optimal portfolio (2.14b) is
(4.13)

X* =

(Jw1Jww)cqq - Tqq'7qyS

-

FsCq1Yqs

17

=

x + xhY(s) + X.

The income hedge portfolio X'"(s), the second term on the right-hand side of (4.13)
is linear in the state variable. This of course follows directly from the assumption that the

drift and standard derivation of income is linear in s. The state variable hedge portfolio

xhs, the third term on the right-hand side of (4.13) is independent of the state variable.
Furthermore, from (4.6), (D.2) in the appendix, and (4.11) we have

X"s = aqq'7qyS - Fs7q1aqs =

(4.14)

+

The F hedge portfolio is simply the combination of the income hedge portfolio and the

state variable hedge portfolio, Thus, the optimal portfolio can be written

x*=xt+xhF,

(4.15)

the sum of the tangency portfolio and the F hedge portfolio.

Let us interpret the results derived so far. The easiest case is when there is no state
variable, or, equivalently, when the state variable is deterministic and constant. This case
corresponds to
(4.16)

p5 = 0 and S5 =

0.

Then

(s - yq7q1vqs)/r and

(4.17a)

F(s) =

(4.17b)

xh5 = x''is

=

aqq1oqyS.

The value of the claim is simply the expected income, tyS plus the expected excess return
of the perfect income hedge portfolio, X1'Y(s)IVq discounted by the riskless rate of

return r. This is the first term in (4.lOa).
When there is a state variable, the value of the claim has a second component as well,

the second term in (4.lOa). The second component is the expected return on the state
variable, the value of which is

-

yqrq'vq)/r1Ps

plus the expected return on the

perfect state variable hedge, the value of which is [( -

again

discounted by the riskless rate of return. Hence, owning the claim is equivalent to also
owning an asset, the state variable, with expected return [(i&) - Tyqaq'vq)/r1P5

standard derivation vector {(iy -

yqaq1vq)/r1S5.

and

18

The results above are independent of the precise form of the utility function V(C).
(As mentioned, we have an example of preference-free pricing.) For specific utility
functions, we can in addition find the explicit consumption function and tangency portfolio.
Let us therefore see what the consumption function and tangency portfolio looks like for

two different instantaneous utility function.
First, with constant absolute aversion to consumption risk, we have

V(C) = eJ'CI(F),

(4.18)

with the coefficient of absolute risk aversion F =

VVc > 0.

For that case it is known

that the indirect utility function J(W,t) to the standard problem when all assets are
traded is of the form (see Merton (1969))
(4.19a)

J(W,t) = e6teV/(Fr),

where A is a constant. Hence, by (4.lOb) and (4.19a) we can conclude that for the
problem when the claim to income is not traded, the indirect utility function is
(4.19b)

+ F(S)]/(Fr)

J(W,t) =

Substitution in the Bellman equation (A.1) in the appendix gives
(4.19c)

A = (r

-

8 - uqcq1vq/2)Ir.

From (4.19b) the absolute tolerance to wealth risk is
(4.20)

w1ww

1/Fr.

and the tangency portfolio is
(4.21)

X=

7qq1vq/I'r
independent of wealth and the state variable. From (2.14a) and (4.18) it follows that the
consumption function is

C*(W,s) = V(eötJW) = log(eötJ)/F = -A/F + r[W + F(s)).
Second, let the instantaneous utility function have constant relative aversion to

(4.22)

consumption risk,
(4.23)

V(C) =

*/(1

-

'y).

with the coefficient of relative risk aversion 7 = - CVcc/Vc >

0.

The indirect utility

function for the standard problem with all assets traded and no state variable is of the form

19

(see Merton (1969))
(4.24a)

J(W,t) = e 6tAwl_ /(i- 7)

Hence, the indirect utility function for the problem when the claim to income is not traded
is

(4.24b)

J(W,t) = etA[W +F(s)]/(1

- 7).

Substitution in the Bellman equation (A.1) reveals that
(4.24c)

A = {[ö - (1 - 7)(r +

This solution is meaningful only if A is positive. Hence the rate of time preference must

fulfill the condition
(4.24d)

8> max[O, (1-7)(r + V'c7qq1VI27)].

From (4.24a) the absolute tolerance to wealth risk is

= [W + F(s)]/7,

(4.25)

and the tangency portfolio is
(4.26)

Xt(W,s) =

aqLiq[W + F(s)]/7,

proportional to comprehensive wealth. The consumption function is
(4.27)

C*(W,s) =

V'(eJ) = (eJ)" = A1/[W + F(s)].

The solution presented in Modest (1984) is a special case of this.

The discussion above has been conducted in terms of the implicit value F of the

claim to nontraded income. Given that F has been calculated, we can then use (3.4) and
(3.6) to calculate the drift and standard deviation for the implicit rate of return on the
claim to nontraded income.

B. No State Variable
We shall now consider the situation when nontraded income is

spanned by the

traded assets. We assume throughout this section that there is no state variable. That is,
the drift and standard deviation vector of income are constant,
(4.28)

(s) = p,

and Sr(s) =

S,.
That income is not spanned means that the income hedge portfolio is no longer a

20

perfect hedge against income, that the standard deviation vector S, is no longer a linear

combination of the standard deviation matrix Sq and that the unhedgeable variance
(4.4a) of income conditional upon the set of traded assets is positive,

'7yjq > 0.
If there is no perfect hedge to income, we cannot use an arbitrage relation like (4.7)

(4.29)

to derive a partial differential equation for the value of a claim to income. Instead we will

use the implicit first-order condition for F, that is, the first-order condition when the
relevant Bellman equation for the problem when also claims to income are traded is
maximized with respect to the amount of comprehensive wealth held in claims to income.

For completeness we first derive the partial differential equation for the case when there is

a state variable. The first-order condition for F is then (see the derivation of (F.5) in
appendix F)

(4.30) WF + WWFqX + FFF) + WsFs = 0,
where

= F - r is the expected excess return on claims to income.
we use (3.6) to express

We note that the term in parenthesis can be written

FW and °Fs in (4.30), and we combine the result with (3.4) to eliminate FPF (see
appendix F). This gives the Fundamental Valuation Equation"
(4.31)

+

+ F5C5 + F55o3
F[ji - C -

+ F5[p5 -

(J/J)c (J/J)o]

(-

-

-

+ Ft - Fr
-

+ py -

(-J\T5/Jr)5

0.

This is the partial differential equation that needs to be solved. Since we assume that
it

See Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1985). Equation (4.31) differs from equation (31) in
Cox, Ingersoll and Ross since here dividends dy are instantaneously risky instead of
instantaneously riskiess, which adds the last two terms in (4.31). Also, Cox, Ingersoll and
Ross assume that there is no net supply of the riskless asset and that the riskiess rate of

return is endogenous. Assuming X0 =
which makes

0

implies Wr(W,s,t) =

-

the term multiplying F equal to Wr - C*, as in Cox,

Ingersoll and Ross's formulation.

-

21

there is no state variable, all terms involving s drop out. Let us also assume that the
utility function has constant absolute aversion to consumption risk, (4.18). Then we can

guess that F is independent of W and hence constant. That gives
(4.32)

With

(-J/J)J/r.
constant absolute aversion to consumption risk, the absolute aversion to wealth risk
F=

-

{Py

is

(4.33)

(-J/J) = Fr.
(see appendix G) it follows that the value of a

From this and from the rewriting
claim to income fulfills
(4.34)

F=

- yqq'Vq - Frjq]/r.

From (4.33) and (F.2) the optimal portfolio will fulfill
(4.35)

=

q'vqIFr

-

q'qy = + xhy.

The indirect utility function is of the same form as (4.19a), namely
- Fr(W

(4.36a)

J(W,t) eSteA

+ F)/(Fr)

but the constant A now reflects also the unhedgeable variance in income,

- 5- VTqqlVq/2 (Fr)2ay1q/2]/r.
The consumption function is then
(4.36b)

A=

(4.36c)

C*(W) = -A/F + r(W + F).

[r

Both (4.32) and (4.34) are intuitive. We see in (4.32) that F is the expected income
less the covariance between income and comprehensive wealth weighed with the absolute

aversion to wealth risk, everything discounted by the riskiess rate of return. In (4.34) we
see that F is the expected income plus the expected excess return on the income hedge

portfolio (the first two terms in the bracket) less the unhedgeable variance o I q weighted
with the absolute aversion to wealth risk, everything discounted by the riskless rate. This
latter expression is also derived by Losq (1978), by directly solving the Bellman equation.
We see that if income is spanned, and hence the unhedgeable variance

q

is zero, (4.34)

collapses to (4.17a).

If income is uncorrelated with the rates of return on traded assets, the income hedge

22

portfolio is zero. There is no effect on the portfolio of traded LiJ assets of the existence
on nontraded income. There is a wealth effect though, and consumption and holdings of
the riskiess traded asset are affected.
Given that the value of the claim to nontraded income has been calculated, we can

use (3.4) and (3.6) to compute the drift and standard deviation of the implicit rate of
return on the claim.
For the finite horizon problem when utility of terminal wealth is maximized, and for

the special case with no state variable and constant absolute risk aversion, Duffie and
Jackson (1988, Case 2) derive a portfolio of risky assets which is essentially the portfolio

X in (4.35) multiplied with the term eT_t), where T is the horizon. Hence, that
portfolio of risky assets approaches zero when the horizon T becomes large. Obviously,
the results from finite horizon terminal wealth maximization cannot directly be
meaningfully extended to the case with an infinite horizon and consumption at each date.

C. Income Instantaneously Riskiess
We now assume that income is instantaneously riskless, that j,12
(4.37)

Sy(5) = 0.

We assume that the drift in income is linear in the state variable, and that the drift and
standard deviation vector of the state variable are constant, that is (4.9a) and (4.9b).
When income is instantaneously riskless, the Bellman equations (2.11) and (A.1) are
simplified since all terms involving variances and covariances of income vanish. The

optimal portfolio is simplified since there is no income-hedge portfolio. In the fundamental
valuation equation (4.31) the last two terms vanish.'3
Even if nontradeci income is instantaneously riskiess, the nontraded claim to income

is instantaneously risky, since implicit capital gains will be instantaneously risky.

12

Fischer (1974, 1975) and Breeden (1979) implicitly assume that the exogenous income
is instantaneously rikless.
13
As mentioned, Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1985) derive the fundamental valuation
equation for an asset with an instantaneously riskless dividend.

23

Let us restrict the utility function to have constant absolute aversion to consumption
risk, (4.18). Then we may assume that the value of the claim to income is independent of
comprehensive wealth, which simplifies the fundamental valuation equation. After some

manipulations (see appendix H) the valuation equation can be written

- Fr + IiyS =
+ F5[p5 F52(J
Csqq1I/q1
We guess that F is linear in s, use (4.33), and get the solution
-

(4.38)

(4.39)

0.

F(s) sIr + [G4/r)5 - (y/r)asqq1uq - Fr(y/r)2siq}/r.

Again it makes sense that F should be roughly proportional to the state variable for
large positive and negative values of the state variable, since the relative variance of the

state variable is then small. I conjecture, although I have not been able to provide a
formal argument, that this asymptotic property is enough to exclude other solutions to
(4.38).'4

Given the solution (4.39), the indirect utility function will be
J(W,s,t) = eeA Fr[W + F(5)]/(Fr) with
(4.40a)

A = [r - 6- vq'crq'vq/2 (Fy)27sq/2]/r.
The consumption function is
(4.40b)

(4.40c)

C*(W,s) = -A/F + r[W + F(s)].

Since the ratio of the absolute tolerance to wealth risk to the absolute tolerance to state
variable risk is
(4.41)

J5/J = F =

from (2.14b) the optimal portfolio is

(4.42)

X* =

-

OqvqIFr (iiyIr)oq1cq5

=

x + xhs = x +

From (4.39) we see that the value of the claim again has two components. The first
component is the value of a riskiess income stream

which equals Jts/r the first

term in (4.39). The second component is the value of a risky state variable, equivalent to

It is
easy to show that any polynomial solution will be linear. I have been unable to find a
general solution to (4.38), which has the special property of having a term which is
quadratic in the first derivative.
14

We want to exclude solutions with a non-zero second-order derivative

24

an asset with expected return (/r)i8 and standard deviation (iz/r)S which value is
the present value of the expected return on the state variable and on the state-variable

hedge portfolio, Ui/r)(t3

-

less the present value of the unhedgeable

return variance of s, (i/r)2o8 q/I• weighed by the absolute aversion to wealth risk, Fr.
From (4.42) we see that the state variable hedge portfolio and the F hedge portfolio
equal, as they should, the negative of the product of

and the covariance between

traded asset returns and the return (iz/r)ds on the state variable. There is, as
mentioned, no income hedge portfolio when income is instantaneously riskiess.

If the state variable is uncorrelated with the rates of return on traded assets, there is
no state variable and F hedge portfolio. There is no effect of the existence of nontraded
income on the portfolio of traded

assets, but there is a wealth effect and an effect on

consumption and holdings of the riskiess traded asset.

Again, the drift and standard deviation of the implicit return on the claim to
nontraded income can be calculated from (3.4) and (3.6).

V. CONCLUSIONS

Let us first summarize the results. We have extended the small previous literature on
portfolio choice with income from nontraded assets (nontraded income, for short) by

relating the portfolio problem with nontraded asset to the problem of pricing a nontraded

asset, and by including a state variable that affects the nontraded income. We have seen
that the existence of nontraded assets clearly affects the optimal portfolio of traded assets
as well as the indirect utility and consumption functions.

In the general formulation of the problem we have found it helpful to distinguish a

nontraded-income hedge portfolio from the ordinary state-variable hedge portfolios. This
nontraded-income hedge portfolio is the portfolio whose return has the maximum negative

correlation with the nontraded income. We have seen that the optimal portfolio of traded
assets can be written as a linear combination of the riskless asset, the tangency portfolio,
the income hedge portfolio, and the state-variable hedge portfolio corresponding to the

25

state variable that effects the nontraded income.
We have also derived a variant of the fundamental valuation equation of Cox,
Ingersoll and Ross (1985) for a claim to an instantaneously risky nontraded income with

and without spanning. This valuation equation is of independent interest, but it is also
helpful in interpreting the solution to the optimal portfolio problem. With nontraded
assets the indirect utility and consumption functions are modified by the addition of the

implicit value of the non traded asset to value of traded asset. When the nontraded income
is not spanned by traded asset, the "unhedgeable' variance of the nontraded income also
enters these functions.

Our analysis has also covered the symmetrical case when the claim to nontraded
income has a negative value and is actually a liability, since income and the state variable
may become negative in the model.

The implicit value of a claim to a given exogenous stochastic nontraded income is the

value of the claim for the owner of the claim. Hence, except under spanning the value
differs between investors/consumers and depends on the preferences of the owner, his

holdings of other nontraded assets, etc. Except under spanning, the implicit value of the
claim is not the value of the claim that would result under free trade in the claim, since
other investors/consumers generally value the claim differently. As mentioned above, in
the literature on optimal hedging against future cash payments Stulz (1984) and Adler and
Detemple (1988) take the stochastic process for the value of a nontraded claim to that
future cash payment to be exogenously given to the holder of the claim, which as far as I
can see makes sense only if the claim is spanned by traded assets.

We have reported explicit analytical solutions to the portfolio problem and the
pricing problem for three special cases, namely (A) the nontraded income is spanned by

the risky assets and there is a state variable affecting it, (B) the nontraded income is not
spanned, there is no state variable, and the instantaneous utility function has constant
absolute risk aversion, and (C) the nontraded income is instantaneously riskless, there is a

state variable, and the instantaneous utility function has constant absolute risk aversion.

26

There are some obvious limitations in the analysis. These limitations also provide
natural directions for further research. Throughout we have assumed the existence of a
riskless asset with an exogenously given constant rate of return, which gives very simple

expressions for the implicit price of the nontraded asset. Without this assumption, there is
an endogenously determined instantaneously riskiess rate of return which equilibrates the
market at zero net supply of the instantaneously riskiess asset, as shown in Cox, Ingersoll

and Ross (1985). With this endogenous no longer constant riskless rate of return it seems

that the solutions to the fundamental valuation equation for the implicit price of the
nontraded asset would be a more complicated integral.

The restriction to constant absolute risk aversion in cases (B) and (C) implies that
the price of the nontraded asset is independent of wealth. This is because with constant
absolute risk aversion, the demand for risky assets is independent of wealth. One way to
understand why it is difficult to find a solution for other utility functions, for instance with
constant relative risk aversion, is that then the price of the nontraded asset will depend on
wealth, since then demand for risky assets is proportional to wealth (which, of course,

seems more plausible than demand for risky assets independent of wealth). Then the terms
in the fundamental valuation equation involving derivatives with respect to wealth are not
zero, and the equation is much more difficult to solve.'5 These difficulties do not arise in the
spanning case, since then the price of the nontraded asset can be assumed to be
independent of wealth anyhow.16
'5
Equivalently, the implicit rate of return on the nontraded asset is a complicated
stochastic process with wealth as a state variable and far from a simple Brownian motion.
Cox and Huang (1987) demonstrate a new and more powerful method of solving
continuous-time optimum portfolio problems, which involve formulating a linear partial
differential equation instead of the nonlinear partial differential equation that results with
the traditional method used by Merton (1971). Their method depends critically upon an
assumption that the number of risky assets is equal to the number of underlying
independent Wiener processes that describe the uncertain environment. That assumption
is definitely violated in the case when a nontraded asset is not spanned by traded assets,
and it therefore seems that their method cannot be applied in that case.
16
Losq (1978) does present an analytic solution to the case when there is constant
relative risk aversion but only under the awkward assumption that the drift and standard
deviation of the nontraded income are proportional to wealth.
Fischer (1974) presents an analytic solution to the case with constant relative risk
aversion when the nontraded income is instantaneously riskless but proportional to a state

27

As to the empirical importance of the effects we have studied, it is of course in

principle possible to estimate the crucial variances and covariances. Of particular interest
would be the covariance between nontraded income and rates of return on traded assets.
Fama and Schwert (1977) examine how the existence of nontraded human capital

empirically affects the security market line in Mayers's CAPM model. Their finding for

US data is that the effect on the security market line is small and that the correlation
between measures of returns on human capital and returns on an aggregate market

portfolio is weak, but that this does not exclude that the correlation may be strong for
particular assets. As they emphasize there are numerous measurement problems involved.
We can easily think of examples of returns on specific human capital strongly correlated
with returns on specific assets, for instance wages and stock prices in a given industry.

I am not aware of attempts to estimate correlations between nontraded income and returns
on traded assets for countries, governments, and other agents. It would clearly be very
interesting to see such estimates, in particular of to what extent nontraded income is
spanned by traded assets.

variable that follows a geometric Brownian motion. In our notation, 5y = 0, Py(5) =
=
and S8(s) =
Ss. One can infer that the suggested solution is of the form (in

our notation) J(W,s,t) = eA(W + s/B)/(l-'y). As far as I can see this solution
works only under the assumption that the nontraded income is spanned by the traded

hs =
* = Xt + X
assets. Then B is a constant, which gives the optimal portfolio X
+ s/B)/7 and the consumption function C* = (etJW)1

t7qq'Vq(W
(1/B)cq'q5s
= Ah17(W + s/B). This corresponds to Fischer's equations (61), (62) and (66). Without

spanning, B is

a constant but a function of s/W, according to Fischer's equation
(67). Then the derivatives
and
have more terms, and the suggested solution
will not work.

28

APPENDIX

A. The Partial Differential Equation for J(W.s.t1

(A.1)

Substitution of (2.14a) and (2.14b) into (2.11) gives
0 U(U1(Jw)) + + J[Wr + -

-

CyqCqq'Vql

-

-

+

yqq'qy1

+ JsIus

+ Jws(Cys -

CyqCq'Tqs)

(ww5/ww SqCq1 "q - (w521ww sqqq1 qs

+ Jsso.ss.
B. Differentiating F(W,s.t)
Applying It&s lemma to express the differential dF in (3.3) gives

dF(W,s,t) = Fdt + FdW + F5ds

(B.1)

+ F(dW)2 + F5dWds + F55(ds)2
= [F +

F(p - C*) + F5p5 +
+ F5,5 +

+

+ FS]d,
where we use the notation

(p - C*)dt +

(B.2)

dW =

(B.3a)

Pii = X''L1q + FSF + Wr and

that is,

(B.3b) S = XSq + FSF.
C. Demonstration in IV.A that F is spanned by traded assets
From (3.2), (3.3) and (B.1) we see that the standard deviation vector of the rate of
return on the claim will fulfill

FSF = Sy + FSIJ + F5S5 Sy + F(X*lSq + FSF) + F5S5, hence,
FSF = (S + FX*ISq + F5S8)/(1 (C.2)
If F # 1 (we shall indeed see that F = 0 under spanning), it follows from (4.6) that

(C.1)

F).

29

SF is a linear combination of Sq since S and S are linear combinations of Sq
Hence, the claim to income is spanned by the traded assets.

D. Derivation of (4.8)
Combining (3.4) and (4.7) gives

+ F*scr5 + F555 + F( - C*) + F5p5 + Ft - Fr

(D.1)

+ + X'iiq = o.
The hedge portfolio

depends on F and its derivatives, however, via UqFF in (4.6).

Thus we use (3.6) to write

aqFF = SqSF'F = Sq(Sy

(D.2)

+ FS + F5S5)' =

+

FTqX + Fs7qs

Substituting in (4.6) and then in (D.1) gives (4.8).

E. Eliminating 'extraneous' solutions to the Fundamental Valuation Eciuation
The homogeneous solution to the second order linear ordinary differential equation

resulting from (4.8) after elimination of the derivatives with respect to wealth and time is

of the form

FH = A1exp(A1s) + A2exp(A2s),
and A2 are the roots (assumed distinct) of the
where A1 and A2 are constants, and
(E.1)

characteristic equation. It seems that an argument along the following lines implies that

both A1 and A2 are zero. Suppose at least one of the roots, A1, say, has a positive real
part. Under (4.9) it makes economic sense that for large values of the state variable, F
should be approximately proportional to the state variable, since the variance of the state

variable then is small relative to the value of the state variable. Then we must have A1

equal to zero. Suppose at least one of the roots, A2, say, has negative real part. In the
model, the state variable has not been restricted to be nonnegative. Actually, under
(4.9b) it is normally distributed and can take negative values. Neither have we restricted
the nontraded income to be nonnegative (or allowed for free disposal if it becomes

negative). Hence, our treatment of nontraded income is symmetrical in that it may be

30

positive or negative, and the nontraded asset may actually be a liability, corresponding to

negative values of F. Given this, we can consider what happens to F when the state
variable takes large negative values. It then again makes economic sense that F should be
roughly proportional to the state variable also for large negative values of the state

variable. Then A2 must be equal to zero as well.

F. Derivation of the Fundamental Valuation Equation (4.31)
When claims to income are freely traded, let F denote the amount of comprehensive

wealth W held in claims to income. That is, the budget constraint is
(P.1)

X0+1'X+F=W.

Comprehensive wealth will develop according to

(F.2)

dW =

[X'Uq

+ Fv + Wr +

- C]dt + [X'Sq + FSF + S(st)}dw.

The first-order conditions with respect to C, X, and F of the relevant Bellman
equation will be

(F.3)

U=J=Oand

(F.4)

JUq + J*(TqqX + CqFF) + 'sqs =

(F.5)

JWUF + J(OpqX + FFF) + JWs0Fs = 0.
First, it follows from (F.4) that the optimal portfolio X* can be written

(P.6)

X* =

(JIJ )CqUq - Cqq qF1 - (is1iqqs

Second, we note that the term in parenthesis in (F.5) is

Using (3.6) to rewrite

and *y' we can manipulate

°FW and °Fs in (F.5), and by identifying
(P.5) to read
(F.7)

FVF = F(PF - r)

=

= F'w[( ( -

+ F5[(-J

iIJq)

+ (-

k'I

+(Jw5/Jw)c53

+ (J /J)c*y + (-J5/J)c5.
Combining (F.7) with (3.4) to eliminate FPF gives (4.31).
We note in passing that (F.7), of course, is fully consistent with the usual equation

31

for the security market line. For when there is no state variable, for an asset whose price is
independent of wealth (F.7) implies

(-J/J)/F.
Similarly, for F =
(F.8)

"F =

W we get

=

(F.9)

(-J/J)c/W.

Eliminating (-j*/j) from (F.7) and (F.8) we get
"FF"W' with
(F.1O)
(F. 11) F = Cov[dy/F,dW/W]/Var[dW/W],
the equation for the security market line.

G. Rewriting

in (4.32)

We have

=

(G.1)

+ aYFF

=

(J/J yqq"'q +

where we have used

(G.2)

X = (J

(G.3)

°yF" = SYSF'F = S(S' + F*S' + F5S51)

TqVq - cq'aqy and

(since there is no state variable and F does not depend on W).

H. Derivation of (4.38)
When the utility function has constant absolute aversion to consumption risk, (4.18),
we may assume that the value of the claim to income is independent of comprehensive

wealth. Then the fundamental valuation equation (4.31) simplifies to
(H.1)

F5555 + F5[5 - (-j
depends on

The covariance

=

(H.2)

sqX*

-

(-J5/J55] - Fr + 7is =0.

F8, though. Therefore we write it as

+ a5FF J/J

sqqq"'q - sqUqqqFF
(JsIJ CsqUqqqs +

where we have used that the optimal portfolio fulfills
(11.3)

X*

JJ(Tq'L/q - Cqq qFF -

32

and that
(H.4)

O'SFF = F5c5.

By incorporating (11.2) in (H.1) the valuation equation can be written
-1
1
- 2
+ F5[p3 "q - (Jws/Jw)csiq]
(H.5)
1's
JsqCqq
= 0.
- Fr +

(JwIJw)q

We can simplify (11.5) further by realizing that J5 = 0. For we know from (3.6)

that
(H.6)

FSF =

Sy = 0 and F = 0. This means that when the claim to income is traded, it is a
perfect hedge against the state variable. That is, the state variable is spanned by the claim
since

to income, and the indirect utility function J(W,t) when claims to income are traded will
therefore not depend separately on the state variable, that is,

= 0. This gives (4.38).

33

REFERENCES
Adler, Michael, and Detemple, Jerome B., 1988, "On the Optimal Hedge of a Nontraded
Cash Position," Journal of Finance 43, 143- 153.

Breeden, Douglas T., 1979, "An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model With Stochastic
Consumption and Investment Opportunities," Journal of Financial Economics 7,
265-296.

Chow, Gregory C., 1979, "Optimum Control of Stochastic Differential Equation
Systems," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 1, 143- 175.

Cox, John C., and Huang, Chi-fu, 1987, "Optimal Consumption and Portfolio Policies
when Asset Prices Follow a Diffusion Process, Sloan School of Management Working

Paper No. 1926-87.

Cox, John C., Ingersoll, Jonathan E., and Ross, Stephen A., 1985, "An Intertemporal
General Equilibrium Model of Asset Prices," Econometrica 53, 363-384.

Dumas, Bernard, 1988, "Pricing Physical Assets Internationally," Wharton School,
University of Pennsylvania.

Duffie, Darrel, and Jackson, Matthew 0., 1988, "Optimal Hedging and Equilibrium in a
Dynamic Futures Market," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, forthcoming.

Fama, Eugen F., and Schwert, 0. William, 1976, "Human Capital and Capital Market
Equilibrium," Journal of Financial Economics 4, 95- 125.

Fischer, Stanley, 1974, "The Demand for Index Bonds," MIT Working Paper No.132.

Fischer, Stanley, 1975, "The Demand for Index Bonds," Journal of Political Economy 83,
509-534.

Hirshleifer, J., 1970, Investment, Interest, and CaDital, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey:

Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Ingersoll, Jonathan E., 1987, Theory of Financial Decision Making, Totowa, New Jersey:
Rowman & Littlefield.

Karatzas, loannis, Lehoczky, John P., Sethi, Suresh P., and Shreve, Steven E., 1986,
"Explicit Solution of a General Consumption/Investment Problem," Mathematics of

34

Operations Research 11, 261-294.

Losq, Etienne, 1978, "A Note on Consumption, Human Wealth and Uncertainty," McGill
University, Montreal, mimeo.
Markowitz, Harry M., 1967, Portfolio Selection: Efficient Diversification of Investments,

Cowles Foundation Monograph #

16,

New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Mayers, David, 1972, "Nonmarketable Assets and Capital Market Equilibrium under

Uncertainty", in Jensen, M.C., ed., Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets,
New York: Praeger Publishers.

Mayers, David, 1973, "Nonmarketable Assets and the Determination of Capital Asset
Prices in the Absence of a Riskless Asset," Journal of Business 46, 258-267.

Merton, Robert C,, 1969, "Lifetime Portfolio Selection Under Uncertainty: the
Continuous-Time Case," Review of Economics and Statistics 51, 247-257.
Merton, Robert C., 1971, "Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a
Continuous-Time Model," Journal of Economic Theory 3, 373-413.

Modest, David M., 1984, "Interest Rates, Labor Income and Aggregate Consumption:

Some Structural Estimates," mimeo.
Richard, Scott F., 1975, "Optimal Consumption, Portfolio and Life Insurance Rules for au

Uncertain Lived Individual in a Continuous Time Model," Journal of Financial
Economics 2, 187-203.

Stulz, René M., 1984, "Optimal Hedging Policies," Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 19, 127-140.

</ref_section>

