NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REAL EXCHANGE RATES AND MACROECONOMICS:
A SELECTIVE SURVEY

Rudiger Dornbusch

Working Paper No. 2775

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1988

This research is part of NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2775
November 1988

REAL EXCHANGE RATES AND MACROECONOMICS:
A SELECTIVE SURVEY

ABSTRACT

This paper discusses exchange rate issues in advanced and
in developing countries. For the determination of exchange rates among
industrialized countries the key question is the following: What is the
right framework- -

the

monetary approach, the equilibrium approach, the new

classical approach or the macroeconomic model in the tradition of MundellFleming. To shed light on that question two empirical problems are
considered: What is known about the behavior of real exchange rates and how
well do alternative models explain the relation among interest rates,
expected depreciation and actual depreciation.

The second half of the paper discusses real exchange rates in
developing countries. This strand of literature has become important in the

context of adjustment programs. We focus on the relation between real
exchange rates and the profitability of capital. The model highlights the
sharp discrepancy between the mobility of capital (even physical capital, in
the long run) and the immobility of labor.

Rudiger Dornbusch
E52-357 MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139

I

REAL EXCHANGE RATES AND MACROECONOMICS:
A SELECTIVE SURVEY

Rudiger Dornbusch
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
and
National Bureau of Economic Research
This paper discusses exchange rate issues in advanced and
in developing countries. For the determination of exchange rates among
industrialized countries the key question is the following: What is the
right framework- -

the monetary approach, the equilibrium approach, the new

classical approach or the macroeconomic model in the tradition of MundellFleming. To shed light on that question two empirical problems are
considered: What is known about the behavior of real exchange rates and how
well do alternative models explain the relation among interest rates,
expected depreciation and actual depreciation.
After twenty or thirty years of exchange rate modelling,
from the work of Meade and Mundell to the New Classical Economics, we are
left with an uncomfortable recognition that our understanding of exchange
rate movements is less than satisfactory. Most models have lost their
ability to explain what has happened, when exchange rates moved a lot, as in

the l980s. The dollar movements of the 1980s are to open economy
macroeconomics what the Great Depression has been to macroeconomics- - a

baffling, largely unexplained phenomenon. For some approaches the
explanation has to rely on mystical productivity shocks, other approaches

2

now use models of asset markets that consciously reject conventional
rationality.

The uncertainty about the relevant model spills over to
policy advice. Recommendations abound. They range from a return to a managed
system of target zones to dual exchange rates, financial transactions taxes
and doing nothing. None of the recommendations has a firm basis, but the

activist ones reflect a belief that when one does not understand what is
going on it is good to tie down

things. Others believe that nailing

dow-n variables may simply shift the problem from one market to another, and

they therefore prefer to tax speculative activity directly. Taxing
speculative activity is justified, in their opinion, because such activity

generates negative externalities. By contrast, the equilibrium approach
views even large exchange rate movements as the reflection of market
adjustments to disturbances and sees no need for policy intervention. On the
contrary, equilibrium theorists argue that policy will lead at the best to
extra noise and will more likely lead to distortions.

The second half of the paper raises some issues about
real exchange rates in developing countries. This is an entirely different
strand of literature, which has become important in the context of

adjustment programs in developing countries. We focus on the relation
between real exchange rates and the profitability of capital. The model we

present highlights the sharp discrepancy between the mobility of capital
(even physical capital, in the long run) and the immobility of labor.

We begin our discussion now with alternative approaches
to exchange rate economics in industrial countries.

3

I .REAL EXCHANGE RATES AMONG INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES IN THE LONG RUN

Figure 1

shows the real exchange rate (using CDP deflators) between

Sweden and the US. The figure shows more than one hundred years of annual
data. Two patterns are of interest. One is the year-to-year fluctuations as
for example in the early 1920s or the 1980s. The other is changes in the
decadal averages.

The barter theory of international trade provides a suitable
framework for the analysis of real exchange rates in the long run. This
theory emphasizes that real exchange rates are determined by resource

endowments, tastes, technology, and intertemporal saving and investment
choices. In the short run, it may be superseded (in ways to be explored
below) by macroeconomic considerations, including price stickiness. But over
a horizon of decades these factors cannot possibly matter (except in so far
as they influence growth performance); and, hence, the microeconomic
framework is appropriate.

We emphasize at the outset the relevance of the barter model of
trade for long run real exchange rate economics, not purchasing power parity
(PPP). Samuelson (1964,p.153) aptly summarized the discussion on PPP when he
wrote:

"Unless very sophisticated, indeed, PPP is a misleading, pretentious
doctrine, promising what is rare in economics, detailed numerical
prediction."

The

divergent

idea that exchange rate movements tend to offset (passively)

trends in national rates of inflation was discredited virtually on

4
conception. The hyperinflation in Germany and Central Europe was an extreme
counterexamPle as was the French experience prior to the Poincare
stabilization. The 1970s and early 1980s have simply brought additional
confirmation for the proposition that PPP does not hold in any form.
To explore the relationships between exchange rates and prices it
is useful to separate out long-term trends in real exchange rates from
movements in the short run. Whatever one's macroeconomic persuasion, the long
run trends of real exchange rates must certainly be interpreted in terms of

microeconomic models of resource allocation. We introduce here a Ricardian
model of real exchange rates and use it to review the evidence developed by
Kravis (1986) and his associates.

Trends in Real Exchange Rates: Ricardo, Harrod, Samuelson, Balassa and Irving
Kravis argue that movements of real exchange rates over time reflect the
divergent trends of productivity between home goods and traded goods sectors.

Let P and * be the home and foreign consumer price levels measured
in a common currency. Suppose, as in Dornbusch, Fischer and Samuelson (1977)

that there are traded goods and home goods with prices T and N' and let 1-k
be the share of nontraded goods in spending. Then the real exchange rate, R,

is

given by

R —

— (PN/PN*)l

(1)

where we have assumed that the prices of traded goods are equalized and that
expenditure shares are equal across countries. Let

—

aNW,

and PN* — aN*W* be

S

the unit labor costs in the home goods sector. Then the real exchange rate is
equal to:

(2)

R —

where v is a function of the given relative unit labor requirements in the home
goods sector. The model is closed by noting that the relative wage must solve
the goods market equilibrium condition:

WN — (WN+W*N*) + (l-k)(WN+TN);

— (W/W*,A);

1<0,2>0

(3)

where N and N* denote the home and foreign labor force and T is a (per capita)
transfer received by the home country, and numerical subscripts denote the
derivatives with respect to the arguments. The term A denotes the relative
level of home country technical efficiency requirements. The expenditure share
falling on the home country's tradables is

and has a maximum value of k. The

share of spending falling on home goods in each country is a constant 1-k. The
expenditure share of domestic tradeables is determined by efficient geographic
specialization. An increase in the relative wage, given technology, reduces the
share. But a relative improvement in home technology, or an increase in the
shift parameter A, raises the share of goods produced competitively by the home
economy.

Equation (3) can be solved for the equilibrium relative wage,

6

— ic(T, N*/N,A);

"T'A ' cN*/N >0

(4)

The equilibrium relative wage in (4) shows a central result of
Ricardian trade theory: an improvement in a country's relative efficiency (a
rise in A) leads to real appreciation. The mechanism is simply the following:
The gain in productivity reduces unit labor costs at the competitive margin and
thereby leads to an incipient expansion in output and employment. The excess
demand for labor at home (and the excess supply abroad) bring about a change in
the relative wage and hence in the competitive margin. The real exchange rate

appreciates, because wages at home rise in the home goods sector and they fall
abroad. The wage increase raises costs and prices of nontraded goods at home
while lowering them abroad where there was no progress. This movement of home
goods prices, initiated by productivity growth in tradables and

transmitted via

the labor market, is the source of the real appreciation.
Support for this theory was adduced first by Balassa and then, in a
major way, by Kravis and his associates in the context of the national income

comparison project of the World Bank. Table 1 reports one set of results from
this research. Kravis and his associates show that the real price structure of
a large group of countries shows an systematic correlation with the level of
per capita income. Specifically, prices of services are low in poor countries
relative to rich countries. Even goods prices (at the consumer level) are low,
because delivered prices have a significant service component.

7

Table 1: Real Prices by Countries' Real Income Level: 1975
(Index U.S. — 100)

Croupa
0
15 30 -

45 -

14.9
29.9
44.9
59.9

GDP

Deflator

Goods

Services

57.4
65.9
83.1
94.0

20.7

40.6

34.1

51.7
64.7
73.5

41.2

46.3

a Percent of U.S. real per capita income.
Source: Kravis (1986)

The data reported in Table 1 are built up from detailed consumer
price data for closely comparable consumption baskets with equal weighting. The
price comparisons thus present as good a test of absolute PPP as possible. It

is clear that the presence of home goods causes an important departure from
absolute PPP and more so, the poorer the country. Interestingly even for
"goods" as opposed to "services" is the departure significant. One reason is
certainly distribution and hence the service content of consumer prices for
goods.

A different kind of evidence of the effect of productivity growth
on relative prices is based on the time series of relative prices within
industrial countries. The higher the growth rate of productivity, other things
equal, the more rapid the change in the relative price of manufactures in terms
of the GDP deflator.

Figure 2 shows this effect for Japan. The figure shows that over
the past quarter of a century the relative price of exports (manufactures) has
declined by about one half in terms of the deflator. Similar diagrams can be
shown for any country with a pronounced rate of productivity growth, such as
Korea.

8

Equation (4) helps establish a further point. A transfer received
by the home country leads to real appreciation. The mechanism through which the
real appreciation comes about is as follows. The transfer raises real aggregate

demand in the home country. Part of the increased spending falls on traded
goods and is offset by reduced foreign spending. But the part that falls on

home goods is not offset by reduced foreign spending. As a result

there is an

excess demand for home goods and labor at home. The relative wage and hence the
relative price level rise in the country receiving transfers.

The idea of a transfer can be interpreted quite broadly, as it
indeed has been in the literature. In particular we can think of the transferreceiving country as borrowing from abroad. Thus Ricardo's remark "in borrowing
countries prices are high" has a counterpart in this model.

Relative Deflators: The previous discussion focussed on the trend behavior of
relative consumer prices. But we can also interpret PPP relations in terms of
producers' prices, and in particular relative value added deflators. Letting R'

— Q/Q* denote the relative value added deflators in a common currency we have:

— Q/Q* — (PT/PT*)C(PN/PN*)l

(5)

It is apparent that the relative producer prices represent a
mixture of the terms of trade and of the relative price of nontraded goods.

11i

this framework, factors that worsen the terms of trade, such as an unfavorable
demand shift, will tend to lead to real depreciation.

9

Figure

3 shows 100 years of the US-UK

real

exchange rate as

measured by relative value added deflators. It is interesting to observe the

relative stability of the real exchange rate prior to World War II, followed by
a large structural adjustment, and then the extraordinary fluctuations

associated with British and US macroeconomic policies under flexible exchange
rates in the 1970s and 1980s.

The large realignment in the aftermath of World War II stands out
as a striking example of a change in the real exchange rate in response to a

loss in wealth, income, and world market share. Note, however, that because of
price controls during World War II and relatively effective exchange control in
the early postwar period the rate in the 1940s cannot be interpreted as an
"equilibrium" real exchange rate. But even so a significant difference remains
between the average of the pre and post World War II

real

exchange rates

remains. This large shift attests to the critical importance of structural
factors in the long-run behavior of real exchange rates.

II. REAL EXCHANGE RATES IN THE SHORT RUN

In

this part, we discuss two central issues of exchange rate

economics among industrialized countries: the link between exchange rates and
prices, and difficulty in accounting for observed exchange rate movements in
terms of the "fundamentals" suggested by theoretical models of the exchange
rate.

l.Four Aptroaches

10

There are four broad approaches to modelling short run exchange
rate behavior. They are not strictly alternatives and, on occasion, come in
combination. These are respectively the monetary approach (MOA), the new

classical economics (NEC), the equilibrium approach (EA) and, for lack of a

better term the macroeconomic approach (MAC). Within each of these broad
groups there are differences of models. Our focus, however, is on broader
differences which have two dimensions. One is whether the model assumes market
that .jj. markets clear. The other is whether an effort to

establish the

microeconomic foundations of the model on the basis of uncompromising, explicit
maximization is made. Table 2 presents an overview of how the various
approaches fall into categories.

Table 2: Alternative Modelling Strategies
MICROFOUNDATIONS

I

I

I

I

I

NO

YES
I

I

I
I

MOA

MARKET

I

I

CLEARING

I

I

I
I

I

I

NCE-EA

YES

I

I
I
I

We

NO

I

I

I

I

MAC

NCE
I

I

will use the macroeconomic approach as a benchmark to judge the

specific contentions of alternative approaches.

11

The Macroeconomic Atroach: A generally accepted, simple model of the
macroeconomic determinants of exchange rates is the extended Mundell-Flemming
model. One version in this tradition is as follows:1

y —

in

a(p*+e.p)

- ap

i —

-

i*

-

(l-a)e

-

(i-p)

+

u

— ky -Ai

+ e

r(y

-

(6)

(7)

(8)

y')

(9)

where p and e denote the domestic prices and the exchange rate, y denotes
output and i denotes the home interest rate. The term y' denotes potential
output and in

denotes money. All the other terms are positive constants. All

variables, except nominal interest rates, are in logs, and u is a disturbance
term representing foreign demand or fiscal policy.

In this macroeconomic approach, the asset market (equations (7)
and (8)) clears continuously, but prices adjust only gradually. Given the
future paths of the forcing variables (foreign interest rates, money and fiscal
policy) the model can be solved for the level and path of output, prices and
the exchange rate.

The model has the property that in response to a permanent,
unanticipated increase in the money stock the exchange rate and the price level

'See Dornbusch (1976,1986), Obstfeld and Stockman (1985).

12

ultimately rise in the same proportion. In the short run, because prices are
sticky, there is an immediate depreciation of the exchange rate, which
overshoots the long-run equilibrium level. The overshooting is a consequence of
the combination of the perfect foresight assumption and instantaneous asset

market adjustment: an increase in the nominal money stock, is an increase in
the real money stock which, absent changes in any other variables influencing
real money demand, must lead to a decline in the equilibrium home interest
rate. But the home interest rate decline is compatible with an international

equalization of returns only when the exchange rate is expected to appreciate,
thus yielding capital gains offsetting the lower interest earnings.

Appreciation can be expected only at a level of the exchange rate that is
higher than the long run equilibrium value. Hence the overshooting
characteristic where the exchange rate is immediately driven above the long run
equilibrium level.

The model can also be expressed in terms of real interest
differentials and the rate of depreciation of the real exchange rate. Let
q —

p*

+ e

-

p.

Then we have:

r.r*q

(8a)

where r and r* are the home and foreign real interest rates. It can be shown
that in the model laid out above the real exchange rate converges
asymptotically to the steady state real exchange rate q'

13

(10)

q —-

Combining (8a) and (10), the dynamics of the real exchange rate following an
unanticipated, nonrecurrent money supply changes can be summarized in an
equation for the real exchange rate:

q —

(11)

q'

-

v(r.r*);

v—1/i

From (11) and (8a), it is apparent that the impact effect of a
monetary disturbance and the resulting impact on real interest differentials
depends on the speed of adjustment of the system. The more gradual the
adjustment the larger is the initial overshooting. The speed of adjustment
depends in turn on all the structural parameters.

The model is not limited to studying once and for all current and
unanticipated money supply changes. It also lends itself to asking q'estions

about the effect of fiscal (or export) shocks. A permanent fiscal expansion,
for example, leads immediately to a real appreciation that crowds out fully the
increased demand by an offsetting current account deterioration.

Wilson (1979) and Mussa (1982, 1984), in particular, have
emphasized the forward looking nature of exchange markets. The above model
captures this aspect because the future time paths of the forcing variables -

m,u,i*

--

determine the current values of interest rates, output, and the

exchange rate.

14

This macroeconomic approach has as a central working hypothesis the
continuous clearing of asset markets and stickiness of prices of at least some

goods. Attention focuses on the implications of this asymmetry in the speed of
adjustment of goods and asset markets for real exchange rates, employment and
trade flows. Uncompromising informational efficiency is imposed in asset
markets, as it is in the other approaches.

Alternatives: Competing with the macroeconomic approach are three alternatives:
the new classical economics, the monetary approach and the equilibrium
approach.

The monetary approach today commands virtually no attention. Soon
after the move to flexible exchange rates, there was considerable interest in a
model of exchange rate determination based on PPP and money market
equilibrium.2 With strict purchasing power parity prices and the exchange rate
are related by a constant and thus in logs we have e — p

-

p*.

Using money

market equilibrium to solve for prices in terms of nominal money, interest
rates and output, yields the central equation:

e — (m-m*)

-

c(i.i*)

+ (yy*)

(12)

The empirical success of this equation has been so poor, and the
PPP foundations so doubtful, that this approach is basically extinct.

2See Frenkel and Johnson (1978) and Dornbusch (1971).

15

The Equilibrium and New Classical Approaches:

The equilibrium approach

shares an emphasis on market clearing with the monetary approach. In fact, the
central assumption is that .ll markets, specifically the markets for goods and
labor clear continuously. In this model, all prices and wages are flexible and
the focus of attention is the determination of absolute and relative prices and
their possible correlations. But there is, at the same time, an uncompromising
attention paid to microeconomic foundations. Behavioral equations are derived
from maximization considerations rather than assumed ad hoc.

The double edge of the approach are market clearing and
microeconomic foundations, in particular maximization and an explicit role for
budget constraints as well as informational efficiency on the part of agents. A
focus of the search for microfoundations is the concern for an explicit wellmotivated role for money. As a result, transactions technologies play a central
role in establishing a demand for money. This approach also emphasizes in
particular intertemporal consumption and investment choices and the effect of
intertemporal and intratemporal relative price changes on saving and spending
decisions. But the model must be closed by an explicit assumption about how
markets function, and it differs occasionally from the equilibrium approach in
this respect.

The closure may be obtained either by the assumption of short-run
stickiness of wages and prices (as might be the case in models with long-term,
overlapping contracts) or else in the same way as the equilibrium approach.
Work by Calvo, for example, tends to emphasize utility maximizing, money using,
forward looking agents operating in a world of full price flexibility or of

16

contracting with only marginal prices flexible. Some work by Helpman, Razin and

Svensson, in the same manner tends to be uncompromisingly in the tradition of
the new classical economics but with different scenarios as to prices.
Specifically, models of liquidity constrained behavior emphasize the
interaction of price stickiness (and hence real balance shortages) and

maximizing behavior.3 In summary, the new classical approach is less catholic
than the equilibrium approach in that it studies, in some applications,
situations where markets do not clear. But, except in those instances, it fully
overlaps with the equilibrium approach.

2. Evaluation
How does one choose among these approaches? The choice between
non(explicit) -maximizing approaches in the equilibrium tradition and the

macroeconomic approach must be based on their predictive ability. We look at
that issue below. The choice between the new classical and macroeconomic
approach is a mud- more difficult one.

In principle the new classical approach should win hands down
because it derives properly those relations which the macroeconomic approach
assumes are derived from maximization. Thus, in case of doubt, one would
invariably turn to the new classical approach to give the more specific,
qualified answer. And this would be the case especially for specific
intertemporal, intersectoral issues where answers depend on the exact relative
price effects and the budget constraints to which consumers or firms are

3For an extensive list of writings see the reference section.

17

subjected. For example, the distinction between transitory and permanent import

price changes might be easily glossed over in a macroeconomic approach but is
addressed a a central concern by the new classical economics.

The hands down superiority of the new classical approach may
falter, however, on two features: One is that the formulation of transactions
technology-based money use, for the time being dominates the predictions of the

model in a most idiosyncratic fashion. Traditional, ad hoc money demand
formulations, even though they cannot (yet?) be derived, may offer a more

sturdy building block. The other difficulty is an overabundance of Ricardian
equivalence effects which undo much of the potential role of fiscal policy.

It is clear though, at least in respect to this latter issue, that
the new classical approach is being revamped in the direction of ad hocery
either by imposing and exploring the implications of credit constraints for
consumers or by introducing Blanchard-type nonneutrality. When the task is
ultimately completed, one suspects that we will all use the new classical
approach, having learned to assume rigorously everything that the macroeconomic
approach assumed as critical features of the operation of the economy. I use
the term to "assume rigorously" to denote the current fashion of introducing ad
hocery at a lower level, and then deriving its implications rigorously.

Macroeconomic vs Equilibrium Aroach: Stockman (1987,1988b) has confronted
the task of setting out the claims of the equilibrium approach, its empirical
relevance and the evidence that favors this view over an alternative approach
that relies on price stickiness as an essential element in the explanation of

18

exchange rate movements. The Stockman contributions are welcome because they
offer in stark colors the claims and evidence. We quote here at length from
Stocknian (1987)

"Economic theory predicts that real disturbances to supplies and
demands for goods cause changes in relative prices, including the
'real exchange rate'. In a wide variety of circumstances, these
changes in the real exchange rate are partly accomplished through
changes in the nominal rate. Repeated disturbances to supplies and
demands thereby create a correlation between changes in real and
nominal exchange rates. This correlation is consistent with the
equilibrium in the economy, in the sense that markets clear through
price adjustment."
He further notes several implications, of which two deserve special
emphasis:

• the correlation between nominal and real exchange rates is not

exploitable by government policy, and
• statistical evidence indicates that changes in exchange rates
(real and nominal) are nearly permanent. This persistence

is inconsistent with

the view that monetary shocks or transitory real shocks are

the source of

exchange rate movements. Instead, it is consistent with the view that most
changes in real exchange rates are due to real shocks with a large permanent
component. because of the high correlation of nominal and real exchange rate
changes the evidence is consistent with the view that most changes in nominal
exchange rates are caused by largely permanent real disturbances.
In making the case for the equilibrium approach

Stockman has no

doubt exaggerated his message in two ways: the macroeconomic approach

does not

predict that exchange rates overshoot in response to any and all disturbances.
In the model set out above, real disturbances, i.e. changes in exports or

19

fiscal disturbances represented by the parameter u, do change the nominal and
real exchange rate permanently. As the model is an equilibrium model in the

long run, and exchange rate determination is forward looking, the adjustment of
prices is exactly the same, as would be the case in an equilibrium model. It is

also the case that support for a unit root in the time series of real exchange
rates is increasingly being questioned. There is evidence of reversion rather
than random walking even if the reversion is not rapid and fails to exhibits
stable patterns.

To appreciate the difference between the two approaches, we can
focus explicitly on the dynamics of output and prices in the macroeconomic
approach. A fiscal contraction, to give a concrete example, has the following
effects: in the long run, the real exchange rate adjusts to achieve full
crowding in. This is accomplished by a depreciation of the nominal rate and a
fall in domestic prices. The equilibrium approach would predict this as the
immediate effect. In the macroeconomic approach, because prices are not fully
flexible in the short run, there is an immediate depreciation and a decline in
output. The

output

decline lowers prices over time. After prices have declined

sufficiently and the exchange rate has further depreciated, the economy
ultimately settles at the new fullemploytnent equilibrium.4

An obvious variable to use to judge the macro versus equilibrium
approach is the behavior of output. The equilibrium approach asserts that

4Note that if the relevant deflator in the money market equilibrium
condition is p and not xp+(l-x)e, the exchange rate will do all the work and
domestic prices will be unaffected in the short and long run. In that case,
the macroeconomic and equilibrium approach cannot even be distinguished.

20

output follows its full employment path with productivity shocks (and world
factor cost shocks) as the only disrupting events. By contrast, the

macroeconomic approach asserts that monetary and fiscal disturbances (in
addition to supply side shocks) cause output to diverge from its full
employment path. But the fact is that protracted deviations of output from
potential have never been accepted as a fact by adherents of the equilibrium
approach, even though they have not offered satisfactory explanations for major
recessions other than to appeal to mystical productivity events.

The behavior of real and nominal exchange rates is the main area
where a resolution of the superiority of one of the contending approaches is
sought. One obvious challenge is to explain the real exchange rate behavior of

the 1980s. Figure 4 shows the (multilateral) real effective exchange rate for
the US.5 The macroeconomic approach has sought to explain the large real
appreciation of the dollar in terms of fiscal policy developments in the US and
in other industrialized countries. In the period of the early 1980s, US fiscal
policy (measured by the structural budget) became very expansionary even as
fiscal policy tightened in other industrialized countries. In Europe and Japan
the reverse pattern prevailed. The Mundell Fleming model predicts a real
appreciation in these circumstances.6
But even if the real appreciation can be explained by fiscal
developments, three questions remain to be answered. First, how does this same
theory explain the dollar decline since 1985, second, does the theory

5We use the Morgan Guaranty data.
6See Feldstein (1987).

also

21

apply to other episodes, as for example the Yen appreciation of 1977-78; and
third, is the size of the real exchange rate movements in line with predictions
that could plausibly come out of the macroeconomic model.
Even if it is possible to account for the broad pattern of the real
exchange rate by appealing to the anticipation of future fiscal correction the
problem of accounting for the size of the movement in the real exchange rate
remains.

The equilibrium approach has not tried to offer a concrete
explanation for the real exchange rate movements of the 1980s. The new

classical school and the macroeconomic model emphasize fiscal policy. For the
new classical school (e.g. Frenkel and Razin (1987)) the explanation is no more

than episodic. But the demonstration has not gone far enough for the
macroeconomic approach either. The broad pattern of real exchange rates can be
explained, but the explanation does not cover the relation between interest
differentials and exchange rate depreciation which is a central part of the
model. This is a decisive reason, as we shall now see, to question the
macroeconomic approach as a full explanation, also.

When exchange rate movements are small any theory can offer a
plausible explanation, and few can be decisively rejected. But when movements
are extremely large, as was the case in the US 1980s, there is a firm test for
any theory. The events were too large and the reversal too sharp and complete
to allude to mystical shifts in tastes and technology. Thus equilibrium
theories fail to explain what happened and are therefore found wanting. We turn
next to the link between interest rates and exchange rates to show that the
macroeconomic model is also unable to explain the experience of the 1980s.

22

3. Interest Rates and Depreciation
Equation (8) in the macroeconomic model laid out above assumes that
investors are risk neutral. A discrete time, rational expectations version of
(8) is:

E(et+i) —

et

+

i

(13)

-

With the assumption of rational expectations the realized level of the exchange
rate is equal to the expected level plus a white noise error term. The theory
predicts that we should observe the following relationship:

et+l -et —

-

+ '?t+l

—

-

+ "news"

(14)

where the error term t+1 is orthogonal to the interest differential and thus
can be referred to as "news".

A simple test of this model is shown in Table 3. The model suggests
that on average interest differentials should be matched by realized
depreciation on average. The table shows annual averages of the three-month
interest differential as well as the depreciation rate during the year. It is
apparent that the divergences are so large that one does not need a lot of
econometrics to see that interest rates fail to forecast depreciation.

23

Table 3

Interest Differential and Depreciation
(Percent per year)
UK-US

1981

1982
1983
1984
1985

1986
1987

GERMANY-US
Diff.
Dep.

Diff.

Dep.

-2.55
-0.71
0.46
-0.92
3.85
4.11

25.5
17.7
11.0
25.8
-20.1
- 1.7

-4.98
-4.67
-4.12
-5.41
-3.06
-2.22

14.3
5.4
14.6
15.6
-21.8
-21.1

2.62

-21.2

-3.12

-18.3

JAPAN-US
Diff.

-12.14
-6.3

-3.15
-4.15

Dep.

8.3
7.3
0
8.1

-1.72 -20.2
-1.66 -10.6
-2.92 -22.3

Note: diff is the interest differential between a country and the US. Dep
measures the exchange rate of as country's currency relative to the dollar.

If the path of the real exchange rate in the 1980s is to be explained by

anticipated behavior of the structural budget (first an expansion, then a
contraction), the interest rate pattern must be consistent with that

explanation. Interest differentials were, in fact, far smaller than the
realized rate of depreciation. To rescue a macroeconomic approach, one would
have to appeal to a sequence of "fiscal contraction" news. It is difficult to
document this news and certainly it is not possible to establish it in the
joint behavior of the dollar and longterm interest rates.
The evidence from interest differentials and exchange rate
depreciation goes much further than rejecting a particular exchange rate model.

In fact, there is no model that can give a satisfactory empirical explanation
of exchange rate behavior. Meese and Rogoff (1983) have made this point, and
Frankel and Meese (1987) have offered a painstaking review of every testable
implication. They report that in virtually every respect exchange rate behavior

24

remains a mystery. Specifically, asset market models with risk neutrality do
evidently fail to explain exchange rate patterns.

The attention has therefore shifted to the possibility of a risk
premium as an additional factor. With the inclusion of a risk premium, the

relationship between the interest differential and expected depreciation
becomes:

E(et+1) —

et

+

-

+ R + "news"

(15)

But inclusion of a risk premium fails equally, as does work that
includes time varying risk premia. There is, in perhaps as many as 100 studies,
only one message: a resounding rejection of the basic models.

Alternative Models: In response to the very unsatisfying explanatory power of
received asset market models, some researchers are exploring entirely different
approaches to the determination of exchange rates. Frarikel and Froot (1986

a,b,c), De Grauwe (1988) and Goodhart (1987) have emphasized that the evidence
from market participants does not bear out the rational asset market model.

Frankel and Froot have shown extensive evidence of large discrepancies among
forecasts gathered from market surveys, forward premia, and realized
depreciation. Table 4 shows some of their data for the case of the
dollar/sterling exchange rate. It is apparent that forecast averages differ
widely from forward rates and from realized depreciation.

25

Table 4

Period

Frankel-Froot Dollar-Yen Data
(Percent per year, sample average)

Horizon

Actual

Survey

10.1

-11.91

-3.85

6/81-12/85 3 months - 6.43

3.66

-0.06

6/81-12/85 12 months

3.38

0.36

10/84-2/86 1 month

-9.47

Forward Discount

Note: The 1 month forecasts are from one survey, the 3 and 12 months forecasts
from a different survey.
Source: Frankel and Froot (1986a)

Frankel and Froot (1986a,b) have explored alternative expectations
formation mechanisms to determine whether simple processes such as adaptive
expectations are consistent with the survey data. They conclude that the models
differ with the sample period. They note that a suitable model of expectations
formation would have to include actors with heterogeneous expectations.

As a first empirical implementation of their lessons, Frankel and
Froot (l986b,c) have proposed a model where forecast errors are made
systematically. A "portfolio manager" forms exchange rate forecasts drawing on
two sources: chartist predictions which extrapolate the current rate of
depreciation and "fundamental" predictions, which would be based on a theory
such as the current account model where real appreciation leads to
unsustainable deficits. The weighting is updated in Bayesian fashion based on
the recent relative forecasting performance of the two kinds of prediction.

This model generates extended cycles in the real exchange rate.
Although suggestive, their model has two difficulties. First, it
involves blatant statistical forecast errors and as such is probably too crude

26

to be a reasonable description of the market process. Second, it involves a
very smooth peaking of the real exchange rate. But, as Figure 4 above shows,
the peaking is far from smooth. It more nearly reflects an abrupt shift in
expectations.

Summary: Equilibrium theory has failed to offer persuasive evidence to explain
the large recessions or the large movements in real exchange rates. Standard
macroeconomic models do well in the goods and labor markets, in that the
stickiness of some wages and prices is a stylized fact. But they do poorly,
along with the other two approaches, in explaining the price movements of longterm assets. In the exchange market, just as in all other asset markets the
question is why long-term, stabilizing speculation is not more pervasive.

The message from the exchange market is then one of full
solidarity. The evidence from the exchange market argues for a research
strategy that seeks to explain the joint behavior of long-term asset prices
rather than isolated attention on stocks, bonds or foreign exchange.

III. EXCHANGE RATE REGIMES
We saw that the equilibrium approach the claim that the behavior of
real exchange rates is invariant to the nominal exchange rate regime.

Pioneering research by Stockman (1983, 1988b) and Mussa (1986) bears on this
question. They show persuasively that the variability of (bilateral) real
exchange rates among the main industrial countries and the US is far higher
under flexible exchange rates than under fixed rates. Figure 5 and 6 make this

27

point for the real exchange rate between the US and Germany.7 The former figure
shows the level and the latter shows the monthly percent change of the real

exchange rate. Table 5 shows the increased variability for various bilateral
real exchange rates with the United States.

Table 5

Variability of Real Exchange Rates
(Coefficient of Variation)
1958-72

US Effective Real Rate
US-Germany
US-Japan
US-UK
US-France
US-Sweden

0.04
0.07

1973-87

0.11
0.21

0.14
0.05
0.10

0.15

0.08

0.21

0.14
0.19

Note: Variability is measured by the Coefficient of Variation of the real
exchange rate. The real exchange rate is the ratio of consumer prices measured
in a common currency.

Although the increased real exchange rate variability in Figure 6
and Table 5 coincides with the flexible exchange rate period (and does so for
all industrialized countries), equilibrium theorists would claim that this does
not constitute proof of regime dependence. Stockman (1987,

1988b),

for example,

makes two points: First, real shocks in the 1970s and 1980s may well have been
different from those in previous periods. The oil shocks would be a case in
point. Second, the exchange rate regime itself may condition policies.

Specifically the flexible exchange rate regime may have changed the constraints
perceived by policy makers and hence their policies.

7See Dornbusch and Ciovannini (1988) for further evidence.

28

If policies do change equilibrium relative prices a different time
series behavior of real exchange rates emerges. Stockman (l988b) advances an
explanation of policy differences: under pegged exchange rates, governments use
balance of payments restrictions, under flexible exchange rates, they do not.
The expectation of such policies is shown to stabilize the real exchange rate
when the nominal exchange rate is pegged. This theory still requires testing.

A separate area of research originated by Baxter and Stockman
(1988) investigates the behavior of macroeconomic aggregates under different

exchange rate regimes. This question is a natural counterpart to the observed
increase in the volatility of the real exchange rate. Strikingly, Baxter and
Stockman conclude (with some caveats about detrending procedures) that there is
little evidence for changes in the behavior of macroeconomic aggregates- -

consumption, exports, industrial production. They note:
"A large class of theoretical models implies that the exchange rate
system has important effects on a number of macroeconomic quantities;
however, we have found little evidence of quantities for which the
exchange rate system is an important determinant."

This finding is interesting because it may constitute evidence

against the equilibrium approach. If real exchange rate changes reflect changes
in eQuilibrium prices, how is it possible that these equilibrium prices are so
much more volatile than quantities? One possible explanation is that monetary
and fiscal policies have real effects (contrary to the implications of the
equilibrium approach) and that their effects are regime dependent. Some very
tentative evidence supporting this view is shown in Table 6. The table shows
correlations among realized real 3 month interest rates, the full employment

29

budget,

the real effective exchange rate and the price-earnings ratio on stocks

for the US.

Table

6

Correlations of U.S. Macroeconomic Variables Under
Alternative Exchange Rate Regimes
1958-72
1.

l.Real Interest Rate
2.F.E. Budget
3.Real Exchange Rate
4.P/E Ratio for Stocks

1973-1987
3.

2,

0.17 1
0.31 0.31
-0.09 0.2

1.

2.

3.

1

1

-0.35
1

0.12

1

0.57 -0.50
-0.06 -0.52

1

0.02

Note that in Table 6, the size and sign of correlations is very
different in the fixed and flexible exchange rate periods. Including policy
variables and prices in the range of variables to be studied may solve the
Baxter-Stockrnan puzzle.

IV. DESTABILIZING SPECULATION AND EXCHANGE RATE POLICY
The basic message from the work of Frankel and Froot (l986a,b,c,

1987), de Crauwe (1988), Garber (1987) and Coodhart (1987) is that asset
markets are not rational, or at least not in ways identifiable in terms of the
models we use and believe.

The message is to look for alternative models of exchange rate
expectations formation and speculation which are not necessarily closed by
consistency of short and longterm speculation. They should respond to the most
striking feature singled out by asset market participants, namely the dominance
of short horizon speculation. The basic fact of life in asset markets is that

30

the average professional thinks he or she can liquidate a position before a
major turn in the market. Speculation can lead to the possibility of trading on
noise which may generate cumulative exchange rate movements out of thin air,
taking the real exchange rate far away from fundamentals. Unless there is
strong, offsetting speculation on fundamentals, these trips away from
fundamentals need to be neither small nor of short duration.

Of course, what is said here of the exchange market applies equally
to markets for real estate, stocks or longterm bonds. Nurkse (1946), Shiller
(1986a,1986b) and Summers (1986,1988) have been very vocal and persuasive in
arguing this point. The more diffuse the fundamentals, the more room there is

for dominance of short-run speculation and for asset prices to depart from
fundamentals.

None of this is new. Keynes (1934, chapter 12) offers a description
of the difference between "speculation" which is geared to making capital gains
from uncovering the shifting psychological moods of the market versus
"enterprise" which seeks to earn income from the long-term holding of an asset.

He notes the markets' pursuit of short-term capital gains rather than long-term
holding yields:

"It might have been supposed that competition between expert
professionals, possessing judgment and knowledge beyond that of the
average private investor, would correct the vagaries of the ignorant
investor left to himself. It happens, however, that the energies and
skill of the professional investor and speculator are mainly occupied
otheise. . .They are concerned, not with what an investment is really
worth to a man who buys it "for keeps", but with what the market will
value it at, under he influence of mass psychology, three months or a
year hence...
The battle of wits to anticipate the basis of conventional valuation a
few months hence, rather than the prospective yield of an investment
over a long term of years, does not require gulls amongst the public to

31

feed the maws of the professional - amongst themselves."

it

can be played by professionals

Even though exchange rate behavior is not well understood, there is
a live policy issue. Should exchange rates be allowed to float freely or should
they be closely managed?
Policy:

For many observers extreme exchange rate volatility and persistent
misaligrunents in the $-DM-Yen triangle calls for a move toward a better

international monetary system. Naturally, participants in that debate follow
the principle "the neighbors' grass is greener": given that we have flexible

rates now, they urge a return to fixed exchange rates. Two kinds of remedies
specifically address this problem. One is target zones ,

the other is the

introduction of a comprehensive financial transactions taxes as suggested by
Tobin (1982). But there is another direction: maintaining a flexible exchange
rate system but discouraging destabilizing speculation by a financial
transactions tax.

The target zone proposal, advocated by by Williamson and Miller
(1987), rests on the premise that longterm speculation is supported if market
participants know that the authorities have a firm commitment to limit the size
of exchange rate fluctuations. Moreover, even if the market does not provide
the stabilizing speculation, policy makers bring it about by their own

intervention

and by policy changes in support of the band. The arguments

against such proposals are well-known and have failed to convince the
proponents of the scheme: First, that in the absence of fiscal coordination the

32

support of target zones may lead to an undesirable use of interest rate policy.
Second, that target zones may be too sticky to deal effectively with the need
for changes in equilibrium real exchange rates.

If most of the shortcomings of our exchange rate experience stem
from excessive, overly volatile capital mobility, a way to cope with excess

capital mobility is to use a dual exchange rates, thus separating commercial
transactions from the vagaries of the capital market. An alternative system is

a worldwide financial transactions tax. A moderate, worldwide tax on all

financial transactions would force asset markets to take a long run view of
the assets they price. Tobin (1982) has suggested such a tax for all foreign
exchange transactions, but the logic can be carried to all financial

transactions. The attraction of the Tobin tax is that when levied at a very
moderate rate it still creates a tax on shortterm (round trip) transactions,
while leaving the profitability of longterm investment virtually unaffected.

But a critical question then is whether a reduction in short-term
speculation increases stability of the exchange rate. If short-term speculation
is the main source of the cumulative departures from fundamentals today then
reduced shortterm speculation and hence relatively stronger longterm
speculation might well limit the extent of exchange rate fluctuations, But that
point still has not been demonstrated.

The major objections to the Tobin tax are two. One is the resource
cost of implementing yet another tax. That cost would have to be compared to
the costs of large exchange rate misalignment and the resulting resource cost.

On that basis, it presumably comes out to be small. The second is the argument

33

that

with

the tax implemented in only one or a few locations, business would

merely shift to offshore centers. Tobin recognized that point in arguing for a
worldwide foreign exchange transactions tax.

IV. REAL EXCHANGE RATES IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
In this part of the paper, we investigate problems of real exchange

rates in developing countries. One concerns the interaction of the world
capital market which a country faces, capital accumulation, real wages and the
standard of living. The simple point of the model we develop is highlights the
asymmetry between the mobility of real capital and the immobility of labor.

Policies that reduce the profitability of capital ultimately reduce the
standard of living of labor.

1. Capital and the Real Wage
In this section, we set out a simple model of a small open economy.
The model is readily recognized as a variation on work by Kouri (1979, 1982).

The Model: There are three sectors: home goods, exportables and a capital
installation industry. The export sector produces with constant returns, using
capital and labor. Firms can sell output at the exchange rate e and hence have
profits equal to:

VE — eF(K,LE)

-

11E

(16)

34

which gives rise to the labor demand equation

LE —

f(w)K ; f<O

(17)

where w— W/E is the wage in dollars. In the home goods sector, output is
produced with a constant unit labor requirement (of one) and no capital. Demand

for home goods is a fraction a of labor income plus government demand, denoted
C:

—

e(p)WL/PN

+ C

(18)

where p —PN/e is the relative price of home goods. The home goods price is

given by unit labor costs, N — W. Accordingly, labor demand in the home goods
sector is

—

e(p)L

+ C

(19)

where L denotes the level of employment.

The capital goods installation industry sells installed capacity at
a price Q.

Installation

requires an increasing marginal input requirement of

imported goods. Thus profits of the installation industry are

V1 — QI

-

(I)e;

e',e">O

(20)

35

Optimization gives the optimal rate of production of installed capacity:

I —

1(q);

(21)

where q—Q/e is Tobin's real price of installed capacity.
The labor market equilibrium condition is given in (22):

L —

[f(w)K + G)/[1-e(w)]

(22)

Note the employment multiplier 1/[l-e(w)] to which we return presently.

The equilibrium real wage is therefore a function of the capital
stock and government spending on home goods.

w — w(K,L,G)

WK>O, wL<O, wG>O

(23)

The sign pattern assumed for the equilibrium wage functions requires that e' (w)

be negative or at least not too positive. This assures that a rise in the wage,
w, reduces labor demand. In fact, if e'(w) is positive it is possible that very
large real wage cuts are required to reduce labor demand.

Capital accumulation is defined by the difference between
investment and depreciation:

K — 1(q)

-

5K —

K(q,K)

where 6 is the rate of depreciation.

(24)

36

The model is closed by an equation relating the return on

domestically installed capital to the rate of return that can be obtained in
the world market, i*:

q/q —

i*

-

4(w)/q — h(q,K;i*,G)

(25)

where 1(w) is the marginal product of capital in the traded goods sector. The
equation states that capital gains must make up the difference between the
world interest rate and the domestic dividend yield of capital.

Substituting (23) in (25) yields the conventional phase diagram
(Figure 7) which shows the dynamics of the capital stock and the real price of

capital. The path JJ is the unique stable trajectory. The subsidiary equations
which already have been used to derive these paths, give the behavior of real
wages and the allocation of labor between sectors.

Three Applications: The first application of this model is to show that
increased home demand by the governnent. via the crowding out effect in the
labor market, reduces the profitability of capital. This must lead to a decline
in the real price of capital and hence to a gradual decline in the capital
stock.

The increase in government spending raises the equilibrium wage and
hence raise the capital intensity in the export sector. In Figure 7, the
resulting reduction in the yield of capital must be offset by a fall in the

real price of assets. The —O schedule therefore shifts downward. The forward

37

looking asset price declines immediately. Over time, the capital stock declines
until a new equilibrium is reached.

The net effect of this adjustment on wages will be positive. Thus
labor gains, and that gain is achieved at the expense of capital. The initial
gain in real wages is subsequently dampened by a decline in the capital stock,
but labor is ahead even in the new long run equilibrium.

Of course, that strong conclusion overshadows the question of how
the expenditure policy is financed. Typically the real appreciation involves

trade and budget deficits, both financed by external loans. The adverse effects
of the policy on the export sector are part of the trade deficit, while the

other part is the increase in imports that occurs as a result of income and
substitution effects. The example illustrates the policy disturbances that led
in many Latin American countries, specifically Mexico, to the debt crisis.

Figure 8 shows Mexico's real exchange rate in the past forty years. The
recurrent episodes of massive real appreciation, such as 1976 or 1982 are
associated with election year spending sprees. They are invariably followed by
massive real depreciation when the external constraint becomes binding.
The asymmetry in the adjustment is worth noting. When the
overvaluation episode has lasted for a while capital will have been decumulated

and, as a result, the equilibrium level of real wages at a balanced budget i11

be below the level at which the overvaluation episode started. A recurrent
policy of overvaluation thus leads, over time, to a declining sustainable real
wage. This is, of course, the pattern observed in many Latin American countries
as shown

in

Table 7.

38

Table 7 Real Exchange Rates in Latin America
(Index 1980-82 — 100)

Argentina
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988:111

77
72
80
71
61
53

64

Brazil
113
86
86
85
74
74
81

Chile

Mexico

97
89
90
80
69
65
61

83
79
92

90
65
67

81

Source: Morgan Guaranty

The real wage effects are further aggravated, as is apparent from
(22), by the employment multiplier, which tends to be very high, and the fact
that the government budget tends to have a high domestic employment content.
The second application deals with international risk premia.

Suppose that a country, because of poor policy performance Peru-style has
scared off international investors. The result is an increase in the cost of
capital. Investors will hold assets in this country only if they receive a
margin over the world rate of return sufficient to compensate for the perceive
risks. In terms of the model this corresponds to an increase in the cost of

capital from i* to i*+R. The —0 schedule will shift down. There will be an
immediate decline in asset prices and, just as discussed above, the capital

stock will decline over time. This time, the long run effect is unquestionably
adverse, even leaving aside the balance of payments crisis. The decumulation o
capital implies that the long run sustainable wage has fallen. Falling out of
favor with the world capital market thus implies a lowering of the standard of
living.

39

The long run consequences of policies that raise the cost of
capital are worth noting because of a temptation to take only the short run
view. It is true that physical capital is in fixed supply, in the short run
and is earning rents. But, because of depreciation, capital is ultimately
mobile, and a period of negative net investment is entirely conceivable.
Argentina in the 1980s is a case in point as is Peru.

The third application concerns an overvaluation imposed by an
increase in the real wage above the market clearing level. Let w' be the real

wage fixed by unions and the government. Suppose also that the immediate
unemployment effects from such a policy are offset by increased government
spending. The focus here is on the long-term employment effects. With a real

wage w' > w(K,G), capital intensity in the traded goods sector increases
immediately and profitability of capital is reduced. Accordingly, as shown in

Figure 9, the —O schedule now becomes horizontal at a level q°, defined by the
equation q°(i*+&)—(w'). There is an immediate decline in the real price of
capital from E to E' At this point, workers have increased purchasing power
and unchanged total employment, but capitalists have already suffered capital
losses.

The next stage is an inevitable decapitalization of the economy. At
the reduced price of capital, investment has fallen, and thus the capital stock
declines until the economy reaches point E°. It is conceivable that the
government increases its demand for goods, thus stabilizing employment. But
sooner or later there is an inevitable payments crisis. Once again, because of
the decapitalization the equilibrium real wage will have to fall far below the

40

initial level. The decline is larger when the real wage cutting itself reduces
the demand for labor in the home goods sector.

Concluding Remarks

The variety of topics reviewed in this selective survey represents
some of the diverse directions of current research of exchange rates. Two
thrusts are dominant. One is the rationality of asset markets and the resulting

question about resource allocation guidsed by disequilibrium real exchange
ratres. The other is an increased focus on microeconomic effects of real

exchange rate changes. We have sketched here a model of capital and
employment, but there is an equally important direction of research emphasizing
hysteresis effects as developed in Krugman's (1988) highly original work.

REFERENCES

Baxter, M. and A. Stockman (1988) "Business Cycles and the Exchange Rate
System: Some International Evidence," Unpublished manuscript, University of
Rochester.

Calvo, G.(1983) "Staggered Contracts and Exchange Rate Policy" in J.Frenkel
(ed.) Excharie Rates and international Macroeconomics, U. of Chicago Press and
NB ER.

(1985) "Currency Substitution and the Real Exchange Rate: the Utility
Maximizing Approach," Journal of International Money and Finance,2.
(1988) "Idiosyncratic Expectations and Economic Fluctuations"
Unpublished manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.

Cumby, R. and M.Obs:feld. (1984) "International Interest Rate and Price Leve
Linkages Under Flexible Exchange Rates. A Review of Recent Evidence." in J.
Bilson and R. Marston (eds.) Exchange Rate Theory and Practice, U. of Chicago
Press and NBER.

41

de Grauwe, P. (1988) "Long Swings in Real Exchange Rates- Do They Fit Our
Theories?," Monetary and Economic Studies (Bank of Japan), May 1988.
Diaz Alejandro,C. (1963) Exchange Rate Devaluation in a Semi Industrialized
Country. MIT Press.
Dornbusch, R.(1971) "Money, Devaluation and Nontraded Goods," American Economic
Review, December.
(1976) "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of Political
Economy, December.
(1983) "Exchange Rate Risk and the Macroeconomics of Exchange Rate
Determination" in R.Hawkins et al. (eds) Research in International Business and
Finance, Vol 3, JAI Press.

(1986a)"Flexible Exchange Rates and Excess Capit1 Mobility," BPEA, 1.
(1986b) Dollars. Debts and Deficits, MIT Press.

Dornbusch,R. and A. Giovannini (1988) "Money in the Open Economy," forthcoming
in F.Hahri and B.Friedman (eds,) Handbook of Monetary Economics, North-Holland.
Dornbusch,R. and J.Frankel (1987) "The Flexible Exchange Rate System:
Experience and Alternatives," NBER Working Paper 2464.

Dornbusch,R., S.Fischer and P.A.Samuelson (1977) "Comparative Advantage, Trade
and Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods," American
Economic Review, December.
Drazen,A. and E.Helpman (1987) "Stabilization with Exchange Rate Management,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, November.
Eichengreen,B. (1988) "Real Exchange Rate Behavior Under Alternative
international Monetary Regimes," European Economic Review, 363-371.
Feldstein,M. (1987) "The Budget Deficit and the Dollar," NF,ER Macroeconomics
Annual.

Frankel,J. (l982)"In Search of the Exchange Risk Premium: A Six Currency Test
Assuming Mean-Variance Optimization." Journal of International Money and
Finance, 1.

(1986)"The Implications of Mean-Variance Optimization for Four Questions
in International Finance," Journal of International Money and Finance, March
Frankel, J. and K.Froot (1986a) "Three Essays Using Survey Data of Exchange
Rate Expectations," Unpublished manuscript, University of California, Berkeley,
Nov.

42

(l986b) "Understanding the US Dollar in the Eighties: The
Expectations of Chartists and Fundamentalists," Economic Record (Supplement)
(1986c) "The Dollar as an Irrational Speculative Bubble: A Tale of
Fundamentalists and Chartists," The Marcus Wallenberz Papers ion International
Finance, No.1.
(1987) "Using Survey Data to Test Standard Propositions Regarding
Exchange Rate Expectations," American Economic Review, March
Frankel,J. and R. Meese (1987) "Are Exchange Rates Excessively Variable?,"
Macroeconomics Annual.
Frenkel,J. (ed.)(l988) Fiscal Policy in the Open Economy. University of Chicago
Press.

and A.Razin (1986) "The International Transmission and Effects of
Fiscal Policy," American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings), May.
(1987) Fiscal Policies and the World Economy, KIT Press
Frenkel,J.A. and H.G. Johnson (1978) (eds.) The Economics of Flexible Exchange
Rates, Addison-Wesley.

Frenkel,J. and A. Razin (1987) Fiscal Policies and the World Economy, MIT
Press.

Friedman, M.(1953) "The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates," in his Essays in
Positive Economics U. of Chicago Press.
Froot, K. (1988) "Currency Speculation: Is It Destabilizing? mimeo,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

and T.Itoh (1988) "On the Consistency of Short run and Long run
Exchange Rate Expectations," Unpublished manuscript, MIT.
Helpman,E. (1981) "An Exploration in the Theory of Exchange Rate Regimes,"
Journal of Political Economy, December.

and A.Razjn (1979) "Towards a Consistent Comparison of Alternative
Exchange Rate Systems," Canadian Journal of Economics, August.
(1982) "Dynamics of a Floating Exchange Race Regime," Journal of
Political Economy, August/September.
(1987) "Exchange Rate Management: Intertemporal Tradeoffs"
American Economic Review, March.

43

Garber,P. (1987) "The Dollar as a Bubble," Unpublished manuscript, Brown
University.
Cavin,M. (1987) "The Dollar as a Speculative Bubble 1984-1985," Unpublished
manuscript, Columbia University.
Goodhart,C. (1987) "The Foreign Exchange Market: A Random Walk with a Dragging
Anchor," LSE Financial Market Group, Discussion Paper No. 0001.
Huizinga,J. (1987) "An Empirical Investigation of the Long Run Behavior of the
Real Exchange Rate," Carnegie Rochester Conference Series, Vol. 27.

Johnson, H. C. (l973)"The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates:1969," in his
Further Essays in Monetary Economics Harvard U. Press.
Kravis,I.(1986) " The Three Faces of the International Comparison Project,"
Research Observer, January.
Keynes,J.M. (1934) The General Theory of Employment. Interest and Money,
London: Macmillan

Kouri, P. (1979) "Profitability and Growth in a Small Open Economy," in
A.Lindbeck (ed.) Inflation and Employment in Open Economies, North Holland
(1982) "

Profitability

and Growth," Scandinavian Journal of Economics,

2.

Krugman,P. (1985) "Is the Strong Dollar Sustainable?," Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City The US Dollar- Recent Developments. Outlook and Policy Options.
(1987) "Target Zones and Exchange Rate Dynamics," NBER Working Paper
No. 2481.

(1988) Exchange Rate Instability Cambridge: MIT Press.

Krugman, P. and Taylor,L.(l981) "The Cont:actionary Effects of Devaluation,"
Journal of International Economics, September.
Lucas,R. (1982) "Interest Rates and Currency Prices in a Two-Country World."
Journal of Monetary Economics.
Meese,R. and Rogoff,K. (1983) "Empirical Exchange Rate Models in the Seventies.
Do They Fit Out of Sample?," Journal of Ir.:ernationa' Economics, May.

Miller,M. and J. Williamson (1987) "The International Monetary System: An
Analysis of Alternative Regimes," Unpublished manuscript, University of
Warwick.

44

Miller,O. and N.Wallace,(l985) "International Coordination of Macroeconomic
Policies: A Welfare Analysis," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly
Review, Spring.
Mussa,M. (1979) "Empirical Regularities in the Behavior of Exchange Rates and
Theories of the Foreign Exchange Market," Carnegie Rochester Conference Series,
(1982) "A Model of Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of Political
Economy, February.

(1984)"The Theory of Exchange Rate Determination," in J.Bilson and
R. Marston (eds.) Exchanze Rate Theory and Practice, U. of Chicago Press and
NBER.

(1986) "Nominal Exchange Rate Regimes and the Behavior of Real Exchange
Rates: Evidence and Implications," Carnegie Rochester Conference Series.
Nurkse, R. (1946) International Currency Experience in the Interwar Period,
Geneva: League of Nations. Reprinted by Arno Press.
Obstfeld, M. and A. Stockinan(1985) "Exchange Rate Dynamics," in R.Jones and
P.Kenen (eds.) Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 2, North-Holland.

Persson,T. "Credibility of Macroeconomic Policy: An Introduction and a Broad
Survey," European Economic Review, 519-532.
Saznuelson,P. (1964) "Some Theoretical Notes on Trade Problems," Review of
Economics and Statistics.
Serven,L.(1986) "The Effects of Devaluation," chapter from an unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, MIT.

Shiller, R. (1986a) "Stock Prices and Social Dynamics," Brookinzs Papers on
Economic Activity, 2.
(1986b) "Fashions, Fads and Bubbles in Financial Markets,"
Unpublished manuscript, Yale University.

Stoc.an,A.(198O) "A Theory of Exchange Rate Determination," Journal of
Political Economy, December
(1983) "Real Exchange Rates under Alternative Nominal Exchange Rate
Regimes," Journal of International Money and Finance, 2.

(1987) "The Equilibrium Approach to Exchange Rates," Federal
Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review, March/April.

45

(1988a) "Fiscal Policies and International Financial Markets,' in
(1988b) "Real Exchange Rate Variability Under Pegged and floating
Nominal Exchange Rate Systems: An Equilibrium Theory," NEER Working Paper No.
2565.

and L.Svensson (1987) "Capital Flows, Exchange Rates and Investment,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, March.
Summers,R.(l986) "Does the Stock Market Rationally Reflect Fundamental
Values?," Journal of Finance, July.
(1988) "What is Memorable in Empirical Macroeconomics?," Unpublished
manuscript, Harvard University.
Svensson,L.(l985a) Currency Prices, Terms of Trade, and Interest Rates: A
General Equilibrium, Asset-Pricing, Cash in Advance Approach," Journal of
International Economics, January.
(1985b)"Money and Asset Prices in a Cash in Advance Economy," Journal
of Political Economy, December.
(1986) "International Fiscal Policy Transmission," unpublished
manuscript, University of Stockholm.

Svensson,L. and S. van Wijnbergen (1986) "International Transmission of
Monetary Policy," Unpublished manuscript, University of Stockholm.

Svensson, L. and A.Razin.(1983) "The Terms of Trade, Spending, and the Current
Account: The Harberger-Laursen-Metzler Effect," Journal of Political Economy
February.

Tobin, J.(l982) "A Proposal for International Monetary Reform," in his Essays
in Economics. MIT Press,chapt. 20
van Wiinbergen.S.(l985) "Trade Reform, Aggregate Investment and Capital Flight:
On Credibility and the Value of Information," Economic Letters, 19.
Williamson,J. (1983) The Exchange Rate System Institute for International
Economics.
Williamson,J. and M.Miller (1987) A Blueprint for International Monetary
Reform. Institute for International Economics.
Wilson, C.(1979) "Exchange Rate Dynamics and Anticipated Disturbances," Journal
of International Economics, June.

FIGURE 1

SWEDISH—US REAL EXCHANGE RATE
(INDEX 1980—100)

110

100

90

80
70

60

50

40
1874 1884 1894 1904

1914

1924

1934

1944

1954

1964

1974

1984

FIGURE 2

RATIO OF EXPORT PRICES TO DEFLATOR
(INDEX 1980—100)

160

150
140
130
120
110
100

90
80
70

1965 1967 1969

1971

1973 1975

1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987

FIGURE 3

THE US—UK REAL EXCHANGE RATE
(INDEX 1980—100)

200
190
180
170
160

150
140
130
120
110
100
90

80

1869 1877 18851893 1901 1909 1917 1925 1933 1941 1949 1957 1965 1973 1981 1989

FIGURE 4

U.S.

REAL EXCHANGE RATE
(INDEX 1980—82—100)

135
130
125

120
115

110
105
100

95

go
85
1970

1972

1974

1976

1976

1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

FIGURE 5

US—GERMAN REAL EXCHANGE RATE
(CPI. INDEX 1980—100)

200
190
180
170

160
150
140

130
120
110
100

90
1Q58

1961

1964

1967

1970

1973

1976

1979

1982

1985

1988

FiGURE 6

US—GERMAN REAL EXCHANGE RATE CHANGES
(CPI. MONTHLY % CHANGES)

8
7
6
5
4

3
2
1

0
-1

-2
-3
-4

.5
•6

7
S

9

0
1958 1960 1962 1964 1966 1968 1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988

q

kO
S

J

J

q=O
k

FICURE 8

THE MEXICAN—US REAL EXCHANGE RATE
(INDEX 1980—100, CPI—BASED)
120

10
0o
90

80

70

60

50

51 53 55 57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79 81 83 85 87 89

q

k:0

q°

E

I

q:Q

