NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT CAN ECONOMICS SAY ABOUT ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE?
Amitabh Chandra
Courtney Coile
Corina Mommaerts
Working Paper 27760
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27760

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2020

We are grateful to Lila Kelso, Spencer Lee-Rey, and Catherine Mankiw for their terrific research
assistance, for the support of Grant P30AG012810 from the National Institute on Aging, to
members of the NBER Economics of Alzheimer's Research Network for helpful comments, and
to Jim Poterba and Jon Skinner for their comments and encouragement. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27760.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Amitabh Chandra, Courtney Coile, and Corina Mommaerts. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What Can Economics Say About Alzheimer's Disease?
Amitabh Chandra, Courtney Coile, and Corina Mommaerts
NBER Working Paper No. 27760
August 2020
JEL No. G41,G51,G52,I11,I13,J14,J22,O31
ABSTRACT
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) affects one in ten people aged 65 or older and is the most expensive
disease in the United States. We describe the central economic questions raised by AD. While
there is overlap with the economics of aging, the defining features of the ‘economics of
Alzheimer’s Disease’ is an emphasis on cognitive decline, choice by cognitively impaired
patients, and a host of issues where dynamic contracts between patients and caregivers are hard to
enforce. There is enormous scope for economists to contribute to our understanding of ADrelated issues, including drug development, efficient care delivery, dynamic contracting within
the family and with care providers, long-term care risk, financial decision-making, and public
programs for AD. These topics overlap with many areas of economics – labor economics, health
economics, public finance, behavioral economics, experimental economics, family economics,
mechanism design, and the economics of innovation – suggesting the presence of a rich research
program that should attract many economists.
Amitabh Chandra
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
amitabh_chandra@harvard.edu
Courtney Coile
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
ccoile@wellesley.edu

Corina Mommaerts
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
cmommaerts@wisc.edu

Why Alzheimer’s Disease?
Economist readers of this article may be puzzled about an article on the economics of
Alzheimer’s Disease: do we, the authors, believe that a new economics of consumer or firm
behavior needs to be developed for a particular disease? How is the economics of Alzheimer’s
different from the economics of cancer, or arthritis, or aging? What can a social science
discipline like economics have to say about a particular medical condition?
While there is overlap between the economics of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) and of aging, the
defining feature of the ‘economics of AD’ is an emphasis on cognitive decline, decision-making
by cognitively impaired patients that may be different from ‘behavioral bias’, and a host of
issues where dynamic contracts between patients and insurers and caregivers are hard to
enforce. Although some of these features could apply to other health conditions that affect the
elderly, the role of cognitive decline is central to the clinical definition of AD (which we detail in
the next section), and how firms, families and patients respond to--or exploit--this decline. In
addition, the issue of innovation--in prevention, delivery and medicines--is a central topic in
economics but its importance is amplified in the economics of AD, where there may be
insufficient investments in basic science and where a fragmented insurance system (at least in
the United States) discourages private investments in these innovations. Finally, the disease is
colossally expensive--more costly than cancer--and mostly paid for by the government, which
means that any discipline that can think systematically about how to finance this spending will
improve the quality of resource allocation. The ‘economics of Alzheimer’s Disease’ therefore
overlaps with a number of areas of economics: health economics, public finance, behavioral
economics, experimental economics, family economics, mechanism design, and the economics
of innovation, suggesting that the topic should attract almost all economists.
We share five key facts about Alzheimer’s Disease to make this point:
Prevalence​: AD is the most common cause of dementia, accounting for 60-80% of dementia
cases and affecting an estimated five million Americans aged 65 or older (Alzheimer's
Association, 2020a). By 2050, this number is expected to almost triple to 14 million (Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, 2019 and Kelley and Petersen, 2007). As of 2020, AD is the
sixth leading cause of death in America, though some estimates rank it just behind heart
disease and cancer as the third leading cause of death for elderly people (National Institute on
Aging, 2014). While death rates for heart disease and cancer have been falling, death rates due
to AD have been rising. Research has also indicated that AD (among other dementias) may be
under-reported on death certificates (National Institute on Aging, 2014). Although AD primarily
affects people over age 65, a form of AD known as early-onset AD affects patients younger than
65 and represents approximately 6% of all AD cases (Mayo Clinic, 2020). ​Race and gender
disparities are first order issues in the prevalence of AD, with disproportionately higher rates
among women, blacks and Hispanics.
Cost​: According to the Center for Disease Control, it cost an estimated $159-$215 billion to
treat AD in 2010, with annual costs predicted to rise to between $379 and $500 billion by 2040
(Hurd et al, 2013). In comparison, treatment costs for heart disease and cancer were $102
billion and $77 billion, respectively (Hurd et al., 2013). While the Medicare program covers

1

most medical costs, much of the cost of AD care is driven by long-term care expenses, covered
predominantly by the Medicaid program or paid out of pocket. On aggregate, roughly 41% of
total costs for AD care are paid by Medicare, 34% by Medicaid, 26% out of pocket, and a smaller
percent by private insurance (Zissimopoulos, Crimmins, and St. Clair, 2015). However, direct
health care expenditures are only part of the total cost: an estimated 3.6 million to 18 million
unpaid caregivers spent a total of 3.6 to 18.5 billion hours providing care in 2018, time valued at
another $233 billion (Alzheimer’s Association, 2020a, Friedman et al., 2015). In total, therefore,
the US spends close to half a trillion dollars annually on AD-related care. AD is a critical public
policy priority due to the immense resources devoted to AD care as well as the vast human cost
of the disease in terms of the suffering of patients and the toll on caregivers.
Long-term care delivery​: For individuals living with AD, management of the disease can involve
substantial amounts of health care and long-term care, care that often requires substantial
amounts of co-production and cognitive decision-making. Individuals survive an average of four
to eight years post-diagnosis, which typically occurs after the onset of symptoms such as
memory loss and the inability to perform daily activities (Tom et al., 2015). Around 30-40% of
individuals with AD reside in nursing homes at any given time, while 70% will die in a nursing
home (Joyce et al., 2018) compared to 20% of those with cancer (Mitchell et al., 2005). Half of
the long-term nursing home population in the US has a dementia diagnosis, and AD is the third
most common primary diagnosis for Medicare beneficiaries in hospice after heart disease and
other circulatory conditions. Given the decreased cognitive capacity among individuals suffering
from AD, there is large scope for inefficiencies in care delivery that may translate to poor health
outcomes and high costs. There is also a large role for insuring these risks which brings up a set
of challenges around the design of insurance contracts.
Cognitive decline​: AD has two definitions: a clinical one, which focuses on cognitive decline
(beyond normal cognitive aging), and a scientific one, which focuses on the precise biology
behind this decline that can occur long before the onset of clinical symptoms. We believe that
economists have a larger comparative advantage in engaging with the first definition. AD is the
largest source of age-related dementia, and while not all age-related dementia is a
consequence of AD, much progress can be made by focusing on the sequela of cognitive
decline. Age-related changes in cognition affect memory, decision-making, judgement,
processing speed, and learning (Institute of Medicine, 2015), and may explain changes in risk
preferences and choice consistency at older ages that would affect economic decision-making
(Tymula et al., 2015). The rate of cognitive decline differs substantially across individuals, due in
part to differences in socioeconomic status, health, lifestyle, genetics, and other factors. AD
patients are at one end of a spectrum of cognitive decline and thus of particular interest for
study, but there are many opportunities for economists to engage with the broader issue of
cognitive decline and decision-making. At the same time the presence of severely
cognitively-challenged patients raises a number of issues for economists who study family
bargaining, care delivery, prevention, and dynamic contracting.
Innovation​: The scientific definition of AD requires a precise diagnosis, and will challenge
economists who want to work on cohorts of patients who have the precise medical diagnosis of
AD. Economics can also provide insights into this definition of the disease. Better and faster

2

diagnosis would spur medical innovation through the expansion of market size. Push and pull
incentives are also key for the development of transformational drugs for AD: firms will be
drawn to AD because of its large market size and unmet medical need, but discouraged by the
relatively poor understanding of the disease’s basic science and the fact that treatments may
have to be given to prodromal patients who are relatively young, with the benefits being
captured many decades later, potentially by a different payer. The presence of different targets
and a complicated disease suggests that it is unlikely that a single medicine will be the panacea
for this disease and that there may be a role for alternative pricing structures. Economists are
well-versed in understanding and quantifying the tradeoffs between various incentive and
pricing structures (Budish, Roin, Williams, 2015; Chandra and Garthwaite, 2017), and we believe
there is opportunity to apply these insights to developing policies around therapeutics for AD.
As a consequence of these 5 facts--some of which are shared by other diseases but no disease
offers the singular combination--there is enormous scope for economists to engage with
AD-related issues, be it around inducing new medical innovations in treatment, incentivizing
efficient care delivery, dynamic contracting within the family and with long-term care facilities,
insuring long-term care risk, saving, decision-making by cognitively impaired individuals, or
designing public programs for AD. Greater attention by economists to this disease has the
potential to lead to important policy insights. The goal of this essay is to encourage economists
to engage in the emerging public policy debate surrounding AD by providing them with a basic
understanding of the underlying science of this unique disease and by laying out the central
economic questions raised by AD where broader lessons from economic theory, labor
economics, public economics, and the economics of aging, health, innovation, regulation, and
the family can be applied to develop new insights.
We begin this essay in Section 1 with a short primer on the basic science and epidemiology of
AD highlighting basic facts that are relevant to economics research. The next sections dive into
particular areas of research where economists are well suited to contribute to our
understanding of AD. In Section 2, we turn to the role of incentive structures in health care and
long-term care markets, valuing informal care, and the market design of insurance for AD.
Section 3 discusses the relevance of AD for labor supply, savings, and financial decision-making.
In Section 4 we describe the scientific understanding for the causes of the disease (as of the
time of writing), and note current methods for diagnosis and therapeutics. We discuss the role
of market frictions and ‘missing medicines’ in drug innovation and highlight how frameworks
and toolkits of economists can help in our understanding of the determinants and effects of AD
on health. Our goal is to describe what questions have been studied by economists and how the
answers might be refined to apply to Alzheimer's, and what questions have not been studied,
i.e., ‘open research questions’, particularly those for which economists have a unique
comparative advantage in offering answers. For this reason, our discussion of the literature is
not exhaustive; rather, we point the reader to papers that contain longer summaries, facts, and
models. We conclude every section with a discussion of topic areas ripe for economists to study
and conclude the paper with a call for investment in data resources and collaborations to
accelerate research on this important disease.

3

1 What is Alzheimer’s Disease?
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is a progressive neurocognitive disease of the brain that eventually
causes dementia. Dementia is not a disease but rather a general term for a loss of cognitive
functioning that interferes with daily activities. While AD is the most common cause of
dementia, other causes include Parkinson’s Disease, Lewy body dementia, vascular disease, and
other conditions. Symptoms of dementia could also be caused by issues such as sleep
disturbances, medication side effects, infections or other temporal non-AD dementias.
Although commonality exists between different forms of dementia, they can differ in
progression, neuropathology, treatment plans, populations affected, and risk factors. Relative
to other causes of dementia, AD is characterized by the presence of specific biochemicals –
amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary, tau-based tangles – in the brain.1
The progression of AD can be divided into three phases: preclinical disease, mild cognitive
impairment (MCI), and Alzheimer’s dementia. The final phase may be further subdivided into
periods of mild, moderate, and severe dementia due to AD. During the preclinical phase,
biological signs of the disease are present in the brain, but the individual maintains normal
cognitive function. This phase can last 15 to 20 years (Scharre, 2019). During the MCI phase, the
individual has memory lapses, decreased planning and problem-solving skills, and other deficits,
but maintains independence in instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs) like driving,
cooking, and managing finances.
Each year, individuals with MCI have a 10-15% chance of developing Alzheimer’s dementia
(Michaud et al., 2017). In this phase, cognitive impairment is severe and the individual loses the
ability to perform IADLs and basic activities of daily living (ADLs) like dressing and feeding.
Patients may retain the ability to read (possibly without understanding), dance, sing, tell stories,
and reminisce, as these abilities are controlled by parts of the brain that are affected later in
the disease’s progression. Other symptoms may include weight loss, seizures, frequent
groaning or moaning, restlessness, tremors, and slow, stiff or repetitive movements. Mood and
behavior changes may occur, including depression, anger, delusions, and wandering. About 20%
of AD patients also experience sun-downing—a phenomena beginning at sunset in which
patients exhibit a worsening of symptoms that lasts throughout the night (Alzheimer's
Association, 2020b). Patients in this phase become completely reliant on caregivers and are
susceptible to malnourishment, dehydration, and infection due to diminished swallowing and
bowel control function. Median time from the onset of Alzheimer’s dementia to death is 7
years, 4 years less than survival time for comparable persons without AD (Fitzpatrick et al.,
2005).
It is useful to distinguish AD from the normal cognitive aging process. Cognitive abilities are
often measured in terms of fluid intelligence (reasoning with novel information) and crystallized
intelligence (reasoning that relies on previous knowledge). Studies regularly show that fluid
​AD was first characterized by Dr. Aloysius “Alois” Alzheimer in 1906 after he discovered abnormal brain tissue in a
former patient named Auguste Deter. After Deter’s death, Dr. Alzheimer found that several odd clumps of protein
and tangled bundles of fibers were present throughout her brain (Maurer et al., 1997). These clumps were later
named and identified as beta-amyloid plaques while the tangles were called neurofibrillary tangles (NFT).
1

4

intelligence declines with age (Salthouse, 2005). As crystallized intelligence rises with age and
many real-world tasks rely on a combination of both skills, performance often exhibits a
hump-shaped pattern with respect to age, peaking in mid-life. At older ages, the decline in fluid
intelligence dominates, leading to declining cognitive performance with age (Agarwal et al.,
2009). A clinical diagnosis of AD requires cognitive impairment beyond what would be expected
due to age. However, individuals without AD may experience normal age-related cognitive
decline that eventually impedes their decision-making ability.
The prevalence of both dementia and cognitive impairment without dementia rise sharply with
age. One estimate indicates a dementia prevalence rate of 1.7% at ages 65 to 69, 6.5% at ages
75 to 79, and 30.1% at ages 85 and above. Rates of cognitive impairment without dementia are
higher still, suggesting that about half of people in their 80s and over 70 percent of people in
their 90s experience one or the other of these conditions (Agarwal et al., 2009).
Women account for around two-thirds of AD cases. However, it is not known whether this is
due primarily to women’s longevity advantage over men or whether other factors play a role.
There is thus far no consensus in the literature as to whether women have higher age-specific
AD prevalence rates, nor whether any differences in AD rates reflect the effect of biology or
social factors (Beam et al., 2018).
Racial disparities in AD prevalence are substantial: Blacks are twice as likely to develop AD or
other dementias as whites, while Hispanics are one and a half times as likely (“AAIC 2018”,
2017). It has been hypothesized that the higher rates of AD in these groups may be partly due
to a higher prevalence of comorbidities such as stroke, heart attack and diabetes, although the
exact biological mechanisms have not yet been determined (Anderson 2004). Other possible
explanations for racial differences include genetic and social factors as well as bias in
measurement of cognitive function (Manly and Mayeux, 2004).
Finally, educational attainment is strongly associated with reduced dementia risk (Meng and
D’arcy, 2012). One theory is that education leads to changes in brain structure that provide a
“cognitive reserve” against age- and disease-related pathology, although other pathways may
also play a role (Langa, 2018).
1.1 What causes Alzheimer’s Disease?
The most prominent theories of how and why AD occurs involve the biochemicals associated
with AD, amyloid and tau. To understand these theories, one must delve into biology.
Amyloid Precursor Protein (APP) is a naturally occurring protein that exists in our brains and
other organs, though its exact function is unknown. APP is broken down by several enzymes,
most notably BACE1 enzyme and gamma-secretase complex, into a small molecule called Ab
peptide. Pieces of Ab peptide aggregate in the brain to form amyloid plaques.
According to the Amyloid Cascade Hypothesis, the buildup of amyloid plaques in the brain is the
root cause of AD. It ultimately leads to the accumulation of other harmful debris in the brain,

5

causes damage to neurons, and leads to cognitive decline. Evidence for this hypothesis includes
abnormal APP creation in people with very early onset AD and the presence of amyloid plaques
in the brains of AD patients at autopsy. However, there is little correlation between amyloid
deposits and cognitive symptoms, and therapeutics that aim to lower amyloid levels in the
brain have thus far failed to slow cognitive decline. This lack of success has caused some to
suggest that amyloid is a response to AD, not its cause (Makin, 2018).
An alternate hypothesis is that tau, a protein that exists within the neurons of the brain,​ ​may be
the driver of disease. Tau protein can be altered in specific ways that causes it to clump
together and form neurofibrillary tangles. Unlike amyloid, tau accumulation in specific parts of
the brain correlates with cognitive impairment. Moreover, tangles can self-propagate, possibly
accounting for disease progression over time.
Most scientists believe that neither theory is sufficient to explain AD on its own, and instead
subscribe to a combined theory of amyloid and tau cascade. Amyloid is thought to develop first
and put the brain at risk for tau accumulation. An analogy can be made to a trigger and a
bullet--while amyloid is the trigger that sets the brain up to be vulnerable to damage, it is not
until tau, the bullet, develops that the damage occurs and individuals begin experiencing
cognitive decline.
While this combined theory remains the leader in AD research, a number of other contributors
to AD have been considered in parallel.​ ​First, immune system activation appears to play a role
in AD development. Some population studies suggest that individuals who take NSAIDs (i.e.,
ibuprofen) and immunosuppressants over long periods of time have reduced incidence of AD.
In addition, individuals with AD have been noted to have higher levels of immune cells in their
nervous system, although it is unclear whether immune cells are protective against worsening
disease or increase the speed of disease progression. Second, infections may increase risk for
AD. Ab peptide can kill some bacteria, which has led to a hypothesis that the initial formation of
amyloid may be a defense mechanism against illness, with unfortunate downstream
consequences. This hypothesis has been supported by an increased level of herpes virus found
in the brains of AD patients.
Genetics are a known contributor to AD. APOE4 is the most important genetic risk factor for AD
-- inheriting one copy of the gene from a parent increases risk 2- to 3-fold and inheriting two
copies increases risk 12-fold (Michaelson, 2014). Researchers continue to explore why APOE4
raises AD risk and to identify other genes associated with AD. Genes play a particularly
important role in early onset AD, the roughly 5 percent of AD cases in which symptoms develop
before age 65. Inheriting a copy of any one of three mutated genes (APP, PSEN1, PSEN2) makes
it probable that a person will develop early onset AD (Mayo Clinic, 2020b). Those with Down
syndrome are also at a higher risk for developing AD, as they have three copies of chromosome
21; it houses the APP gene, which plays a role in the creation of beta-amyloid plaques (Mayo
Clinic, 2020). Although not everyone with Down syndrome will develop AD, researchers have
estimated that about 75% of those with Down syndrome over the age of 65 have AD
(Alzheimer’s Association, 2017). People with Down syndrome tend to develop symptoms of AD
one to two decades earlier than those without it (Head et al., 2012).

6

Finally, AD has also been linked to several behavioral risk factors including poor sleeping
patterns, smoking, and a lack of exercise (Mayo Clinic, 2018). Research has indicated that AD
shares many of the same risk factors as heart disease and other vascular or metabolic
conditions, particularly hypertension (Launer, 2019) and that later-life depression is associated
with an increased risk for AD (Diniz et al., 2013). Recent research also suggests a scientific link
between air pollution and dementia (Block et al., 2012; Underwood, 2017).
1.2 Diagnosing Alzheimer’s Disease
It is useful to differentiate between a biological and a clinical diagnosis of AD. A biological
diagnosis relies on biomarkers – something that can be reliably measured to indicate the
presence of disease. Until recently, a diagnosis of AD was possible only via autopsy after death.
Currently there are two tests that allow for the detection of biochemicals associated with AD. A
positron emission tomography (PET) scan can look for amyloid deposits in the brain. A spinal
tap, which extracts a sample of cerebrospinal fluid, can detect changes in amyloid components
and tau levels. Using these biomarkers, AD can be diagnosed in the pre-clinical phase.
A clinical diagnosis is based on physicians applying clinical guidelines created by the American
Psychiatric Association (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, or
DSM-V) or the National Institute on Aging and the Alzheimer’s Association (NIA-AA) to assess
patients with AD symptoms. While the two sets of guidelines differ in some respects, neither
requires memory loss and both require cognitive impairment for AD diagnosis.2 Physicians may
perform an office-based multi-domain cognitive assessment if AD is suspected. As patients may
view early AD symptoms – which often begin with short-term memory loss (Lakhan, 2019) – as
normal signs of aging, they wait an average of 3 to 4 years after onset to raise the issue with
their physician (Scharre, 2019). Clinical diagnosis occurs during the MCI or dementia phase.
Biomarkers can be used to improve the accuracy of a clinical diagnosis, as even experienced
clinicians render an inaccurate diagnosis in 10 to 15 percent of cases (Thai et al., 2006). Further,
biomarkers can be used for three other purposes: to detect AD during the pre-clinical phase,
track disease progression in AD patients, and evaluate AD interventions in clinical trials.
With respect to the first of these, PET imaging has yet to be implemented as a routine screening
test in clinical practice. Insurance companies argue that using PET scans for early diagnosis is
expensive and unnecessary because there are currently no treatments to alter disease
progression (Apostolova, 2016). Routine screening may also lead to unnecessary psychological
​The DSM-V currently recognizes two cognitive syndromes: major cognitive impairment and mild cognitive
impairment. To be diagnosed with major cognitive impairment, individuals must show a measured decline in
cognition that is extreme enough to impede activities of daily living. It must also not be caused by any other
medical, neurological or psychiatric disorder. Individuals with mild cognitive impairment must show some decline
in cognition but can otherwise live independently while still being able to perform relatively complex tasks like
driving. The NIA-AA guidelines recognize the three general stages of AD discussed above. To be diagnosed with
dementia, individuals must show diminishment in two cognitive domains or one cognitive domain and one
behavioral domain, as well as drastic declines in everyday functioning.
2

7

strain, as many individuals who never develop clinical AD during their lifetimes have been found
to have abnormal amyloid deposits upon post-mortem examination (Mormino et al., 2018).
Appropriate Use Criteria for amyloid PET imaging recommend its use in three instances: for
patients who have already developed symptoms of MCI with memory loss, patients already in
the dementia stage or with atypical AD presentations, and patients with early onset AD
(Apostolova, 2016). Scans are not recommended for cognitively normal individuals based on
family history alone or for the purpose of determining dementia severity. The second and third
goals of AD diagnostics are closely related. Biomarkers can allow doctors to understand
whether and how quickly their patients are getting worse. They may also allow drug developers
to assess the efficacy of an intervention more quickly than when clinical outcomes are used,
leading to more efficient and less costly clinical trials (Thal et al, 2006).
Further development of AD diagnostics focuses on two goals. The first is to find tools that allow
for earlier and less invasive detection of disease, such as a blood or saliva test that could be
administered at an annual checkup.3 The second is to better characterize disease trajectory to
aid in AD treatment and research. Further validation of specific biomarkers is necessary before
they can be used as a surrogate endpoint – a marker that is known or very likely to produce
clinical benefit and can be used to support drug approval (Brioch et al, 2011).4 Better and earlier
diagnosis may also induce innovation by revealing market size and heterogeneity in the disease.
1.3​ ​Further reading and future research on AD diagnosis and prevalence and disparities
There are several promising avenues for economic research in this area. First, economists could
validate whether epigenetic and epidemiological risk factors for AD are causal or not. Such an
effort would reveal potential preventive measures and interventions to reduce the burden of
disease. This research program would resemble the work that economists have done to assess
the causal effect of education on mortality, or birthweight on the well-being of infants, or
in-utero exposures on later health, where the associations noted by epidemiologists were
validated by economists as being causal while others were not. Second, understanding forces
that reduce disparities in quality of health care, particularly for women and minority patients, is
an area in which economists have a comparative advantage. This could build on the approaches
used by Alsan et al. (2019) to study the effect of racial congruity between patients and their
physicians on health, Baicker and Staiger (2005) on the conditions for which public assistance
can improve patient outcomes, and Skinner et al. (2005) on the role of geography in racial
disparities in health care.

​Other easy-to-administer tests might serve a dual diagnosis and prevention role. One such example, Neurotrack,
provides users with a Cognitive Health Program, which works to improve users' brain function now in an attempt
to delay decline later. Taking the form of a mobile application that can be used on tablets and smartphones, the
program includes measures such as eye tracking, processing speed, and recognition memory to determine areas in
which users might be at most risk of cognitive decline or at risk for dementia.
4
​One biomarker that has garnered enthusiasm in recent years is the neurofilament light chain, a marker of general
damage to brain cells. It is not specific to AD and has been seen in increased amounts in many conditions, including
other dementias and traumatic brain injuries. While it would not be useful in distinguishing AD from other
conditions, serial measurements of such a marker may help predict if the disease is worsening or improving.
3

8

2 Health care and long-term care for Alzheimer’s Disease
Treatment for AD typically involves a combination of drug therapies to slow cognitive decline
and health care and long-term care to manage the disease. Current pharmaceutical treatments,
however, have only small effects on the progression and symptoms of the disease, so many of
the pressing questions for individuals currently suffering from AD fall within the realm of care
delivery within the health and long-term care spheres. We now turn to the economics of this
care, and we return to drug therapeutics in Section 4.
Care for individuals with AD draws upon decisions by a host of agents, including the patients,
their families, health care and long-term care providers, and regulators. While many important
questions related to the optimal care delivery for AD have parallels with broader literature in
health economics and public finance, a distinction that makes AD care relatively unique is the
role that cognitive constraints play in the delivery of care. As cognition – and decision-making
ability more generally – declines over the course of the disease, demand-side forces may not
operate as standard economic models would suggest. Instead, individuals with cognitive
constraints may have to rely on altruistic agents (such as their family), regulatory checks, or
self-enforcing dynamic contracts to ensure optimal care provision. Thus not only is AD care an
area in which health economists can make progress, but economists studying family bargaining,
regulation, and dynamic contracting problems can also add value to the study of AD. This
section discusses the issues surrounding health care and long-term care for AD, with an eye
toward the more unique features of AD for which efforts by economists may be particularly
fruitful. We begin with an overview of how care decisions are made for individuals with limited
cognitive capacity, and then discuss health care, long-term care (including the role of informal
care), and insuring care for AD.
2.1 An overview of care delivery under cognitive constraints
The ability to advocate for oneself and act according to one’s preferences -- regardless of
whether they are deemed “rational” or “behavioral” -- is the launching pad of the study of
consumer choice. In studying market outcomes, economists generally evaluate the functioning
of a market relative to a frictionless, first-best world, and study particular deviations from
first-best, such as asymmetric information or market power. But what happens when one side
of the market -- the consumer -- does not have the cognitive capacity to act according to their
​
preferences, and they become dependent on other forces to enforce their preferences?​ More
generally, how should we conceptualize economic decision-making under cognitive constraints,
when individuals may not remember past experiences, or where they are, or how to think?
Theory and identification of market outcomes are difficult without a more precise
understanding of how cognitive capacity manifests into choice, but insights from behavioral
economics and psychology may lead us to a better understanding of whether cognitive
constraints can be understood as rational inattention, or time inconsistent preferences, or
​
something else entirely.​ How
do market structures for health care delivery function under
cognitive frictions? What mechanisms could mitigate these frictions? These are inherently

9

questions about market design, an area where economists are well-tooled to contribute to AD
research.
One mechanism that mitigates cognitive frictions is the presence of altruistic agents that can
act on a cognitively-constrained individual’s behalf. A long tradition in family economics
explores the role of adult children as caretakers and guardians for elderly parents. The
literature that tests for altruistic motives versus exchange motives of children could be applied
to families with AD as a relatively extreme test case: for example, do altruistic motives appear
in children of parents with AD (who may not even recognize their children), even without the
prospect of bequests? Economists could also contribute to the literature on family bargaining
models to understand, for example, whether parental cognitive decline leads to changes in
bargaining power, health care decisions, and ultimately health outcomes.
Another altruistic agent is the state, which uses regulation to discipline health care and
long-term care practices. For example, the government sets minimum quality standards, such
as staffing ratios in nursing homes, that aim to safeguard against low quality care, and monitors
trends by collecting data on outcomes and quality measures of health care providers. These
regulatory checks may be particularly valuable for the AD population, some of whom may not
5
have others to act in their interest.
An alternative path to mitigate cognitive frictions is to appeal to mechanism design. While
cognitive frictions may prevent first-best allocations in a simple one-shot model of health care
delivery, insights from contract theory may suggest that more complex--and likely
dynamic--contracts could come closer to the frictionless allocation. For example, some
providers (e.g., “continuing care facilities”) offer long-term, dynamic contracts to individuals
prior to cognitive decline that define care arrangements for all future care need contingencies.
Whether this type of contract sustains agreed upon levels of quality care, particularly in
cognitively constrained states of the world, could still depend on other safeguards like family
advocates or regulatory constraints. Reputation effects could also generate better allocations
for consumers, especially among long-standing providers. Government data collection and
monitoring could have the added benefit of providing measurements of provider reputation.
In sum, the economics of health care delivery may be quite complex for individuals with AD,
and could greatly benefit from insights of economists working in areas ranging from contract
theory to family economics to regulation. We next discuss more specific areas related to health
care and long-term care delivery for individuals with AD.
2.2 Health care for individuals with AD
Individuals with AD often receive many kinds of health care over the course of their disease.
Initial diagnosis often occurs in a primary care setting, and patients receive care in a multitude
of settings as the disease progresses, including hospitals, nursing homes, and the home. Thus all
of the usual providers in the U.S. health care system are involved in AD-related care. Similarly,
As fertility rates continue to decrease, the availability of children to act as advocates for their parents with AD will
inevitably decline, suggesting further value in these safeguards.
5​

10

the usual payers -- private insurance, Medicare, Medicaid, and patients -- all bear a share of the
expenditures.
Given this complex network of payers and providers, an important area for economic research
is how the incentive structures of all of these players interact to generate AD care. Within
health care more broadly, a growing literature suggests that there is a substantial amount of
“waste”, with much of it attributable to the fact that private incentives of consumers, payers,
and providers do not always align with the socially optimal levels of care (Fisher et al., 2009).
Studying these incentive structures in the context of AD care -- i.e., care for cognitively
constrained individuals whose care involves many players over many years -- could offer
additional insights into the black box of this waste.
One example where the study of AD care can provide insight is the role of cognitive constraints
in the demand-side incentives for health care. Classic demand theory suggests that health
insurance leads to overuse of low-value care, and cost-sharing generates more efficient levels
of care (at the cost of lower risk protection). However, there is increasing evidence that
cost-sharing additionally leads to cuts in ​high​-value care, a finding that is difficult to reconcile
with standard theory. For example, Chandra et al. (2010) found that increases in patient-cost
sharing for physician office visits and prescription drugs led to decreased spending on those
services, but these savings were fully offset--and in fact exceeded--by spending increases on
6
hospitalizations. Similarly, Brot-Goldberg et al. (2017) found that patients introduced to a
high-deductible health insurance plan decreased overall health spending, but did so seemingly
indiscriminately, cutting back on both wasteful ​and​ valuable care. These findings are suggestive
of “behavioral hazard” in which patients mistakenly cut back on high value care in response to
cost-sharing (Baicker et al., 2015). These hazards may be particularly interesting to study in the
context of AD patients, who--because of decreased cognitive capacity or awareness--may be
more prone to such mistakes. This exploration could challenge the prevalent view that the
price-elasticity of demand is a sufficient statistic for welfare.
The context of AD care may also be fruitful for studying the role of intertemporal incentives in
health care. Specifically, fiscal externalities or free-riding can arise when the costs of (earlier)
care accrue to different agents than the (later) benefits. Underinvestment in preventive
measures is a prime example of this (Ellis and Manning 2007). Some research suggests that a
healthy diet and exercise can improve later AD outcomes and lower AD costs (Pope et al.,
2003), yet these investments can be costly or unpleasant to individuals. Because the
downstream savings of these investments largely accrue to insurers, individuals may not find
the preventive measures to be worth the immediate costs, leading to underinvestment in
preventive care.
Similar intertemporal incentive problems may arise when different insurers provide coverage at
different ages (Fang and Gavazza, 2007). Given that health care for AD can span decades, this
Furthermore, Chandra et al. (2010) also showed evidence of fiscal externalities arising from multiple insurers: the
savings accrued to a supplemental insurer that covered physician visits and drugs, while the offsetting hospital
costs accrued to Medicare. Given the multitude of insurers and payers involved in Alzheimer’s care, this could be a
relevant concern for AD payer design.
6

11

issue may be particularly acute for AD care: for instance, a private insurer may not want to
cover an expensive but effective early-stage intervention (e.g., diagnostic testing) because the
later stage savings accrue to Medicare or Medicaid. Whether or not these incentives are
empirically relevant, however, is an open question, as there is currently little consensus on the
appropriateness of early stage interventions. For example, while the World Health Organization
promotes “early diagnosis in order to promote early and optimal management”, other research
suggests that many of these strategies are poorly targeted and that there is insufficient
evidence of their merits (“Dementia”, 2018 and U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, 2020).
Economic frameworks and causal methods could provide a useful lens to understand not only
incentives for early stage AD interventions, but also to identify whether and when to
recommend different diagnostic tests in the first place (e.g., Einav et al., 2019).
Provider-side incentives are also a growing area of research, and studying this topic in the
context of AD could lead to insights given the many transitions between providers that AD
patients experience. Because health care providers are often paid for the care rendered (e.g.,
fee-for-service) and not for outcomes (e.g., pay-for-performance), they face financial incentives
to maximize payments rather than incentives to lower costs. The payment structure for
end-of-life care for AD patients illuminates this issue. Nursing homes provide care to many AD
patients near the end of life, many of whom are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid.
Medicaid typically pays a relatively low per-diem rate for each nursing home resident regardless
of their intensity of care needs, while Medicare reimburses at a higher rate but only covers 100
days of post-acute nursing home care. Because end-of-life AD patients are typically more costly
than other patients, nursing homes face incentives to transfer patients near death--who need
more intensive care--to hospitals, to temporarily shift their reimbursement to Medicare, which
7
pays higher reimbursement rates (Goldfeld et al., 2013). This not only increases costs of care,
but is associated with increased use of “questionable medications” (Tjia et al., 2014) and is
generally inconsistent with the goals of patients for comfort (Gozalo et al., 2015).
Studies suggest that Medicare payment structures that have pay-for-performance features
(e.g., Medicare Advantage plans) result in lower-cost AD care as well as fewer burdensome
8
hospital transfers (Goldfeld et al., 2013). There is also growing evidence that coordinated care
plans for individuals with AD, which--among other things--assign a care manager to coordinate
the wide range of provider services, can result in positive health outcomes (see Hughes et al.
(2017) for a review). These plans have not been widely implemented, however, in part because
typical reimbursement systems once again do not incentivize coordinated care (Boustani et al,
2019). Nonetheless, a recent trend towards alternative payment models in Medicare more
broadly, such as Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs) and bundled payments (e.g.,
McWilliams et al., 2015, and Finkelstein et al., 2018) suggest an appetite for payment redesign
for AD care in the near future.

This not only relieves the nursing home from high-intensity care during the hospitalization, but also shifts the
reimbursement to Medicare for 100 days after the patient returns to the nursing home.
8
Others have cautioned an interpretation of “hopeless” spending by showing that it is virtually impossible to
predict death from health spending and suggesting that it is not clear that care for those who ex-post died was
futile (Einav et al., 2018).
7

12

Some AD care is being funded via prospective payment under the Program of All-Inclusive Care
for the Elderly (PACE). PACE providers receive capitated payments from Medicare and Medicaid
to provide a full spectrum of health care services to frail elderly individuals with a need for
long-term care, over half of whom have dementia (Mukamel et al., 2007). One long-standing
concern about capitated payment systems is that providers may provide fewer services,
potentially resulting in lower quality care (Rogers et al., 1990). This concern may be heightened
in a context where the patient is not an effective self-advocate due to cognitive compromise.
Additional research analyzing the cost savings and quality impacts of capitated payments for AD
care would shed light on the value of this payment model in this context.
While many of the economic incentives discussed in this section are not unique to AD care, they
may be particularly relevant for AD in the coming years for at least two reasons. First, the
long-term nature of AD progression and the reliance on a wide range of providers and services
makes relying on demand-side forces for navigating the care and treatment of the disease
particularly challenging and susceptible to errors, especially for those with cognitive
constraints. In other words, demand curves may not be well-defined for AD patients. Second,
new developments in screening technologies and drug therapies for the disease as well as the
rise of alternative payment models for AD care warrants study of how supply-side incentives
evolve.
2.3 Long-term care and caregiving
Long-term care consists of care for activities of daily living (ADLs), such as bathing, dressing,
eating, and walking and instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs), such as taking
medications, managing money, and shopping for groceries. This care is most commonly
provided either in a nursing home setting or at home, but also in assisted living facilities, adult
9
day care centers, and other settings along the care continuum. For individuals diagnosed with
AD, one third live in a residential care setting (18% in nursing homes), though by the time of
10
death, two thirds die in nursing homes (Kasper et al., 2015; Mitchell et al., 2005). In 2019,
nursing home care averaged $90,000-$100,000 per year, while formal home care cost around
$23 per hour, or roughly $53,000 annually for 44 hours per week. In all, these long-term care
costs rival the medical care costs of the disease. Medicare does not cover most long-term care
costs, so the majority of these costs fall on the Medicaid program, individual savings, families,
and, to a lesser extent, private insurance (Kelley et al., 2020).
These formal costs, however, paint an incomplete picture of the economic burden of long-term
care for individuals with AD because they do not factor in the substantial amount of informal
care. An estimated 7.4 billion hours of informal care was given to 3.6 million individuals with AD
in 2010 (Friedman et al., 2015), and of the AD population receiving care in the community, 78%
of care hours were informal (Kasper et al., 2015). Most AD caregivers are female spouses or
children, and many live with the individual with AD. 30% of these caregivers provide over 20
hours of care per week, and the majority of them help with ADLs and IADLs (Alzheimer’s
There has also been a rise in dementia special care units (SCUs) within nursing homes over the past decade,
which make up the largest type of specialized long-term care (Cadigan et al., 2012).
10
In contrast, most deaths from cancer occur at home or in a hospital (Mitchell et al., 2005).
9

13

Association, 2019). They also have other demands for their time: 60% also work part or full
time, and a quarter are also caregivers to young children (National Alliance for Caregiving in
Partnership with the Alzheimer’s Association, 2017).
2.3.1 Measuring the cost of informal care
Measuring the cost of informal care can be difficult because these hours do not have an explicit
market or monetary value. One simple method, which attempts to quantify the ​savings​ from an
hour of informal care, is to price it at its replacement cost, such as the market rate for
purchased home care (roughly $20 per hour). A second simple method, which attempts to
quantify the ​cost​ of an hour of informal care, is to price it at the cost of foregone wages if the
caregiver had worked in the labor market instead of providing care. Hurd et al. (2013) estimate
that the cost of informal care for individuals with dementia using the ‘replacement cost’
method is around $28,000 annually while using the ‘foregone wages’ method generates around
$13,000 annually. Using the former method, the 7.4 billion hours of informal care for AD is
“worth” $148 billion on aggregate, or roughly as much as the total formal payments for health
care.
In reality, the true value of informal care is somewhere in between. An alternative method is an
economic model that incorporates replacement costs, potential foregone wages, and other
opportunity costs, in a unified framework of caregiver well-being. At a basic level, it specifies
caregiver utility over monetary consumption and leisure and a budget constraint over labor
income, consumption, and care costs. Caregivers make decisions over how to spend their time,
which considers the value of each hour spent doing something else instead of caring, including
potentially working (i.e., lost productivity) but also enjoying leisure, and evaluates it against the
11
cost of doing so (i.e., purchasing the care on the formal market). This type of model, which has
been developed for informal care more broadly but not tailored to the particularities of AD, can
then be used to calculate a more comprehensive measure of the welfare costs and benefits of
12
informal AD care.
2.3.2 Prices, costs, and selection among long-term care options
The existence of informal care and other long-term care options for individuals with AD raises
important economic and policy questions about selection into various long-term care options.
How do individuals decide whether to enter a nursing home versus receive informal care versus
receive paid in-home care? To what extent do they care about price versus preferences versus
health outcomes? These questions have implications not only for individual welfare but also
social policy, given that social programs pay for many of these costs and there are substantial
cost differences between modes of care. One question that economists have made progress
answering is whether individuals are price-elastic in their long-term care decisions. The answer
It can also include other possible costs of caregiving, such as mental and physical health costs (Coe and Van
Houtven, 2009).
12
The model can also be expanded to account for the welfare of the AD individual as well as their preferences over
informal care, either with the addition of “warm glow” utility or a more complex model of family interactions (e.g.,
Barczyk and Kredler, 2018; Mommaerts, 2016).
11

14

appears to be yes: studies have shown that consumers are generally responsive to relative
out-of-pocket costs for long-term care. For example, Coe, Goda, and Van Houtven (2015) and
Mommaerts (2018) find evidence of substitution towards nursing home care and away from
informal care when the out-of-pocket cost of nursing home care decreases. These studies,
however, focus on the general long-term care population and an open question is whether
individuals with AD--who are likely cognitively constrained--make similar choices. Additionally,
more work is needed to understand the role of preferences (which are potentially less well
defined under cognitive constraints) and perceived health benefits in these decisions.
A related question is whether these choices between long-term care options generate
selection, and the ramification of this selection for providers. For example, the rise of assisted
living facilities over the past few decades may pull healthier, cheaper patients out of nursing
homes and leave nursing homes with a much sicker pool of patients. With fixed reimbursement
rates that are independent of health, this suggests increased financial strain for these facilities.
As new care arrangements arise, such as specialty care units, integrated care models, etc., and
diseases requiring long-term care such as AD evolve, an important followup question is how
demand and selection into various options interacts with the cost structures of care providers.
Another open question is whether different long-term care options lead to differences in
overall health care costs. For example, while home-based care is generally less costly than
nursing home care, it is not clear whether it leads to long-run savings on total health care costs.
This is particularly relevant for state Medicaid policies, which have expanded home care in
13
recent decades. Evidence from community care demonstrations in the 1980’s suggests that
costs increased when home care was provided in lieu of nursing home care, but this was in
large part because recipients were otherwise forgoing nursing home care (Kemper et al., 1987).
Another example is the decision to use hospice at the end of life: Gozalo et al. (2015) found that
individuals with AD who entered hospice had higher overall Medicare costs than those who did
not enter hospice, despite efforts to design the Medicare hospice benefit to lower total health
costs. Much more evidence on the effects of various care settings on costs is needed,
particularly among the population suffering from AD whose health and long-term care needs
may differ from those suffering from other ailments.
2.3.3 Quality of long-term care
Another important aspect of long-term care for AD that economists are well positioned to study
is the market for quality long-term care, particularly in formal care settings. A persistent
concern among policymakers is that many long-term care facilities provide low-quality care,
and patients are not well informed about the wide variation in quality when making long-term

The primary setting for Medicaid-covered long-term care was historically nursing homes, but in the past 40 years
states have gradually shifted Medicaid funds toward long-term care benefits and services in the home. This shift is
partly in recognition of a strong preference to remain in the community (and the Supreme Court’s Olmstead
decision in 1999 that reinforced this), but a second justification is economic: many policymakers believe that
nursing home care is excessive for many with less-intensive long-term care needs, and thus allowing them to
remain in the community may result in lower long-term care costs.
13

15

14

care decisions. In general, if consumers can easily evaluate the quality of facilities, basic
economic theory suggests that facilities have an incentive to compete with higher quality care;
if consumers cannot evaluate their quality, facilities may underinvest in quality care. Empirical
evidence confirms this for the broader long-term care population: for example, nursing home
“report cards” lead to increased demand for higher quality facilities (at least when these report
cards are easily interpretable), and competition among providers have meaningful effects on
quality, but only when consumers have good information about the quality of nursing homes
from which they are choosing (Grabowski and Town, 2011; Werner et al., 2016; Zhao, 2016).
Complicating this basic theory, however, is the fact that not all consumers of long-term care are
the same: some are higher cost than others and providers may have an incentive to use quality
as a screening device for patients. For example, lower Medicaid reimbursement rates lead to
lower quality care for Medicaid patients (Hackmann, 2019) and even rationing of Medicaid
patients by nursing homes (He and Konetzka, 2014). Moreover, the quality effects discussed
above mainly arise in short-stay nursing home populations whose stays are typically covered by
Medicare and thus have higher profit margins than long-stay residents who are typically
covered by Medicaid (Grabowski and Town, 2011). It is not obvious how these incentive
structures for quality care apply to the AD population. In hospital settings, for example, AD
patients typically generate low to negative profits, and Colla et al. (2016) show that competition
is associated with ​lower​ quality AD care, perhaps as a way to discourage these unprofitable
patients. On the other hand, special care units for AD patients in nursing homes have been
shown to provide higher quality care, at a higher price point (Joyce et al., 2018).
A related and understudied issue is the role of cognitive constraints in the demand for quality
care. This is particularly relevant for the AD population, as individuals with AD may be less
15
aware and/or less able to advocate for quality care. Some have loved ones advocating for
them. Others depend on the state as their advocate. As discussed at the beginning of this
section, economists can bring insights from market design and contract theory to study the
provision of quality care when consumers are cognitively constrained. For example, a possible
contract structure is one in which individuals make care arrangement contingencies well in
advance of cognitive decline (like an Arrow-Debreu security) to avoid making decisions under
cognitive constraints. Continuing care communities, in which individuals enter the community
at a relatively early age and move from independent living to assisted living to nursing home
care as needed, are an example of this type of contract. Of course, there is no guarantee of high
quality of care when it is needed years later, nor is it necessarily enforceable once the individual
suffers from dementia. Future work could examine the possibility of alternative contract

For example, while around 5% of nursing homes had zero out of around 175 types of “deficiencies” in 2016, over
20% of facilities received scores for the most egregious deficiencies of “actual harm or jeopardy” (Harrington et al.,
2018).
15
Exacerbating this is the high use of psychotropic drugs on AD patients. Not only do these drugs decrease
awareness among AD patients, but studies have found increases in mortality among AD patients directly related to
these drugs (Briesacher et al., 2013).
14

16

16

structures, as well as the role of regulation , for quality care for those unable to advocate for
themselves.
2.3.4 The long-term care workforce
The production of quality long-term care is very labor-intensive, predominantly made up of
direct care workers including nursing, home health, and personal aides that are typically low
skilled, low paid, and often immigrant workers, and the US is currently facing a major shortfall
of these workers (Zallman et al., 2019). Studies have shown that low pay is linked both to this
shortage as well as lower quality care (Ruffini, 2020) and that tight labor markets lead to lower
staffing levels in long-term care facilities and higher mortality rates (Stevens et al., 2015). At the
same time, however, a significant fraction of long-term care provider financing is dictated by
low Medicaid reimbursement rates that do not allow much room for pay adjustments, either to
increase quality or respond to cost shocks. For example, Cawley and Grabowski (2006) found
that exogenous increases in labor costs (through minimum wage law increases) led to
substitution away from labor towards “capital”, i.e., psychoactive drugs, for nursing home
patient care.
The shortage of long-term care workers is projected to worsen as the older population in the
US and their demand for long-term care grows. A ripe area for study is understanding the
effectiveness of various policy levers to improve the supply of this workforce. For example,
changes to immigration policy, labor market policies (e.g., minimum wage policy), and
regulatory conditions could all play a major role in the future supply of long-term care workers,
as could more ambitious changes to the organization of the occupation, such as the formation
of career ladders. Moreover, the prospect of technological advancements that can act as
substitutes for labor--such as GPS signals to safeguard AD patients’ whereabouts--could also be
a fruitful area of study.
Overall, there are many unanswered questions about the economics of long-term care for
individuals with AD. Important directions for future research include a better understanding of
care decision-making processes for individuals who cannot advocate for themselves, the design
of payment structures that incentivize providers to provide high quality care to AD patients, the
relative merits of various long-term care settings, and how informal care fits into this
landscape.
2.4 Insuring care for AD
In the United States, insurance against medical expenditures operates in a largely distinct
market from insurance against long-term care expenditures. While medical expenditures for AD
care are relatively well insured, long-term care expenditures pose one of the largest uninsured
financial risks to the elderly (Brown and Finkelstein, 2011). Crucially, Medicare does not cover
17
most long-term care expenses. Of the $310 billion in aggregate formal long-term care
For example, regulations such as minimum staffing regulations and nursing home inspections have had modest
success in increasing quality care in nursing homes (Werner and Konetzka, 2010).
17
Medicare covers 100 days of post-acute care, but only after a hospitalization lasting at least three days.
16

17

expenditures in 2013, 8% was paid by private long-term care insurance, 72% was paid by public
insurance (mostly Medicaid, the means-tested program for the impoverished), and 19% was
18
paid out-of-pocket (Reaves et al., 2015). These expenditures are not spread evenly across
elderly individuals: while fewer than 50% of individuals will ever enter a nursing home, there is
a long right tail in the duration of nursing home stays among those that do, with 15% of stays
lasting over 5 years (Brown and Finkelstein, 2009). These tail events are the events for which
insurance is most valuable, and AD patients are the population who often need this very
19
long-term care.
2.4.1 Private long-term care insurance
Despite the potential value of insurance in this setting, the private market for long-term care
insurance is small (and continuing to shrink), and the contracts offered are very incomplete. In
this market, the average applicant is in their mid-sixties, and payouts typically do not begin until
years later. The average annual premium for an individual policy was $2,700 in 2015, and
covered roughly $150 per day of nursing home or home care for up to four years (LifePlans,
Inc., 2017). Overall, only around 10% of individuals 65 and over in 2015 owned a private
long-term care insurance plan, and even with insurance they still pay for a substantial fraction
of care out of pocket.
Many explanations for this poorly functioning market have been offered, and developments in
AD prevalence, treatment, and information could exacerbate these issues. One explanation is
the aggregate risk inherent in insuring against contingencies that can occur far into the future.
Long-term care insurance contracts are written and signed years, often decades, before AD
risks are realized, and there is a great deal of uncertainty over what the long-term care
landscape will look like in the coming decades (Cutler, 1996). For example, unexpected
advances in technologies and treatments for AD and unexpected increases in AD prevalence
rates can result in (unexpectedly) higher future costs to insurers. To safeguard against this risk,
insurers can impose higher premiums or “quantity rationing” such as payout caps, which
ultimately results in less attractive, incomplete insurance to policyholders (Brown and
20
Finkelstein, 2007).
Another explanation is the role of private information about one’s risk for developing AD. When
insurees have more knowledge about their underlying risk than insurers, adverse selection can
result, whereby higher risk (i.e., higher cost) individuals purchase insurance. This drives up
prices and results in lower risk individuals being priced out of the market; at its worst, it can
lead to unraveling of the market. A first-order question is the degree to which advancements in
genetic and diagnostic technologies for AD will exacerbate adverse selection in the long-term
care insurance market. If individuals are able to privately obtain this information or insurers are
not allowed to price on it, this could exacerbate adverse selection. On the other hand, if
insurers are able to screen applicants with these tools, this could lead to more price
discrimination and ultimately a pool of uninsurable higher risk individuals. For example,
These numbers correspond to long-term care expenditures for all underlying ailments, not only AD.
For example, among a sample of AD patients, mean nursing home use was three years (Welch et al., 1992).
20
Reinsurance, which insurers can purchase to insure this aggregate risk, is also small in this market.
18
19

18

Hendren (2011) shows that insurers use health conditions (including AD diagnoses) to screen
and reject high risk individuals in the long-term care insurance market, while Zick et al. (2005)
and Taylor et al. (2010) show that individuals who learn that they have a variant of ApoE that
increases the risk of developing AD are significantly more likely to purchase long-term care
21
insurance. The Genetic Information Nondisclosure Act currently bans the use of genetic tests
in health insurance pricing, but does not regulate the use of genetic testing (nor biomarkers) in
long-term care insurance pricing (Arias et al., 2018). Thus the full effects of current and future
AD testing advancements on the functioning of the long-term care insurance market is an open
and pressing question.
Private information may also lead to moral hazard. In particular, because some care is valuable
even to those who don’t need it (e.g., housekeeping and errands), there are incentives for
insured individuals to over-use these services, which in equilibrium leads to higher-cost,
22
lower-value insurance. One solution to this type of problem is to create a targeting
mechanism so that only those who truly need care will use it (Nichols and Zeckhauser, 1982;
Lieber and Lockwood, 2019). The downside to this type of screening mechanism is that the
resulting insurance provides inferior coverage. For example, given that most individuals would
prefer to remain at home as long as possible, a policy that only covers nursing home care will
only attract use from those who need care, but at the cost of less preferred care. Indemnity
insurance, on the other hand, would allow individuals to receive the care they prefer, but would
not provide the screening benefits and would likely be subject to over-use. Complicating the
concern of moral hazard in the context of AD is the underlying assumption of rationality behind
the behaviors of those suffering from AD: what does moral hazard and “over-use” mean for
someone who does not have normal cognitive functioning, who may not know where they are
or that they even have insurance? An open question is how to formulate the behavior of
individuals with AD into an economic model of decision-making in order to further understand,
in this case, how moral hazard interacts with AD care.
2.4.2 Substitute sources of long-term care insurance
Without formal insurance, most individuals rely on alternative sources of insurance against AD
risk, including precautionary savings, Medicaid, and informal insurance from the family.
Precautionary savings, however, can come with high opportunity costs, though Lockwood
(2018) shows that bequest motives lower this opportunity cost by providing value to unused
23
savings. The Medicaid program provides long-term care insurance to individuals with very low
income and assets. Nevertheless, it crowds out demand for private insurance even for wealthy
individuals: Brown and Finkelstein (2008) and De Nardi, French, and Jones (2016) show that
Similarly, Oster et al. (2010) shows that genetic testing for Huntington’s disease (another degenerative disease)
results in selective purchase of long-term care insurance.
22
Moral hazard problems of this sort also occur in health insurance (e.g., additional screenings, unnecessary
procedures) when it is not obvious to insurers whether the patient needs the screening but patients derive value
(e.g., peace of mind) from the extra services, as well as in disability insurance when it is difficult for disability
examiners to ascertain whether an applicant is truly disabled.
23
In addition to liquid savings, Davidoff (2010) shows that individuals also use housing assets as a hedge: if
individuals need care, they can sell their house and use the equity to pay for nursing home care; if they do not
need care, they can continue to live in their house.
21

19

Medicaid acts as “catastrophic” insurance, and, coupled with precautionary savings, is more
valuable than private insurance contracts in their current form for much of the wealth
distribution.
Perhaps the largest substitute for formal long-term care insurance is the family. A series of
papers show that expectations of informal care from family members acts as implicit insurance
and suppresses demand for formal insurance (Mommaerts, 2016; Coe, Goda, and Van Houtven,
2015; Mellor 2001). This is not a perfect substitute for insurance, however, as informal care
comes with its own costs and can lead to further selection problems in the formal insurance
market (Ko, 2016). As rates of AD grow and the availability of informal caregivers decreases
(e.g., due to lower fertility rates), more research will be needed to assess the evolving role of
the family in insuring care for AD.
Going forward, more comprehensive social insurance for long-term care--which exist in many
European countries--could provide a solution to the challenges of offering private insurance for
24
AD care. A classic benefit of social insurance is its ability to mitigate adverse selection issues
by imposing mandatory participation. Moreover, social insurance may also be better equipped
to weather aggregate risk associated with AD and its associated expenditures because it can
more easily spread the risk across generations. However, a classic downside of social insurance
is that it could exacerbate moral hazard concerns, particularly if it comes with the generous
benefits that are typical in other countries. For example, the Netherlands recently scaled back
its long-term care program due to ballooning costs often attributed to excessive use (Maarse
and Jeurissen, 2016). These European programs will be useful case studies for the US as it
grapples with how to insure an aging population in the coming decades amidst an evolving AD
landscape.
A final point to consider in insuring AD care—both privately and publicly—is the role of
preferences and beliefs in shaping demand for insurance. Behavioral constraints, such as
limited financial literacy, incorrect beliefs of the risks and costs associated with AD,
procrastination, and the perceived risk of insurer bankruptcy limit the demand for private
insurance (Brown, Goda, and McGarry, 2012, 2016). These are features that policy may seek to
ameliorate, for example by information campaigns, tight regulations on insurers, changing
defaults, or providing social insurance. On the other hand, it is also important to consider
whether preferences support (fully) insuring the state of the world in which one needs
long-term care for AD. If marginal utility of consumption is much lower when one is suffering
from AD, then it may not be welfare improving to have insurance coverage for these states of
the world. This notion of state-dependent utility has been studied in a variety of contexts, with
mixed results (Ameriks et al., 2020; Finkelstein, Luttmer, and Notowidigdo, 2013). The extent to
which state-dependent utility is relevant for AD is an open and important question for further
research.
In sum, while our understanding of the insurance market for long-term care has grown
substantially over the past decades, there are still many unanswered questions, particularly as
The CLASS Act was an attempt in 2010 to create a voluntary social long-term care insurance program as part of
the Affordable Care Act, but was ultimately struck from the final bill over concerns about adverse selection.
24

20

the market relates to care for AD. Will it be possible to privately insure the risk of AD in the
coming decades, or will the aggregate risk associated with changes in AD prevalence and
treatment render it infeasible? How should the use of diagnostic testing be regulated in this
market? How should we model the concept of moral hazard, and decision-making more
generally, for cognitively impaired individuals? The following section expands on the economics
of financial decision-making for individuals with AD.
2.5 Further reading and avenues for future research in care for AD
This section has suggested several areas for future research on the economics of AD care,
including a deeper understanding of care choices under cognitive constraints, how supply side
incentives react to these constraints, the role of regulation, payment models, and alternative
contract structures in this environment, the impact of future enhanced diagnostic testing on
the functioning of the long-term care insurance market, and the role of informal care in care
and insurance decisions.
Beyond the studies discussed above, broader literatures on care delivery and long-term care
challenges may serve as useful resources for readers interested in further research on these
topics. For understanding health care choices under cognitive constraints, Keane and Thorp
(2016) review the literature on health care decisions under complex choice environments, and
Ericson and Sydnor (2017) review theory and evidence on how consumer constraints such as
confusion (which may be a relevant friction for individuals suffering from AD) impact health
insurance choice and interact with market forces such as adverse selection. On the supply side,
Gaynor, Ho, and Town (2015) provide an overview of the industrial organization of health care
markets and provider incentives that serves as a useful building block for the study of supply
side responses to consumer constraints. For further reading on long-term care issues more
generally, Norton (2016) reviews theory and evidence on the market for long-term care, and
Brown and Finkelstein (2011) outline the broader challenges presented in the long-term care
insurance market.
3 Labor supply and Financial Decision-Making
The risk of developing AD can affect many life-cycle decisions beyond the health care and
insurance decisions discussed above, including labor supply choices, savings, and investment
decisions. This section discusses these topics and the role of financial literacy and financial
mistakes for cognitively compromised individuals.
3.1 Labor supply
An individual who develops AD prior to his or her planned age of retirement may need to exit
the labor force, reduce hours, or switch to a different job to accommodate the AD-related
decline in cognitive, behavioral, and social skills. Thus, AD poses a risk to labor earnings.

21

The risk of developing AD or MCI at an age when many people are still working appears to be
low, although obtaining precise age-specific prevalence rates is difficult due to the limited
number of studies focusing on younger age groups. Using an expert elicitation approach, Ferri
et al. (2005) report a mean AD prevalence rate of 0.9 percent at ages 60-64 and 1.5 percent at
ages 65-69 for Western European countries. Meta-analyses suggest that MCI prevalence rates
in developed countries may be on the order of 3 percent at ages 60 to 64 and 6 percent at ages
65 to 69 (Ward et al., 2012; Roberts et al., 2013). The magnitude of the (maximum) earnings
loss experienced by an affected individual will be determined by the length of time between AD
or MCI onset and the intended retirement age.
Economists could estimate how AD onset affects work and retirement trajectories and estimate
lost earnings (Moschetti et al., 2015), which are part of the societal cost of AD. Economists are
also well-positioned to explore how the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), workplace
policies, and access to Social Security Disability Insurance benefits help workers cope with the
shock of an AD diagnosis, building on general research on these topics in the past (​Acemoglu
and Angrist, 2001; Hill et al., 2016). Recent work estimating work capacity by comparing
individuals’ self-reported functional abilities to the functional requirements of occupations
(Garcia et al., 2019) could be adapted to assess the work capacity of those with AD or MCI.
As discussed in section 2.3, the onset of AD can also affect the labor supply of informal
caregivers, who are typically spouses or adult children of the affected individual. ​Caregiving can
affect labor supply at both the intensive and extensive margins: caregivers experience not only
a reduction in work hours due to the time spent caregiving (the intensive margin), but they may
leave the workforce entirely or choose a worse paying (or otherwise less satisfying) job to
achieve more flexibility or proximity to caregiving obligations (the extensive margin). Van
Houtven, Coe, and Skira (2013) finds some evidence of both margins of labor supply adjustment
in response to caregiving demands, while Loken, Lundberg, and Riise (2017) only find intensive
margin responses. There may also be dynamic effects of caregiving on downstream labor
outcomes if there is human capital depreciation or labor market frictions in finding a new job.
Using a model with these features, Skira (2015) estimates welfare costs of caregiving that are
seven times the size of foregone wages. Furthermore, labor market protections for caregiving,
such as paid family leave or the Family Medical Leave Act, reduce the use of nursing homes and
provide savings on government expenditures for long-term care (Skira, 2015; Barczyk and
Kredler, 2018; Aurora and Wolf, 2018). These studies of caregiver labor supply, however, are
not specific to AD care and more research is needed to understand how AD in particular--which
may involve more inflexible, around the clock care--affects the labor supply of informal
caregivers.
Future work in this area could make use of variation in the timing of AD onset to estimate a
causal effect of AD on own or caregiver labor supply, following the example of Fadlon and
Nielson (2015). To explore whether government policies mitigate labor supply responses to AD,
a valid source of variation in benefits would need to be identified, which likely presents a more
difficult challenge.
3.2 Financial Decision-Making

22

3.2.1 Saving and Dissaving
How much should households save for retirement, and how should they spend down their
assets during retirement? The risk of AD may affect these decisions. We briefly review the
relevant economic theory before turning to the implications of AD.
In the standard life-cycle model of consumption and saving, forward-looking individuals who
seek to maximize lifetime utility accumulate wealth during their working years and decumulate
assets during retirement in order to equate the marginal utility of consumption over time.
However, a large literature has identified numerous empirical phenomena that are not easily
explained in the context of the simple model. These include low levels of retirement wealth for
the typical household, heterogeneity in retirement wealth among similar households, an
observed drop in consumption at retirement, and low rates of wealth decumulation in
retirement (Browning and Crossley, 2001). These revelations have spurred the development of
more complex life-cycle models that incorporate elements such as uncertainty in longevity,
earnings, and medical expenses, capital and insurance market imperfections, bequest motives,
and access to social insurance programs (Hubbard et al., 1994, 1995; Dynan et al., 2002) in
order to help explain these phenomena.
The behavioral economics literature offers an alternative explanation for these outcomes,
stressing the potential for “bounded rationality” and “bounded willpower” to affect decisions
(Mullainathan and Thaler, 2001). Factors such as overconfidence, loss aversion, and mental
accounting can lead individuals to make choices that are inconsistent with the standard model,
while self-control problems can limit individuals’ ability to achieve their desired outcome.
Consistent with this, numerous studies find that individuals are strongly influenced by defaults
when making decisions about their employer-provided pension plan (Beshears et al., 2009).
This literature also encompasses new savings models that incorporate features like
time-inconsistent preferences (e.g., Laibson, 1997).
The role of health care expenditure risk in saving and dissaving decisions is of particular
relevance in the context of AD. Medical expenditures of the elderly are substantial and rise with
age. DeNardi et al. (2016) report that average annual medical expenditures rise from about
$7,000 at age 65 to over $25,000 at age 90 and above. Expenditures are highly skewed, with the
top 5 percent of spenders responsible for over one-third of total spending and average annual
spending of nearly $100,000 within that group. Long-term care, which features prominently in
the treatment of those with AD, accounts for one-fifth of total health care spending among
those ages 65 and above, as well as most of the growth in spending with age. Long-term care
costs are financed primarily by Medicaid (30%), Medicare (24%), and out-of-pocket spending
(28%). Medicare covers short stays (up to 100 days of skilled nursing care per illness), while
Medicaid coverage is limited to those with low income and assets.
Research using augmented life-cycle models confirms the importance of medical expenditure
risk in saving decisions. Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1994, 1995) find that incorporating
uncertainty in medical expenditures, longevity, and earnings helps to explain the saving

23

behavior of individuals who accumulate significant assets during their lifetime as well as
aggregate asset accumulation. They also show that means-testing within social insurance
programs helps to explain the low asset accumulation of a significant fraction of the population.
Based on simulations of a 55-period life-cycle model, Kotlikoff (1989) estimates that adding
uncertain medical expenses raises aggregate savings by one-third, while incorporating a
means-tested Medicaid program reduces savings by three-quarters.
Medical expenditure risk may also affect the rate of decumulation of assets during retirement.
Poterba, Venti, and Wise (2011) report that in 2008, most households with a head between
ages 65 and 69 had financial assets (87%), home equity (80%), and personal retirement
accounts (52%), with median non-annuitized wealth of $222,000 and median financial assets
(including retirement accounts) of $52,000. They find that households in the top half of the
wealth distribution largely do not spend down their financial assets in the early decades of
retirement. Venti and Wise (2004) report that households tend to preserve home equity during
retirement until they experience a shock such as the death of a spouse or the entry of either
spouse into a nursing home. These patterns of behavior are consistent with households holding
wealth during retirement to insure against medical expenditure risk, though alternative
hypotheses – that wealth-holding primarily reflects concerns about longevity risk, bequest
motives, or bounded rationality – are also possible.
Studies based on life-cycle models offer support for the former hypothesis. DeNardi et al.
(2010) estimate that assets would decline much more rapidly with age in the absence of
out-of-pocket medical expenditure risk. The effect is primarily due to the risk of living longer
and incurring average age-specific medical expenditures, rather than to the risk arising from
variation in age-specific expenditures, and is largest for high-income individuals, for whom the
consumption floor provided by means-tested programs is less relevant. Palumbo (1999) also
finds that uncertain medical expenditures help to explain slow draw down of asset wealth.
Ameriks et al. (2011) introduce a “Medicaid aversion” parameter in a model of post-retirement
saving and find that this phenomenon helps to explain low rates of decumulation among
middle-class retirees. Ameriks et al. (2020) add health state-dependent utility to the model and
conclude that this feature contributes to greater asset accumulation pre-retirement and can
also motivate continued asset accumulation during retirement.
In the future, researchers who estimate life-cycle models of saving could incorporate AD into
their models by distinguishing between dementia-related and non-dementia-related medical
expenditure risks and allowing Medicaid aversion or utility to vary across these states of the
world, potentially leading to a better understanding of saving decisions. Analysts could also
explore the empirical effect of cognitive decline or AD risk on wealth decumulation, as distinct
from portfolio allocation in retirement, the subject we turn to next.
3.2.2 Portfolio Allocation
Older households face a number of risks that may influence portfolio allocation decisions,
including longevity risk, investment risk, inflation risk, and expenditure risk.

24

Annuities are a potentially attractive investment because they allow insured individuals to
convert a lump sum of wealth into a guaranteed stream of income that lasts as long as they live,
providing protection against longevity risk. Annuities also offer a higher rate of return than
traditional investments because payments go only to surviving annuitants and the initial
investment is not returned upon the buyer’s death (the “mortality credit”; Brown, 2009). Given
these advantages, the small size of the private annuity market has been seen as a puzzle
(Benartzi et al., 2011); indeed, Davidoff et al. (2005) show that individuals should annuitize all
wealth in the absence of a bequest motive. Among the reasons advanced for this puzzle are
bequest motives, the degree of annuitization provided by Social Security and defined benefit
pensions (Dushi and Webb, 2004), adverse selection (Finkelstein and Poterba, 2004), and
behavioral biases (Brown et al, 2008, 2011).
Medical expenditure risk – such as the risk posed by AD – may also help to explain low annuity
demand. Sinclair and Smetters (2004) model annuity demand using a dynamic programming
model and find that full annuitization is not optimal given uninsured medical expenditure risk.
Laitner et al. (2018) explore how the availability of Medicaid changes the demand for annuities
using a tractable model of post-retirement saving. They find heterogeneous effects by wealth –
for median-wealth households, Medicaid reduces optimal annuitization because households
are unsatisfied with the care provided by Medicaid and need to hold liquid assets to insure
against out-of-pocket medical spending, while optimal annuitization is high among low-wealth
households (who are satisfied with Medicaid) and high-wealth households (who are unlikely to
use Medicaid even at high levels of annuitization). An annuity product that provides protection
both against longevity risk and the risk of long-term care expenditures may reduce the cost of
these products and make them available to more buyers (Murtaugh et al., 2001).
Portfolio choice involves deciding not only what fraction of retirement wealth to annuitize but
also how to allocate non-annuitized assets across asset classes that vary in risk, return, and
liquidity. A long line of research beginning with Merton (1969) and Samuelson (1969) examines
optimal portfolio composition. Although a classic result from this literature (see Kaschützke and
Mauer, 2016, for a review) is that individuals should invest a constant fraction of their wealth in
the risky asset regardless of age, empirical evidence suggests that retired individuals shift their
portfolio towards less risky assets as they age (Ameriks and Zeldes, 2004; Guiso et al., 2002).
Health status and health risk may help to explain risk-taking behavior in the post-retirement
portfolio. Rosen and Wu (2004) find that households in poor health hold less of their wealth in
risky assets and Edwards (2008) reports that older individuals decrease financial risk as they age
as a hedge against rising health risk, although Fan and Zhao (2009) and Smith and Love (2010)
argue that these findings may be driven by unobserved heterogeneity. Coile and Milligan (2009)
potentially surmount this concern by focusing on health shocks and find that shocks are
associated with a shift out of housing wealth and into low-risk assets such as bank accounts and
CDs. Yogo (2016) estimates a life-cycle model with stochastic health depreciation and
establishes that it can explain why the share of the portfolio held in stocks is low and positively
related to health while the share held in housing is negatively related to health and falling with
age. Goldman and Maestas (2013) report that households who face reduced medical

25

expenditure risk because they hold a Medigap or other supplemental health insurance policy
are more likely to hold risky assets.
A number of studies have established a strong relationship between cognition and portfolio
choice, although whether this represents a causal effect is not yet well understood. McArdle et
al. (2009) provide a descriptive analysis of the association between cognition and wealth
holdings in the HRS and Kezdi and Willis (2003) report higher levels of stockholding among HRS
respondents who provide more precise answers to subjective probability questions (e.g., fewer
focal points). Christelis et al. (2010) find that higher cognitive abilities are more strongly
associated with stock than bond ownership in European SHARE data. Grinblatt et al. (2011)
show that higher IQ individuals in Finland are more likely to hold stocks, conditional on income
and wealth and controlling for family fixed effects. However, Pak and Babiarz (2018) conclude
that there is no causal effect of cognition on portfolio choice based on an analysis that exploits
variation in cognition driven by seasonal affective disorder. In a rare example of AD-specific
research on this topic, Shin et al. (2019) find that AD risk is associated with increased holding of
“hands off” assets like CDs.
A useful next step for this literature would be to examine how portfolio allocation is affected by
cognitive decline. By exploiting plausibly exogenous variation in the onset or timing of MCI or
AD, researchers could potentially gain a better understanding of the causal relationship
between cognition and asset holdings. Analysts who focus on changes in cognition over time
should be alert to the possibility of measurement error resulting from taking the difference of
two survey observations (Bound et al. 2001).
3.2.3 Financial literacy and financial mistakes
Financial literacy may enhance individuals’ ability to make better financial decisions (Lusardi
and Mitchell, 2014). Financial literacy peaks in midlife and declines at older ages (Finke et al.,
2017), an effect that may primarily reflect the effect of declining cognitive abilities (Lusardi et
al., 2014). While financial education can improve financial literacy and affect financial behaviors
(Kaiser et al., 2020), this treatment may be more effective for younger individuals who lack
crystallized intelligence than for older individuals experiencing declining fluid intelligence.
A nascent literature explores age patterns in financial decision-making and the effects of AD on
these decisions. Consistent with the age patterns in financial literacy, financial mistakes like
excess interest rate and fee payments rise with age (Agarwal et al., 2009). Financial capacity
such as checkbook management declines as AD progresses (Triebal et al., 2009; Sudo and Laks,
2017). Medicare beneficiaries with AD are more likely to select a suboptimal prescription drug
plan (Keane et al., 2019), an effect that arises even before AD diagnosis (Bishop et al., 2018).
Becoming a victim of financial fraud may be a particularly costly financial mistake. Over
one-third of older individuals report attempted or successful fraud over the past five years, with
attempted or actual unauthorized use of an account accounting for most of the incidents
(DeLiema et al., 2018). In 2017, U.S. financial institutions reported 63,500 cases of elder
financial exploitation to the government, representing $1.7 billion in suspicious activity but only

26

a “tiny fraction of actual incidents of elder exploitation” (CFPB, 2019). Several studies suggest
that weak cognitive skills put older individuals at greater risk of financial fraud (Judges et al.,
2017; Gamble et al., 2014; Spreng et al. 2016).
Future research on the effect of AD on financial decision-making could have important policy
implications. If individuals begin to make financial mistakes during the asymptomatic period
prior to an AD diagnosis, routine financial monitoring could be used to help detect AD at an
early stage (Nicholas et al., in progress). If financial mistakes in the early stages of AD are
sufficiently common and costly, this could suggest a need for more early screening for AD (e.g.,
via imaging) even in the absence of an effective medical treatment for AD.
Economists could be helpful in designing and assessing the impact of policies to protect older
individuals with diminished cognitive capacity from financial mistakes or exploitation. Advances
in technology could allow for earlier detection of fraud. Potential regulatory remedies include
financial “driver’s licenses,” greater regulation of financial products, and stronger fiduciary
requirements (Agarwal et al., 2009). A variety of contractual or legal models could be used,
including long-term wealth management contracts, financial advanced directives, and Social
Security’s Representative Payee Program, which is currently used by 9% of beneficiaries with
AD and 2% with MCI (Belbase and Sanzenbacher, 2016). Finally, economists could develop new
models of financial decision-making that reflect the reality that many older people receive
assistance from adult children with these tasks.
3.3 Further reading and future research on labor supply and financial decision-making
This section has discussed how AD poses a risk to the labor supply of those afflicted by AD and
their caregivers, how the medical expenditure risk associated with AD may affect saving and
portfolio allocation decisions, and how cognitive impairment may impact financial
decision-making. Promising avenues for future empirical research include estimating the effect
of AD on own or caregiver labor supply and estimating the effect of cognitive decline on asset
decumulation, portfolio allocation, and financial mistakes. Another direction for future work is
the expansion of life-cycle models of saving or models of annuity demand to allow for multiple
types of expenditure risk (AD- and non-AD-related), which may have different effects on utility.
For researchers interested in pursuing AD-related research in these areas, the following may be
useful resources. Attanasio and Weber (2010) offers an introduction to the life cycle model of
consumption and saving, while Kaschutzke and Maurer (2016) provides a useful discussion of
asset decumulation and portfolio choice during retirement. Keane and Thorp (2016) highlight
the many inconsistencies between the predictions of rational choice models and consumer
behavior in the areas of retirement saving and health insurance purchase; their extensions to
rational models to account for irrational behavior and “confusion” might be of use in modeling
cognitive decline. Gomes et al. (2020) provides a very recent and wide-ranging review of
household finance that includes a discussion of financial literacy and cognitive abilities.
4 Current and future therapeutics for AD

27

A transformational medicine for Alzheimer's Disease would be one way to get around many of
these seemingly intractable challenges. Such a medicine might delay the onset of the disease,
and ideally reverse its course. We are quite far from this goal and we review the opportunities
to increase innovation here.
There are currently four FDA-approved treatments for AD. Each works to prevent the
breakdown of neurotransmitters -- the signaling devices neurons release to communicate with
each other-- which die as AD progresses, essentially correcting some of the damage done by the
disease. Unfortunately, all have only a small effect on cognition. They also have no effect on the
progression of the disease as they do not target the underlying causes of AD.
Pharmaceutical companies, biotechnology companies, and academic centers brought 413 AD
drugs to trial between 2002 and 2012 (Cummings et al, 2014), with more introduced in recent
years. Despite this investment, no new AD drug has been approved since 2003 and the failure
rate for clinical trials exceeds 99%. Drug developers in Alzheimer’s face several unique hurdles.
The average cost of drug development is estimated to be $5.6 billion (an estimate that requires
many assumptions), largely due to high preclinical and phase 3 trial costs (Cummings et al.,
2018). This number greatly exceeds R&D costs for other drugs, where the median cost of
development is estimated to be $2.5 billion (DiMasi et al., 2016). One reason for the high cost is
the long trial time needed to see results – the average length of Alzheimer’s drug development
is 13 years. Patient recruitment into trials also poses an obstacle because gerontologists may
not be close to trials in the same way that oncologists are.
Despite the challenges, many biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies persevere. Were a
drug to gain FDA approval, potential sales would be large-- even for a treatment with a small
effect size -- given the large market, lack of competitors, and relatively poor prognosis. In 2019,
there were 132 potential therapeutics in the development pipeline (Cummings et al., 2019).
4.1 Future therapeutics
Drugs in development to treat AD fall broadly into two categories: symptomatic and
disease-modifying. Symptomatic drugs aim to reduce suffering from AD. All existing treatments
are in this category, as are one-quarter of the drugs in the pipeline in 2019. A majority of the
drugs seek to enhance cognitive capacity, while the rest aim to alleviate psychiatric and
behavioral symptoms (Cummings et al., 2019). Most of these drugs affect neurotransmitters,
like existing treatments. These clinical trials receive less attention, as they often investigate
off-patent drugs and are run by academic medical centers. Benefits to this approach include the
known safety profiles, shorter clinical trial times, and low cost of many of these drugs.
Disease-modifying drugs​ ​aim to slow or stop the progression of disease. They generally target
the underlying causes of disease, such as amyloid or tau. In 2019, there were 96 trials of
disease-modifying medications across all stages of development (Cummings et al., 2019).

28

Amyloid was the first therapeutic approach to be explored, and remains the most common
target of new therapeutics, with 38 trials targeting it in 2019 (Cummings et al., 2019). There are
three drug development strategies based on the amyloid hypothesis.
Most amyloid-based therapeutics are immunotherapies, which aim to activate the immune
system to clear amyloid from the brain. Immunotherapy medications may be delivered via
vaccination or as an infusion of laboratory-formed immune components (i.e., antibodies). While
multiple immunotherapies targeting amyloid have failed in clinical trials, more are under
development.25 BACE1 and Secretase inhibitors both aim to prevent the breakdown of APP and
thus halt the formation of amyloid. Several BACE1 inhibitors have entered clinical trials but
have not been successful.26 Multiple recent trials have been suspended due to worsening
cognitive function and weight loss, and there is concern that these side effects may exist across
this entire class of drugs. While Secretase inhibitors have thus far failed due to lack of efficacy
or side effects, there is hope that a drug that more specifically targets the secretase complex
could be successful. The third amyloid-based strategy is based on the hypothesis that clinical
trials have occurred too late in the disease progression. New trials have been focusing on
individuals with preclinical AD and failed immunotherapies, including solanezumab and
crenezumab, have been revived to try on individuals with high-risk genetics conditions before
they develop any symptoms of the disease.
Another theory is that tau, not amyloid, is the proper target for drug developers. As with
amyloid, most tau-directed therapeutics are immunotherapies, aimed at helping the immune
system clear tau protein from the brain. While tau has not gained as much traction as amyloid
in treatment of AD, it still accounted for 17 clinical trials in 2019 and several of these drugs have
cleared safety-trials (Cummings et al., 2019).
Scientists are also exploring alternate therapeutic approaches. Inflammatory modulators up- or
down-regulate the immune system more generally. As it is unknown whether the increased
immune cells researchers see in AD are protective or harmful, both anti-inflammatory and
pro-inflammatory strategies are being tested.27 Gene therapy replaces genes implicated in AD.
There appears to be some success in drugs targeting APOE4 in the lab, and early stage trials of
high-risk individuals with two APOE4 genes are ongoing (Weill Medical College of Cornell
​Notable failures include Janssen and Pfizer’s bapinezumab in 2012, Eli Lilly’s solanezumab in 2012 and 2016, and
Genentech’s crenezumab in 2019. The most anticipated drug in development is Biogen’s aducanimab. This drug
originally began efficacy trials in 2015, which were terminated by Biogen in March 2019 when they failed to meet
their goals. However, in October 2019, Biogen announced that patients who had received high doses of the drug
appeared to have been responding. The company then re-initiated a follow up trial and claimed it would file for
FDA approval in early 2020, only to push back its filing date for unknown reasons (George, 2019). This drug has in
many ways re-energized the field and instilled ongoing hope in the potential of amyloid-directed immunotherapy.
26
​Eli Lilly worked to develop two of these drugs, but ultimately halted the pursuit when they were found to be
toxic to the liver and worsened cognitive performance (Lahiri et al., 2014).
27
Anti-inflammatory approaches have thus far failed to demonstrate efficacy. Trials of NSAIDs (i.e., ibuprofen),
aspirin, and the immunosuppressant prednisone have all failed to reduce cognitive decline in mild Alzheimer’s
disease. Stakeholders have not lost hope in this approach: Intelgenx Corp. is running an Alzheimer’s trial of
anti-inflammatory Montelukast (trade name Singulair), that has been used to treat allergies and asthma since 1998
(Hajjar, 2019). Genzyme is taking a different approach by trialing sargramostim, an immune system stimulator that
has been used to boost the immune system of patients with leukemia (Clinicaltrials.gov, 2017)
25

29

University, 2019). Editing of BACE-1 or other genes that relate to the formation of amyloid
plaques have been suggested but not yet moved to human trials. Regenerative biology and
stem cell approaches aim to increase the number of neurons in the brain, reversing some of the
damage caused by AD. While success has been demonstrated in laboratory models, they have
thus far gained less traction than the amyloid and tau strategies, especially in the US.​ ​Finally,
there are approaches that evade the above categories. Blood from young donors has been
prescribed off-label ever since studies found it improved age-related cognitive impairment in
mice. While the FDA released a statement recommending against these blood transfusions,
several trials investigating this solution are underway. In addition, regulators in China granted
conditional approval of GV-971, a mixture of carbohydrates extracted from kelp, when a
Chinese trial of 818 participants with mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease showed a trend
toward increased cognitive functioning (Trial Site News, 2020).
Which of these therapeutic strategies will ultimately prevail--if any--is unknown. Multiple
targets may be successful, or alternative ones may emerge. Alternatively, multiple therapeutic
approaches may need to be combined. For example, it could be that tau and amyloid therapies
only work when used in conjunction with one another.
4.2 Behavioral interventions
Behavioral interventions to prevent AD or slow disease progression could be very cost-effective,
given the high costs of AD and potentially low cost of behavioral modifications. Unfortunately,
the evidence base establishing the efficacy of interventions is still lacking, particularly evidence
from randomized controlled trials. Two recent reports conclude that the current evidence does
not justify large-scale public health investments aimed at preventing dementia, while noting
that there is encouraging if inconclusive evidence that cognitive training, blood pressure
management, and physical activity may be protective against disease (AHRQ, 2017; NAS, 2017).
4.3 Incentives for new therapeutics
There are three open questions in the economics of pharmaceutical innovation on whether
there are sufficient economic incentives to bring drugs for AD to market. The first relates to the
economics of “pull incentives”. Pull incentives work by increasing the economic viability of R&D:
expected profits ought to be higher than a project’s cost-of-capital (the opportunity cost of
capital), and expected profits depend on market size, potential prices, net manufacturing costs
and the probability of failure. Policies that increase expected profits will increase innovative
activity in an area-- for example, the Orphan Drug Act increased economic viability by lowering
R&D costs (through R&D tax-credits) and increasing potential prices by protecting
manufacturers from generic competition for a longer period of time (Bagley, Chandra,
Garthwaite and Stern, 2018). Interestingly, there are very few pull incentives for discovering
non-therapeutic ways to prevent AD (for example, better sleep) for it will be difficult to patent
such ideas. This leads to an underinvestment in such discovery and a greater reliance on
push-incentives for prevention.

30

Because the marginal costs of manufacturing drugs is relatively small compared to the large
fixed costs of research and development, a variety of incentives, such as patents and exclusivity
periods, are granted by governments to permit above-marginal cost pricing in order to help to
induce innovation. Patents prevent competitors from using, making, or selling their intellectual
property for a limited period of time (usually 20 years from the date the patent was filed). In
exchange for these rights the patent holder discloses the existence of their innovation to the
public. The key challenge here is whether the effective patent length is long enough to make
the expected value of an R&D investment profitable. Ultimately, the difference in time between
patent filing and bringing a product to market means that pharmaceutical companies receive
much shorter periods of patent exclusivity than other industries; the longer the clinical trials
take, the shorter the patent exclusivity life is. For example, evidence from Budish, Roain, and
William (2015) shows that drug companies have more incentives to develop drugs to treat late
stage cancers compared to early stage ones, because early stage cancers require longer clinical
trials to confirm that they are effective in extending patient lives. It remains an open question
whether transformative treatments for Alzheimer’s require more generous protections to come
to market as a result of the sometimes slow progression of the disease. Venture capitalists play
a large role in this enterprise, but not much is known about the quality of their decision-making
even though their decisions profoundly shape the medicines that come to market (Lerner and
Nanda, 2020).
The second question relates to follow-on innovation in AD. Patents can lead to follow-on
innovation by other firms because the invention is declared to the public and permits learning,
but not copying. This generates incentives for follow-on innovation by competitors once the
patent expires as well as inventions around the patent, both of which can increase social
welfare. On the other hand, too expansive or too long of a patent could induce more innovation
initially but discourage follow-on innovation and lead to decreased access to life saving
treatments for patients. Too generous a patent could also reward infra-marginal medicines
more than they require to be launched. Because AD treatment will likely involve multiple drugs
for multiple targets, the tradeoffs surrounding inframarginal medicines and follow-on
innovation may be particularly salient for R&D for AD. Frameworks used by economists, as
summarized by Lakdawalla (2018), are central for making these determinations.
Finally, medicines build on “push incentives” such as public financing of basic science. Basic
science research is an area ripe with market failure as it is hard to patent a basic science
discovery and thus private firms will not pursue it. Discovering new and novel forms of
non-therapeutic prevention (say through lifestyle changes), where it is hard to capture the
value of the discovery will discourage innovation by firms that can be rectified by push-funding.
There is evidence that public funding leads to more commercializable insights but is unclear
what the optimal level of such funding is (Azoulay et al., 2017, 2019). A new area for research
for economists is to measure the performance of the review process for basic science funding
itself, for there is a tradeoff between expert reviewers and unbiased reviewers, with experts
more likely to identify more successful applications but potentially less likely to bet on diverse
(or high risk, high reward) ideas (Li, 2017; Begley, 2019).

31

Increasing amounts of public funding have been devoted to AD in recent years. In 2019, the
National Institute of Health spent $2.2 billion on Alzheimer’s research, considerably more than
they spent on heart disease ($444 million) or stroke ($350 million); funding in 2020 is $2.8
billion. Part of these funds supports Alzheimer’s Disease Research Centers at major medical
institutions across the US. Despite this commitment to research, little progress has been made
in developing therapeutics that extend life or slow cognitive decline. The cause is twofold: 1)
ongoing ambiguity about the cause of AD, 2) lack of clear biological markers to inform
physicians and researchers. Both of these hurdles are basic-science hurdles that are unlikely to
be solved by private companies.
The key point for inducing new treatments for AD is that AD is a complicated disease so it is not
likely there will be a single treatment that will change the course of this disease. As with
oncology treatments, society will have to ensure that a variety of treatments come to market,
with different treatments for different targets. These combination therapies also mean that
medicines have complementary effects on each other whereby the value of one medicine may
be increased by the presence of another. This feature may increase incentives for firms to
partner to capture the value of their combination therapies, while also increasing the likelihood
of static deadweight loss from less competition. Understanding the tradeoffs between long-run
social welfare and short run deadweight loss is an area where economists have a unique
comparative advantage (Kakani, Chernew and Chandra, 2020). Similarly, pricing schemes such
as Ramsey pricing may be of particular interest in this area, pointing to the importance of
economic insights from industrial organization, entrepreneurial finance, and the economics of
innovation.
4.4 Health
Other factors beyond drug therapies may impact the development, progression, and health
effects of AD, and economists have a useful toolkit to answer questions related to risk factors,
genoeconomics, and the burden of disease.
Economists are well-positioned to contribute to the literature on the determinants of AD. An
important set of contributions are likely to come from identifying plausibly exogenous sources
of variation in order to generate causal estimates of the effect of AD risk factors on disease
onset. Economists could use standard multiple regression analysis to examine the relationship
between AD risk factors and disease onset. However, this type of an analysis would not be
clearly distinct from the work of epidemiologists, who seek to understand patterns and causes
of disease and other health-related states and events. It is also harder to establish causality in
such analysis, due to the difficulty of controlling for all potentially confounding factors.
Despite these challenges, the economic literature on the long-run consequences of infant
health provides an excellent model to understand whether epidemiological risk-factors are
risk-factors or represent causal effects. If the latter, then one can think about policy levers to
manipulate them. If the former, then they are only useful for predicting the future risk of AD.
Researchers have used sibling differences (Black et al., 2007; Johnson and Schoeni, 2011) and
events such as the 1918 influenza epidemic (Almond, 2006) or Chinese famine of 1959-1961

32

(Chen and Zhou, 2007) to generate exogenous variation in health at birth. Using
quasi-experimental methods and longitudinal or large administrative data sets to exploit this
variation, these studies have established that infant health has substantial long-run effects on
adult health and economic outcomes (Currie, 2011). Bishop et al. (2018) illustrate how this
approach could be used for AD-related work in their study of air pollution and dementia.
Relatedly, the emerging field of genoeconomics may offer some promise for AD-related
research. As defined by Benjamin et al. (2007), genoeconomics is the field at the intersection of
molecular genetics and economics. As discussed in Section 1, the scientific literature has
identified several genes that are indicated in the development of AD, while concluding that AD
is caused by a specific genetic mutation in fewer than one percent of cases. Polygenic scores
(PGS) are used to predict an individual’s probability of developing a complex disease in which
multiple genes are indicated, such as AD. Scores are calculated by using genome-wide
association studies to identify which genetic variations are found more frequently among those
with a particular disease, then combining this with the individual’s own genetic information to
calculate an individual risk score.
The availability of datasets that provide PGS and economic data may facilitate genoeconomic
research. The Health and Retirement Study (HRS) includes PGS data for 38 outcomes, including
AD and other diseases, health outcomes, and economic outcomes. Benjamin et al. (2012)
identify “​four ways that the intersection of molecular genetics and economics promises
ultimately to contribute to economics: (a) identifying and measuring latent traits, (b) identifying
biological mechanisms that influence economic behavior, (c) providing exogenous proxies for
preferences and abilities that may be used as control variables or—more problematically—as
instrumental variables, and (d) predicting the differential effects of policies across individuals
with different genetic constitutions.”
The existing genoeconomic literature is fairly small, and it remains to be seen which areas hold
the most promise for AD research. Replication is a key problem in these studies (Beauchamp et
al., 2011). Shin et al. (2019) find a positive correlation between the PGS for AD and the share of
wealth held in “hands off” assets like certificates of deposit, an example identifying biological
mechanisms that influence economic behavior. Linnér and Koellinger (2020) find that the PGS
for AD, parental lifespan, and smoking are associated with survival and may be better
predictors than some conventional actuarial risk factors; they also find that greater genetic
mortality risk is associated with a reduced probability of long-term care purchase. Future
research could explore whether the genetic risk of AD is related to latent parameters such as
time preference or risk aversion. The PGS for AD could be used as an instrument for cognition,
though Benjamin et al. (2012) caution about the possible violation of the exclusion restriction,
since genes often have multiple effects. Finally, it could be useful to explore whether policies
(for example, to aid with financial decision-making) have differential effects by AD risk.
Economists can also help estimate the effect of AD on health to help quantify the burden of
disease and the social value from reducing it. Health capital is the present discounted value of
lifetime health, where health at each future age is the probability of being alive at that age
multiplied by the average quality of life among those alive at that age (or quality weight,

33

ranging from 0 to 1) multiplied by the value of a year of life in perfect health (Grossman, 1972).
Quality weights may be estimated from health survey data by regressing self-reported health
status on a set of disease indicators to obtain the estimated effect of each condition on health,
then multiplying these coefficients by disease prevalence rates by age to obtain an age-specific
quality weight (Cutler and Richardson, 1999). Economists have estimated the value of a year of
life by estimating the wage premium for risky jobs and or consumers’ willingness to pay for
safety improvements as well as by contingent valuation (Viscusi, 1993). This model can be used
to quantify the total health cost of AD by calculating health capital using quality weights that
include versus exclude these risks. The model can also illustrate the value of treatments or
lifestyle changes that would delay disease onset or reduce its impact on quality of life.
Disability-free life expectancy is another health measure used by economists that could yield
insights as to the impact of AD on health. It is calculated like standard life expectancy, except
that the probability of being alive at future ages is multiplied by the age-specific probability of
being non-disabled. Defining disability as having difficulty in performing activities of daily living
or instrumental activities of daily living, Chernew et al. (2017) estimate that changes in AD and
Parkinson’s disease prevalence between the early 1990s and late 2000s led to a 0.13-year
(0.10-year) decrease in life expectancy (disease-free life expectancy), mostly due to the change
in AD. The societal willingness to pay (WTP) to avoid these declines may be large and may
induce new innovations in therapeutics and care-delivery if there is a way for manufacturers
and providers to capture some of this value; conversely, there may be market failure if WTP
exists but these entities are not able to capture it because of insufficiently built markets for
long term care. Economists likely have a comparative advantage in thinking through the
limitations of these measures, even if their advantage in estimating them is less certain.
4.5 Further reading and future research on innovation for Alzheimer’s Disease
For further reading on the topic of innovation, a starting point is Williams (2018), which
provides an overview of the patent system through the lens of an economist and includes
frameworks for thinking about the incentives underlying the patent system. Lakdawalla (2008)
provides an overview of the pharmaceutical industry, ​the positive and normative implications
for the R&D, pricing, and strategic decisions of pharmaceutical firms, including persistent gaps
in this literature. In the context of AD--where there is some consensus among scientists that
more basic science investments are needed--it is important to better understand the
production function that converts basic science research into patents, and subsequently, into
medicines. These push incentives are not well understood, with Azoulay et al (2019) pioneering
the way to think about them. Moreover, there is a tendency to conflate ‘basic science’ (which is
fundamental science that is detached from a particular disease or therapy) with disease-specific
efforts such as the National Cancer Institute. Alzheimer’s research received $350 million in
funding from the US Congress in 2016 and that went up to almost $2.0 billion in 2020, which
would serve to improve the scientific basis for new therapeutics. However, it is still not known
whether this type of disease-specific funding unlocks better insights than investments in more
fundamental biological processes of aging, or regenerative biology.

34

5 Accelerating research on economics of AD
Data resources will be key to accelerate the research agenda of the economics of Alzheimer’s.
When considering possible datasets for use in AD research, the researcher faces a familiar
tradeoff (Coile and Maestas, 2018) between the richness of the data and sample size. The
Health and Retirement Study (HRS), a longitudinal study of the US population age 50 and above
that has spawned “sister studies” in many other countries, provides state of the art measures of
memory and cognition (Ofstedal, 2005). In addition to the cognitive data collected at every
wave, the Aging, Demographics, and Memory Study (ADAMS) and Harmonized Cognition
Assessment Protocol (HCAP) provide data on dementia for a subset of participants. The HRS
includes PGS and biomarker data and linkages to several administrative data sets. The richness
of these data allows the researcher to examine a wide variety of AD-related questions. Yet the
sample size of about 40,000 participants over the HRS’ first 25 years may be limiting for the
study of a disease that affects 1 in 15 individuals in their 70s. This concern is heightened if the
researcher wishes to explore racial disparities.
Administrative datasets such as claims data from Medicare or private insurers provide large (or
population) sample sizes and can be used to identify AD based on clinical data (Taylor et al.,
2002) and to track health care utilization by AD patients. However, they lack biomarkers and
genetic information and data on other outcomes of interest or potential confounding factors,
and thus are suitable for a narrower set of questions.
There are several options for researchers seeking to expand their data options. Some
researchers have worked to establish new linkages -- for example, between Medicare claims
and consumer credit data (Nicholas et al., in progress) or Medicare and Medicaid claims
28
(Hackmann and Pohl, 2019), to name just a couple of examples. Investments by the NIA and
other funders into more data linkages of this sort -- for example, linking credit data to the HRS
or earlier life course data to data on older adults -- could greatly enhance the scope of
AD-related questions economists can tackle. A second option is to use data from countries that
provide access to linked administrative data covering numerous domains (e.g., health care, tax,
and public benefit records) for the entire population. For many questions, the country of
analysis seems unlikely to affect research outcomes, although these data would not be suitable
for certain topics, such as an analysis of racial disparities in the US. Since many AD patients
reside in nursing homes, data on these facilities may be an underutilized resource for AD
29
research. Finally, specialized surveys might need to be developed to explore hard-to-study
aspects of AD, like the experience of caregivers or the role of adult children in financial
decision-making. Online surveys like the RAND American Life Panel offer the potential to collect

The link between Medicare and Medicaid records is particularly fruitful for AD research and long-term care more
generally, given that Medicaid is a major payer of care for AD. Many studies thus far cannot observe the Medicaid
side of the payer market, resulting in a major gap in our knowledge of the payer side of AD care.
29 ​
For example, the Minimum Data Set (MDS) Nursing Home Assessment, Transformed Medicaid Statistical
Information System (T-MSIS), and Outcome and Assessment Information Set (OASIS) for home care clinicians all
offer promise, and might be matched with Medicare Provider Analysis and Review (MEDPAR) or CASPER data.
28

35

custom data rapidly and inexpensively and link it to previously-collected data, but sample sizes
may not be adequate for all projects.
In addition to seeking out new data, researchers should not overlook areas where new(er)
theory or empirical methods may be useful. The insights of behavioral economics, which have
been so important in understanding savings behavior, could fruitfully be applied to many
AD-related topics. Indeed, it would be useful for researchers to grapple with the question of
whether decision-making under cognitive constraints can be more fruitfully modeled within the
rational consumer framework, a behavioral framework, or whether neither is fully adequate.
Genoeconomic research may help to explain AD-related behavior, particular as the science of
AD advances. Machine learning offers both promise and pitfalls for economic research
(Mullainathan and Spiess, 2017; Athey and Imbens, 2019), including on health care topics
(Mullainathan and Obermeyer, 2019).
This essay reviews existing economic research that is relevant for understanding the challenges
posed by AD and highlights areas where future research by economists could generate valuable
insights, many of which could inform public policy. There is important work to be done in
understanding the causal forces behind Alzheimer's Disease -- an enterprise that could be
particularly fruitful for economists if the disease turns out to have a strong epigenetic basis that
requires rigorous identification and quantification of these forces. The high fraction of nursing
home patients with dementia combined with the expected rise in AD cases and poor financial
protection against this risk brings new urgency to questions around the adequacy of savings
and long-term care insurance. The presence of cognitively challenged consumers also opens up
new areas of study at the intersection of law and economics for it is not clear if firms will exploit
these individuals or whether competitive forces will temper the behavior of firms. At the same
time, there is great need for innovation in prevention and treatment which requires an
understanding of the different policy levers that can be deployed to hasten such innovation.
The prospects for economists working in many different fields to contribute to our
understanding of AD appear to us to be very bright.

REFERENCES
“AAIC 2018.” 2017. Accessed May 31, 2020.
https://www.alz.org/aaic/releases_2017/AAIC17-Sun-briefing-racial-disparities.asp.
Acemoglu, D., & Angrist, J. D. (2001). Consequences of employment protection? The case of the
Americans with Disabilities Act. Journal of Political Economy, 109(5), 915-957.
Agarwal, S., Driscoll, J. C., Gabaix, X., & Laibson, D. (2009). The age of reason: Financial decisions
over the life cycle and implications for regulation. ​Brookings Papers on Economic Activity​,
2009​(2), 51-117.

36

Agency for Health Quality Research (2017). Interventions to Prevent Age-Related Cognitive
Decline, Mild Cognitive Impairment, and Clinical Alzheimer's-Type Dementia. Comparative
Effectiveness Review Number 188.
Almond, D. (2006). Is the 1918 influenza pandemic over? Long-term effects of in utero influenza
exposure in the post-1940 US population. Journal of Political Economy, 114(4), 672-712.
Alsan, Marcella, Owen Garrick, and Grant Graziani. 2019. "Does Diversity Matter for Health?
Experimental Evidence from Oakland." ​American Economic Review​, 109 (12): 4071-4111.
Alzheimer’s Association. “Beta-Amyloid and the Amyloid Hypothesis,” March 2017.
https://www.alz.org/national/documents/topicsheet_betaamyloid.pdf.
Alzheimer’s Association. “What Is Alzheimer’s?” 2020a. Accessed May 31, 2020.
https://alz.org/alzheimers-dementia/what-is-alzheimers.
Alzheimer’s Disease and Dementia. “Sleep Issues and Sundowning.” Accessed May 31, 2020.
https://alz.org/help-support/caregiving/stages-behaviors/sleep-issues-sundowning.
Alzheimer's Association. "2019 Alzheimer's disease facts and figures." Alzheimer's & Dementia
15.3 (2019): 321-387.
Ameriks, J., & Zeldes, S. P. (2004). How do household portfolio shares vary with age, working
paper, Columbia University.
Ameriks, J., Briggs, J., Caplin, A., Shapiro, M. D., & Tonetti, C. (2020). Long-Term-Care Utility and
Late-in-Life Saving. Journal of Political Economy, 128(6), 000-000.
Ameriks, J., Caplin, A., Laufer, S., & Van Nieuwerburgh, S. (2011). The joy of giving or assisted
living? Using strategic surveys to separate public care aversion from bequest motives. The
journal of finance, 66(2), 519-561.
Ameriks, John, et al. "Long-Term-Care Utility and Late-in-Life Saving." Journal of Political
Economy 128.6 (2020): 000-000.
Anderson, Norman B., Rodolfo A. Bulatao, Barney Cohen, and Ethnicity National Research
Council (US) Panel on Race. Ethnic Differences in Dementia and Alzheimer’s Disease. National
Academies Press (US), 2004. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK25535/.
Arias, Jalayne J., et al. "The Proactive Patient: Long-Term Care Insurance Discrimination Risks of
Alzheimer's Disease Biomarkers." The Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics 46.2 (2018): 485-498.
Athey, S., & Imbens, G. W. (2019). Machine learning methods that economists should know
about. ​Annual Review of Economics​, ​11​, 685-725.

Arora, K., & Wolf, D. A. (2018). Does paid family leave reduce nursing home use? The California
experience. ​Journal of Policy Analysis and Management​, ​37​(1), 38-62.
Attanasio, O. P., & Weber, G. (2010). Consumption and saving: models of intertemporal
allocation and their implications for public policy. ​Journal of Economic literature​, ​48​(3),
693-751.

37

Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua S. Graff Zivin, Danielle Li, and Bhaven N. Sampat. “Public R&D
Investments and Private-Sector Patenting: Evidence from NIH Funding Rules.” The Review of
Economic Studies 86, no. 1 (January 1, 2019): 117–52.​ https://doi.org/10.1093/restud/rdy034​.
Bagley, Nicholas, Amitabh Chandra, Craig Garthwaite, and Ariel D. Stern. “It’s Time to Reform
the Orphan Drug Act.” NEJM Catalyst, December 19, 2018.
https://catalyst.nejm.org/doi/abs/10.1056/CAT.18.0032​.
Baicker, Katherine, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Joshua Schwartzstein. “Behavioral Hazard in
Health Insurance.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130, no. 4 (November 1, 2015):
1623–67. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjv029.
Baicker, Katherine and Douglas Staiger. "​Fiscal Shenanigans, Targeted Federal Health Care
Funds, And Patient Mortality,​" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2005, v120(1,Feb), 345-386.
Barczyk, Daniel, and Matthias Kredler. "Evaluating long-term-care policy options, taking the
family seriously." The Review of Economic Studies 85.2 (2018): 766-809.
Beam, C. R., Kaneshiro, C., Jang, J. Y., Reynolds, C. A., Pedersen, N. L., & Gatz, M. (2018).
Differences between women and men in incidence rates of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease.
Journal of Alzheimer's Disease​, ​64​(4), 1077-1083.
Beauchamp, Jonathan P., David Cesarini, Magnus Johannesson, Matthijs J. H. M. van der Loos,
Philipp D. Koellinger, Patrick J. F. Groenen, James H. Fowler, J. Niels Rosenquist, A. Roy Thurik,
and Nicholas A. Christakis. “Molecular Genetics and Economics.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 25, no. 4 (December 2011): 57–82. ​https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.25.4.57​.

Begley, Sharon. “How an Alzheimer’s ‘Cabal’ Thwarted Progress toward a Cure.” STAT, June 25,
2019, sec. Special Report.
https://www.statnews.com/2019/06/25/alzheimers-cabal-thwarted-progress-toward-cure/.
Benartzi, S., Previtero, A., & Thaler, R. H. (2011). Annuitization puzzles. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 25(4), 143-64.
Benjamin, D. J., Cesarini, D., Chabris, C. F., Glaeser, E. L., Laibson, D. I., Age, G., ... & Smith, A. V.
(2012). The promises and pitfalls of genoeconomics. Annual Review of Economics, vol 4.
Benjamin, D. J., Chabris, C. F., Glaeser, E. L., Gudnason, V., Harris, T. B., Laibson, D. I., ... &
Purcell, S. (2007). Biosocial Surveys. Biosocial Surveys. Washington, DC: National Academies
Press.
Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. C. (2009). The importance of default options
for retirement saving outcomes: Evidence from the United States. In Social security policy in a
changing environment (pp. 167-195). University of Chicago Press.
Bishop, K. C., Ketcham, J. D., & Kuminoff, N. V. (2018). ​Hazed and confused: the effect of air
pollution on dementia​ (No. w24970). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Black, S. E., Devereux, P. J., & Salvanes, K. G. (2007). From the cradle to the labor market? The
effect of birth weight on adult outcomes. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1), 409-439.

38

Block, M. L., Elder, A., Auten, R. L., Bilbo, S. D., Chen, H., Chen, J. C., ... & Gold, D. R. (2012). The
outdoor air pollution and brain health workshop. ​Neurotoxicology​, ​33​(5), 972-984.

Bound, J., Brown, C., & Mathiowetz, N. (2001). Measurement error in survey data. In ​Handbook
of econometrics​ (Vol. 5, pp. 3705-3843). Elsevier.
Boustani, Malaz, et al. "An alternative payment model to support widespread use of
collaborative dementia care models." Health Affairs 38.1 (2019): 54-59.

Briesacher, Becky A., et al. "Antipsychotic use among nursing home residents." Jama 309.5
(2013): 440-442.
Broich, K., Weiergräber, M., & Hampel, H. (2011). Biomarkers in clinical trials for
neurodegenerative diseases: regulatory perspectives and requirements. ​Progress in
Neurobiology​, ​95​(4), 498-500.

Brot-Goldberg, Zarek C., Amitabh Chandra, Benjamin R. Handel, and Jonathan T. Kolstad. “What
Does a Deductible Do? The Impact of Cost-Sharing on Health Care Prices, Quantities, and
Spending Dynamics.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, no. 3 (August 1, 2017):
1261–1318. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjx013.
Brown, J. R., Kapteyn, A., Luttmer, E. F., & Mitchell, O. S. (2011). Do consumers know how to
value annuities? Complexity as a barrier to annuitization. Working Paper WR-924-SSA.
Brown, J. R., Kling, J. R., Mullainathan, S., & Wrobel, M. V. (2008). Why don’t people insure
late-life consumption? A framing explanation of the under-annuitization puzzle. American
Economic Review, 98(2), 304-09.
Brown, Jeffrey R. (2009). “Understanding the Role of Annuities in Retirement Planning.” In
Annamaria Lusardi, ed., Overcoming the Savings Slump: How to Increase the Effectiveness of
Financial Education and Saving Programs. University of Chicago Press, 178¬-206.
Brown, Jeffrey R., and Amy Finkelstein. "Insuring long-term care in the United States." Journal
of Economic Perspectives 25.4 (2011): 119-42.
Brown, Jeffrey R., and Amy Finkelstein. "The interaction of public and private insurance:
Medicaid and the long-term care insurance market." American Economic Review 98.3 (2008):
1083-1102.
Brown, Jeffrey R., and Amy Finkelstein. "The private market for long-term care insurance in the
United States: a review of the evidence." Journal of Risk and Insurance 76.1 (2009): 5-29.
Brown, Jeffrey R., and Amy Finkelstein. "Why is the market for long-term care insurance so
small?." Journal of public Economics 91.10 (2007): 1967-1991.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Gopi Shah Goda, and Kathleen McGarry. "Heterogeneity in State-Dependent
Utility: Evidence from Strategic Surveys." Economic Inquiry 54.2 (2016): 847-861.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Gopi Shah Goda, and Kathleen McGarry. "Long-term care insurance demand
limited by beliefs about needs, concerns about insurers, and care available from family." Health
Affairs 31.6 (2012): 1294-1302.

39

Browning, M., & Crossley, T. F. (2001). The life-cycle model of consumption and saving. Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 15(3), 3-22.
Budish, Eric, Benjamin N. Roin, and Heidi Williams. 2015. "Do Firms Underinvest in Long-Term
Research? Evidence from Cancer Clinical Trials." American Economic Review, 105 (7): 2044-85.
Cadigan, Rebecca Orfaly, et al. "The quality of advanced dementia care in the nursing home:
The role of special care units." Medical care 50.10 (2012): 856.
Cawley, J., Grabowski, D. C., & Hirth, R. A. (2006). Factor substitution in nursing homes. ​Journal
of health economics​, ​25(​ 2), 234-247.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “What Is Alzheimer’s Disease?” October 10, 2019.
Accessed May 31, 2020. https://www.cdc.gov/aging/aginginfo/alzheimers.htm.
Chandra, Amitabh, and Craig Garthwaite. “The Economics of Indication-Based Drug Pricing.”
New England Journal of Medicine 377, no. 2 (July 13, 2017): 103–6.
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp1705035​.
Chandra, Amitabh, Jonathan Gruber, and Robin McKnight. “Patient Cost-Sharing and
Hospitalization Offsets in the Elderly.” American Economic Review 100, no. 1 (March 2010):
193–213. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.100.1.193.
Chen, Y., & Zhou, L. A. (2007). The long-term health and economic consequences of the
1959–1961 famine in China. Journal of health economics, 26(4), 659-681.
Chernew, Michael, David M. Cutler, Kaushik Ghosh, and Mary Beth Landrum (2017).
“Understanding the Improvement in Disability-Free Life Expectancy in the U.S. Elderly
Population,” in Insights in the Economics of Aging, David A. Wise, ed. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Christakis, Nicholas A., and José J. Escarce. "Survival of Medicare patients after enrollment in
hospice programs." New England Journal of Medicine 335.3 (1996): 172-178.
Clinicaltrials.gov. “Safety Study of Sargramostim in Treating Patients With Mild Cognitive
Impairment Due to Alzheimer’s Disease.” April 7, 2017. Accessed June 5, 2020.
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02667496.
Coe, Norma B., and Courtney Harold Van Houtven. "Caring for mom and neglecting yourself?
The health effects of caring for an elderly parent." Health economics 18.9 (2009): 991-1010.
Coe, Norma B., Gopi Shah Goda, and Courtney Harold Van Houtven. Family spillovers of
long-term care insurance. No. w21483. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2015.
Coile, C. C., & Maestas, N. (2018). The Value of the Health and Retirement Study for Health
Economics Research. In ​Forum for Health Economics & Policy​ (Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 1-11).

Coile, Courtney and Kevin Milligan (2009). "How Household Portfolios Evolve After Retirement:
The Effect Of Aging And Health Shocks," Review of Income and Wealth 55(2), 226-248.
Colla, Carrie, Julie Bynum, Andrea Austin and Jonthan Skinner. Hospital Competition, Quality
and Expenditures in the US Medicare Population. NBER WP 22826. November 2016. Available
at ​https://www.nber.org/papers/w22826

40

Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2019). “Suspicious Activity Reports on Elder Financial
Exploitation: Issues and Trends,”
Cummings, J. L., Morstorf, T., & Zhong, K. (2014). Alzheimer’s disease drug-development
pipeline: few candidates, frequent failures. ​Alzheimer's research & therapy​, ​6​(4), 1-7.
Cummings, J., Reiber, C., & Kumar, P. (2018). The price of progress: Funding and financing
Alzheimer's disease drug development. ​Alzheimer's & Dementia: Translational Research &
Clinical Interventions​, ​4​, 330-343.

Cummings, Jeffrey, Garam Lee, Aaron Ritter, Marwan Sabbagh, and Kate Zhong. “Alzheimer’s
Disease Drug Development Pipeline: 2019.” Alzheimer’s & Dementia: Translational Research &
Clinical Interventions 5 (January 1, 2019): 272–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trci.2019.05.008.
Currie, J. (2011). Inequality at birth: Some causes and consequences. American Economic
Review, 101(3), 1-22.
Cutler, David M. and Elizabeth Richardson (1999). “Your Money and Your Life: The Value of
Health and What Affects It,” in Frontiers in Health Policy Research, volume 2, Alan M. Garber,
ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Cutler, David M. Why don’t markets insure long-term risk?. mimeo, 1996.
Davidoff, Thomas, Jeffrey R. Brown, and Peter A. Diamond (2005). "Annuities and Individual
Welfare," American Economic Review, American Economic Association, vol. 95(5), 1573-1590
Davidoff, Thomas. "Home equity commitment and long-term care insurance demand." Journal
of Public Economics 94.1-2 (2010): 44-49.
DeLiema, M., Deevy, M., Lusardi, A., & Mitchell, O. S. (2020). Financial fraud among older
americans: Evidence and implications. ​The Journals of Gerontology: Series B​, ​75(​ 4), 861-868.
De Nardi, M., French, E., & Jones, J. B. (2010). Why do the elderly save? The role of medical
expenses. Journal of political economy, 118(1), 39-75.

De Nardi, M., French, E., Jones, J. B., & McCauley, J. (2016). Medical spending of the US elderly.
Fiscal Studies, 37(3-4), 717-747.
De Nardi, Mariacristina, Eric French, and John Bailey Jones. "Medicaid insurance in old age."
American Economic Review 106.11 (2016): 3480-3520.
Diniz, B. S., Butters, M. A., Albert, S. M., Dew, M. A., & Reynolds, C. F. (2013). Late-life
depression and risk of vascular dementia and Alzheimer's disease: systematic review and
meta-analysis of community-based cohort studies. ​The British Journal of Psychiatry​, ​202(​ 5),
329-335.
DiMasi JA, Grabowski HG, Hansen RA. Innovation in the pharmaceutical industry: new estimates
of R&D costs. ​Journal of Health Economics​ 2016;47:20-33.
Dushi, I., & Webb, A. (2004). Household annuitization decisions: Simulations and empirical
analyses. Journal of Pension Economics & Finance, 3(2), 109-143.

41

Dynan, K. E., Skinner, J., & Zeldes, S. P. (2002). The importance of bequests and life-cycle saving
in capital accumulation: A new answer. American Economic Review, 92(2), 274-278.
Edwards, R. D. (2008). Health risk and portfolio choice. Journal of Business & Economic
Statistics, 26(4), 472-485.
Ehrlich, Isaac, and Gary S. Becker. "Market insurance, self-insurance, and self-protection."
Journal of political Economy 80.4 (1972): 623-648.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Ziad Obermeyer. “Predictive Modeling
of U.S. Health Care Spending in Late Life.” Science 360, no. 6396 (June 29, 2018): 1462–65.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aar5045​.
Ericson, K. M., & Sydnor, J. (2017). The questionable value of having a choice of levels of health
insurance coverage. ​Journal of Economic Perspectives​, ​31​(4), 51-72.
Fadlon, I., & Nielsen, T. H. (2015). ​Family labor supply responses to severe health shocks​ (No.
w21352). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Ferri, C. P., Prince, M., Brayne, C., Brodaty, H., Fratiglioni, L., Ganguli, M., ... & Jorm, A. (2005).
Global prevalence of dementia: a Delphi consensus study. The lancet, 366(9503), 2112-2117.
Finke, M. S., Howe, J. S., & Huston, S. J. (2017). Old age and the decline in financial literacy.
Management Science​, ​63(​ 1), 213-230.
Finkelstein, A., & Poterba, J. (2004). Adverse selection in insurance markets: Policyholder
evidence from the UK annuity market. Journal of Political Economy, 112(1), 183-208.

Finkelstein, Amy, and Kathleen McGarry. "Multiple dimensions of private information: evidence
from the long-term care insurance market." American Economic Review 96.4 (2006): 938-958.
Finkelstein, Amy, Erzo FP Luttmer, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. "What good is wealth without
health? The effect of health on the marginal utility of consumption." Journal of the European
Economic Association 11 (2013): 221-258.
Finkelstein, Amy, Yunan Ji, Neale Mahoney, and Jonathan Skinner. “Mandatory Medicare
Bundled Payment Program for Lower Extremity Joint Replacement and Discharge to
Institutional Postacute Care: Interim Analysis of the First Year of a 5-Year Randomized Trial.”
JAMA 320, no. 9 (September 4, 2018): 892–900. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2018.12346.
Fisher, Elliott S., Julie P. Bynum, and Jonathan S. Skinner. "Slowing the growth of health care
costs—lessons from regional variation." The New England journal of medicine 360.9 (2009):
849.
Fitzpatrick, A. L., Kuller, L. H., Lopez, O. L., Kawas, C. H., & Jagust, W. (2005). Survival following
dementia onset: Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia. ​Journal of the neurological
sciences​, ​229​, 43-49.

Friedman, Esther M., et al. "US prevalence and predictors of informal caregiving for dementia."
Health Affairs 34.10 (2015): 1637-1641.
Gamble, K. J., Boyle, P., Yu, L., & Bennett, D. (2014). The causes and consequences of financial
fraud among older Americans. Boston College Center for Retirement Research WP, 13.

42

Garcia, Italo, Nicole Maestas and Kathleen Mullen (2019). “Latent Work Capacity and
Retirement Expectations,” Michigan Retirement Research Center Working Paper 19-02.
Gaynor, M., Ho, K., & Town, R. J. (2015). The industrial organization of health-care markets.
Journal of Economic Literature​, ​53​(2), 235-84.
George, Judy. “Biogen Reverses Take on Aducanumab Trial Data,” October 22, 2019.
https://www.medpagetoday.com/neurology/alzheimersdisease/82865.

Goldfeld, Keith S., Mary Beth Hamel, and Susan L. Mitchell. "The cost-effectiveness of the
decision to hospitalize nursing home residents with advanced dementia." Journal of pain and
symptom management 46.5 (2013): 640-651.
Goldman, Dana and Nicole Maestas (2013). "Medical Expenditure Risk And Household Portfolio
Choice," Journal of Applied Econometrics 28(4), 527-550
Gomes, F., Haliassos, M., & Ramadorai, T. (2020). Household finance. Journal of Economic
Literature.
Gozalo, Pedro, et al. "Changes in Medicare costs with the growth of hospice care in nursing
homes." New England Journal of Medicine 372.19 (2015): 1823-1831.
Grabowski, David C., and Robert J. Town. "Does information matter? Competition, quality, and
the impact of nursing home report cards." Health services research 46.6pt1 (2011): 1698-1719.
Grossman, M. (1972). On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. Journal of
Political Economy, 80(2), 223-255.
Guiso, L., Haliassos, M., & Jappelli, T. (Eds.). (2002). Household portfolios. MIT press.
Hackmann, Martin B. "Incentivizing better quality of care: The role of Medicaid and competition
in the nursing home industry." American Economic Review 109.5 (2019): 1684-1716.
Hackmann, Martin B., and R. Vincent Pohl. ​Patient vs. provider incentives in long term care​. No.
w25178. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.
Hajjar, Ihab M. “Effects of Montelukast Therapy on Alzheimer’s Disease (EMERALD).” Clinical
trial registration. clinicaltrials.gov, September 27, 2019.
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03991988.
Harrington, C., et al. "Nursing Facilities, Staffing, Residents and Facility Deficiencies, 2009
Through 2016. Kaiser Family Foundation." (2018).
Head, Elizabeth, David Powell, Brian T. Gold, and Frederick A. Schmitt. “Alzheimer’s Disease in
Down Syndrome.” European Journal of Neurodegenerative Disease 1, no. 3 (December 2012):
353–64.
Hendel, Igal, and Alessandro Lizzeri. "The role of commitment in dynamic contracts: Evidence
from life insurance." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118.1 (2003): 299-328.
Hendren, Nathaniel. "Private information and insurance rejections." Econometrica 81.5 (2013):
1713-1762.

43

Hill, M. J., Maestas, N., & Mullen, K. J. (2016). Employer accommodation and labor supply of
disabled workers. Labour economics, 41, 291-303.
Hodes, Richard J. “We Have a Budget for FY 2019!” National Institute on Aging. Accessed June
1, 2020. https://www.nia.nih.gov/research/blog/2018/10/we-have-budget-fy-2019.
Hubbard, R. G., Skinner, J., & Zeldes, S. P. (1994). The importance of precautionary motives in
explaining individual and aggregate saving. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, 40, 59-126.
Hubbard, R. G., Skinner, J., & Zeldes, S. P. (1995). Precautionary saving and social insurance.
Journal of political Economy, 103(2), 360-399.
Hughes, Stephanie, MPP Michael Lepore, and Joshua M. Wiener. "Research on Care
Coordination for People with Dementia and Family Caregivers." (2017).
Hurd, Michael D., et al. "Monetary costs of dementia in the United States." New England
Journal of Medicine 368.14 (2013): 1326-1334.
Institute of Medicine 2015. Cognitive Aging: Progress in Understanding and Opportunities for
Action. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/21693
Johnson, R. C., & Schoeni, R. F. (2011). The influence of early-life events on human capital,
health status, and labor market outcomes over the life course. The BE Journal of Economic
Analysis & Policy, 11(3).
Joyce, N. R., McGuire, T. G., Bartels, S. J., Mitchell, S. L., & Grabowski, D. C. (2018). The impact
of dementia special care units on quality of care: An instrumental variables analysis. ​Health
services research​, ​53​(5), 3657-3679.
Judges, R. A., Gallant, S. N., Yang, L., & Lee, K. (2017). The role of cognition, personality, and
trust in fraud victimization in older adults. Frontiers in psychology, 8, 588.

Kaiser, T., Lusardi, A., Menkhoff, L., & Urban, C. J. (2020). ​Financial education affects financial
knowledge and downstream behaviors​ (No. w27057). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kakani, Pragya, Michael Chernew, and Amitabh Chandra. “Rebates in the Pharmaceutical
Industry: Evidence from Medicines Sold in Retail Pharmacies in the U.S.” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper Series, March 12, 2020.
https://www.nber.org/papers/w26846.ack.
Kaschützke, B., & Maurer, R. (2016). Investing and Portfolio Allocation for Retirement. In
Handbook of the Economics of Population Aging (Vol. 1, pp. 567-608). North-Holland.
Kasper, Judith D., et al. "The disproportionate impact of dementia on family and unpaid
caregiving to older adults." Health Affairs 34.10 (2015): 1642-1649.
Keane, M. P., & Thorp, S. (2016). Complex decision making: the roles of cognitive limitations,
cognitive decline, and aging. In ​Handbook of the economics of population aging​ (Vol. 1, pp.
661-709). North-Holland.
Kelley, Amy S., et al. "The burden of health care costs for patients with dementia in the last 5
years of life." Annals of internal medicine 163.10 (2015): 729-736.

44

Kemper, Peter, Robert Applebaum, and Margaret Harrigan. "Community care demonstrations:
What have we learned?." Health Care Financing Review 8.4 (1987): 87.
Ko, Ami. "An Equilibrium Analysis of the Long-Term Care Insurance Market." (2016).
Kopits, Ilona M., et al. "Willingness to pay for genetic testing for Alzheimer's disease: a measure
of personal utility." Genetic testing and molecular biomarkers 15.12 (2011): 871-875.
Kotlikoff, L. J. (1989). What determines savings? MIT Press Books.
Lahiri, Debomoy K., Bryan Maloney, Justin M. Long, and Nigel H. Greig. “Lessons from a BACE
Inhibitor Trial: Off-Site but Not off Base.” Alzheimer’s & Dementia : The Journal of the
Alzheimer’s Association 10, no. 0 (October 2014): S411–19.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jalz.2013.11.004.
Laibson, D. (1997). Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 112(2), 443-478.
Laitner, J., Silverman, D., & Stolyarov, D. (2018). The role of annuitized wealth in
post-retirement behavior. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 10(3), 71-117.
Lakdawalla, Darius N. “Economics of the Pharmaceutical Industry.” Journal of Economic
Literature 56, no. 2 (June 2018): 397–449. https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.20161327.
Lakhan, Shaheen E. “Alzheimer Disease Clinical Presentation,” May 9, 2019.
https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/1134817-clinical#b5.
Launer, Lenore J. “Blood Pressure Control as an intervention to prevent dementia,” The Lancet
Neurology 18(10), October 1, 2019: 906-08.
Leibson, Cynthia L., et al. "Direct medical costs and source of cost differences across the
spectrum of cognitive decline: a population-based study." Alzheimer's & Dementia 11.8 (2015):
917-932.
Lerner, Josh, and Ramana Nanda. “Venture Capital’s Role in Financing Innovation: What We
Know and How Much We Still Need to Learn.” Working Paper. Working Paper Series. National
Bureau of Economic Research, July 2020. ​https://doi.org/10.3386/w27492​.

Langa, K. M. (2018, June). Cognitive Aging, Dementia, and the Future of an Aging Population. In
Future Directions for the Demography of Aging: Proceedings of a Workshop​. National
Academies Press.
Li, Danielle. “Expertise versus Bias in Evaluation: Evidence from the NIH.” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 9, no. 2 (April 2017): 60–92.
https://doi.org/10.1257/app.20150421​.
Li, Danielle, Pierre Azoulay, and Bhaven N. Sampat. “The Applied Value of Public Investments in
Biomedical Research.” Science (New York, N.Y.) 356, no. 6333 (07 2017): 78–81.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aal0010​.
Lieber, Ethan MJ, and Lee M. Lockwood. "Targeting with in-kind transfers: Evidence from
Medicaid home care." American Economic Review 109.4 (2019): 1461-85.

45

LifePlans, Inc. “Who Buys Long-Term Care Insurance?” (2017).
Linnér, Richard and Philipp Koellinger (2020). “Genetic health risks, insurance, and retirement,”
Netspar Design Paper 142, April.
Lockwood, Lee M. "Incidental bequests and the choice to self-insure late-life risks." American
Economic Review 108.9 (2018): 2513-50.
Løken, Katrine V., Shelly Lundberg, and Julie Riise. "Lifting the burden formal care of the elderly
and labor supply of adult children." Journal of Human Resources 52.1 (2017): 247-271.
Love, D. A., & Smith, P. A. (2010). Does health affect portfolio choice?. Health economics,
19(12), 1441-1460.
Lusardi, A., & Mitchell, O. S. (2014). The economic importance of financial literacy: Theory and
evidence. Journal of economic literature, 52(1), 5-44.
Lusardi, A., Mitchell, O. S., & Curto, V. (2014). Financial literacy and financial sophistication in
the older population. Journal of pension economics & finance, 13(4), 347.
Maarse, JAM Hans, and PP Patrick Jeurissen. "The policy and politics of the 2015 long-term care
reform in the Netherlands." Health Policy 120.3 (2016): 241-245.
Makin, Simon. “The Amyloid Hypothesis on Trial.” Nature 559, no. 7715 (July 25, 2018): S4–7.
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-018-05719-4.
Manly, Jennifer J. and Richard Mayeux (2004). Ethnic differences in dementia and Alzheimer's
disease. In ​Critical perspectives on racial and ethnic differences in health in late life​. National
Academies Press.
Maurer, K., S. Volk, and H. Gerbaldo. “Auguste D and Alzheimer’s Disease.” Lancet (London,
England) 349, no. 9064 (May 24, 1997): 1546–49.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(96)10203-8.
Mayo Clinic. “Alzheimer’s Disease - Symptoms and Causes,” December 8, 2018.
https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/alzheimers-disease/symptoms-causes/syc-203
50447.
Mayo Clinic. “When Alzheimer’s Symptoms Start before Age 65.” 2020. Accessed May 31, 2020.
https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/alzheimers-disease/in-depth/alzheimers/art-2
0048356.
Mayo Clinic (2020b). “Alzheimer’s Genes: Are You At Risk?”
https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/alzheimers-disease/in-depth/alzheimers-gene
s/art-20046552​ (accessed 7/12/20)
McWilliams, J. Michael, Michael E. Chernew, Bruce E. Landon, and Aaron L. Schwartz.
“Performance Differences in Year 1 of Pioneer Accountable Care Organizations.” New England
Journal of Medicine 372, no. 20 (May 14, 2015): 1927–36.
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa1414929.
Mellor, Jennifer M. "Long-term care and nursing home coverage: are adult children substitutes
for insurance policies?." Journal of Health Economics 20.4 (2001): 527-547.

46

Meng, X., & D’arcy, C. (2012). Education and dementia in the context of the cognitive reserve
hypothesis: a systematic review with meta-analyses and qualitative analyses. ​PloS one​, ​7​(6),
e38268.
Merton, R. C. (1969). Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: The continuous-time case.
The review of Economics and Statistics, 247-257.
Michaelson, D. M. (2014). APOE ε4: The most prevalent yet understudied risk factor for
Alzheimer's disease. ​Alzheimer's & Dementia​, ​10​(6), 861-868.
Michaud, T. L., Su, D., Siahpush, M., & Murman, D. L. (2017). The risk of incident mild cognitive
impairment and progression to dementia considering mild cognitive impairment subtypes.
Dementia and geriatric cognitive disorders extra​, ​7​(1), 15-29.
Mitchell, Susan L., et al. "A national study of the location of death for older persons with
dementia." Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 53.2 (2005): 299-305.

Mitchell, Susan L., et al. "The clinical course of advanced dementia." New England Journal of
Medicine 361.16 (2009): 1529-1538.
Mommaerts, Corina. "Are coresidence and nursing homes substitutes? Evidence from Medicaid
spend-down provisions." Journal of health economics 59 (2018): 125-138.
Mommaerts, Corina. "Long-term care insurance and the family." unpublished, November
(2015).
Mormino, E. C., & Papp, K. V. (2018). Amyloid accumulation and cognitive decline in clinically
normal older individuals: Implications for aging and early Alzheimer’s disease. ​Journal of
Alzheimer's Disease​, ​64​(s1), S633-S646.

Moschetti, Kristin, Noel Barragan, Ricardo Basurto-Dávila, Patricia L. Cummings, Frank Sorvillo,
and Tony Kuo. “Mortality and Productivity Losses From Alzheimer Disease Among US Adults
Aged 40 to 64 Years, 1999 to 2010.” Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders 29, no. 2 (June
2015): 165–68. ​https://doi.org/10.1097/WAD.0000000000000017​.
Mukamel, D. B., Peterson, D. R., TEMKIN-GREENER, H. E. L. E. N. A., Delavan, R., Gross, D.,
Kunitz, S. J., & Williams, T. F. (2007). Program Characteristics and Enrollees' Outcomes in the
Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE). ​The Milbank Quarterly​, ​85​(3), 499-531.

Mullainathan, S., & Obermeyer, Z. (2019). ​A Machine Learning Approach to Low-Value Health
Care: Wasted Tests, Missed Heart Attacks and Mis-Predictions​ (No. w26168). National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Mullainathan, S., & Spiess, J. (2017). Machine learning: an applied econometric approach.
Journal of Economic Perspectives​, ​31​(2), 87-106.
Mullainathan, Sendhil and Richard Thaler (2001). Behavioral Economics. International
Encyclopedia of Social Sciences, Pergamon Press, 1094-1100.

Murtaugh, C., B. Spillman and M. Warshawsky (2001). In sickness and in health: an annuity
approach to financing long-term care and retirement income. Journal of Risk and Insurance
68(2), 225-254.

47

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 2017. Preventing Cognitive Decline
and Dementia: A Way Forward. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
https://doi.org/10.17226/24782.
National Institute on Aging. “Number of Alzheimer’s Deaths Found to Be Underreported.”
Accessed May 31, 2020.
https://www.nia.nih.gov/news/number-alzheimers-deaths-found-be-underreported.
Nicholas, Lauren, Kenneth M. Langa, Julie P.W. Bynum, Joanne W. Hu (in progress). “The
Financial Presentation of Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias,” mimeo.
Nichols, Albert L., and Richard J. Zeckhauser. "Targeting transfers through restrictions on
recipients." The American Economic Review 72.2 (1982): 372-377.
Norton, E. C. (2016). Health and long-term care. In ​Handbook of the economics of population
aging​ (Vol. 1, pp. 951-989). North-Holland.

Ofstedal, Mary Beth, Gwenith Fisher, and A. Regula Herzog (2005). Documentation of Cognitive
Functioning Measures in the Health and Retirement Study, HRS Documentation Report DR-006
Oster, Emily, et al. "Genetic adverse selection: Evidence from long-term care insurance and
Huntington disease." Journal of Public Economics 94.11-12 (2010): 1041-1050.
Palumbo, M. G. (1999). Uncertain medical expenses and precautionary saving near the end of
the life cycle. The Review of Economic Studies, 66(2), 395-421.
Pope, Sandra K., Valorie M. Shue, and Cornelia Beck. "Will a healthy lifestyle help prevent
Alzheimer's disease?." Annual review of public health 24.1 (2003): 111-132.
Poterba, J., Venti, S., & Wise, D. (2011). The composition and drawdown of wealth in
retirement. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(4), 95-118.
Reaves, Erica L., and MaryBeth Musumeci. "Medicaid and long-term services and supports: A
primer." Washington, DC: The Kaiser Family Foundation 8 (2015).
Roberts, R., & Knopman, D. S. (2013). Classification and epidemiology of MCI. Clinics in geriatric
medicine, 29(4), 753-772.
Rogers, W. H., Draper, D., Kahn, K. L., Keeler, E. B., Rubenstein, L. V., Kosecoff, J., & Brook, R. H.
(1990). Quality of care before and after implementation of the DRG-based prospective payment
system: a summary of effects. ​Jama,​ ​264​(15), 1989-1994.
Rosen, H. S., & Wu, S. (2004). Portfolio choice and health status. Journal of Financial Economics,
72(3), 457-484.
Ruffini, K. (2020). “Higher Wages, Service Quality, and Firm Profitability: Evidence from Nursing
Homes and Minimum Wage Reforms.” Working paper.
Sachs, Greg A., Joseph W. Shega, and Deon Cox-Hayley. "Barriers to excellent end-of-life care
for patients with dementia." Journal of general internal medicine 19.10 (2004): 1057-1063.
Samuelson, P. A. (1969). Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: the continuous-time
case. Review of Economics and Statistics, 51, 247-257.

48

Salthouse, Timothy A. 2005. “Effects of Aging on Reasoning.” In The Cambridge Handbook of
Thinking and Reasoning. Cambridge University Press.
Scharre, D. W. (2019). Preclinical, Prodromal, and Dementia Stages of Alzheimer’s Disease.
PRACTICAL NEUROLOGY.​
Scholz, J. K., Seshadri, A., & Khitatrakun, S. (2006). Are Americans saving “optimally” for
retirement?. Journal of political economy, 114(4), 607-643.

Schott, Jonathan M., and Tamas Revesz. “Inflammation in Alzheimer’s Disease: Insights from
Immunotherapy.” Brain 136, no. 9 (September 1, 2013): 2654–56.
https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awt231.
Shin, S. H., Lillard, D. R., & Bhattacharya, J. (2019). Understanding the correlation between
Alzheimer’s disease polygenic risk, wealth, and the composition of wealth holdings (No.
w25526). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Sinclair, S., & Smetters, K. A. (2004). Health shocks and the demand for annuities. Washington,
DC: Congressional Budget Office.
Skira, Meghan M. "Dynamic wage and employment effects of elder parent care." International
Economic Review 56.1 (2015): 63-93.
Stevens, A. H., Miller, D. L., Page, M. E., & Filipski, M. (2015). The best of times, the worst of
times: understanding pro-cyclical mortality. ​American Economic Journal: Economic Policy​, ​7​(4),
279-311.
Spreng, R. N., Karlawish, J., & Marson, D. C. (2016). Cognitive, social, and neural determinants
of diminished decision-making and financial exploitation risk in aging and dementia: A review
and new model. ​Journal of elder abuse & neglect​, ​28​(4-5), 320-344.
Sudo, F. K., & Laks, J. (2017). Financial capacity in dementia: A systematic review. Aging &
mental health, 21(7), 677-683.

Taylor Jr, Donald H., et al. "Genetic testing for Alzheimer’s and long-term care insurance."
Health Affairs 29.1 (2010): 102-108.
Taylor Jr, D. H., Fillenbaum, G. G., & Ezell, M. E. (2002). The accuracy of medicare claims data in
identifying Alzheimer's disease. ​Journal of clinical epidemiology​, ​55​(9), 929-937.
Thal, L. J., Kantarci, K., Reiman, E. M., Klunk, W. E., Weiner, M. W., Zetterberg, H., ... & Siemers,
E. (2006). The role of biomarkers in clinical trials for Alzheimer disease. ​Alzheimer disease and
associated disorders​, ​20​(1), 6.
Trial Site News. “The New Chinese Alzheimer’s Drug (GV-971) Making Its Way to Global Trials:
Material Science or Marketing?,” January 6, 2020.
https://www.trialsitenews.com/the-new-chinese-alzheimers-drug-gv-971-making-its-way-to-gl
obal-trials-material-science-or-marketing/.
Tjia, Jennifer, et al. "Use of medications of questionable benefit in advanced dementia." JAMA
internal medicine 174.11 (2014): 1763-1771.
Tom, S. E., Hubbard, R. A., Crane, P. K., Haneuse, S. J., Bowen, J., McCormick, W. C., ... & Larson,
E. B. (2015). Characterization of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease in an older population:
49

updated incidence and life expectancy with and without dementia. ​American journal of public
health​, ​105​(2), 408-413.
Triebel, K. L., Martin, R., Griffith, H. R., Marceaux, J., Okonkwo, O. C., Harrell, L., Clark, D.,
Brockington, J., Bartolucci, A., & Marson, D. C. (2009). Declining financial capacity in mild
cognitive impairment: A 1-year longitudinal study. ​Neurology, 73(​ 12), 928–934.
https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181b87971

Tymula, A., Belmaker, L. A. R., Ruderman, L., Glimcher, P. W., & Levy, I. (2013). Like cognitive
function, decision making across the life span shows profound age-related changes.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences​, ​110​(42), 17143-17148.
US Preventive Services Task Force. “Cognitive Impairment in Older Adults: Screening.” JAMA
323, no. 8 (February 25, 2020): 757–63.
Underwood, Emily. 2017. “The Polluted Brain”. Science. 355(6323): 342-345
Van Houtven, Courtney Harold, Norma B. Coe, and Meghan M. Skira. "The effect of informal
care on work and wages." Journal of health economics 32.1 (2013): 240-252.
Venti, S. F., & Wise, D. A. (2004). Aging and housing equity: Another look. In Perspectives on the
Economics of Aging (pp. 127-180). University of Chicago Press.
Viscusi, W. K. (1993). The value of risks to life and health. Journal of Economic Literature, 31(4),
1912-1946.
Ward, A., Arrighi, H. M., Michels, S., & Cedarbaum, J. M. (2012). Mild cognitive impairment:
disparity of incidence and prevalence estimates. Alzheimer's & Dementia, 8(1), 14-21.
Weill Medical College of Cornell University. “Gene Therapy for APOE4 Homozygote of
Alzheimer’s Disease.” Clinical trial registration. clinicaltrials.gov, November 18, 2019.
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03634007​.
Welch, H. G., Walsh, J. S., & Larson, E. B. (1992). The cost of institutional care in Alzheimer's
disease: nursing home and hospital use in a prospective cohort. ​Journal of the American
Geriatrics Society​, ​40​(3), 221-224.

Werner, Rachel M., and R. Tamara Konetzka. "Advancing nursing home quality through quality
improvement itself." Health Affairs 29.1 (2010): 81-86.
Werner, Rachel M., R. Tamara Konetzka, and Daniel Polsky. "Changes in consumer demand
following public reporting of summary quality ratings: an evaluation in nursing homes." Health
services research 51 (2016): 1291-1309.
Williams, Heidi L. 2017. "How Do Patents Affect Research Investments?," Annual Review of
Economics, Annual Reviews, vol. 9(1), pages 441-469, September.
World Health Organization. “Dementia.” September 19, 2019.
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/dementia.
Yogo, Motohiro (2016). "Portfolio choice in retirement: Health risk and the demand for
annuities, housing, and risky assets," Journal of Monetary Economics, 80(C), 17-34.

50

Zallman, L., Finnegan, K. E., Himmelstein, D. U., Touw, S., & Woolhandler, S. (2019). Care for
America’s elderly and disabled people relies on immigrant labor. ​Health Affairs​, ​38​(6), 919-926.
Zhao, Xin. "Competition, information, and quality: Evidence from nursing homes." Journal of
Health Economics 49 (2016): 136-152.
Zick, Cathleen D., et al. "Genetic testing for Alzheimer’s disease and its impact on insurance
purchasing behavior." Health Affairs 24.2 (2005): 483-490.
Zissimopoulos, Julie, Eileen Crimmins, and Patricia St Clair. "The value of delaying Alzheimer’s
disease onset." Forum for Health Economics and Policy. Vol. 18. No. 1. De Gruyter, 2015.

51

