                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              OFFSET AND STERILIZATION UNDER FIXED EXCHANGE
                  RATES WITH AN OPTIMIZING CENTRAL BANK




                             Nouriel   Roubini




                          Working Paper No. 2777




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                               November 1988




I thank Alberto Giovannini and Jeff Sachs for an original suggestion for this
                                                                         all
paper and Kala Krishna and Sue Collins for helpful comments. Of course,
errors are mine. This research is part of NBER's research program in
                                                   those of the author not
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #2777
                                       November 1988


               OFFSET AND STERILIZATION UNDER FIXED EXCHANGE
                   RATES WITH AN OPTIMIZING CENTRAL BANK


                                  ABSTRACT


    The traditional approach to the estimation of the offset and steril-

ization equations can be criticized for the ad-hoc specification of the

reaction function of the monetary authorities and the endogeneity of the

domestic credit and foreign reserve variables in the estimated equations.
                                               model where the sterilization
The paper proposes an alternative analytical

and offset equations are derived from an explicit maximization problem

solved by the monetary authority. In such a model,    the optimal intervention

and sterilization policies of the monetary authority are shown to be depen-

dent on the different disturbances hitting the economy and the preferences
                                                     wide range of domestic
of the monetary authority. In particular, under a

and foreign disturbances the optimal response of the central bank
                                                 of domestic credit and
will lead to negatively correlated comovements

foreign reserves if the cer1tral bank cares more about the interest rate

smoothing objective relative to the foreign exchange reserve stabilization
                                          between domestic credit and foreign
goal. Conversely, positive correlations
                                                   objective is dominant.
reserves will be observed if the foreign reserve


                                          Nouriel Roubini
                                          Department of Economics
                                          Yale University
                                          P.O. Box 1972 Yale Station
                                          New Haven, CT 06520
                                                                              I


      1. jpduction
                                               of fixed exchange rates and
      In a small open economy under a regime

high capital mobility, an attempt to expand the money supply through a

domestic credit expansion will lead to offsetting reductions in foreign

exchange rate reserves: in the limiting case of perfect capital

mobility and asset substitutability the money supply is endogenouS and

the offset coefficient will be equal to minus one,     i.e. any domestic

credit expansion will lead to a one-to-one fall in foreign reserves. In

this case any attempt to sterilize the effects of foreign exchange

interventions on the money supply would be self-defeating and engineer

further foreign reserve losses.

      More recent studies of fixed rate regimes and the European

                                1 have stressed that, while the previous
Monetary System in particular

 argument is correct for a small open economy bearing the burden of

 pegging the exchange rate (a "follower" or "periphery" country)

 offset coefficients might be very small and sterilization policies

 feasible for a "leader" or "center" country in a fixed exchange rate

 regime, i.e. the country that is allowed by the "rules of the game" to

 set independently its monetary policy.
                                               2 that a way to test
       More strongly, it has been suggested

 empirically whether a fixed rate regime like the EMS works

 asymmetrically (with a leader country setting the monetary policy of
                                                                in order to
 the union and the followers adjusting their money supplies
                                           (with the burden of pegging the
 peg the exchange rate) or symmetrically


                                                   Ciovannini (1988 a, b).
 1.   See Roubirti (1988 a,b,c) and Ciavazzi and

 2. See Roubini (1988 a, c).
                                                                          2


exchange rate cooperatively shared by all the members of the union) is

to estimate the offset and sterilization coefficients for the members

of the union. In particular, one would expect that:

     (a) If a fixed rate regime is characterized by leadership, the

offset coefficient of the leader will be close to zero while the offset

coefficient of the followers will be close to negative one (in the

absence of capitai. controls). Conversely, in a symmetric regime offset

coefficients will be negative but smaller than one for all the member

countries.

     (b) In a regime of leadership, estimates of the sterilization

parameter should be close to zero for follower countries given their

inability to sterilize foreign reserve flows and close to minus one for

the leader country.

     A large literature in open economy macroeconomics in the past

decade has analyzed the interactions between domestic credit policies,

foreign exchange rate reserves and money supplies under a regime of

fixed exchange rates .   On one side, estimates of capital flow

equations for the Bretton Woods period of fixed rates were performed in

order to obtain estimates of the offset coefficient, i.e. how much of a

domestic credit expansion is offset by a reduction in foreign exchange

reserves. On the other side, sterilization equations for Bretton Woods

period and the successive period of managed rates were estimated to

verify whether central banks are able to sterilize the effects of

foreign exchange rate interventions on their money supplies. More


3. See Argy and Kouri (1974), Kouri and Porter (1974), Herring and
Marston (1977 a, b), Kouri (1975), Marston (1980), Neumann (1978,
1984), Obstfeld (1978, 1982a, l982b) among the others.
                                                                             3


recently, a number of authors have tried to test the hypothesis of a

"German leadership" of the EMS versus a "cooperative" model of the EMS

by estimating sterilization and offset equations for the most recent

EMS period

     The objective of this paper is twofold:

     (1) To show that the traditional, and generally used, approach to

the estimation of the offset and sterilization equations is flawed

because of the ad-hoc specification of the reaction function of the

monetary authorities and the endogeneity of the domestic credit and

foreign reserve variables in the estimated equations.

     (2) To propose an alternative analytical model where the

sterilization and offset equations are derived from an explicit

maximization problem solved by the monetary authority. In such a model,

an optimal reaction function for the monetary authority is derived and

the optimal intervention and sterilization policies are shown to be

dependent on the different disturbances hitting the economy and the

preferences of the monetary authorities.

     The plan of the paper is the following. Section 2 discusses the

problems with the traditional approach to the specification and

estimation of the offset and sterilization equations. Section 3

presents the alternative model of a central bank behavior and shows    the


implications of this model for the analysis of the sterilization



4. Roubini (1988 a) estimates sterilization and offset equations for
the EMS countries. Mastropasqua, Micossi and Rinaldi (1988) and
Giavazzi (1987) estimate sterilization equations. Ciavazzi and
Giovannini (1988 b) abandon the structural reaction function estimation
approach and attempt to estimate the reduced form reaction functions of
the monetary authorities of the EMS.
                                                                                    4

policies of the monetary authority. Section 4 concludes and suggest

some avenues for further research.




2. The Traditional Approach to the Sterilization and Offset Equations.



     The basic approach followed by all the studies of sterilization

policies has been to specify an arbitrary reaction function of the

monetary authorities relating the change in domestic credit (DDC) to

the change in net foreign assets (DNFA) and a set of other policy

objectives (usually the inflation rate (INF) and deviation of output

from trend (YGAP):



             +               +                         u
DDC — a0                         a2 INF + a3 YGAPt +
                                                               (a)
                      DNFA


In equation (a), the parameter a1 is an estimate of the degree of

sterilization of foreign reserves followed by the monetary authorities.

For given levels of the inflation rates and deviation of output from

trend, a1 measures how much of a change in foreign exchange reserves

deriving from interventions in the exchange rate market is sterilized

by the monetary authorities. For a1 —          -l   the sterilization is complete

while a1 >       -1   implies a degree of sterilization that is less than full.

The inflation rate enters in the reaction function with a negative sign

(a2 <0) since the monetary authority will react to an increase in the

inflation rate with a contraction of domestic credit while the output

gap variable will have a negative sign (a3 < 0) because the central
                                                                             5


bank will react to a fall of output relative to its trend by expanding

domestic credit

      One of the problems with equation (a) is the endogeneity of the

net foreign asset variable in the reaction function (a): because of

this endogeneity OLS estimates of the sterilization coefficient will be

inconsistent. This endogeneity of the reserve variable derives    from the

fact that, under a system of fixed exchange rate, a domestic credit

expansion will be offset by a fall in foreign exchange rate reserves;

the offset coefficient will be greater the larger is the degree    of

capital mobility and asset substitutability between domestic and

foreign assets. It then follows that, in a reaction function like (a),

the net foreign asset is an endogenous variable and that high

coefficients on the foreign asset variable in the estimated reaction

 function might be wrongly interpreted as high sterilization


 5.   Herring and Marston (l977a) estimated a reaction function of the
 Bundesbank for the 1960-1971 and found that during each quarter of that
 period approximately 90 % of the change in foreign reserves was
 sterilized; this suggest a policy of almost complete sterilization of
 foreign reserve flows. Obstfeld (1982) estimated a similar reaction
 function for the 1975-81 period and found that the sterilization
 coefficient was not significantly different from minus one, a result
 that would imply a policy of complete sterilization. Neumann (1984),
 using Bundesbank data that distinguished between active and passive
 intervention and estimating a reaction function for the 1974-1981
 period found that the sterilization coefficient was negative and large
 but less than unity. Vaubel (1980) advanced a more extreme
 "punishment" hypothesis by claiming that the Bundesbank tried to impose
 its monetary policy dominance over the other European central banks by
 "punishing" them whenever it was forced to intervene in support of the
 European currencies participating to the pre-EMS "snake"; according to
  this hypothesis the punishment consisted in overcoinpensating the
 effects on the German monetary base of its foreign exchange
 interventions (a sterilization coefficient greater than one in absolute
 value). The results of Obstfeld (1983) and Neumann (1984) do not
 confirm this "punishment" hypothesis; however, they provide ample
 evidence that sterilization of reserve flows was systematically pursued
 by the Bundesbank throughout the 1970s.
                                                                               6


coefficients; in reality, they might just represent high offset

coefficient. In other terms, while equation (a) interprets the relation

between domestic credit and net foreign assets as a causal relation

that goes from foreign assets to domestic credit, the actual relation

could go from domestic credit to foreign assets.

    A similar and dual endogeneity problem arises in the estimation of

capital flow equations where the objective is to obtain estimates of

the offset coefficient. The standard approach to the estimation of the
                    6
offset parameter        starts from the asset markets equilibrium conditions

and the central bank balance sheet and derives a reduced form equation

that relates the capital account of the balance of payments (CAP) to

the change in domestic credit (DDC), the current account balance
                                                 *
(CURR), the change in foreign interest rates (DR ), the change Ln

nominal income (DY) and a vector of other exogenous variables (EXOG)


                                             *
CAP —    +                              +   DR + fi4 DY + EXOC'fl +    (b)
             fl1   DDC   + fl2   CURR


In equation (b), the parameter l is an estimate of the offset

coefficient. The main problem with OLS estimates of equation (b) is

that domestic credit is an endogenous variable when the central bank




6. This approach is followed by Argy and Kouri (1974). Kouri and Porter
(1974), Kouri (1975), Neumann (1978), Herring and Marston (1977a,b),
Obstfeld (1978, l982a, 1982b).

7. An analytical derivation of equation (b) in described in section 3.
                                                                                  7


follows a sterilization policy; OLS estimates of the parameters of
                                               8
equation (2) will then be inconsistent

       Given the inconsistency of the OLS estimates of the offset and

sterilization parameter because of the endogeneity of the net foreign

asset and domestic credit variables in these equations, what will be

the direction of the bias of the OLS estimators of the sterilization

and offset coefficients ? It can be shown that OLS estimators will bias

both coefficients towards minus one. Consider again equation (a) and

(b) and the definition of the change in net foreign assets as the sum

of the current account and capital account (equation (c)):



                                                                           (a)
DDCt —          + a1 DNFA + a1 INF + a2 YGAP +         ut

                                           *
CAPt
       —        + i DDC + 2 Rt        +   DR       +    DYt +   EXOG   +    (b)


                                                                            (c)
DNFAt — CURR + CAPt



Substituting (c) in (a), (a) and (b) can be rewritten in compact form

as:




DDCt — a1       CAP + a'      +
                                  u                    (a')




CAPt —     i.   DDCt +   ' X2 +                        (b')


8. While most of the work on the offset coefficient is based on OLS
estimates, some authors (Argy and Kouri (1974) and Obstfeld (1982a, b))
use instrumental variables and estimate equation (2) by two-stage least
squares.
                                                                                  8




where X1 and X2 are the vectors of the exogenous regressors in

equations (a) and (b).

       Given the endogeneity of DNFA in equation (a) and of DDC in

equation (b), these explanatory variables are correlated with the error

terms in their respective equations and OLS estimates of both            and

are inconsistent. It can be easily shown that the bias on a1 and

the estimated values of a1 and ,       is   given by the expressions (d) and

(e)

                                  2
                           11 U
                            + 22
Plim l - a1)    —                                       (d)
                               a
                              lu        +   a2C




                                   2
                      a1 (l- a ) a
                            11
Plim   l -      —
                                22
                    a'V(X1)a + a16
                                 a      + a
                                             2
                                                        (e)

                                             U




where V(X1) and V(X2) are the asymptotic variance-covariance matrices

X1 and X2. Stability of the model requires that a1 /3, <      I   that will

always be satisfied as long as the sterilization coefficient () and

offset coefficient (a1) are not smaller than minus one .          Given that a1

and l are negative, the formulas (d) and (e) imply that the OLS bias


9. Assuming realistically that the offset effect is, at the maximum,
equal to minus one (-1 < a1 < 0) and that sterilization is, at the
maximum, complete (-1 <    < 0), this stability condition is always
satisfied. The offset coefficient is bounded downward by minus one only
if the exchange rate is pegged with certainty. However, if exchange
rate realignments are possible, a "peso problem" will result and the
estimated offset coefficient might be greater than unity in absolute
value. In fact, close to realignments, expected changes in the exchange
rate may lead to offset of domestic credit on reserves that are more
than one-to-one.
                                                                          9


in the estimation of a1 and     is negative, i.e. OLS estimates of both

parameters will be biased towards minus one. This means that OLS

estimates of the sterilization coefficient will tend to show high

degrees of sterilization in all the countries when the true value of

these sterilization policies is smaller; similarly, the estimates of

the offset coefficient will be biased towards high measures of offset.

     In order to deal with the simultaneity bias deriving from the

endogeneity of the reserve and domestic credit variables, the approach
                           10 has been to use instrumental variables to
followed by many authors

estimate (a) and (b) by two-stage least squares (2SLS). This route to

the solution of the simultaneity bias problem is however ridden with a

number of problems.

     First of all, consistent 2SLS estimates of the sterilization

coefficient suggest that most of the countries in a fixed rate regime

like the Bretton Woods system or the EMS are able to sterilize their

reserves flows (the estimates of the sterilization coefficient are

highly negative). This is however incompatible with the operation of a

fixed rate regime where only one member, the leader country, can

systematically sterilize reserve flows       Moreover, the estimates of

the parameters on the macro targets in the reaction function (a)

(inflation and output gap) are generally insignificant and often of the

wrong sign suggesting that the reaction function might be mispecified.


10. Argy and Kouri (1974), Herring and Marston (1977), Obstfeld
(l982a, b), Mastropasqua, Micossi and Rinaldi (1988), Roubini (1988 a).

11. For the instability of reserve flows when more than one country
tries to sterilize see De Grauwe (1977), Aoki (1977), Giavazzi and
Giovannini (1988a, b) and Roubini (l988a, c).
                                                                          10

     Secondly, and more importantly, the reaction function (a) is not

derived from any particular maximization problem solved by a monetary

authority but rather presented in a ad-hoc manner. In particular, any

maximization problem where output and inflation enter in the loss

function of the central bank could     lead to a reduced form reaction

function like (a) where the two targets appear. The first order

conditions of such a problem would imply that these final targets would

disappear from the reduced form and be supplanted by the underlying

shocks and/or exogenous variables to which the central bank is

reacting. In view of this substantial misspecification of the reaction

function, it is not surprising that "consistent" estimates of the

parameters of this reaction function give insignificant estimates of

the two macro targets and are unable to identify the true value of the

sterilization coefficient.

     Third, given the misspecification of the sterilization function,

consistent instrumental variable estimator of the offset coefficient in

the capital flow equation (b) are also unable to identify the true

value of the offset parameter.

     Given the nature of the problems with the traditional approach to

the estimation of the offset and sterilization function, the next

section presents a model where these functions are derived from the an

explicit maximization problem solved by the monetary authority. In that

approach, it can be shown that speaking of a unique value of the

sterilization parameter becomes meaningless because the optimal

sterilization and foreign exchange intervention policies are no
                                                                            11

constant but dependent on the disturbances hitting the economy and the

preferences of the monetary authority.



3. Offset and Sterilization with an Optimizing Central Bank



     We have seen in the previous section that the main problems with

the traditional approach to the estimation of sterilization and offset

functions are twofold: first, the standard reaction function used in

the literature on sterilization is assumed in ad hoc manner and is not

derived from any specific maximization problem of the central bank;

second, the reduced form of a correctly specified offset function will

also depend on the optimization problem solved by the central bank.

     Methodologically, a more correct approach is to consider

explicitly the problem faced by a monetary authority and derive an

optimal reaction function where the central bank chooses simultaneously

its optimal intervention jj   sterilization policies   by reacting to the

various disturbances that hit the economy.

     In this section we will try to address this issue by considering a

simple financial model of a small open economy with fixed exchange

rates and derive the reaction function for its monetary authority. In

order to consider the implications of imperfect capital mobility and

asset substitutability we will present a model where the degree of

asset substitutability between domestic and foreign asset is not
           12
complete


 12. A interesting recent paper by Giavazzi (1987) considers the policy
 trade-offs of a central bank trying to stabilize the money supply
 following current account and asset preference shocks. However this
                                                                                                    12

           Consider the following model of the financial bloc of a small open

economy under fixed rates:



H—R4-D                                                           (1)




        — 3d +    H   + Fd                                       (2)




B — Bd +          D                                              (3)




H _h0r+h1r*                            + h2 Y ÷ h3 W             (4)
                                                                         h0<0, h1—0, h2 >0, h3 >0


    d                              *
B       —b0r -            b1r          +
                                           b2
                                                Y +
                                                      b3
                                                           W     (5)     b0>0, b1>O, b2 <0, b3 >0


    d —                            *
                                                Y +
F
           f0   r +
                          f1   r       +
                                                      f3 W       (6)     f0<0, f1>0, f2 <0, f3 >0



where




                (h0 + b0 + fo)               —



                      -            +         —   0
                (h1       b1           f1)
                      +            + f2) — 0                   (h2 +         > 0
                (h2       b2                                           b2)
                      +            + f3) — 1
                (h3       b3




and:            H — High powered money



contribution does not present an explicit optimization model for the
behavior of the central bank.
                                                                          13


         R — Foreign exchange rate reserves (foreign bonds held by the

           central bank)

         D — Domestic credit (domestic bonds held by the central bank)

         W —   Total    financial wealth of domestic residents

         Bd — Domestic bonds held by domestic residents

         B —       Exogenous stock of domestic bonds
         Fd —      Foreign bonds held by domestic residents
         r — Interest         rate on domestic bonds

               —   Interest   rate on foreign bonds

         Y — Domestic         real income



We will concentrate on the financial side of the model and consider a

short term analysis; then we can take income (Y) as given; W, domestic

wealth is also assumed to be exogenous and its change is equal to the

current account of the balance of payments. The country is small and

therefore the foreign interest rate will also be exogenous. However,

the specification of the asset demand functions does not impose an

assumption of perfect asset substitutability so that the interest

parity condition between domestic and foreign asset does not
                       13
necessarily hold

     Given the financial flavor of the model we do not assume that the

objective of the central bank is to stabilize output and inflation as

the standard sterilization literature does. We will rather assume that,

in the short run that we are considering, the objective of the central


13. As a special case of the model, we can get perfect asset
substitutability for b0 — b1 —   . We will discuss this special case
below.
                                                                           14

bank is to stabilize foreign exchange reserves and domestic interest

rates. The inclusion of foreign exchange reserves can be explained by

the argument that central banks under fixed exchange rates care about
                                       14 15    The interest rate target
their level of net foreign reserves

depends on the short term nature of the model: for given expected

values of the real variables of the system and the inflation rate, the

central bank might want to reduce the short term volatility of interest
        16   We can then write the loss function of the central bank as:
rates


         1                   1
L —     —(r      )
                     2
                         +   — (R)2               (7)
         2                   2




where m is the weight given to the foreign reserves objective relative

to the interest rate smoothing goal in the loss function. The central




14. Theoretically, if the central bank could borrow foreign reserves in
unlimited amounts, it might not care about its level of reserves.
However, there is ample evidence that central banks care about their
level of reserves. Roubini (1987 a) discussed at length why that is the
case. Among the various reasons: first, if central banks care about
their     foreign reserves borrowing gross reserves would not affect
their amount net of borrowing. Second, the opportunity cost of
borrowing reserves is likely to be positive and its marginal cost
increasing. Third, liquidity constraints in the international capital
markets and/or "conditionality" in borrowing (from IMF and/or the EMS
borrowing facility) limit the ability to borrow and/or increase its
marginal cost.

15. The assumption of a foreign reserve objective is the standard one
in model of strategic policy interactions under fixed exchange rate
regimes; in this regard, see the seminal contributions of Hamada
collected in Hamada (1985).

16.  In a recent paper Barro (1988) makes the same assumption of an
"interest rate smoothing" objective of the central bank.
                                                                                                15

bank uses domestic credit (D) as its policy instrument to control its
                 17
two objectives

     Using equations (l)-(6) we can write the reduced form solution for

the interest rate (r) and foreign reserve (R) variables as:




                      I
r— b1—r* +_(B-Db2Yb3W)                                            (8)

      b0            b0




    b1    *                                                                                 -
R — — h0 r + (h0/b0)          B +
                                    [h2
                                          -
                                              (h0/b0)b2}
                                                           Y +
                                                                 [h3
                                                                       -
                                                                           (h0/b0)b3]
     0




    -(1+—)                D                                        (9)
               b0


As can be seen from equation (9) the offset of a domestic credit
                                                                                  18
expansion on foreign reserves is negative but less than unity
                                                                                        —
the special case of perfect asset substitutability where (b0 — b1

we get:




17. One could equivalently assume that foreign reserves are the policy
instrument in which case domestic credit (D) becomes endogenous. The
results of the model are identical under the two alternative
assumptions.

18. Equation (9) is essentially identical to the semi-reduced form
capital flow equation (b) estimated in the studies of the offset
coefficient. The endogeneity of the domestic credit variable (D) in
this equation is the source of the problem with the traditional
estimates of this function.
                                                                                                          16

r_r*                                   (8')



—
dR
dD
            —-1                         (10)




i.e. domestic rates are always equal to foreign ones and the offset

coefficient is equal to minus one.

            Given the solution for the interest rate and the foreign reserves

in equations (8) and (9), the problem of the central bank is to

minimize the loss function (7) with respect to the policy instrument

(D) subject to the system (8)-(9). Taking the first order conditions

and grinding through the algebra, one obtains the following reaction

function for the domestic credit variable:



                            2

D   — [
                 1+
                       b0
                                   2
                                              *   {_ [l/b
                                                      b1
                                                                      + a2h0(l + h0/b0)1   r*   +

                      a(h0+b0)                        b0




        1                                                   b                             h
            +    a2 (1+     h0/b0)h0/b0]               +[——
                                                                  +   a2(1 + h0/b0)(h2 - __2.. b2)] y +
    0                                                      b0                              b0




                                                       h
     b3
    [_—--
                + a2 (1     +
                                h0/b0)(h3
                                                  -
                                                                b3)] W )         (11)
      o                                                b0
                                                                                                 17

Substituting the reaction function (11) in the equations (8)-(9) for r

and R , we obtain the final reduced form for the interest rate and the

foreign reserves:




                b1 a2 (h0+b0)               *            -a2(b0+h0))(h3+b3)
r—      [
                     2                 2 Jr     +f                  2            2
            l+a (b0+h0)                                      l+a (b0+h0)



                                                              a2 (h0 +   b   )
     -2(b0+h0))(h2+b2)
            2                  2 JY             +[              2
                                                                                     JB   (12)
     1-s-a (b0+h0)                                     l+a (b0+h0)




                         -
                                                                    (h3+b3)
                             b1
                                           Jr* +                                 2 ]W+
                1 + a
                         2             2                      1 +   a2 (h0+b0)
                             (h0+b0)




                -l                                   (h2 +    b2)
            2                 2 ]B               1 + a
                                                         2              2 JY              (13)
      1 +   a   (h0+b0)                                      (h0+b0)




       One can observe that in the reduced form equations for the

 domestic credit reaction function (11) and the offset function for

 reserves (13), these two variables depend only on the exogenous

 variables and disturbances hitting the system. In particular, the two

 endogenous variables do not depend on each other in these reduced
                                                                                                 18

forms; in these sense these solution differ from the standard semi-

reduced sterilization and capital-flow functions found in the

literature where domestic credit and foreign reserves depended on each

other.

       We will now consider the movements of interest rates, domestic

credit and foreign reserves following a number of exogenous

disturbances to discuss the circumstances under which it is likely to

observe the large and negative empirical correlations between domestic

credit and foreign reserves found in the estimation of offset and
                                      19
sterilization equations



A. A foreign interest rate shock



       Let us start by considering a foreign disturbance in the form of

an increase in the foreign interest rate (r*). From equation (11), the

effect of the change in r* on domestic credit, foreign reserves and the

interest rate is:




dD                            b2                                                  >
      * — b1
          —[                               2        [li'bo + m2h0(1 +   h0/b0)]       0   (14)
d r                     1+ a(h0+b0)
           b0




dR
                        2
                                               <0                                 (15)
ci r            1 + a
                            (h0+b0)




19. See Roubini (1988 a).
                                                                           19


                        2
d r

dr
               b1
                    2
             l+a (b0+h0)
                            (h0÷b0)
                                      2                      (16)




The optimal response of the monetary authority depends on the degree of

substitutability between domestic and foreign assets; consider first

the case of perfect asset substitutability where b0 — b1 —       in this

case, equations (11)-(13) imply:



dD                              dR             dr
                                      *   —o     * —1     (17)
dr                              dr             dr


      If assets are perfectly substitutable, the domestic interest rate

must equal the foreign one; then, any attempt to stabilize the domestic

interest rate in face of the foreign shock would be futile. The optimal

response of the central bank in then to forget the interest rate target

and rather attempt to stabilize the level of foreign reserves. The

foreign rate shock, in the absence of a reaction by the central bank,

would lead to a loss of reserves (see equation (13)); however, by

reducing domestic credit by the amount by which money demand has fallen

following the shock in r* (i.e. by h0) the central bank in able to

stabilize completely the level of foreign reserves. In this case, then,

we would observe empirically a fall in domestic credit with no change

in foreign reserves, i.e.:



dR
——0
dD
                                                                              20



       We can consider next the more general case where assets are less

than perfectly substitutable; in this case the optimal response of

domestic credit depends on the relative weight of the interest rate and

foreign reserve targets in the loss function (7). The trade-off faced

by the monetary authority is clear: given the rise in the foreign rate,

it can stabilize interest rates by expanding domestic credit (see

equation (B)) in which case it would lose foreign reserves (see

equation (9)) or it can stabilize foreign reserves by contracting

domestic credit in which case it has to allow the domestic interest to

rise towards the higher foreign one. If the central bank cares about

both objectives ( 0 < a <   ), then   it will contract domestic credit if

it cares more about reserves while it will expand credit if the

smoothing of interest rates is more important. More formally, domestic

credit will be expanded or contracted on the basis of the following

critical condition:



dD >                            <         1
            0          if   a                                     (18)
dr <                            >                    (1/2)
                                      (-b0(b0+h0))




What will occur to the level of foreign reserves ? Equation (15) shows

that, independently of what happens to domestic credit, foreign

reserves will unequivocally fall (as long as b0 <       o). The   result is

again intuitive: in the absence of a reaction of domestic credit, the
           *
rise   in r would lead to a fall in reserves; then, if domestic credit
                                                                              21

in (14) in increased in order to stabilize the interest rate (low a

case from (18)), the foreign reserves will fall even more. However,

even if domestic credit is contracted (the case of a high value of a in

(18)), the optimal reaction of D is not enough to prevent some fall in

foreign reserves; then, in either case, foreign reserves must fall

following the rise in r*.

       The empirical implication of this result is that we will observe a

negative correlation of domestic credit and foreign reserves if the

central bank does not care a lot about reserves and tries to stabilize

interest rates in the short run (a low value of a) ; while we will

observe comovements in the same direction of R and D if the main

objective of the monetary authority is to stabilize the level of

foreign reserves (a high value of a).

       This role of the preferences of the monetary authority can be

further discussed and formally derived by considering how the optimal

reaction to a foreign shock depends on a, the relative weight of the

two objectives in the reaction function. Consider the reaction to a

foreign interest rate shock in the two limiting cases where a —    0   (the

central bank cares only about interest rate smoothing) and a —         (the
central bank cares only about foreign reserves):



a—O

dD              dR                           dD
   *
        —   -
                  * — b1    >   0   or             —   -l   (19)
dr              dr                           dR
                                                                                     22




dD               h0b0                         dR
      *
           —                 <    0
                                                 *   —0           (20)
dr             (b0÷h0)                        dr


If the monetary authority does not care about reserves (a —          0),   we will

observe comovemnts of reserves and domestic credit that are negative

and perfectly correlated. As a increases, this correlation becomes

smaller (in absolute value) and turns positive for a rising above the

critical value in condition (18).

          One implication of these results for the EMS is that the large and

negative correlations of domestic credit and foreign reserves found in
                                      20
sterilization studies of the EMS           even for the case of the smaller

"follower" countries could be consistent with a view of these EMS

central banks as being more concerned about the short term

stabilization of interest rates relative to the objective of

maintaining their level of foreign reserves. In this sense, even for a

follower country it would be optimal to sterilize partially the foreign

reserve losses following an increase in the level of foreign interest

rates. This sterilization is feasible as long as domestic and foreign

assets are less than perfectly substitutable (b0 —             < ) so that the
                                                          b1
offset coefficient is less than unity; but its foreign reserve loss

cost becomes greater as the degree of substitutability becomes larger.

          To conclude the discussion of the effects of a foreign interest




20.       See Roubini (1988 a).
                                                                            23

rate shock we can consider the case of zero asset substitutability   (or

no capital mobility). In this case b1 is equal to zero and we then get:



 dD         dR       dr
                            —0            (21)
 dr         dr       dr*


If assets are not substitutable, foreign interest rate shocks do not

affect the domestic variables in which case the optimal policy   is to do

nothing; in this case neither domestic credit nor foreign reserves will

be affected by the shock.



B. A current account shock



        We will consider next the effect of an exogenous current account

(CA) shock represented here by a change in financial wealth:



CA — d W



 In this case the solution for the domestic credit and the foreign

 reserves will be:



  d D
                                                 >
                 -b3 + a2(b0-4-h0)(h3b0h0b3)
 _____ —                                             0   (22)
  d W                 1 +
                            a2(h0+b0)2
                                                                                       24



 d R            -b3 +    a2(b0+h0)(h3b0-h0b3)
_____ — -
                             2       2
                                                    (1 +   —) + (h3 -b3h0—) (23)
                                                           h0
 d W                    1 + a
                              (h0-i-b0)                    b0                  b0




                          (h. + b3)
       -                                       >0
                        1 ÷




      In the absence of a reaction by the monetary authority, equations

(8) and (9) show that the current account shock would lead to an

increase in foreign reserves and a fall in the domestic interest rate.

Then, the central bank can try to stabilize the domestic interest rate

by reducing domestic credit (see equation (8)) but this would further

increase the level of foreign reserves above its targeted level;

conversely, the central bank might want to stabilize the level of

reserves (by expanding domestic credit as in equation (9)) but this

policy choice would lead to a further decline of interest rates. The

optimal choice of the central bank will again depend on the relative

weight of the two objectives; if it cares more about interest rates (a

low a) it will contract credit; otherwise ( a high a) it will expand

credit to stabilize reserves; more formally, it is simple to show that:




dD     >                          >                                    (1/2)
            0      for        a
                                                     b3
                                          {                        }            (24)
d W    <
                                              (b0÷h0)(h3b0-h0b3)
                                                                          25



Unlike the effect on domestic credit, the effects of the current

account shock on foreign reserves is unambiguous as can be seen from

equation (23). In the absence of a domestic credit reaction by the

central bank, the foreign reserves would increase following the current

account shock; then, if the central bank contract domestic credit to

stabilize interest rates (the case of a low value od a) the foreign

reserve will increase even further; however, even if domestic credit is

contracted (case of a high a), the foreign reserves would still rise

because the direct positive effects of the current account shock on

reserves dominates the secondary effect coming from the domestic credit

reaction of the monetary authority.

     It then follows that if the monetary authority cares more about

smoothing interest rates (low a) we will observe empirically large and

negative correlations of domestic credit and foreign reserves following

current account shocks; while we will observe positive comovements of

the two variables if the central bank leans towards stabilizing foreign
           21
reserves

     We will turn now to some special cases by considering the current

account shock under the assumption of perfect asset substitutability

(b0 — b1   —    );   in this case we obtain:




 dD                        dR                  dr
____ — h >0                      —0                 —0   (25)
 dW                        dW                  dW


21. Note the symmetry of this result with the one obtained in the case
of a foreign interest rate shock.
                                                                                  26




Given the perfect substitutability of domestic and foreign assets, the

domestic interest rate does not change. In the absence of a policy

reaction, foreign reserves would increase following the current account

shock; then, the central bank can completely insulate the effect of the

shock on the level of foreign reserves by expanding the domestic

credit; then, the increased money demand following the wealth shock is

satisfied through the increase in domestic without any effect on
                   22
foreign reserves        .   In   this case we would then observe an increase in

domestic credit with no change in foreign reserves

      We can finally consider the effects of the preferences of the

central bank on the outcome of a current account shock. As discussed

above the more (less) the central bank cares about interest rate

smoothing (foreign reserve stabilization) the greater the contraction

in domestic credit will be following a current account shock and the

greater the expansion of foreign reserves. In the limit when a —0, we

obtain:




a—p

 dD                                     dR
          —   - b3 < 0                         —         +         > 0   (26)
                                                   (h3       b3)
 dW                                     dW

22. Alternatively, in the framework of Giavazzi (1987) where the
central cares only about domestic interest rates, the case of perfect
capital mobility will automatically insure that domestic interest rate
is stabilized and that "the central bank is relieved from the burden of
monitoring the domestic money market".
                                                                           27

arid:

 dD                 b.
        -   -
 dR             b3+h3

In this case the observed empirical correlation between domestic credit

and foreign reserves will be negative and tending to minus one if the

money demand elasticity relative to wealth is small (   h — 0).   Again,

as in the case of foreign interest rate shocks, the observation of

large negative correlation of domestic credit and foreign reserves

observed in the ENS countries could be interpreted as the optimal

response of a central bank caring about interest rate stabilization in

the presence of exogenous current account shocks. Similarly, the model

implies that negative current account shock will lead to losses in

foreign reserves and increases in domestic credit as the central bank

tries to prevent the increase in domestic interest rates caused by the

current account disturbance; in this case, the sterilization of these

foreign reserve losses is feasible as long as domestic and foreign

asset are not perfectly substitutable. It must also be observed that

this interest rate smoothing objective becomes increasingly costly, in

terms of foreign reserves losses, as the degree of substitution between

domestic and foreign assets increases and the offset coefficient

becomes greater.



C. An increase in    domestic   bonds
                                                                           28

       We consider next the case of a domestic bond disturbance, i.e. an

increase in the supply of domestic bonds deriving, for example, from

the bond financing of a fiscal shock.

       Equation (8)-(9) show that the impact effect of the shock, in the

absence of a central bank optimal reaction, leads to an increase of

interest rates and a fall in foreign exchange reserves. Interest rate

have to rise to absorb the increased supply of domestic bonds while

foreign reserves fall since the domestic residents diversify out of

domestic asset into foreign asset. In the case of this bond shock the

trade-off faced by the central bank is clear: it can stabilize the

interest rate through a domestic credit expansion at the cost of an

even greater loss of reserves or it can stabilize the level of reserves

by contracting domestic credit and pushing further up the level of the

domestic interest rates. Again the choice of the central bank will

depend on its relative preference for the interest rate and foreign

reserve objectives. More formally the effect of the shock on domestic

credit and reserves is:



                      2
 d D         (1 + a                 >
         —
                    (h0+b0)h0)
                                        0               (27)
                  2       2
 dB          l+a(h0+b0)             <



 dR              -l
_____    —                     <0                       (28)
                  2        2
dB           l+a (h0+b0)


Equation (27) implies that domestic credit will fall or rise depending

on the following condition:
                                                                           29



dD                                   <           1
               0          for    a                              (29)
dB                                   >                  (1/2)
                                          [(h0+b0)h0]


i.e. domestic credit will be expanded if the central bank cares more

about interest rate smoothing while it will be contract if it prefers

to preserve the level of reserves. Condition (28) shows, however, that

independently of whether domestic credit is expanded or contracted,

foreign reserves will fall: if domestic credit is expanded the impact

loss of reserves is reinforced by the fall of reserves engineered by

the domestic credit expansion; if domestic credit is contracted the

impact loss of reserves dominates the secondary positive effect on

reserves coming from the monetary contraction.

      As in the case of a foreign interest rate and current account

shocks, this result implies that a bond financed fiscal shock will lead

to the observation of negatively correlated comovenients of foreign

reserves and domestic credit if the central bank is concerned about

stabilizing interest rates and positive cotnovements if the central bank

leans towards stabilizing foreign reserves. In the extreme case of

perfect capital mobility, interest rates are pegged to the foreign ones

and no change occurs in either foreign reserves or domestic credit,

i.e.:




dr   dD            dR
__ — __ —               —0
 dB       dB       dB
                                                                          30


D. A domestic outDut shock



      As a last case we will consider a domestic output shock (a change

in Y). The impact effect of the shock is to increase domestic interest

rates (through its positive effect on money demand) (see equation (8))

and increase foreign exchange reserves (equation (9)) as the increased

money demand and interest rate lead to a capital inflow. In order to

avoid the deviations of interest rates and foreign reserves from their

targeted levels, the central bank will have to unambiguously increase

domestic credit because such a monetary expansion will reduce both

interest rates and foreign reserves. Formally the optimal response of

domestic credit and reserves will be:




 d D
_____          -b2 ÷ a2(b0+h0)(h2b0-h0b2)
        —                                    >   0    (30)
 d Y                1 +   a2 (h0-1-b0)2




 dR           (h2+b2)
                2         2
                                   >0                  (31)
 dY         l+a(h0+b0)



Equations (30)-(31) show that the optimal reaction of domestic credit

and foreign reserves is unambiguous: they both increase. Domestic

credit must increase in order to reduce interest rate and reserves to

their pre-shock levels while reserves increase on net because the

primary positive effect of the shock on reserves dominates the
                                                                           31

secondary negative effect coming from the increase in domestic credit.

It then follows that in the case of an output shock domestic credit and

foreign reserves will comove in the same direction.



4. Conclusions




     The objective of this paper was to explain the large negatively

correlated coinovements of domestic credit and foreign exchange reserves

found in the analysis of sterilization policies under fixed exchange

rates and in the EMS experience. It was shown that such correlations

can be explained in a model where the central bank tries to smooth the

short run fluctuations of domestic interest rates and foreign exchange

reserves under fixed exchange rates. In particular, under a wide range

of domestic and foreign disturbances the optimal response of the

central bank will lead to negatively correlated comovements of domestic

credit and foreign reserves if the central bank cares more about the

interest rate smoothing objective relative to the foreign exchange

reserve stabilization goal. These disturbances include foreign interest

rate shocks, current account shocks and fiscally induced increase in

domestic bonds. Conversely, positively correlated comovements of

domestic credit and foreign reserves will be observed if the foreign

exchange reserve objective is dominant. The results are obtained   under

the assumption the domestic and foreign assets are not perfectly

substitutable. In this case the central bank is able to maintain some

degree of control on its interest rates through the domestic credit

instrument (the offset coefficient is smaller than minus one in
                                                                          32

absolute value). In the limiting case of perfect capital mobility, the

domestic central bank has no control on its domestic interest rate and

its domestic credit policy will be aimed at maintaining the targeted

level of foreign reserves.

     The implications of these results are that, as long as capital is

not perfectly mobile and asset not perfectly substitutable, even a

small "follower" country in a fixed exchange rate system like the ENS

is going to be able and will optimally "sterilize" the effects on its

money supply of changes in foreign reserves generated by a number of

disturbances. This sterilizing response will occur if the objective of

stabilizing domestic interest rate in the short run dominates the

objective of maintaining a certain level of foreign reserves. The

analysis also implies that the optimal degree of "sterilization" is not

constant but rather depends on the type   of   shock that disturbs the

economy. In this sense the sterilization and offset functions found in

the literature do not fully consider the nature of the stabilization

problem faced by a monetary authority in a fixed exchange regime. An

empirical test of the model presented in this paper is certainly the

next step to be considered.
                                                                                  33




                                References

Aoki, M. "A Note on the Stability of the Interaction of Monetary Policy",

     Journal of International Economics, 7.

Argy, V. and P. Kouri (1974) "Sterilization Policies and the Volatility in

     International Reserves", in R.Z. Aliber ed. National Monetary Policies

     and the International Financial System ,    University   of Chicago Press,

     Chicago.

Barro, a.   (1988) "Interest Rate Smoothing", mimeo, Harvard University, 1988.
De Grauwe, P. (1975) "The interaction of Monetary Policy in a a Group of

     European Countries", Journal of International Economics, 5.

Giavazzi, F. (1987) "Exchange Controls and Sterilization: The German

     Experience and Lessons for Korea", mimeo.

Giavazzi, F. and A. Giovannini (1988 a) "Models of the EMS: Is Europe a

     Greater Deutsche-Mark Area ?",   in   R. Bryant and R. Portes eds. Global

     Macroeconomics: Policy Conflict and CooDeration ,     McMillan   Press,

     London.

Giavazzi, F. and A. Giovannini (1988 b) "Is Europe a Greater Deutsche-Mark

     Area ?",   Chapter 4 in LimitinE Exchange Rate Flexibility: The European
     Monetary System, forthcoming.

Hamada, K. (1985) The o1itica1 Economy of International Monetary

     InterdeDendence, MIT Press.

Herring, R.J. and R.C. Marston (1977 a) "Sterilization Policy: The Trade-Off
                                                                               34

     between Monetary Autonomy and Control over Foreign Exchange Reserves",

     EuroDean Economic Review, 10.

Herring, R.J. and R.C. Marston (1977 b) National Monetary Policies and

     International Financial Markets, Amsterdam, 1977.

Kouri, P. (1975) "The Hypothesis of Offsetting Capital Flows - A Case Study

     of Germany", Journal of Monetary Economics, 1.

Kouri, P. and M. Porter (1974) "International Capital Flows and Portfolio

     Equilibrium", Journal of Political Economy, May/June, 82.

Marston, R. (1980) "Cross Country Effects of Sterilization, Reserve

     Currencies and Foreign Exchange Intervention", Journal of International

     Economics, 10.

Mastropasqua, C., S. Micossi and R. Rinaldi "Interventions, Sterilization

     and Monetary Policy in EMS Countries" paper presented at the Conference

     on the EMS organized by CEPR and the Banca d'Italia, Perugia, Italy,

     October 16-17, 1987.

Neumann, M. (1978) "Offsetting Capital Flows: A Reexamination of the German

     Case", Journal of Monetary Economics, 4.

Neumann, M. (1984) "Intervention in the Mark/Dollar Market: The Authorities'

     Reaction Function", Journal of International Money and Finance, vol.3.

Obstfeld, M. (1978) "Sterilization and Offsetting Capital Movements:

     Evidence from West Germany, 1960-1971", unpublished manuscript, M.I.T.

Obstfeld, M. (1982 a) "Exchange Rates, Inflation, and the Sterilization

     Problem: Germany, 1975-1981", Eurotean Economic Review.

Obstfeld, M. (1982 b) "Can We Sterilize: Theory and Evidence", American

     Economic Review, May.

Padoan, P. (1984) "The European Monetary System: Pyramid or ECU   7", mimeo.
                                                                               35

Roubini, N. (1986) "Strategic Policy Interactions in a Three Country Model",

     unpublished, Harvard University, October

Roubini, N. (1987) "An Empirical Study of the EMS Realignments",

     unpublished, Harvard University, January.

Roubini, N. (1988 a) "Sterilization Policies, Offsetting Capital Movements

     and Exchange Rate Intervention Policies in the EMS", Chapter 4 of

     unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Harvard University, May.

Roubini, N. (1988 b) "Leadership and Cooperation under Alternative Exchange

     Rate Regimes: A Simulation Approach", Chapter 3 of unpublished Ph.D.

     Dissertation, Harvard University, May.

Roubini, N. (1988 c) "International Transmission of Macro Policies under

     Alternative Exchange Rate Regimes: A Four Country Model", unpublished,

     Harvard University.

Scholl, F. (1981) "Praktische Erfahrungen mit dem Europaischen

     Wahrungssystem", in W. Ehrlicher and R. Richter (eds.) Probleme der

     Wahrungstolitik, Berlin, 1981, pp.151-i71.

Vaubel, R. (1980) "The Return to the New European Monetary System -

     Objectives,   Preferences, Perspectives", CarneEie-Rochester Conference

     Series on Public Policy, Autumn, 13.
