                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               RUGGED INDIVIDUALISM AND COLLECTIVE (IN)ACTION
                        DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

                                        Samuel Bazzi
                                       Martin Fiszbein
                                      Mesay Gebresilasse

                                      Working Paper 27776
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27776


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2020




We thank Austin Wright for sharing data. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Samuel Bazzi, Martin Fiszbein, and Mesay Gebresilasse. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Rugged Individualism and Collective (In)action During the COVID-19 Pandemic
Samuel Bazzi, Martin Fiszbein, and Mesay Gebresilasse
NBER Working Paper No. 27776
September 2020
JEL No. H12,H23,H75,I12,I18,P16

                                          ABSTRACT

Rugged individualism—the combination of individualism and anti-statism—is a prominent
feature of American culture with deep roots in the country’s history of frontier settlement. Today,
rugged individualism is more prevalent in counties with greater total frontier experience (TFE)
during the era of westward expansion. While individualism may be conducive to innovation, it
can also undermine collective action, with potentially adverse social consequences. We show that
America’s frontier culture hampered the response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Across U.S.
counties, greater TFE is associated with less social distancing and mask use as well as weaker
local government effort to control the virus. We argue that frontier culture lies at the root of
several more proximate explanations for the weak collective response to public health risks,
including a lack of civic duty, partisanship, and distrust in science.


Samuel Bazzi                                     Mesay Gebresilasse
Department of Economics                          Amherst College
Boston University                                301 Converse Hall
270 Bay State Road                               Amherst, MA 01002
Boston, MA 02215                                 mgebresilasse@amherst.edu
and CEPR
and also NBER
sbazzi@bu.edu

Martin Fiszbein
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
fiszbein@bu.edu
1   Introduction
Individualism is often associated with resourcefulness and innovation. However, it may also hinder
collective action. In the context of infectious disease epidemics, non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs)
like social distancing and mask use can be key components of effective public health responses. During
the COVID-19 pandemic, adoption of these practices has varied widely across and within countries. This
variation has important consequences for the spread of the virus, but its origins remain widely debated.
We argue that individualism is an important driving factor.
    This paper shows that America’s culture of rugged individualism—the combination of individual-
ism and opposition to government intervention—undermined collective action against COVID-19. The
public health response to COVID-19 has been significantly weaker in U.S. localities with a longer frontier
history, which Bazzi et al. (forthcoming) identify as a key driver of rugged individualism.
    During the process of westward expansion that marked the early history of the U.S., the frontier
rewarded independence and self-reliance. Frontier settlers had opportunities for upward mobility but
also faced significant challenges, with little social infrastructure to turn to. As suggested by Turner
(1893), frontier locations were historically more individualistic. Our prior work shows that this distinc-
tive culture persisted: localities that spent more time on the frontier exhibit greater individualism and
anti-statism in the long run. Rugged individualism cuts across known cultural divides in the U.S., in-
cluding urban–rural and north–south, and thus sheds new light on the stark geographic variation in
opposition to effective public health efforts to contain COVID-19.
    We identify a weaker response to the pandemic in counties with greater total frontier experience
(TFE, the duration of exposure to frontier conditions historically). This can be seen in the responses of
residents as well as local governments. We measure social distancing with mobility data before and
after the national pandemic declaration on March 13, 2020, estimating event-study specifications with
county fixed effects. While high- and low-TFE counties exhibit little difference in mobility before this
date, a sharp differential emerges thereafter as residents of high-TFE counties are less likely to avoid
non-essential trips outside the home.
    We also find that greater TFE is associated with less use of face masks in public space, another impor-
tant response to curb infectious disease transmission. Residents in high-TFE counties are significantly
more likely to report never, rarely, or only sometimes using masks when outside the home. While this
outcome is only observed in early July 2020, the stark cross-sectional differences in mask use are consis-
tent with the event-study results on social distancing.
    The negative influence of TFE on social distancing and mask use is not due to confounding demo-
graphic and climatic differences. We consider a host of factors emphasized in prior work on COVID-19,
including population density, temperature, income, education, and racial composition. Contemporary
population density in particular is closely connected to historical settlement patterns. We show that the
effects of TFE remain sizable even after flexibly accounting for the time-varying relationship between
density and social distancing.
    The sluggish pandemic response among residents of high-TFE counties is mirrored by the inaction of
local government. We show that policymakers in high-TFE counties are significantly less likely to enact
NPIs to control the spread of the virus, including emergency declarations, stay-at-home policies, and



                                                     1
mask-use mandates. While many NPIs are enacted by state governments, our results are based only on
cross-county policy variation within states. Weak voluntary distancing and mask use go hand-in-hand
with weak official efforts to fight COVID-19.
   Both defining features of rugged individualism plausibly undermine collective action in response to
public health crises. The implications of individualism are straightforward. The primacy of personal
goals over group goals and the regulation of behavior by personal attitudes rather than social norms—
two key dimensions of individualism—are likely to weaken voluntary social distancing and mask use.
Both actions require people to internalize externalities, a key dimension of the response to infectious
diseases (Althouse et al., 2010). In the case of NPIs to limit the spread of COVID-19, there are salient
positive externalities. Young people have to comply with distancing even when they may perceive
their risks as negligible. Individuals sometimes have to comply with strict isolation even if they are
asymptomatic. Mask use is considered more protective of others than oneself. In these cases, the social
returns to preventive action are much larger than the private returns.
   The negative effects of individualism on collective action resonate with recent work on the pandemic.
In their discussion of social and behavioral science insights on the pandemic response, Van Bavel et al.
(2020) point to cultural explanations, specifically related to varying degrees of individualism. Frey et
al. (2020) show that social mobility declined less in individualistic countries, while Germani et al. (2020)
suggest, based on survey data from Italy, that individualistic traits hinder protective behaviors. Our
findings on the link between frontier experience and social distancing within the U.S. are concurrent with
those of Bian et al. (2020). Our study shows that rugged individualism, with its deep roots in American
history, hinders not only voluntary responses but also public policies to fight COVID-19 spread, and that
it underlies many proximate explanations for the weak pandemic response across the U.S.
   The lack of civic duty is an important channel through which rugged individualism may hamper
COVID-19 responses. Several recent papers show that voluntary social distancing is associated with civic
culture, i.e., prosocial preferences such as reciprocity, trust, cooperation, and propensity to contribute to
the public good (Barrios et al., 2020; Bartscher et al., 2020; Brodeur et al., 2020; Durante et al., 2020; Dincer
and Gillanders, 2020). While individualism and civic culture are not necessarily at odds, we show that
TFE (and, by implication, rugged individualism) indeed has a negative association with civic culture
(proxied by voter turnout as in Barrios et al., 2020).
   The other defining feature of rugged individualism, opposition to government intervention, is also
likely to deter effective public health responses. Local officials with anti-statist constituencies are bound
to adopt policy stances that align with the strong opposition of their voters to government intervention in
its various forms, including coordinated public health efforts. In Bazzi et al. (forthcoming), we show that
TFE is associated with opposition to tax redistribution and welfare spending, as well as to the Affordable
Care Act (ACA), a salient policy for gauging preferences over public intervention in healthcare.
   Moreover, rugged individualism has implications for understanding how partisanship has affected
collective action against COVID-19. Bazzi et al. (forthcoming) show that high-TFE counties exhibit
stronger (and increasing) support for the Republican Party between 2000 and 2016—a period in which
Republican platforms have leaned more and more against government intervention in multiple dimen-
sions, including health and welfare policies. In many respects, the Republican Party has come to embrace
the sort of anti-statism at the heart of frontier culture. It is therefore unsurprising that Republican voters


                                                         2
engage in less voluntary social distancing and less mask use, and express less support for social distanc-
ing policies (Allcott et al., 2020; Barrios and Hochberg, 2020; Milosh et al., 2020; Painter and Qiu, 2020).
At the same time, Republican governors have been less prone to issue stay-at-home advisories (Baccini
and Brodeur, 2020). Our results are consistent with partisan identity and beliefs being an important
channel through which rugged individualism has undermined the COVID-19 response.
      Another potentially important mechanism concerns distrust in science, which may partly reflect
opposition to hierarchies and elites. Such attitudes are pervasive in frontier culture. In the context
of COVID-19, distrust in science may reduce risk perceptions, thereby diminishing voluntary social
distancing and mask use as well as more general compliance with public health advisories (see, e.g.,
Brzezinski et al., 2020). We assess the implications of TFE along this dimension by examining an issue
in which distrust in science plays a central role: beliefs regarding climate change. We find that high-TFE
counties exhibit significantly lower prevalence of beliefs that climate change is happening.
      Overall, our findings illustrate a fundamental role for America’s frontier culture in shaping collective
action in the face of a public health emergency. Individualism weakens voluntary prevention efforts and
undermines support for policy intervention. Opposition to government intervention not only reinforces
individual non-compliance with NPIs but also stifles policy coordination across county lines. The social
science literature has offered a range of explanations for the weak pandemic response in the U.S. We
argue that many of these proximate factors have common, deep roots in the country’s frontier history.
      The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data and empirical framework. Section 3
reports our main results on TFE and the evolution of social distancing, mask use, and government poli-
cies to fight COVID-19 across U.S. counties. Section 4 explores the relationship of frontier culture with
different proximate explanations for collective inaction against COVID-19. Section 5 concludes.


2     Empirical Strategy
2.1     Data

Our measure of total frontier experience (TFE) comes from Bazzi et al. (forthcoming). This paper tracks
frontier settlement from 1790 onward, identifying the frontier line in each year as the contour beyond
which population density falls below 2 people per square mile. Counties within 100 km of this line and
with population less than 6 people per square mile are defined as frontier counties. This historically-
grounded definition of the frontier captures both dimensions of frontier life: population sparsity and
isolation from urban centers. We then construct a novel, county-level measure of TFE, which captures
the number of years that each county spent on the frontier from 1790 to 1890, the end of the frontier era
according to Turner (1893) and the U.S. Census Bureau. The geographic variation in TFE can be seen in
Appendix Figure A.1, reproduced from Bazzi et al. (forthcoming). Our baseline analysis focuses on the
2,036 heartland counties whose entire frontier history can be observed from 1790 to 1890. Robustness
checks extend to the West Coast and 20th century frontier.
      We capture individual and policy responses to the pandemic with measures of social distancing,
mask use, and local NPIs. Our core time-varying outcome of interest is social distancing. We consider
two proxies based on mobility data. First, we use the Social Distancing Scoreboard from Unacast. This
location-based data from cellphones captures the number of non-essential visits to locations outside

                                                       3
the home. Second, we use Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports, which measure the percent
change in visits to six types of destinations: workplaces, residential, grocery and pharmacy, parks, transit
stations, and retail and recreation. We focus on mobility around workplaces for comparability with
Unacast.1 Both data sources provide mean county-level mobility measures through August 2020 and are
reported relative to pre-pandemic reference dates (i.e., a value of 60% implies that social mobility is 60%
of what it was prior to the pandemic). The Unacast and Google data cover 1,378 and 1,872 counties in
our sample, respectively.2
     Starting in early March 2020, both the Unacast and Google data show steep and abrupt reductions
in social mobility. This has been discussed at length in prior research and in the popular press. Figure
1 reveals a novel feature of this declining mobility, namely that it was more pervasive in low-TFE coun-
ties.3 Looking across the two outcomes, residents of counties in the top 25% of TFE (26–63 years) practice
roughly 10–20% less social distancing than those in the bottom 25% (TFE from 0 to 11 years). This siz-
able gap emerges rather suddenly in mid-March and sustains for several months thereafter. Although
suggestive of a link with frontier culture, this pattern could be due to any number of factors that might
be correlated with TFE and social distancing. Our empirical strategy, explained in the next section, aims
at ruling out such confounders of the relationship between TFE and the pandemic response.


                               Figure 1: TFE and Social Distancing: Basic Patterns
                    (a) Non-Essential Visits                                          (b) Time at Workplaces
                            (Unacast)                                             (Google Community Mobility)




    Notes: These graphs plot the evolution of social mobility since the beginning of reporting for each series in early 2020. Each
    measure reflects a weekly average mobility over all days in the week relative to the first day-of-the-week in the series. The
    averaging explains why the series does not begin at 0. The dark black (light gray) line corresponds to counties with total
    frontier experience in the top quartile (bottom quartile).


1
  Workplace and residential comprise the bulk of mobility, and results for time at residential areas are roughly the mirror image
  of the results for time at workplaces. Unacast also reports measures of distance traveled and human encounters that deliver
  similar insight.
2
  The set of counties missing from the Unacast data remains stable over time while, for a subset of counties, the Google data are
  available in some periods but not others. Our event study results are robust to restricting to those counties observed over the
  entire period and to reweighting counties according to their odds of being observed, estimated as a logit function of TFE and
  the baseline covariates described below.
3
  The Unacast and Google data exhibit differences in the extent of recovery to pre-pandemic mobility levels. The former is
  apparently more sensitive to seasonality than the latter. Regardless of these differences, the use of time fixed effects in our
  empirical strategy ensures that seasonality will not be a confounding factor in social distancing.


                                                                  4
      We measure mask use with a nationally-representative survey from early July. The data are based
on roughly 250,000 interviews conducted by Dynata, a survey firm, at the request of The New York
Times. The survey asked respondents about the frequency of mask use ranging from never to always.
It provides a cross-county snapshot of mask use several months into the pandemic, at a time when the
virus had reached most of the country and mask use itself remained a hot-button cultural issue.
      We measure county-level policy responses across four NPIs: emergency declarations, stay-at-home
orders, business closures, and mask mandates. The first three NPIs are recorded in the National Asso-
ciation of Counties (NACo) County Explorer dataset, which covers over 3,070 counties across the U.S.
through April 15, 2020. Our analysis focuses on the cross-section of policy enactment as this is where the
primary variation lies (i.e., most counties enacted policies around the same time in March). The mask
mandates come from the dataset compiled by Wright et al. (2020) and cover the entire U.S. through
August 4, 2020.


2.2     Estimating Equations

Our empirical strategy is twofold. First, we estimate event-study specifications to identify differential
trends in social distancing across high- and low-TFE counties around the national pandemic declara-
tion on March 13th. Second, we estimate cross-sectional specifications that relate TFE to mask use and
county-level NPIs. We do not relate social distancing trends to the timing of state- or county-level NPIs
out of concern for endogenous policy implementation. Indeed, our analysis of NPIs suggests that TFE is
associated with county-level policies to fight the pandemic.
      Our event-study analysis of social distancing is based on the following equation:

                                 max
                                 X
                     yct = α +           βj TFE × 1(time since March 13 = j) + θc + γt + εct ,         (1)
                                 j=min


where yct is a measure of social distancing in county c at time t, TFE captures total frontier experi-
ence (scaled in decades), 1(time since March 13 = j) are indicators for the time until/after the national
pandemic declaration on March 13th, θc is a county fixed effect, and γt is a time fixed effect. Our
core specification defines time at the weekly frequency, but results are robust to other horizons. We
consider two extensions of equation (1): (i) state×time fixed effects (θs(c)t ), and (ii) interactions of
1(time since March 13 = j) with other pre-determined correlates of social distancing, an important one
being population density. Together with the baseline equation (1), these specifications address potential
confounding by time-invariant unobservables as well as differential trends across high- and low-TFE
counties. We also estimate a simpler difference-in-difference analogue of (1) to summarize the event-
study results.
      Our cross-sectional estimating equation is given by:

                                          yc = α + βTFEc + x0c γ + θs + εc ,                           (2)

where yc captures mask use or county-level NPIs, xc is a vector of predetermined county-level controls




                                                          5
used in Bazzi et al. (forthcoming),4 and θs is a state fixed effect. We consider a number of extensions to
equation (2), focusing on confounders explored in our prior work and new ones specific to the pandemic
response. In all regressions, we cluster standard errors based on an arbitrary grid-cell approach that
allows for correlated unobservables across all counties within 60 miles (Bester et al., 2011).5


3     Rugged Individualism and Collective Inaction
This section shows that frontier culture hindered collective action against COVID-19. Total frontier expe-
rience (TFE)—the duration of historical exposure to frontier conditions—has a negative association with
social distancing, mask use, and local-government NPIs in response to COVID-19. This result is robust
to many alternative explanations for the stark geographic differences in the public health response.


3.1     Social Distancing

Using the event-study specification (1), we find that high-TFE counties practiced considerably less social
distancing after the national pandemic declaration on March 13. Figure 2 shows that around that date,
TFE starts displaying positive effects on non-essential visits (panel a) and time spent at work (panel
b). Panels (c) and (d) show similar patterns when we include state-by-week FE instead of simply week
FE. The more demanding FE help account for variation in state-level policies at different points in time
as well as differential regional evolution of public health risks (and thus of perceived needs for social
distancing and other responses).
      The dynamic path of point estimates in Figure 2 show a sharp break in mobility patterns immediately
after the week of March 13. Each additional decade of TFE is associated with 2 percentage points (p.p.)
higher likelihood of non-essential visits (panels a and c) and roughly 1.5 p.p. more time spent at work
(panels b and d). This differential response materializes quickly after March 13 and is consistent with less
social distancing in high-TFE counties. These are large effects given that the within-week, cross-county
standard deviation in non-essential visits is 24 p.p. and in time at work is 6 p.p.
      With data beginning 2–3 weeks before March 13, we see limited evidence of pre-trends. Panels (a)
and (b) suggest that residents of low-TFE counties were not increasingly less mobile prior to public
awareness about the severity of COVID-19 risk. This is consistent with the abruptness of the information
shock in early March. With state-by-week FE in panels (c) and (d), we see some indication of a pre-trend,
though the sharp jump in coefficients after the emergency declaration remains so large that it continues
to suggest a strong break from the counterfactual trend.6




4
  These include county area; county centroid latitude and longitude; distance to oceans,lakes and rivers from county centroid;
  mean county temperature and rainfall; elevation; and average potential agricultural yield.
5
  As in Bazzi et al. (forthcoming), inference is robust to clustering by state or by more flexible spatial structures.
6
  Given our objective in this analysis, the existence of pre-trends would not change our interpretation of the findings. Rather, it
  would suggest that residents of low-TFE counties began to engage in voluntary social distancing prior to (federal) government
  action to contain the virus. Any differential response prior to March 13 could be due to the same sort of mechanisms that
  triggered the differential response after March 13.


                                                                6
                             Figure 2: TFE and Social Distancing: Event-Study
                                       Specification: County and Week FE
                  (a) Non-essential Visits                                       (b) Time in Workplaces
                         (Unacast)                                          (Google Community Mobility)




                                 Specification: County and State-by-Week FE
                  (c) Non-essential Visits                                       (d) Time in Workplaces
                         (Unacast)                                          (Google Community Mobility)




  Notes: This figure reports estimates of the event-study specification in equation 1 with week and state-by-week fixed ef-
  fects. All panels display point estimates by week and 95% confidence intervals corresponding to standard errors clustered
  by arbitrary 60-square-mile grid cells.


   The gap in social distancing between high- and low-TFE counties becomes narrower over time in
some specifications. Nearly two months after the national emergency declaration, TFE becomes sig-
nificantly less correlated with social distancing in panels (a), (b) and (d). This partial convergence in
behavior between high- and low-TFE places might reflect various forces, e.g., greater collective response
in high-TFE places as they eventually converge in perceived health risks, or weaker collective response
in low-TFE places as residents grow fatigued with protracted social distancing.
   Ultimately, our event-study specification focuses on the event of the national emergency declaration
as a salient information shock. In the subsequent months, there are many events with heterogeneous



                                                             7
regional patterns that affect risk perceptions and calls for collective action.7 Our results in Figure 2
establish the sharp break in social distancing in high- versus low-TFE counties around the initial shock.


3.2      Mask Use

Besides less social distancing, high-TFE counties exhibit lower mask use. Those unwilling to voluntarily
restrict activities outside the home may well be engaging in other preventative behaviors, and some may
view mask use as one such substitute behavior. Although plausible, this hypothesis is rejected in Table
1. The estimates, based on the cross-sectional specification (2), suggest that greater TFE is associated
with more residents reporting never, rarely, or sometimes using masks, and fewer residents reporting
that they always wear a mask. Each additional decade of TFE is associated with roughly a 5–6 percent
shift from regular mask use to never or rarely wearing one. These are sizable differences given that 17%
of residents in the average county report never or rarely wearing a mask outside the home while 48%
report always wearing a mask.


                                               Table 1: TFE and Mask Use
                                                              How often do you wear a mask in public
                                                        when you expect to be within six feet of another person?

                                                        Never          Rarely     Sometimes   Frequently   Always
                                                         (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)

                 total frontier experience              0.006***       0.004***    0.009***    -0.000      -0.019***
                                                         (0.002)        (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.002)      (0.003)

                 Number of Counties                      2,036          2,036       2,036       2,036       2,036
                 Dep. Var. Mean                          0.086          0.089       0.132       0.211       0.482
                 R2                                       0.30           0.27        0.25        0.16        0.54
                 State Fixed Effects                       X              X           X           X           X
                 Geographic/Agroclimatic Controls          X              X           X           X           X

     Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (2) for county-level means across a series of mutually exclusive responses
     to a question about mask use in early July 2020. The regressions control for state fixed effects and the following prede-
     termined controls: county area; county centroid latitude and longitude; distance to oceans,lakes and rivers from county
     centroid; mean county temperature and rainfall; elevation; and average potential agricultural yield. Standard errors are
     clustered by arbitrary 60-square-mile grid cells.
     Significance levels: ∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗ : 1%.


       Combined with weaker social distancing, the lower mask use in high-TFE counties is consistent
with individualistic opposition to collective action. Mask use, perhaps more than other risk-prevention
behaviors, is seen as providing greater protection to others than to oneself. As such, the choice to wear
a mask conveys concern for the well-being of those encountered in public space. The apparent greater
lack of concern in high-TFE counties may stem from individualistic attitudes. It might also be due to
weaker signals from local government about the importance of mask use or to distrust in the underlying
science around efficacy in reducing risk.

7
    When controlling for time-varying, county-level COVID-19 cases and deaths, the same general pattern from Figure 2 survives.
    These results in Appendix Figure A.2 suggest that the dynamic relationship between TFE and social distancing is not solely
    driven by confounding changes in the local prevalence of infection risk.


                                                                   8
3.3     Local Policies

We now show that local governments in high-TFE counties are less likely to implement policies aimed
to slow the spread of COVID-19. We examine the association of TFE and NPIs at the county level. Using
equation (2), we estimate the effects of TFE on four types of interventions, the implementation of which
varies widely across counties: emergency declarations (24% of sample counties by April 15, the end of
the period covered by the NACo data), stay-at-home policies (5%), business closure policies (1%), and
mask mandates (40% by early August).
      Table 2 reports a negative association between TFE and each of these NPIs, strongly significant for all
but the business closure interventions. With state fixed effects, these estimates isolate variation in county-
level NPIs holding constant the state-level NPIs in place for those counties. While more than half of the
variation in policies across counties is driven by variation across states, there are numerous counties
that implement more aggressive NPIs than do their respective state governments, and still others that
mandate less aggressive NPIs. The effects are sizable: each additional decade of TFE is associated with
a decrease in the likelihood of NPIs on the order of 18% for emergency declarations (column 1), 50% for
stay-at-home policies (column 2), and 9% for mask mandates (column 4).


                                                Table 2: Local Policies
                                                           Emergency       Stay at    Business     Mask
                                                           Declaration     Home       Closure     Mandate
                                                               (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)

                    total frontier experience                -0.042***    -0.025***    -0.003     -0.036***
                                                              (0.011)      (0.007)     (0.003)     (0.008)

                    Number of Counties                        2,036         2,036       2,036       2,035
                    Dep. Var. Mean                            0.236         0.048       0.006       0.405
                    R2                                         0.20          0.16        0.06        0.61
                    State Fixed Effects                         X             X           X           X
                    Geographic/Agroclimatic Controls            X             X           X           X

  Notes: This table reports linear probability estimates of equation (2) for the incidence of four county-level NPIs listed at
  the top of each column. The regressions control for state fixed effects and the following predetermined controls: county
  area; county centroid latitude and longitude; distance to oceans,lakes and rivers from county centroid; mean county
  temperature and rainfall; elevation; and average potential agricultural yield. Standard errors are clustered by arbitrary
  60-square-mile grid cells.
  Significance levels: ∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗ : 1%.


      The results thus far suggest a strong link between frontier culture and the pandemic response. Resi-
dents of high-TFE counties are more likely to eschew social distancing and mask use, and their represen-
tatives are more likely to avoid public intervention aimed at changing individual behavior. These two
sides of collective inaction are, of course, connected. Lack of distancing and mask-wearing may reflect
weak or absent policies to nudge and coordinate such preventative behaviors. At the same time, the
policy choices of local governments tend to reflect the preferences of their constituencies. While pref-
erences and policies both shape behavior, we do not attempt to disentangle their relative importance in
this paper.




                                                               9
3.4     Robustness Checks

We consider several alternative explanations for the relationship between TFE and the response to
COVID-19. First, the results in Figure 2 cannot be fully explained by other county-specific determinants
of COVID-19 risk and social distancing. We show this in Appendix Figure A.3 by separately interacting
several county-level covariates with time-to-event, mirroring the interaction with county-level TFE. The
potential confounders include population density, temperature, income, education, and racial composi-
tion, each of which has featured prominently in prior work exploring the pandemic risk and response
(see, e.g., Ahmadi et al., 2020; Brown and Ravallion, 2020; Chiou and Tucker, 2020; Coven and Gupta,
2020; Sajadi et al., 2020). While some, like population density and temperature, remain the subject of
debate about the precise risk mechanism, the mere perception of risk could shape prevention behavior.
Some of these measures are themselves potential outcomes of TFE, which can make interpretation diffi-
cult. Nevertheless, the fact that the event-study results are robust to these additional controls suggests
that they are unlikely to be important confounders. Appendix Table A.4 provides similar evidence of ro-
bustness using a simpler difference-in-difference specification with county FE that merely interacts TFE
and the other covariates with an indicator for weeks after March 13.
      The cross-sectional estimates for mask use and local policies are also generally robust to adding
the same potential confounders as controls (see Appendix Tables A.2 and A.3). Together, these results
suggest that TFE captures variation in the pandemic response that is not related to leading demographic
and environmental factors associated with COVID-19 risk.

Disentangling Population Density. It is worth emphasizing that our findings cannot be explained by
differences in population density across high- and low-TFE counties. Contemporary population density
is strongly decreasing in TFE, and in some of the the robustness checks described above, a linear control
for density reduced the effects of TFE on social distancing, mask use, and NPIs. Appendix Tables A.5
and A.6 show that the effects of TFE remain sizable with even more flexible controls for density. The
matching-type exercise in column 4 is an extremely demanding specification: for each county, we find
the county within the same state with the most similar population density and create matched pairs,
define a dummy for each pair, and then add these as fixed effects (interacted with the post-March 13
indicator in the social distancing regressions). Columns 5 and 6 split the sample into counties above
versus below the 90th percentile of population density, the former being urban areas. The effects of TFE
generally survive across these specifications, which suggests that frontier culture and its implications for
collective action cut across the density divide.

Regional Variation and the 20th Century Frontier.        Appendix Tables A.7 and A.8 explore regional
heterogeneity in the effects of TFE on social distancing, mask use, and NPIs. First, we add 105 West
Coast frontier counties that were settled starting in the mid-19th century (column 1). We then split the
sample by Census region: the Midwest (column 2), the South (column 3), and the West (column 4). The
estimates are noisier for the latter given the smaller number of counties. In subsequent columns 5–8, we
extend the frontier time-frame, thereby including counties that experienced frontier conditions beyond
1890. Overall, the findings remain largely unchanged across all these checks.




                                                    10
4       Frontier Culture and Proximate Causes of Inaction
This section explores why frontier culture undermined the pandemic response. We show that TFE un-
derlies several leading explanations for opposition to social distancing, mask use, and NPIs.
       In Table 3, we examine the association of TFE with civic culture, anti-statist partisanship, and trust in
science. Each of these has been linked to variation in the public health response to COVID-19. We argue
here that frontier culture underpins these findings. There are of course numerous other correlates of the
individual and policy response to COVID-19. Our goal in this section is not to provide an exhaustive
account of the role of TFE in understanding all of these associations documented in prior work. Rather,
we aim to demonstrate that frontier culture may be a unifying explanation across a set of important
factors underlying the public health response to the pandemic.
       Many have argued that civic culture helped to promote voluntary social distancing. The strand of
individualism cultivated on the American frontier tends to go against civic culture. Historically, frontier
settlers had to rely on themselves for protection and prevention, and to improve their living conditions.
While returns to cooperation may have been high, maintaining reciprocity would have been challeng-
ing given the high population mobility on the frontier. The “rugged” aspect of frontier culture, and
the prevalence of violence in frontier societies, plausibly made this type of individualism particularly
inimical to civic culture.
       We explore the association of TFE with a common proxy measure of civic culture: voter turnout.
Barrios et al. (2020) show that this measure is negatively correlated with social distancing. We share
their interpretation: weaker civic culture implies lower disposition to internalize externalizes and take
costly actions that contribute to the common good. Table 3 reveals a negative association between TFE
and average voter turnout across the last five presidential elections (column 1).8 Each additional decade
of TFE is associated with nearly 0.5 p.p. lower turnout relative to a mean of 58% (std. dev. of 8.7%).
       Residents of high-TFE counties not only display lower civic capital but also greater anti-statist parti-
sanship, which can be an obstacle to public health during a pandemic. Bazzi et al. (forthcoming) show
that high-TFE counties exhibit stronger and increasing support for the Republican Party between 2000
and 2016 (see column 2 of Table 3 below for the estimated effect of TFE in 2016). During this period, the
Republican platform has increasingly aligned with the principles of rugged individualism. In Bazzi et al.
(forthcoming), we showed that TFE is associated with opposition to tax redistribution, welfare spending,
and other forms of government intervention, including the Affordable Care Act (ACA). Opposition to
the ACA, a program for state-led provision of affordable health care, reflects, in part, opposition to see-
ing health as a right or as a public good. This ideology is likely to hamper the response to an infectious
disease epidemic like COVID-19, which requires individuals and government to address externalities
through collective action. Opposition to tax redistribution and welfare programs may also be an obsta-
cle, since stay-at-home policies require support for individuals whose livelihoods are threatened.
       The anti-statist element of rugged individualism and its partisan expression in the Republican Party
may have limited the policy response to the pandemic while also undermining individual willingness
to engage in costly collective action around social distancing and mask use. Others have shown that
Republican voters are less likely to engage in social distancing (Barrios and Hochberg, 2020; Gadarian

8
    The county-level voting outcomes in this section are based on data from Leip’s Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections.


                                                                 11
et al., 2020; Painter and Qiu, 2020) and mask use (Milosh et al., 2020), and that Republican leaders are
more likely to downplay the risks of COVID-19 (Allcott et al., 2020) and less likely to issue NPIs (Baccini
and Brodeur, 2020). We argue that the frontier culture of rugged individualism lies at the heart of these
partisan responses to the pandemic.
   Another way in which frontier culture has shaped the pandemic response is through distrust in
science and experts more generally. Frontier culture, insofar as it leads to opposition to all kinds of
hierarchies, may be associated with distrust in science. Historically, the frontier was characterized by
novel and uncertain conditions where traditions and rules of thumb acquired elsewhere were often ill-
suited. This created an advantage for individualism, a trait that is associated with resourcefulness, non-
conformism, and inventiveness (Raz, 2020; Shannon, 1977). While the context changed, there may be an
enduring frontier cultural opposition toward established norms and hierarchies, including those based
on science and education.


                Table 3: Civic culture, anti-statist partisanship, and distrust in science
                                                            Civic Capital    Republican       Don’t Think
                                                           (Avg. Turnout     Vote Share     Global Warming
                                                              2000-16)          2016         Is Happening
                                                                 (1)             (2)               (3)

                   total frontier experience                   -0.438**        3.154***          0.919***
                                                                (0.176)         (0.416)           (0.130)

                   Number of Counties                          2,036            2,036             2,036
                   Dep. Var. Mean                              57.865           65.420            21.751
                   R2                                           0.53             0.32              0.35
                   State Fixed Effects                           X                X                 X
                   Geographic/Agroclimatic Controls              X                X                 X

  Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (2) for the outcomes listed at the top of each column. The regressions control
  for state fixed effects and the following predetermined controls: county area; county centroid latitude and longitude;
  distance to oceans,lakes and rivers from county centroid; mean county temperature and rainfall; elevation; and average
  potential agricultural yield. Standard errors are clustered by arbitrary 60-square-mile grid cells.
  Significance levels: ∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗ : 1%.


   To assess this possibility, we examine a salient topic on which distrust in science plays a key role:
beliefs regarding climate change. Brzezinski et al. (2020) show that those who believe in the severity of
global warming are more likely to engage in social distancing and to comply with government-mandated
public health advisories. We show in Table 3 that frontier culture is associated with disbelief in climate
change. Each additional decade of TFE is associated with a 1 p.p. increase in the share of residents that
do not believe global warming is happening, according to survey data collected by the Yale Program
on Climate Change Communication (Howe et al., 2015). This is a meaningful effect given that 22% of
residents in the mean county hold such disbelief. This result suggests that distrust in science is one
important way in which frontier culture undermines public health campaigns.




                                                               12
5   Conclusion
American rugged individualism—the combination of individualism and opposition to government
intervention—has undermined collective action against the COVID-19 pandemic. We provide the first
empirical evidence that frontier culture is central to understanding the weak public health response.
Counties with longer historical frontier experience exhibit less mask use, less social distancing, and fewer
NPIs. These counties also exhibit weaker civic capital, stronger anti-statist partisanship, and greater dis-
trust in science, which are, among others, important proximate determinants of the country’s weak pub-
lic health response. We argue that America’s frontier culture of rugged individualism is at the heart of
its flawed response to the COVID-19 pandemic. An effective response requires strong collective action,
the likes of which has eluded many areas of the country with a deep historical connection to the frontier.
    The fragmented response to COVID-19 that we identify may have broader aggregate implications.
As high- and low-TFE counties adopt different approaches to the pandemic, this makes it more difficult
to blunt the spread of infection. Prevention success in one county will be offset and even undone as indi-
viduals come into contact with those from other counties with weaker responses. Ultimately, America’s
federal system of government—itself intertwined with the country’s frontier history—makes it difficult
to avoid such spillovers.
    Individualistic responses to collective risk can pose grave public health consequences, especially in a
context like the U.S. where institutions freely permit such a response. The U.S. legal system is predicated
on the protection of individual liberties and decentralized governance. In his book, The Pox of Liberty:
How the Constitution Left Americans Rich, Free, and Prone to Infection, Troesken (2015) describes how the
institutional emphasis on individual liberties undermined America’s historical response to smallpox by
making vaccine (inoculation) avoidance possible. While America is considerably richer and its health-
care more advanced today, the institutional context is similar, and rugged individualism seems more
entrenched than ever. Looking forward, it will be important to examine whether frontier culture hinders
an effective COVID-19 immunization campaign if and when a vaccine becomes available.




                                                    13
References
Ahmadi, Mohsen, Abbas Sharifi, Shadi Dorosti, Saeid Jafarzadeh Ghoushchi, and Negar Ghanbari,
  “Investigation of effective climatology parameters on COVID-19 outbreak in Iran,” Science of the Total
  Environment, 2020, p. 138705.
Allcott, Hunt, Levi Boxell, Jacob Conway, Matthew Gentzkow, Michael Thaler, and David Y Yang,
  “Polarization and public health: Partisan differences in social distancing during the Coronavirus pan-
  demic,” NBER Working Paper 26946, 2020.
Althouse, Benjamin M., Theodore C. Bergstrom, and Carl T. Bergstrom, “A public choice framework
  for controlling transmissible and evolving diseases,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
  2010, 107 (suppl 1), 1696–1701.
Baccini, Leonardo and Abel Brodeur, “Explaining Governors’ Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic in
  the United States,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 13137, 2020.
Barrios, John M and Yael Hochberg, “Risk perception through the lens of politics in the time of the
  covid-19 pandemic,” NBER Working Paper 27008, 2020.
  , Efraim Benmelech, Yael V Hochberg, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, “Civic capital and social
  distancing during the covid-19 pandemic,” NBER Working Paper 27320, 2020.
Bartscher, Alina K, Sebastian Seitz, Michaela Slotwinski, Sebastian Siegloch, and Nils Wehrhöfer,
  “Social capital and the spread of Covid-19: Insights from European countries,” CESifo Working Paper
  Series 8346, 2020.
Bavel, Jay J. Van, Katherine Baicker, Paulo S Boggio, Valerio Capraro, Aleksandra Cichocka, Mina
  Cikara, Molly J Crockett, Alia J Crum, Karen M Douglas, James N Druckman et al., “Using social
  and behavioural science to support COVID-19 pandemic response,” Nature Human Behaviour, 2020,
  pp. 1–12.
Bazzi, Samuel, Martin Fiszbein, and Mesay Gebresilasse, “Frontier Culture: The Roots and Persistence
  of ‘Rugged Individualism’ in the United States,” Econometrica, forthcoming.
Bester, C Alan, Timothy G Conley, and Christian B Hansen, “Inference with dependent data using
  cluster covariance estimators,” Journal of Econometrics, 2011, 165 (2), 137–151.
Bian, Bo, Jingjing Li, Ting Xu, and Natasha Foutz, “Individualism During Crises: Big Data Analytics
  of Collective Actions amid COVID-19,” SSRN Working Paper 3620364, 2020.
Brodeur, Abel, Idaliya Grigoryeva, and Lamis Kattan, “Stay-At-Home Orders, Social Distancing and
  Trust,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 13234, 2020.
Brown, Caitlin S and Martin Ravallion, “Inequality and the Coronavirus: Socioeconomic Covariates of
  Behavioral Responses and Viral Outcomes Across US Counties,” NBER Working Paper 27549, 2020.
Brzezinski, Adam, Valentin Kecht, David Van Dijcke, and Austin L Wright, “Belief in science influ-
  ences physical distancing in response to covid-19 lockdown policies,” University of Chicago, Becker
  Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper, 2020, (2020-56).
Chiou, Lesley and Catherine Tucker, “Social distancing, internet access and inequality,” NBER Working
  Paper 26982, 2020.
Coven, Joshua and Arpit Gupta, “Disparities in mobility responses to covid-19,” NYU Stern Working

                                                    14
  Paper, 2020.
Dincer, Oguzhan C. and Robert Gillanders, “Shelter in Place? Depends on the Place: Corruption and
  Social Distancing in American States,” Depends on the Place: Corruption and Social Distancing in American
  States (May 28, 2020), 2020.
Durante, Ruben, Lugi Guiso, and Giorgio Gulino, “Civic capital and social distancing: evidence from
  Italians’ response to COVID-19,” SSRN 3611606, 2020.
Frey, Carl Benedikt, Chinchih Chen, and Giorgio Presidente, “Democracy, Culture, and Contagion:
  Political Regimes and Countries Responsiveness to Covid-19,” Covid Economics, 2020, 18, 1–20.
Gadarian, Shana Kushner, Sara Wallace Goodman, and Thomas B. Pepinsky, “Partisanship, health
  behavior, and policy attitudes in the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic,” Working Paper, 2020.
Germani, Alessandro, Livia Buratta, Elisa Delvecchio, and Claudia Mazzeschi, “Emerging Adults and
  COVID-19: The Role of Individualism-Collectivism on Perceived Risks and Psychological Maladjust-
  ment,” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 2020, 17 (10), 3497.
Howe, Peter D, Matto Mildenberger, Jennifer R Marlon, and Anthony Leiserowitz, “Geographic vari-
  ation in opinions on climate change at state and local scales in the USA,” Nature Climate Change, 2015,
  5 (6), 596–603.
Manson, Steven, Jonathan Schroeder, David Van Riper, and Steven Ruggles, “IPUMS National His-
  torical Geographic Information System: Version 14.0 [Database].,” Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS. 2019.
Milosh, Maria, Marcus Painter, David Van Dijcke, and Austin L. Wright, “Unmasking Partisanship:
  How Polarization Influences Public Responses to Collective Risk,” University of Chicago, Becker Fried-
  man Institute for Economics Working Paper, 2020, (2020-102).
Painter, Marcus and Tian Qiu, “Political beliefs affect compliance with covid-19 social distancing or-
  ders,” Available at SSRN 3569098, 2020.
Raz, Itzchak Tzachi, “Learning is Caring: Soil Heterogeneity, Social Learning and the Formation of
  Close-knit Communities,” Unpublished Manuscript, 2020.
Sajadi, Mohammad M, Parham Habibzadeh, Augustin Vintzileos, Shervin Shokouhi, Fernando
  Miralles-Wilhelm, and Anthony Amoroso, “Temperature and latitude analysis to predict potential
  spread and seasonality for COVID-19,” SSRN 3550308, 2020.
Shannon, Fred A., The Farmer’s Last Frontier: Agriculture, 1860-1897, Vol. 5, ME Sharpe, 1977.
Troesken, Werner, The pox of liberty: how the constitution left Americans rich, free, and prone to infection,
  University of Chicago Press, 2015.
Turner, Frederick Jackson, “The Significance of the Frontier in American History,” Proceedings of the State
  Historical Society of Wisconsin, 1893.
Wright, Austin L., Geet Chawla, Luke Chen, and Anthony Farmer, “Tracking Mask Mandates During
  the Covid-19 Pandemic,” University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper
  104, 2020.




                                                     15
Appendix


                           Figure A.1: Total Frontier Experience (1790 to 1890)




 Notes: This figure is reproduced from Bazzi et al. (forthcoming). It is based on county-level data from NHGIS (Manson et
 al., 2019). Total frontier experience is the total number of years the county was within 100 km of the frontier line and its
 population density was below 6 people per square mile, between 1790–1890. The white areas to the east of the 1790 main
 frontier line are counties for which we do not know frontier history given the lack of Population Census data before 1790.
 The white areas to the west are beyond the 1890 frontier line.




                                                             16
Figure A.2: TFE and Social Distancing controlling for Lagged Per Capita Cases and Deaths
                                     Specification: County and Week FE
                (a) Non-essential Visits                                       (b) Time in Workplaces
                       (Unacast)                                           (Google Community Mobility)




                               Specification: County and State-by-Week FE
                (c) Non-essential Visits                                       (d) Time in Workplaces
                       (Unacast)                                           (Google Community Mobility)




Notes: This figure displays estimation results for our event-study specification in equation 1 for two different outcomes,
with and without state-by-week fixed effects. All panels display point estimates by week and 95% confidence intervals
corresponding to standard errors clustered by arbitrary 60-square-mile grid-cells.




                                                           17
                      Figure A.3: Robustness Check: TFE and Social Distancing
                                      Specification: County and Week FE
                (a) Non-essential Visits                                         (b) Time in Workplaces
                        (Unacast)                                            (Google Community Mobility)




                                Specification: County and State-by-Week FE
                (a) Non-essential Visits                                         (b) Time in Workplaces
                        (Unacast)                                            (Google Community Mobility)




Notes: This figure displays estimation results for our event-study specification in equation 1 for two different outcomes and
controlling for, separately, county level population density, race (share of white), mean temperature, median income or
education (share with post-secondary educatiob) interacted with time-to-event dummies. The first panel icnludes county
and week fixed effects while the second panel uses county and state-by-week fixed effects. All panels display point
estimates by week and 95% confidence intervals corresponding to standard errors clustered by arbitrary 60-square-mile
grid-cells.




                                                             18
                      Table A.1: Robustness Checks: TFE and Social Distancing
                                               (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)           (6)         (7)

                                                                    (a) Non-essential Visits (Unacast)

     TFE × post-March-13                     2.645***   1.746***    3.238***    3.255***    2.057***     1.003*      1.731***
                                              (0.619)    (0.529)     (0.579)    (0.645)      (0.593)     (0.531)       (0.544)
     pop. density × post-March-13                       -0.018***                                                    -0.007***
                                                         (0.002)                                                       (0.001)
     share white × post-March-13                                    0.483***                                         0.282***
                                                                     (0.054)                                           (0.058)
     temperature × post-March-13                                               -0.685***                              -0.469**
                                                                                (0.218)                                (0.237)
     median income × post-March-13                                                         -0.000***                 0.000***
                                                                                            (0.000)                    (0.000)
     share post-sec. educ × post-March-13                                                                -1.027***   -1.097***
                                                                                                          (0.061)      (0.106)

     Number of County–Weeks                  35,828      35,828      35,828      35,750     35,828        35,828      35,750
     Dep. Var. Mean                           -10.8       -10.8       -10.8       -10.8      -10.8         -10.8       -10.8

                                                        (b) Time at Workplaces (Google Community Mobility)

     TFE × post-March-13                     1.075***   0.787***    1.119***    0.996***    0.635***     0.413***    0.390***
                                              (0.192)    (0.151)     (0.191)    (0.189)      (0.131)      (0.129)     (0.121)
     pop. density × post-March-13                       -0.007***                                                    -0.003***
                                                         (0.001)                                                      (0.001)
     share white × post-March-13                                     0.028**                                            0.007
                                                                     (0.011)                                          (0.012)
     temperature × post-March-13                                                 0.070                                 -0.045
                                                                                (0.053)                               (0.041)
     median income × post-March-13                                                         -0.000***                 -0.000***
                                                                                            (0.000)                   (0.000)
     share post-sec. educ × post-March-13                                                                -0.420***   -0.306***
                                                                                                          (0.019)     (0.026)

     Number of County–Weeks                  49,938      49,938      49,938      49,857     49,938        49,938      49,857
     Dep. Var. Mean                           -22.4       -22.4       -22.4       -22.4      -22.4         -22.4       -22.4
     County Fixed Effects                       X           X           X           X          X             X           X
     Time Fixed Effects                         X           X           X           X          X             X           X

Notes: This table reports estimates of the simpler difference-in-difference analogue of specification in equation (1) for two
different outcomes and accounting for potential confounders interacted with an indicator for post-March-13. Standard
errors are clustered by arbitrary 60-square-mile grid cells.
Significance levels: ∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗ : 1%.




                                                             19
                            Table A.2: Robustness Checks: TFE and Mask Use
                                                            Share who always wear a mask in public
                                                     when they expect to be within six feet of another person

                                            (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)

     total frontier experience           -0.019***   -0.014***     -0.016***   -0.019***   -0.015***   -0.012***   -0.008***
                                          (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)
     pop. density                                     0.000***                                                      0.000***
                                                       (0.000)                                                       (0.000)
     share white                                                   -0.002***                                       -0.002***
                                                                    (0.000)                                          (0.000)
     temperature                                                                -0.001                                -0.008
                                                                                (0.009)                              (0.007)
     median income                                                                         0.000***                 0.000***
                                                                                            (0.000)                  (0.000)
     share post-sec. educ                                                                              0.005***     0.002***
                                                                                                        (0.000)      (0.000)

     Number of Counties                    2,036       2,036        2,036       2,036       2,036       2,036       2,036
     Dep. Var. Mean                        0.482       0.482        0.482       0.482       0.482       0.482       0.482
     R2                                     0.54        0.58         0.56        0.54        0.58       0.60         0.63
     State Fixed Effects                     X           X            X           X           X           X           X
     Geographic/Agroclimatic Controls        X           X            X           X           X           X           X

Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (2) for the main mask use outcome while accounting for potential con-
founders at the county level. The regressions control for state fixed effects and the following additional predetermined
controls: county area; county centroid latitude and longitude; distance to oceans,lakes and rivers from county centroid;
mean county rainfall; elevation; and average potential agricultural yield. Standard errors are clustered by arbitrary 60-
square-mile grid cells. Standard errors are clustered by arbitrary 60-square-mile grid cells.
Significance levels: ∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗ : 1%.




                                                              20
                        Table A.3: Robustness Checks: TFE and Local Policies (I)
                                                   (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)       (7)

                                                                (a) County Policies: Emergency Declarations

             total frontier experience          -0.042***   -0.025**     -0.035***   -0.042***   -0.030***   -0.023**     -0.013
                                                 (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.010)     (0.011)    (0.010)
             pop. density                                   0.000***                                                    0.000***
                                                             (0.000)                                                     (0.000)
             share white                                                 -0.003***                                      -0.002***
                                                                          (0.001)                                        (0.001)
             temperature                                                              -0.013                             -0.032*
                                                                                      (0.021)                            (0.017)
             median income                                                                       0.000***               0.000***
                                                                                                  (0.000)                (0.000)
             share post-sec. educ                                                                            0.012***   0.005***
                                                                                                              (0.001)    (0.002)

             Number of Counties                  2,036       2,036        2,036       2,036       2,036       2,036      2,036
             Dep. Var. Mean                      0.236       0.236        0.236       0.236       0.236       0.236      0.236
             R2                                   0.20        0.24         0.20        0.20        0.23        0.24       0.27
             State Fixed Effects                   X           X            X           X           X           X          X
             Geographic/Agroclimatic Controls      X           X            X           X           X           X          X

                                                                    (b) County Policies: Stay at Home Policies

             total frontier experience          -0.025***   -0.014**     -0.021***   -0.025***   -0.019***   -0.014**    -0.009
                                                 (0.007)     (0.006)      (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.006)   (0.006)
             pop. density                                   0.000***                                                    0.000***
                                                             (0.000)                                                     (0.000)
             share white                                                 -0.002***                                      -0.001*
                                                                          (0.001)                                        (0.000)
             temperature                                                              0.024*                              0.012
                                                                                      (0.014)                            (0.014)
             median income                                                                       0.000***               0.000**
                                                                                                  (0.000)                (0.000)
             share post-sec. educ                                                                            0.007***   0.003**
                                                                                                              (0.001)    (0.001)

             Number of Counties                  2,036       2,036        2,036       2,036       2,036       2,036      2,036
             Dep. Var. Mean                      0.048       0.048        0.048       0.048       0.048       0.048      0.048
             R2                                   0.16        0.23         0.16        0.16        0.19        0.21       0.25
             State Fixed Effects                   X           X            X           X           X           X          X
             Geographic/Agroclimatic Controls      X           X            X           X           X           X          X

                                                                (c) County Policies: Business Closure Policies

             total frontier experience            -0.003    -0.001        -0.002      -0.003       -0.002     -0.002    -0.001
                                                 (0.003)    (0.003)       (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)
             pop. density                                    0.000                                                        0.000
                                                            (0.000)                                                     (0.000)
             share white                                                  -0.000                                         -0.000
                                                                          (0.000)                                       (0.000)
             temperature                                                               0.001                             -0.001
                                                                                      (0.003)                           (0.003)
             median income                                                                         0.000                  0.000
                                                                                                  (0.000)               (0.000)
             share post-sec. educ                                                                            0.001*      0.000
                                                                                                             (0.000)    (0.000)

             Number of Counties                  2,036       2,036        2,036       2,036       2,036       2,036      2,036
             Dep. Var. Mean                      0.006       0.006        0.006       0.006       0.006       0.006      0.006
             R2                                   0.06        0.07         0.06        0.06        0.06        0.06       0.07
             State Fixed Effects                   X           X            X           X           X           X          X
             Geographic/Agroclimatic Controls      X           X            X           X           X           X          X


Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (2) for local policy outcomes while accounting for potential confounders
at the county level. The regressions control for state fixed effects and the following additional predetermined controls:
county area; county centroid latitude and longitude; distance to oceans,lakes and rivers from county centroid; mean
county rainfall; elevation; and average potential agricultural yield. Standard errors are clustered by arbitrary 60-square-
mile grid cells. Standard errors are clustered by arbitrary 60-square-mile grid cells.
Significance levels: ∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗ : 1%.

                                                                    21
                       Table A.4: Robustness Checks: TFE and Local Policies (II)

                                              (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)

                                                                   (d) County Policies: Mask Mandates

        total frontier experience          -0.036***   -0.025***     -0.028***   -0.037***   -0.030***   -0.019**     -0.012
                                            (0.008)     (0.008)       (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)
        pop. density                                    0.000***                                                        0.000
                                                         (0.000)                                                      (0.000)
        share white                                                  -0.004***                                      -0.003***
                                                                      (0.001)                                         (0.001)
        temperature                                                               -0.031                             -0.043**
                                                                                  (0.020)                             (0.017)
        median income                                                                        0.000***                  -0.000
                                                                                              (0.000)                 (0.000)
        share post-sec. educ                                                                             0.012***   0.011***
                                                                                                          (0.001)     (0.002)

        Number of Counties                   2,035      2,035          2,035      2,035       2,035       2,035      2,035
        Dep. Var. Mean                       0.405      0.405          0.405      0.405       0.405       0.405      0.405
        R2                                    0.61       0.63           0.62       0.61        0.62        0.64       0.65
        State Fixed Effects                    X          X              X          X           X           X          X
        Geographic/Agroclimatic Controls       X          X              X          X           X           X          X


Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (2) for local policy outcomes while accounting for potential confounders
at the county level. The regressions control for state fixed effects and the following additional predetermined controls:
county area; county centroid latitude and longitude; distance to oceans,lakes and rivers from county centroid; mean
county rainfall; elevation; and average potential agricultural yield. Standard errors are clustered by arbitrary 60-square-
mile grid cells. Standard errors are clustered by arbitrary 60-square-mile grid cells.
Significance levels: ∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗ : 1%.




                                                                22
    Table A.5: Disentangling Population Density: TFE, Social Distancing, and Mask Use
                                                                    (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)
 Pop Dens x post-March-13                                                        X
 Pop Dens Decile Within-State x post-March-13 FE                                            X
 Pop Dens Neighbor Matching Within-State x post-March-13 FE                                            X
 Sample Restriction                                                None       None        None        None       > 90th     ≤ 90th
                                                                                                                  percentile urban
                                                                                                                  pop. share, 2010


                                                                             Panel (a): Non-Essential Visits (Unacast)

 TFE × post-March-13                                           2.645***      1.746***      0.748      0.845*      1.191    1.681***
                                                                (0.619)       (0.529)     (0.560)     (0.499)    (1.138)    (0.591)

 Number of County–Weeks                                            35,828     35,828      35,542      35,750     3,588      32,240
 R2                                                                 0.70       0.70        0.70        0.73       0.69       0.69

                                                                   Panel (b): Time in Workplaces (Google Community Mobility)

 TFE × post-March-13                                           1.075***      0.787***    0.641***    0.558***     0.336    0.796***
                                                                (0.192)       (0.151)     (0.147)     (0.111)    (0.440)    (0.153)

 Number of County–Weeks                                            49,938     49,938      49,537      49,852     4,995      44,943
 R2                                                                 0.91       0.91        0.91        0.92       0.96       0.90

                                                                        Panel (c): Share who always wear a mask in public
                                                                      when they expect to be within six feet of another person

 total frontier experience                                     -0.019***     -0.014***   -0.012***   -0.010***    -0.012   -0.013***
                                                                (0.003)       (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.007)    (0.003)

 Number of Counties                                                2,036      2,036       2,021       2,036       201       1,832
 R2                                                                 0.54       0.58        0.59        0.82       0.59      0.55
 County Fixed Effects                                                X          X           X           X          X          X
 Week Fixed Effects                                                  X          X           X           X          X          X


Notes: This table disentangles the effects of TFE on social distancing outcomes from the effects of contemporary population
density by controlling for the differential effects of population density in several ways. Column 1 reports the baseline
estimates with county and week fixed effects. Column 2 adds an interaction of the 2010 population density with post-
March 13 indicator. Column 3 includes fixed effect for the decile of within-state population density interacted with week
indicators. Column 4 includes fixed effects indicators within-state pairs of counties that have the most similar population
density in 2010 interacted with week indicators. Columns 5 and 6 split the sample into counties above and below the 90th
percentile of contemporaneous urban population shares. Standard errors are clustered by arbitrary 60-square-mile grid
cells. Column 4 and 5 additionally cluster (two-way) on the population density deciles and within-state county-pairs,
respectively.
Significance levels: ∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗ : 1%.




                                                              23
               Table A.6: Disentangling Population Density: TFE and Local Policies
                                                                    (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)       (6)
  Pop Dens x post-March-13                                                       X
  Pop Dens Decile Within-State x post-March-13 FE                                             X
  Pop Dens Neighbor Matching Within-State x post-March-13 FE                                            X
  Sample Restriction                                              None        None          None       None        > 90th ≤ 90th
                                                                                                                   percentile urban
                                                                                                                   pop. share, 2010


                                                                                      (a): Emergency Declaration

  total frontier experience                                      -0.042***   -0.025**       -0.017     -0.022       0.025    -0.021*
                                                                  (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.011)    (0.014)      (0.035)   (0.012)

  Number of Counties                                              2,036       2,036         2,021      2,036        201       1,832
  R2                                                              0.20        0.24          0.25       0.63         0.27      0.20

                                                                                      (b): Stay at Home Policies

  total frontier experience                                      -0.025***   -0.014**      -0.012*    -0.012*      -0.051*    -0.009
                                                                  (0.007)     (0.006)      (0.006)    (0.007)      (0.029)   (0.006)

  Number of Counties                                              2,036       2,036         2,021      2,036        201       1,832
  R2                                                              0.16        0.23          0.25       0.69         0.48      0.13

                                                                                  (c): Business Closure Policies

  total frontier experience                                       -0.003       -0.001       -0.001     0.000        0.040    -0.003*
                                                                  (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)    (0.004)      (0.029)   (0.002)

  Number of Counties                                              2,036       2,036         2,021      2,036        201       1,832
  R2                                                              0.06        0.07          0.06       0.52         0.23      0.04

                                                                                         (d): Mask Mandates

  total frontier experience                                      -0.036***   -0.025***     -0.019**   -0.022**      -0.037   -0.018**
                                                                  (0.008)     (0.008)       (0.008)    (0.010)     (0.036)    (0.008)

  Number of Counties                                              2,035       2,035         2,020      2,035        201       1,831
  R2                                                              0.61        0.63          0.65       0.83         0.44      0.67
  State Fixed Effects                                               X           X             X          X           X          X
  Geographic/Agroclimatic Controls                                  X           X             X          X           X          X


Notes: This table disentangles the effects of TFE on local policies from the effects of contemporary population density in
several ways. Column 1 reports the baseline with state fixed effects and geographic and agroclimatic controls. Column 2
controls for contemporaneous population density. Column 3 includes fixed effects for the decile of within-state population
density. Column 4 included fixed effects for the nearest-neighbor matching based on 2010 population density. Columns
5 and 6 split the sample into counties above and below the 90th percentile of contemporaneous urban population shares.
The regressions control for state fixed effects and the following additional predetermined controls: county area; county
centroid latitude and longitude; distance to oceans,lakes and rivers from county centroid; mean county rainfall; elevation;
and average potential agricultural yield. Standard errors are clustered by arbitrary 60-square-mile grid cells. Standard er-
rors are clustered by arbitrary 60-square-mile grid cells. Column 4 and 5 additionally cluster (two-way) on the population
density deciles and within-state county-pairs, respectively.
Significance levels: ∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗ : 1%.




                                                            24
         Table A.7: Adding West Coast, Extended Time Frame, Regional Heterogeneity
                                    TFE, Social Distancing, and Mask Use

 Frontier Time Frame:                            Baseline (1790–1890)                              Extended (1790–1950)
 Regional Sample Restriction:       Baseline +     Only        Only         Only       Extended      Only        Only        Only
                                    West Coast    Midwest      South        West        Sample      Midwest      South       West
                                       (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)


                                                                   (a): Non-Essential Visits (Unacast)

 TFE × post-March-13                 1.036**       3.338**      0.519      -1.959*     1.149***     4.581***      0.364       0.718
                                     (0.466)       (1.408)     (0.409)     (1.010)      (0.413)      (1.552)     (0.380)     (0.593)

 Number of County–Weeks               38,168       15,106      18,460       3,120       42,926       15,340      20,410      5,694
 R2                                    0.04         0.01        0.03         0.07        0.03         0.02        0.03        0.08

                                                       (b): Time in Workplaces (Google Community Mobility)

 TFE × post-March-13                 -4.021***    -5.909***   -3.056***    -3.603***   -2.778***    -5.212***   -2.794***   -1.508***
                                      (0.239)      (0.339)     (0.265)      (0.665)     (0.212)      (0.423)     (0.208)     (0.218)

 Number of County–Weeks               52,615       23,275      23,884       3,757       59,965       23,681      26,696      7,889
 R2                                    0.15         0.19        0.12         0.09        0.12         0.17        0.12        0.10

                                                          (c): Share who always wear a mask in public
                                                      when they expect to be within six feet of another person

 total frontier experience           -0.019***    -0.031***   -0.018***     -0.002     -0.012***    -0.016***   -0.015***   -0.005*
                                      (0.003)      (0.006)     (0.004)      (0.009)     (0.002)      (0.006)     (0.003)    (0.003)

 Number of Counties                   2,141         987         936          152         2,499       1,037       1,074        322
 R2                                    0.58         0.40        0.44         0.55         0.59        0.42        0.46        0.72
 County or State Fixed Effects          X            X           X            X            X           X           X           X
 Week FE                                X            X           X            X            X           X           X           X
 Geographic/Agroclimatic Controls       X            X           X            X            X           X           X           X


Notes: Focusing on the key social distancing outcomes, this table extends our baseline sample of counties and examines
region-by-region sample splits. Column 1 adds counties along the secondary West Coast frontier. Column 2 restricts to
counties in the Midwest Census region, column 3 restricts to the South region, and column 4 restricts to the West, which
includes the counties added in column 1 plus others in states in the West region but falling inside the 1890 main east-to-
west frontier line. Column 5 expands the column 1 sample to include counties beyond the (main and secondary) 1890
frontier lines but inside the eventual frontier line realized by 1950. Columns 6–8 then proceed with the same region-by-
region sample splits. Standard errors are clustered by arbitrary 60-square-mile grid cells.
Significance levels: ∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗ : 1%.




                                                              25
         Table A.8: Adding West Coast, Extended Time Frame, Regional Heterogeneity
                                                  TFE and Local Policies

  Frontier Time Frame:                             Baseline (1790–1890)                                Extended (1790–1950)
  Regional Sample Restriction:       Baseline +       Only        Only            Only     Extended        Only        Only        Only
                                     West Coast      Midwest      South           West      Sample        Midwest      South       West
                                        (1)            (2)         (3)             (4)        (5)           (6)         (7)         (8)


                                                                         (a): Emergency Declaration

  total frontier experience           -0.039***      -0.060***   -0.039***        0.023    -0.020***      -0.041***   -0.027***     -0.004
                                       (0.011)        (0.018)     (0.015)        (0.026)    (0.007)        (0.014)     (0.010)     (0.010)

  Number of Counties                   2,141           987            936         152        2,500         1,038       1,074        322
  R2                                    0.26           0.10           0.19        0.45        0.28          0.09        0.19        0.42

                                                                             (b): Stay at Home Policies

  total frontier experience           -0.027***       -0.013     -0.027***       -0.034    -0.021***        -0.005    -0.029***   -0.018***
                                       (0.007)        (0.010)     (0.008)        (0.023)    (0.004)        (0.009)     (0.006)     (0.005)

  Number of Counties                   2,141           987            936         152        2,500         1,038       1,074        322
  R2                                    0.24           0.12           0.16        0.50        0.22          0.12        0.16        0.40

                                                                         (c): Business Closure Policies

  total frontier experience             -0.002        -0.002      -0.002          0.012     -0.004**        -0.001     -0.003       -0.004
                                       (0.003)        (0.002)     (0.004)        (0.011)     (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.003)

  Number of Counties                   2,141           987            936         152        2,500         1,038       1,074        322
  R2                                    0.09           0.02           0.08        0.35        0.11          0.02        0.07        0.22

                                                                               (d): Mask Mandates

  total frontier experience           -0.004***       -0.000     -0.002**        -0.008     -0.003          -0.000    -0.003**      0.000
                                       (0.001)        (0.004)     (0.001)        (0.011)    (0.002)        (0.004)     (0.001)     (0.003)

  Number of Counties                   1,307           349            771         136        1,494          351         827         265
  R2                                    0.10           0.03           0.05        0.44        0.09          0.03        0.05        0.25
  State Fixed Effects                    X              X              X           X           X             X           X           X
  Geographic/Agroclimatic Controls       X              X              X           X           X             X           X           X


Notes: Focusing on the local policy outcomes, this table extends our baseline sample of counties and examines region-by-
region sample splits. Column 1 adds counties along the secondary West Coast frontier. Column 2 restricts to counties in
the Midwest Census region, column 3 restricts to the South region, and column 4 restricts to the West, which includes the
counties added in column 1 plus others in states in the West region but falling inside the 1890 main east-to-west frontier
line. Column 5 expands the column 1 sample to include counties beyond the (main and secondary) 1890 frontier lines
but inside the eventual frontier line realized by 1950. Columns 6–8 then proceed with the same region-by-region sample
splits. The regressions control for state fixed effects and the following additional predetermined controls: county area;
county centroid latitude and longitude; distance to oceans,lakes and rivers from county centroid; mean county rainfall;
elevation; and average potential agricultural yield. Standard errors are clustered by arbitrary 60-square-mile grid cells.
Standard errors are clustered by arbitrary 60-square-mile grid cells.
Significance levels: ∗ : 10% ∗∗ : 5% ∗ ∗ ∗ : 1%.




                                                                 26
