                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE SOCIAL SAFETY NET IN THE WAKE OF COVID-19

                                        Marianne Bitler
                                       Hilary W. Hoynes
                                 Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach

                                       Working Paper 27796
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27796


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




Paper prepared for the June 2020 Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Volume. We thank
Seth Murray and Edward Olivares for sharing data on timing of acceptance of PUA claims and
Tomaz Cajner, Andrew Figura, Brendan Price, David Ratner and Alison Weingarden for sharing
their code and data on this. Raheem Chaudhry, Danea Horn, Abigail Pitts, and Natalie Tomeh
provided excellent research assistance. We thank Lisa Barrow, Stacy Dean, Robert Moffitt, Zach
Parolin, Brendan Price, Dottie Rosenbaum, Jesse Rothstein, Geoff Schnorr, Jay Shambaugh,
Louise Sheiner, Tim Smeeding, Ernie Tedeschi, Till von Wachter, Justin Wolfers, and Abigail
Wozniak for helpful comments. This paper received research support from the Brookings
Institution. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Marianne Bitler, Hilary W. Hoynes, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Social Safety Net in the Wake of COVID-19
Marianne Bitler, Hilary W. Hoynes, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
NBER Working Paper No. 27796
September 2020
JEL No. H53,I3,I38

                                          ABSTRACT

The COVID-19 crisis has led to spiking unemployment rates with disproportionate impacts on
low-income families. School and child-care center closures have also meant lost free- and
reduced-price school meals. Food prices have increased sharply leading to reduced purchasing
power for families’ limited income. The Families First Coronavirus Act and the CARES Act
included robust responses including expansions to unemployment insurance (expansions in
eligibility and $600 per week supplement), a one-time payment of $1,200 per adult and $500 per
dependent, an increase in SNAP payments, and the launch of the Pandemic EBT program to
replace lost school meals. Despite these efforts, real time data show significant distress – notably
food insecurity rates have increased almost three times over the pre-COVID rates and food
pantry use has also spiked. In this paper, we explore why there is so much unmet need despite a
robust policy response. We provide evidence for three explanations: (1) timing - relief came with
a substantial delay (due to overwhelmed UI systems/need to implement new programs); (2)
magnitude – payments outside UI are modest; and (3) coverage gaps – access is lower for some
groups and other groups are statutorily excluded.

Marianne Bitler                                  Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
Department of Economics                          Institute for Policy Research
University of California, Davis                  Northwestern University
One Shields Avenue                               2040 Sheridan Road
Davis, CA 95616                                  Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER                                         and NBER
bitler@ucdavis.edu                               dws@northwestern.edu

Hilary W. Hoynes
Richard & Rhoda Goldman School of Public Policy
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
hoynes@berkeley.edu
I. Introduction
       The COVID-19 crisis has hit low-income families especially hard. As unemployment
rates have spiked overall, they have risen even higher for those with lower levels of education,
and for Black and Hispanic individuals. Other aspects of the crisis disproportionately impact
low-income families as well; for example low-income families are more likely to be headed by a
single mother, and a higher share of women have lost jobs than during prior recessions. Closures
of schools and child-care centers have meant that large numbers of low-income children have
lost access to free- or reduced-price meals. Food prices have increased sharply leading to a
reduction in the purchasing power of families’ limited income.
       Two pieces of legislation, the Families First Coronavirus Act and the Coronavirus Aid,
Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act, include important provisions to respond to these
historic job losses. Four elements are particularly relevant in our context. First, there were
substantial expansions to unemployment insurance (UI): a $600 per week universal supplement,
a 13-week extension of eligibility, and expanded eligibility for self-employed and gig economy
workers and those without sufficient earnings for normal UI. Second, a one-time payment of
$1,200 per adult ($2,400 for a married couple) plus $500 per dependent child under 17 was
implemented (with phase outs for high-income families). Third, all Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP) payments were raised to the maximum benefit level – averaging a
$165 increase in monthly benefits for households receiving increases. Fourth, a new program
(Pandemic EBT) was launched to provide direct payments to the millions of families whose
children lost access to free and reduced-price meals while their schools were closed.
       Despite these efforts, many individuals and families are suffering. Food insecurity rates
have increased almost three times over the pre-COVID rates with almost a quarter of families
reporting their food “just didn’t last” and they did not have money to buy more. Seven percent of
adults reported receiving help from a food pantry in the prior week, with Feeding America (the
national organization of food pantries) reporting a 70 percent increase in need and many news
outlets documenting miles-long lines of individuals waiting to obtain for food assistance.
Adverse mental health conditions have worsened, with rates of depression and anxiety doubling
over pre-COVID levels. While it will be many months before we have a clear picture of how
family incomes are changing, it is evident from the available real-time data that there currently
remains tremendous unmet need.


                                                  1
        Why do we see so much need and distress despite a policy response of unprecedented
magnitude? In this paper, we examine this question and provide evidence for three explanations.
First, is the timing of the response; many relief payments especially to low-income families
came with a substantial delay—and could not be weathered without hardship (or emergency
charity aid) for those who lacked savings or access to credit. Payment delays have been driven
by overwhelmed UI systems, the need to engineer new programs, and application requirements
for the most disadvantaged families built into the delivery system. To the extent that these are
factors, we should see improvements as administrative capacity and payments increase across
time—though of course hardship may increase once again when emergency payments are rolled
back. Second, outside of the UI system, the magnitude of payments made to low-income families
was relatively modest—averaging $30 to $40 per week—and may not have been sufficient to
offset increased need. Third, there are coverage gaps in the response and some who were hit by
the economic shock had no recourse from existing safety net programs. Importantly, despite
expansions intended to make UI coverage more universal than it has traditionally been, the
limited real-time data suggest that there are still many unemployed workers who are not
receiving UI.
        Furthermore, and more structurally, over the past several decades the U.S. has steered its
social safety net, which has always been less far-reaching and less funded compared to other rich
countries, to focus on work. Through the shift from cash assistance to earnings supplements, and
through adding work requirements to programs designed to meet basic food and healthcare
needs, the United States has built a social safety net that delivers less insurance and has placed
more emphasis on incentivizing work and topping up low earnings. The current system may
meet need during times of low unemployment, but it is ill suited to protect against job loss and
high unemployment. Cash welfare payments for the non-disabled are extremely limited and are
either not countercyclical or only very slightly so (Bitler and Hoynes 2016a; Bitler, Hoynes, and
Iselin, forthcoming). While SNAP payments typically can quickly increase in response to rising
need, the benefits are modest, and recent policy changes—tying SNAP receipt to work for some
groups and making it more difficult for immigrants to participate—will dampen SNAP’s
counter-cyclical impact if not waived. As a result, there are many who are likely falling through
holes in the safety net.



                                                 2
        This analysis leads us to discuss the set of policy responses that could be applied to this
documented need. Policies including the emergency policies expanding UI and SNAP and
replacing missed school meals could be extended and adapted to the ongoing crisis. In addition,
following the successful policies of the 2009 stimulus, one could consider increasing maximum
SNAP benefits by 15 percent. Because UI and SNAP only serve a limited subset of those in
need, another round of stimulus payments could provide relief, potentially targeted more
narrowly to low-income families.
        Second, structural policy changes to our work-based social safety net could enable it to
function more effectively in economic downturns. One approach is to update the UI system to
reach a larger share of unemployed workers—including the self-employed and those with
inconsistent work histories. Another approach is to build more effective counter-cyclicality into
these key safety net programs, with policy changes automatically triggered by increases in the
unemployment rate and shutting off when economic recovery takes place. Additionally, there
would be value in harmonizing Federal and state data systems to facilitate automation of relief
payments to all eligible recipients.


II. The COVID-19 Shock to Economic Wellbeing
        To begin, we deploy the available data to monitor the current, real-time measures of
                                                                                                1
household well-being, with particular attention to the disadvantaged population.
        To understand who is at risk under COVID-19 for needing new or increased access to the
social safety net, we start by describing the extent of job loss. We use the monthly Current
Population Survey (CPS) to document increases in unemployment across education groups (e.g.,
Blau et al., 2020, Montenovo et al. 2020) pooling the data for 24 months ending in June 2020,
limiting the sample to ages 18-64, and estimating a model with calendar month dummies (to
control for seasonality) and month dummies for the four months beginning in March 2020. In
Appendix Table 1, we present the estimated coefficients on the COVID-19 month dummies
(March, partially treated; April; May and June); each provides estimates the effect of the crisis
on labor market outcomes, net of typical seasonal patterns. 2 As has been widely discussed, the



1
  Han at al. (this volume) and Parolin et al (2020) use available data to estimate real time measures of poverty.
2
  The baseline comparison we suggest is to February 2020, but of course, the regression results would be the same as
long as the omitted month is not during March-June.

                                                         3
current crisis has made it difficult to measure unemployment and the Bureau of Labor Statistics
has documented a spike in the share recorded as having jobs but not being at work and also in
those not in the labor force but wanting work—many of whom should likely be classified as
unemployed instead. 3 We estimate those receiving a COVID-19 shock to unemployment (netting
out the previous year) and show three measures of the unemployment shock: the March-June
change in those unemployed, unemployed or having a job and are not at work, and unemployed
or having a job and not at work or not in the labor force. 4 Our preferred measure is the most
expansive and is shown in column 3. Overall, by April 2020 there was a 14.1 percentage-point
increase in the share unemployed or with a job but not at work or not in the labor force (or a 8
percentage-point increase in unemployed, an 11.2 percentage-point increase for those
unemployed or with a job but not at work). The labor market shock has been significantly greater
for those with lower levels of education. The increase in April unemployment (for our preferred
measure) was 17.8 percentage points for those with high school or less compared to 8.8
percentage-points for those with a college degree or more. Because children’s exposure to
economic shocks has been shown to have long-lasting health and economic consequences
(Hoynes and Schanzenbach, 2018), we also analyze changes in children’s exposure to the crisis
as measured by changes in labor market status for adults 18-64 in their household. 5 As shown in
Appendix Table 2, children in households with a household head with high school degree or less
experienced an 10.1 percentage point increase in the likelihood they lived with an adult who was
unemployed, with a job but not at work or not in the labor force in April, compared to 6.9
percentage points for children with a head with a college degree. These striking inequalities in
the extent of the economic shock across education groups continue through May and June 2020
and are evident for all of the labor market measures. This result—that recessions increase




3
  https://www.bls.gov/cps/employment-situation-covid19-faq-may-2020.pdf. The BLS has documented that some
share of those reporting they have a job but are not at work likely are unemployed given ideal definitions of these
measures and also notes similar concerns for those not in the labor force due to COVID. Some who would like to
have work but are not measured as in the labor force reached record levels during the crisis, likely due to closures,
stay at home orders, and concerns about engaging in the labor market (also noted in the BLS FAQ).
4
  For completeness the table also shows estimates for has a job and not at work (column 4), and not in the labor
force (column 5).
5
  Note that unlike measures about own labor force participation and employment status, these measures are not
mutually exclusive, as a child living with more than one adult can live with adults with various employment
outcomes.

                                                           4
unemployment more for lower education groups than higher education groups—is a recurring
feature of U.S. business cycles (Hoynes et al., 2012; Aaronson et al., 2019).
        Also important to the underlying context is that these economic indicators increased more
and did so more quickly during the COVID-19 crisis, compared to the Great Recession (see
Appendix Figures 1a and 1b). 6 The (official) unemployment rate spiked to 14.7 percent in April
2020 and has remained above 10 percent through July (the most recent data available) during
COVID-19, while it reached 10 percent for only a single month in the Great Recession. Food
prices have increased quickly during COVID-19 driven in large part by the largest single-month
increase in nearly 50 years in March. 7
        Next we move beyond labor market outcomes to examine real-time measures of family
economic wellbeing. We start by analyzing food insecurity—a summary measure indicating that
a household does not have reliable access to the food they need due to lack of resources. Usually,
a household’s food insecurity status is categorized based on their answers to an 18-item
questionnaire, ranging from how often the household worried that their food would run out
before there was money to buy more, to whether a child in the household has gone for a day
without eating due to lack of money for food. Food insecurity rates can be thought of as a
measure of economic (lack of) well-being, and the time series pattern is highly correlated with
unemployment rates (Schanzenbach and Pitts, 2020).
        During the COVID-19 pandemic, surveys collecting real-time data have not asked the
entire battery of food security questions, but instead have asked only a few questions drawn from
the survey. We show estimates from three waves of the COVID Impact Survey, which asked
respondents whether the following statement was often true, sometimes true, or never true for
their household over the past 30 days: “The food that we bought just didn’t last, and we didn’t
have money to get more.” We code a respondent as being food insecure if they report that the
statement was often or sometimes true. To compare food insecurity rates during COVID-19 to
the past, we calculate the share answering yes to the same question in the National Health
Interview Survey (NHIS). The NHIS asks the full food security questionnaire, but we limit the


6
  The Appendix Figures differ in when the series documenting unemployment rates and price changes in the Great
Recession begins, with 1a starting at the beginning of the Great Recession and 1b showing the run-up to the
unemployment peak.
7
  These price increases do not include increased time and hassle costs of obtaining food for many families during
COVID-19.

                                                         5
analysis to responses to the single item asking whether the respondent agrees that their food “just
didn’t last.” 8
         Figure 1 displays trends in food insecurity rates for households overall and for those with
children. 9 For respondents overall, rates of food insecurity increased sharply from 11 percent in
2018 (the latest available NHIS estimate) to 23 percent in April 2020. Low-income families with
children have been hit particularly hard during this period, between the loss of free and
subsidized school meals due to school closures and particularly elevated unemployment rates
among women. This is reflected in even greater elevation in food insecurity among respondents
with children, from 13 percent in 2018 to 34 percent in April 2020. 10 The large increase in
(seasonally adjusted official) unemployment, from 3.5 percent in February to 14.7 percent in
April—an out of sample prediction with strong linearity assumptions to be sure—explains more
than half of the increase in food insecurity. Some of the remaining unexplained increase in food
insecurity may be due to the sharp increase in food prices (Appendix Figure 1) or loss of free or
reduced-price school meals due to school closures. 11 Food insecurity rates remain elevated but
have come down somewhat from their April peak, with overall rates of 22 percent in May and 20
percent in June (32 percent and 27 percent for respondents with children, respectively).
         Other measures of real-time hardship are also elevated. Figure 2 displays the share of
households reporting receipt of emergency food from a food bank, food pantry or church, based
on an annual time series 2002-2018 drawn from the CPS-Food Security Supplement (CPS-FSS)
collected each December that asks about receipt of emergency food over the past month. The
blue and orange lines present trends for households overall and for those with children. The


8
  Like the COVID Impact Survey, the NHIS also asks about experiences in the past 30 days. To make the data series
comparable, we weight the NHIS at the respondent level; the COVID Impact Survey only provides respondent-level
weights. In general, in the NHIS the share answering that their food “just didn’t last” is consistently 1.24 (overall) to
1.27 (with children) times the food insecurity rate based on the full questionnaire, see Appendix Table 3.
9
  Appendix Figure 2 shows increases in food hardship measures using the Census Bureau’s Household Pulse Survey
compared with the Current Population Survey’s Food Security Supplement. The Household Pulse Survey asks a
different question from the food security questionnaire and inquires about the past 7 days. Results are qualitatively
similar.
10
   Karpman et al. (2018) find that food insecurity rates are higher in self-administered online surveys than they are in
telephone or in-person interviews, which they theorize is in part due to reduced social desirability bias, suggesting
that the self-administered versions might be more accurate descriptions of respondent well-being.
11
   While many schools continued to offer grab-and-go meals, according to our calculations from the Census
Household Pulse survey fewer than 10 percent of households with children report receiving “free meals through the
school or other programs aimed at children.” Ananat and Gassman-Pines (2020) find that 11 percent of low-income
families reported picking up a grab-and-go meal at their child’s school in the first weeks of school closures. Usually
58 percent of students are eligible for free or reduced-price meals at school.

                                                           6
previous peak, in 2014, showed 2.8 percent of households receiving emergency food (3.6 percent
for households with children) per month. The point estimates for the COVID-19 period represent
responses from the Census Household Pulse Survey (pooled across the April 23-June 26 period),
which asked respondents to report on emergency food from these sources over the past week.
Comparing across data sources, weekly receipt of free food is at or above its previous peak
monthly rate. 12
        In addition, measures of mental health are also being tracked in real-time during COVID-
19 and show elevated rates of distress across three categories: whether the respondent had little
interest in doing things; felt down, depressed or hopeless; or felt nervous, anxious or worried.
During COVID-19, the share of adults reporting mental health problems in the past week has
doubled compared with rates from 2017-18, suggesting serious distress. 13 Rates are generally
higher among those with lower levels of education, and this gradient persists during COVID-19
(see Appendix Table 4).
        The Census Household Pulse survey also asks respondents to rate their confidence in
their ability to pay for basic needs in the coming weeks. In May, more than half of respondents
indicated they are not “very confident” in their ability to pay for the food they need in the next
four weeks, with 9 percent indicating they are “not at all confident.” These rates are uniformly
higher among respondents with children and are higher among respondents with lower levels of
education (see Appendix Table 5). Among those who have a rent or mortgage payment, 43
percent overall and 51 percent of those with children did not have “high confidence” that they
could make their next payment. Together, the evidence suggests that households and individuals
are struggling across a variety of dimensions during COVID-19.


III. The Policy Response: How Much Money is Going to Whom and When?
        Between the Families First Coronavirus Act (passed March 18) and the CARES Act
(passed March 27), more than $1.8 trillion dollars have been allocated in relief and assistance
nationally. Four elements are particularly important for lower-income families: expansions to
SNAP, the new Pandemic-EBT (P-EBT) program that provides payments to compensate for


12
   The COVID Impact Survey also asks about receipt of food over the past 7 days from a food pantry and finds even
higher estimates—6.8% for respondents overall and 8.3% among those with children, averaged across their 3 waves
of data collected from April-June.
13
   The 2017-18 data measures are for the past 2 weeks.

                                                        7
missed school meals, expansions to UI, and the one-time Economic Impact Payments (EIP). As
we will show, these four policies account for about $600 billion and main response of direct
payments to households. Here we track what we know about the magnitude of these benefits,
who they went to, and the timing of their activation.
        By design, and even without Congressional action, SNAP is structured to respond quickly
to increased need. Households that newly become eligible due to unemployment or other loss of
income can apply for SNAP and generally receive benefits with 30 days. Indeed, across states,
SNAP participation increased more between February and April in states with larger increases in
unemployment rates (see Appendix Figure 3) following the pattern found in prior downturns
(Bitler and Hoynes 2016). 14 Additionally, during COVID-19 Congress made temporary changes
that increased both participation and (for many participants) benefit levels. Usually, SNAP
benefits are reduced as a household’s income increases—with a maximum monthly benefit of
about $170 per person reduced by 30 cents for each additional dollar in income (after allowable
deductions). While state and federal health emergencies are in progress, states can award all
SNAP participants the maximum benefit (a provision known as the Emergency Allotment). This
increased SNAP spending (holding participation constant) and provides an average increase in
benefits of 40 percent to those on SNAP with higher incomes—such as the working poor (for
whom SNAP tops up earnings) who have been at particular risk for job loss. To date there has
been no benefit increase for the most disadvantaged SNAP recipients who were already
receiving the maximum benefit. Additionally, states are temporarily allowed to extend eligibility
periods for currently participating households for six months—under normal circumstances
recipients are required to reapply for benefits every 6 to 12 months—so offices already stretched
by health-related office closures and the need to socially distance could concentrate on screening
new applicants. This temporary policy change increased SNAP participation by reducing the
flows out of the program during the pandemic.
        As a result, SNAP spending and participation are increasing with unprecedented speed, as
shown in Figure 3 but as we show below, the magnitude is small relative to UI and the Economic
Impact Payment. Although national data on SNAP participation only come with some lag, the



14
  Worth noting, Florida experienced the largest increase in SNAP participation, likely due in part to their strong
administrative system for SNAP developed to quickly deploy Disaster-SNAP after hurricanes. Rosenbaum (2020)
provided SNAP data.

                                                         8
figure presents the percentage increase in SNAP participation (orange solid line) across 43 states
that have released their data for April and/or May (these states account for 97 percent of SNAP
participation). Relative to February, SNAP participation increased by 12 percent in April, and by
17 percent by May. For comparison, SNAP participation increases during the Great Recession
are shown as the orange dotted line. It took 9 months to see the same SNAP participation
increase during the Great Recession, but of course unemployment also grew more slowly during
that recession. 15 SNAP spending (green solid line) is calculated using Daily Treasury Statements
and compares spending on SNAP by month through July relative to spending in February. Some
of the spending increase is due to the new P-EBT program, which provides benefits patterned
after SNAP to families who lost access to free- or reduced-price meals due to school closures. By
the end of July, SNAP spending has more than doubled. Our calculations suggest about 20
percent of the increase is explained by increases in participation, 40 percent is due to paying all
participants the maximum benefit, and 40 percent is from P-EBT payments. Much of this
increase is slated to end soon, as P-EBT payments have not (yet) been extended to cover fall
school closures, and states are only eligible to pay maximum benefits to all SNAP participants as
long as there is a state and federal health emergency. Spending grew much more slowly during
the Great Recession (green dotted line) and increased substantially when the 15 percent increase
in maximum SNAP benefits authorized by Congress as part of the ARRA stimulus package was
implemented.
        The Congressional policy response also included large expansions to UI, including a
$600 per week supplement, a 13-week extension of fully federally funded benefits, and an
expansion of eligibility for self-employed and gig-economy workers and other patches to reach
workers who were previously excluded from eligibility (under the new Pandemic Unemployment
Assistance or PUA program). 16 The number of UI participants has increased to record levels,
with 34.5 million total continuing claims through the week ending July 4, as shown in Appendix
Figure 5. After their early May peak, regular continuing claims have started to decrease while
PUA claims, after considerable delay in initiation, started to increase.



15
   Appendix Figure 4 shows the growth of SNAP spending and participation for the 12 months leading up to the
unemployment rate peak during the Great Recession. The patterns are qualitatively similar.
16
   The Federal government also is funding the "waiting" week for UI, so benefits get out more quickly and most
states have suspended search requirements for obtaining UI during the health crisis through May at least.

                                                        9
        The one-time Economic Impact Payments included in the CARES Act provide $1,200
per adult ($2,400 for a married couple) and $500 per dependent under 17. This was structured as
a fully refundable tax credit, phased out beginning at annual incomes of $150,000 for married
couples, $112,000 for head of household filers, and $75,000 for single filers. Treasury provided
automatic payments for all who filed federal taxes in tax years 2018 or 2019 as well as many
elderly or disabled individuals receiving payments through Social Security or Veteran’s Affairs
programs. 17 However, entire families that included any immigrant adult without an SSN were
ineligible, thus excluding many citizen children and spouses (if not in the military). The initial
payments were made to those with direct deposit information during the week of April 17 and
paper checks followed more slowly after that.
        Putting this all together, Figure 4 shows weekly spending on Economic Impact Payments,
UI, and SNAP (including P-EBT) calculated from Daily Treasury Statements. 18 The increase in
UI payments have averaged $23 billion per week since May. We estimate $137 billion in
Economic Impact Payments were made in mid-April when the direct deposit payments were
made, with smaller amounts paid in subsequent weeks as the paper checks rolled out. Increases
in SNAP, the only program with payments narrowly targeted to low-income families, hover
around $1 billion per week, with some weekly fluctuation due to variation across states in timing
of monthly SNAP benefit payments and disbursal of P-EBT benefits. Between these three
categories of spending, nearly $600 billion in new expenditures occurred between April and
July—almost $360 billion through UI, $216 billion through Economic Impact Payments, and less
than $20 billion in new spending came through SNAP. 19
        There is some emerging evidence that these payments are helping alleviate hardship. For
example, unemployed workers who report receiving UI have lower levels of food insecurity than
do those who unsuccessfully attempted to receive UI. Food insecurity rates reported in the
COVID Impact Survey dropped from 23 percent in April to 20 percent in June for respondents
overall, and from 35 percent to 28 percent among respondents with children (Figure 1). The
Census Household Pulse survey shows improvements in the share of respondents stating that
they are “very confident” they will be able to afford to purchase the foods they need over the


17
   Some of the SSA groups had to submit forms to receive dependent payments
18
   We follow Tedeschi (2020) here, who estimates Economic Impact Payment and UI payments by calculating year-
over-year changes by week. We also use this approach for SNAP spending.
19
   Appendix Figure 6 shows cumulative weekly spending using the same data.

                                                     10
next four weeks, increasing from 55 percent of households at the beginning of May to 60 percent
at the beginning of June. Furthermore, new evidence finds that receipt of P-EBT payments
decreases measures of food hardship (Bauer et al., 2020). Despite noteworthy improvements,
these measures are still extremely elevated, and are generally worse for families with children,
and for Black and Hispanic respondents.


IV.     With This Policy Response, Why Is There Need?
        Given the policy response to date, why do we see such large unmet economic need?
There are three driving factors: delays in the receipt of payments that were authorized, modest
benefit levels (for programs other than UI), and holes in coverage. In this section, we describe
elements of the policy implementation, including slow rollout, cumbersome administrative
processes, as well as more structural deficiencies.
        The available real-time evidence shows that despite high levels of aggregate claims,
many workers, especially those with low levels of education, are not receiving UI. We establish
this finding from survey and administrative data sources and is consistent with experiences
during previous recessions. Panel A of Table 1 presents data from week 3 of COVID Impact
Survey data collected May 30 – June 6 (Wozniak et al. 2020). We tabulate data on receipt of UI
and SNAP among workers reporting being on furlough. The survey asks “In the past 7 days,
have you either received, applied for, or tried to apply for any of the following forms of income
assistance, or not?” and the interviewer asks about UI and SNAP. The table presents the
responses separately for those with a high school education or less, some college, or a college
degree or more. The results show striking disparities in access to UI payments – among
furloughed persons with a high school degree or less, 42 percent were receiving UI compared to
52 percent for those with a college degree or more. And this disparity in access to UI is
consistent with prior recessions. Panel B of Table 1 presents a similar gradient for the Great
Recession using the 2008 Panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation. Using the
sample of individuals in short-term unemployment near the trough of the Great Recession, 29
percent of those with a high school degree or less were receiving UI compared to 47 percent of
college graduates. It is also important to note that this table suggests that there is only partial
overlap between UI and SNAP receipt among the unemployed/furloughed, and a substantial



                                                   11
share obtain SNAP but not UI. Around half of furloughed (during COVID-19) or short-term
unemployed (during the Great Recession) report receiving neither UI nor SNAP.
        To explore why UI does not reach all unemployed workers, now and in previous
recessions, we use the 2019 CPS Annual Social and Economic Supplement (which covers 2018
calendar year) and the 2020 UI calculator in Ganong et al. (2020) to simulate the share of
individuals age 20-59 with positive earnings who would be eligible for UI (under normal UI
rules, i.e. without Federal expansions) if they became unemployed. 20 There are sharp disparities
in eligibility, with much lower eligibility rates for those in lower-income families (see Appendix
Figure 7). For workers in families with income below 100 percent of poverty, only 63 percent are
eligible for UI compared to 87 percent among all workers. Among those with income below
poverty, 14 percent of the ineligible are unauthorized (not eligible to work legally), another 7
percent are ineligible due to being self-employed, and 17 percent are authorized and have wage
and salary earnings, but do not meet the work history requirements. 21 Importantly, the new PUA
provisions in the CARES Act have attempted to fill the gap in eligibility for the self-employed
and those with insufficient work history so it is possible that more of these 7 + 17 percent now
have UI eligibility; changes have not altered ineligibility rates for unauthorized workers. Thus, as
many as 14 percent of those under the poverty level may still be ineligible under the best-case
scenario. In addition, there is widespread variation in the share of those unemployed who obtain
UI conditional on being eligible. O'Leary and Wandner (2020) report that in 2018, the share of
the eligible unemployed receiving UI ranged from 10.5 percent in North Carolina to 95 percent
in Rhode Island. Murray and Olivares (2020) report that states with higher rates of pre-COVID
UI utilization among those eligible are paying out more claims in the COVID era, suggesting a
role for administrative burdens.




20
   The code for the Ganong et al (2020) calculator is available at https://github.com/ganong-noel/ui_calculator.
Ganong et al. (2020) also present eligibility estimates using their calculator; their approach differs slightly from
ours. They focus on all workers who are U.S. citizens, have hourly wage and salary earnings above the federal
minimum wage, and who are eligible for UI based on their earnings history. Our sample differs in that we restrict
the sample to workers ages 20-59 and expand it to include all workers regardless of immigration status and with any
positive earnings, not just those with wage and salary earnings above the federal minimum wage. When estimating
potential eligibility should they be laid off and average weekly benefits, we treat workers who are likely
unauthorized immigrants as ineligible for UI benefits. We also ignore self-employment income in determining UI
eligibility and benefits.
21
   We follow Passel (2007) to identify survey respondents as unauthorized immigrants.

                                                        12
        Next, we turn to real-time administrative data to assess how the UI system responded to
this unprecedented increase in unemployment. Ideally we would present, weekly and by state,
the number of persons receiving regular UI, PUA, and the $600 supplement, along with the dates
of initiation for the new programs. While we (and others) have made valiant attempts to
assemble this, as of this writing there is no systematic data source available to identify this
information. One approach is to use Department of Labor reports of weekly continuing claims.
However, many concerns have been raised about the use of continuing claims to capture number
of recipients, particularly for PUA. First, the count of continuing claims is the number of
weeks*people not the number of people—this is particularly problematic when there are delays
in processing and back payments are issued with first payments. 22 Second, continuing claims can
include claimants who are still pending a determination and denials can occur after this stage
(Hedin et al. 2020). Additionally, PUA continuing claims appear to be inconsistently reported
during the COVID-19 crisis. 23 Another approach is to use Department of Labor reports of
weekly initial claims—yet these also have weaknesses, including subsequent denials, double
counting due to returning to UI after brief return to work, and, particularly for PUA, capturing
possible fraud. 24
        Despite these data challenges, the available evidence clearly points to significant delays,
especially in the rollout of PUA across states. This is not surprising, as states had to design
entirely new methods to ensure eligibility for PUA, and states varied widely in their
administrative capacity and the need for social distancing in the early months of the pandemic.
Additionally, for a state to receive Federal reimbursements for PUA, its recipients must be
ineligible for state UI. In practice, in some states PUA applicants must apply to and be rejected
from the regular UI program before they could separately apply for PUA, leading to further


22
   For example, if it takes four weeks to process the claim when the first payment is made, it will count “4” in
continuing claims that week due to the back pay.
23
   Take Florida for example: the first initial claim reported to DOL for PUA was for the week ending June 27 despite
an April 25 press release announcing people could start applying for PUA. Additionally, there have been no
continuing claims reported as data downloaded August 9 yet the state data dashboard reports they have paid out
$453 million of PUA as of August 9. Using data shared by Morales and Olivares (2020) and Cajner et al. (2020) we
document similar discrepancies between the timing of the first week first claims were reported to the Department of
Labor and when states reported that they started accepting PUA claims, with at least 23 states accepting PUA
applications at least 7 days before the first week of initial claims was reported to DOL, and with the average
difference being 29 days. We thank them for generously sharing their data.
24
   For example, the state of Ohio froze 270,000 claims as of August 7 in order to investigate fraud at a time when
about 500,000 PUA claims had been paid, and the U.S. Labor Department inspector general raised concerns about
fraud in a May 26 Alert Memorandum.

                                                        13
delays. Using information from state press releases, we can document significant delays and
wide differences in when PUA was first paid out—ranging from as early as March in New
Hampshire (which had passed a program expanding UI to the self-employed even before the
CARES Act), to April 30 in California, to May 11 in West Virginia and May 26 in Kansas. 25
States also varied in the timing of their payment of the Federal supplemental $600 weekly
payment (FPUC) which was meant to go to all UI recipients.
        Using less granular monthly data, we can also calculate for the U.S. a more reliable
measure of the UI utilization rate by taking the ratio of “first UI payments” available monthly for
regular and PUA UI from the Department of Labor (currently through May 2020 for all states
reporting PUA first payments) to the total number of unemployed. 26 First payments get around
the problem of subsequent denials as well as being an unduplicated count of recipients.
Combining regular state UI and PUA first payments, we find that 6.4 percent of the unemployed
had received a first payment in March, rising to 53.9 percent in April and 84.9 percent in May
(see Appendix Table 6). If we limit to payments for PUA, we find 1.6 percent of the unemployed
received a first payment by April 2020 rising to 11.0 percent in May.
        In summary, the combination of real-time survey and administrative data, the historical
patterns, and policy changes during COVID-19 suggest that while UI is serving the majority of
the unemployed, it is far from universal. During COVID-19, UI has been slow to reach the
unemployed and there is a sizeable share—disproportionately those with low levels of
education—who are not receiving benefits. This is consistent with available pre-COVID
evidence.
        Coverage was incomplete for the Economic Impact Payments as well. According to the
Daily Treasury Statements (shown in Appendix Figure 6), cumulative payments for the one-time
Economic Impact Payments ($1,200 per adult and $500 per child under 17) through the end of
July 2020 are around $215 billion. However, despite the apparent universality of the payment for
those with income below the high income phase-out level, the design of the payment scheme has


25
   Many states also started by sending PUA applicants the minimum payment (plus, where relevant the additional
$600 Federal payment), and then later determined actual payment eligibility amounts and sent back payments where
appropriate.
26
   Regular and PUA UI first payments come from the 902P and 5159 forms from the Department of Labor,
respectively. PEUC first payments are very small, so we exclude them from the graphs. For the denominator we use
CPS monthly estimates of those unemployed (adjusted for changes in those with a job but not at work and not in the
labor force over the previous year).

                                                       14
left out the most disadvantaged Americans. First, the law excludes immigrant families who are
deemed ineligible if any adult or spouse lacks a Social Security number (unless the family
included a member of the military). 27 Second, the payments were sent automatically, with no
additional action, for tax filers (in 2018 or 2019) and those receiving benefits from the Social
Security Administration or Veterans Affairs. Marr et al. (2020) estimate that 12 million nonfilers
are eligible for the relief payment but did not automatically receive it. Instead to receive these
payments individuals are required to apply for the payment through a new IRS non-filer tool.
This nonfiler population is a disadvantaged group with low income, and an estimated three
quarters of them are eligible for SNAP or Medicaid. Based on the Urban Institute Coronavirus
Tracking Survey, wave 1, fielded between May 14 and May 27, 59 percent of adults with income
below poverty reported that they had received their Economic Impact Payment compared with
78 percent among those eligible with income above poverty.
        Another source of delay in benefits reaching needy families came from having to create a
new program in the midst of the pandemic. When schools across the U.S. closed in mid-March,
30 million students lost daily access to free or reduced-price school meals. To offset this loss,
Congress authorized the new Pandemic EBT program to provide food benefits to families who
lost subsidized school meals. In order to participate, though, states had to set up and receive
approval from USDA this completely new program. Payments came out slowly, as shown in
Figure 5, by two months after the Families First Act authorized the program, very few states had
made payments—about 15 percent of eligible families lived in states where P-EBT benefits
began being dispersed to those on SNAP (where pre-existing debit cards could be used) and
fewer than 10 percent lived in states where non-SNAP recipients eligible for school meals
programs were dispersing P-EBT benefits. Many states did not make retroactive payments until
June or July.
        In sum, this discussion illustrates the delays and incomplete coverage in the policy
response. Also among those eligible we have incomplete take-up of these programs. Why? This
is a direct result of the “application-based” policy environment. Across the different relief
provisions, some payments were made automatically (recovery rebate for previous tax filers,
increase in SNAP benefit for existing participants) while others required application (UI,


27
  Also ineligible are adult dependents, 17-year-olds, and college students whom their parents can claim as
dependents.

                                                        15
recovery rebate for some non-filers, Pandemic EBT for those not on SNAP in some states).
Decades of research shows that take-up rates are incomplete when an application is required.
Individuals need to know about the program to access them (Currie 2006). Administrative
hassles are built into many programs and contribute to the less than complete take-up (Herd and
Moynihan 2019). In addition, as the COVID-19 crisis has highlighted, states have made policy
choices that result in differential capacity to quickly enroll newly unemployed individuals.


V. Putting the Policy Response in the Context of the Broader Social Safety Net
         The COVID-19 crisis has been met with an extraordinary economic policy response. It is
important to understand, though, that the U.S. social safety net—the foundation beneath this
policy response—has been redesigned in recent decades in ways that have made it less
responsive to economic downturns. In the years following the Great Recession, many states have
reduced the generosity of their UI programs. Average replacement rates to low-income workers
are below 50 percent in many states (Appendix Figure 8), providing very limited earnings
replacement. More generally, our social safety net has shifted toward a work-conditioned social
safety net, using earnings subsidies to increase incomes among workers but offering relatively
little out-of-work assistance (to those not elderly or disabled). These changes have been ushered
in through the 1996 welfare reform law, expansions to the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC),
and, for some populations, work requirements for SNAP. More recently work requirements have
been adopted in some states for Medicaid and regulations implemented to expand SNAP work
requirements. The result is a social safety net with an emphasis on promoting and rewarding
work—a system that may be adequate during times of low unemployment but provides too little
insurance against job loss and economic shocks. 28
         Recent work by Bitler, Hoynes and Iselin (2020) and Bitler and Hoynes (2016)
summarizes how participation in SNAP, UI, the EITC and cash welfare varies with the
unemployment rate at the state level, and how that has changed over time. In the period since
2007, only UI shows a robust countercyclical response, with a 1 percentage-point increase in
unemployment leading to an 18 percent increase in UI spending. SNAP has a weaker response,


28
  For reference, anti-poverty effects of existing programs in 2018 for children, adults with and without children, and
the elderly are presented in Appendix Figure 9. The Earned Income Tax Credit has the largest anti-poverty impact
for children and adults who live with them, followed by SNAP, housing assistance, and school meals. Among the
elderly and childless adults, Social Security overwhelmingly has the largest anti-poverty effect.

                                                         16
with a one percentage-point increase in the unemployment rate leading to a 7 percent increase in
SNAP spending. Neither the work-conditioned EITC nor cash welfare systematically change in
response to the economy. In other words, despite its important role in reducing poverty, the EITC
is poorly suited to insure consumption against job loss. 29
         Overall, the literature shows that on the eve of the COVID-19 crisis, the safety net was
providing uneven and incomplete protection. While UI is strongly counter-cyclical overall, not
all unemployed workers receive benefits—including undocumented immigrants and those with
inconsistent work histories. Cash welfare does not respond to aggregate economic need, and the
EITC is not designed to provide insurance against job loss. SNAP does have the capacity to
expand during economic downturns, but benefits are modest and since its benefits are food
vouchers they are only partially fungible. In addition, recent policy changes risk further
dampening the protective effects of SNAP by imposing stricter work requirements among non-
disabled adults without dependents and reducing participation among immigrants and families
with mixed immigration status. 30


VI. Looking Forward
         Next we discuss the set of policy responses that could be applied to this documented
need. The increased payments authorized by Congress for UI, SNAP and for missed school
meals have been crucial, if incomplete, responses—but all are in danger of not being continued
as cases continue to surge at the time of this writing. For example, the $600/week UI supplement
was allowed to expire at the end of July, and PUA (covering the self-employed) is scheduled to
expire at the end of December. The temporary increase in SNAP payments is not tied to the state
of the economy, but instead is only authorized through the duration of national and state health
emergencies. Pandemic EBT has not yet been extended into the 2020 school year for students


29
   Bitler et al. (2017) show that lack of cyclicality of the EITC masks two opposing responses: a procyclical effect
for single filer EITC recipients (whose EITC payment falls or is lost all together with economic shocks) and a
countercyclical effect for married filers (or more generally those with higher predicted earnings) for whom a labor
market shock can bring them down into EITC eligibility.
30
   When labor market conditions are poor, states can waive SNAP time limits when particular economic conditions
(based on employment statistics in the state or local area) are met, so that food assistance is not conditional on
employment during bad economic times. The Trump Administration issued a new rule effective April 1 2020
making it more difficult to obtain time-limit waivers. Importantly, the new rule requires that states have elevated
unemployment rates for at least the previous 12 months, slowing the ability of the program to respond to immediate
need at the onset of an economic downturn.


                                                         17
who are engaged in remote learning. This potential rollback in support is occurring despite an
unemployment rate that still exceeds the maximum rates experienced in the Great Recession.
One obvious option is to continue the policy responses of July, in particular those applying to UI
and SNAP but phase them out only as the economic emergency recedes.
       As a general matter, our safety net as designed may need an additional boost during
recessions to have a strong countercyclical response. Usual state UI systems generally provide
low payments (as a share of wages) for a short duration. SNAP benefits are modest and are
intended to supplement other food resources. The EITC tops up low earnings but is not
countercyclical. Because these limitations are known, and since there is a high cost both to
policy uncertainty and to delays in relief payments, one solution which could provide
countercyclical smoothing would build automatic expansions into key safety net programs
during recessions (as proposed in Boushey et al. 2019). For example, following the successful
policies of the 2009 stimulus, maximum SNAP benefits could be increased by 15 percent
(thereby reaching those most disadvantaged recipients who did not gain from the current SNAP
expansions). In order to support a work-based safety net, the UI system could be redesigned to
provide more insurance and to reach a larger share of disadvantaged unemployed workers during
recessions, for example by making permanent the pandemic expansions to UI that extended
coverage to self-employed and gig workers and to those with limited work histories, although
this may require rethinking the UI tax system for these groups. We could also build a
harmonized federal and state data system to facilitate automated relief payments to all eligible
Americans. For example, information from state administered SNAP and Medicaid data systems
should have been available to the Treasury to facilitate EIP payments for this group. Finally, this
crisis has made clear the value for states in increasing their administrative capacity for their
programs, particularly UI.


VII. Conclusions
       The COVID-19 recession is unlike previous recessions due to its depth and speed of
onset. In response to this shock, Congress enacted a number of smart short-term fixes to the
safety net that have improved its ability to insure low-income families during this recession,
including increasing UI payments and extending eligibility, increasing SNAP payments to some
participants, sending cash relief payments (EIP), and introducing a new program to replace


                                                 18
missed school meals (P-EBT). Without question, these policies have improved the
responsiveness of the safety net to this crisis and have reduced suffering that would have
occurred without these actions.
       Even with these valuable policy responses, there is still tremendous unmet need. Food
insecurity has sharply increased, as has the share of families relying on emergency food pantries.
Some excess suffering occurred because much of the policy response was slow to roll out and
reach needy families. The available yet incomplete data suggest a sizeable subset who
experienced shocks have not received safety net payments, for example some workers who lost
their jobs are not receiving benefits from UI or SNAP. In addition, there remain great economic
risks if additional policy responses are removed too quickly, because the underlying U.S. safety
net does not provide adequate protection during recessions.


References
Aaronson, Stephanie R., Mary C. Daly, William L. Wascher, and David W. Wilcox. “Okun
Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy?” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 2019, no. 1 (2019): 333-404.

Ananat, Elizabeth O. and Anna Gassman-Pines. 2020. “Snapshot of the COVID Crisis Impact on
Working Families.” Econofact, March 30.
Bauer, Lauren, Abigail Pitts, Krista Ruffini, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, 2020. “The
Effect of Pandemic EBT on Measures of Food Hardship,” The Hamilton Project, Economic
Analysis, July 30.
Bitler, Marianne and Hilary Hoynes, 2016. “The More Things Change, the More They Stay the
Same? The Safety Net and Poverty in the Great Recession,” Journal of Labor Economics Vol.
34, No. S1, Part 2.
Bitler, Marianne, Hilary Hoynes and John Iselin. 2020. The Cyclicality of Cash and Near Cash
Transfer Programs, forthcoming, National Tax Journal.
Bitler, Marianne, Hilary Hoynes and Elira Kuka, 2017. “Do In-Work Tax Credits Serve as a
Safety Net?” Journal of Human Resources Vol 36, Issue 2, pp. 358-389.
Blau, Francine, Josefine Koebe and Pamela Meyerhofer. 2020. “Essential and Frontline Workers
in the COVID-19 Crisis,” EconoFact, April 30, 2020.
Boushey, Heather Ryan Nunn, and Jay Shambaugh. 2019. Recession Ready: Fiscal Policies to
Stabilize the American Economy. Hamilton Project and Washington Center for Equitable
Growth.


                                                19
Cajner, Tomaz, Andrew Figura, Brendan Price, David Ratner, and Alison Weingarden. 2020.
"Reconciling Unemployment Claims with Job Losses in the First Months of the COVID-19
Crisis." Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-55, (Washington, DC: Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System).
Currie, Janet, 2006. “The Take Up of Social Benefits,” in Alan Auerbach, David Card, and John
Quigley (eds). Poverty, the Distribution of Income, and Public Policy, (New York: Russell Sage)
2006, 80-148.
Fox, Liana. 2019. “The Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2018,” Current Population Reports, P60-
268.
Ganong, Peter, Pascal Noel, and Joseph Vavra. 2020. “US Unemployment Insurance
Replacement Rates During the Pandemic,” Becker Friedman Institute Working Paper.
Han, Jeehoon, Bruce D. Meyer, and James X. Sullivan. 2020. “Income and Poverty in the
COVID-19 Pandemic,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, this volume.
Herd, Pamela and Donald Moynihan 2019. Administrative Burden: Policymaking by Other
Means, Russell Sage Foundation.
Hedin, Thomas, Geoffrey Schnorr, and Till von Wachter. 2020. “An Analysis of Unemployment
Insurance Claims in California During the COVID-19 Pandemic,” California Policy Lab Policy
Brief, June 11, 2020.
Hoynes, Hilary, Doug Miller and Jessamyn Schaller, 2012. “Who Suffers During Recessions?”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Volume 26, Number 3, pages 27–48.
Hoynes, Hilary and Ankur Patel, 2018 “Effective Policy for Reducing Inequality? The Earned
Income Tax Credit and the Distribution of Income,” Journal of Human Resources 53:859-890
Hoynes, Hilary and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach 2018. “Safety Net Investments in Children,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Fall 2018.
Karpman, Michael, Stephen Zuckerman, and Dulce Gonzalez. 2018. “The Well-Being and Basic
Needs Survey: A New Data Source for Monitoring the Health and Well-being of Individuals and
Families.” Washington: Urban Institute.
Marr, Chuck Kris Cox, Kathleen Bryant, Stacy Dean, Roxy Caines and Arloc Sherman. 2020.
“12 Million Non-Filers Eligible for Stimulus Payments,” Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
Montenovo, Laura, Xuan Jiang, Felipe Lozano Rojas, Ian Schmutte, Kosali Simon, Bruce
Weinberg and Cody Wing. 2020. “Unequal Employment Impacts of COVID-19”, June 1, 2020.
Murray, Seth, and Edward Olivares. 2020. “Job Losses During the Onset of the COVID-19
Pandemic: Stay-at-home Orders, Industry Composition, and Administrative Capacity.” Available
at SSRN: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3633502

O'Leary, Christopher J., and Stephen A. Wandner. 2020. “An Illustrated Case for Unemployment
Insurance Reform.” Upjohn Institute Working Paper 19-317.

                                              20
Parolin, Zachary, Megan Curran, and Christopher Wimer. 2020. “A Framework for Projecting
Current Poverty Rates During and After the COVID-19 Pandemic.”
Passel, Jeffrey. 2007. “Unauthorized Migrants in the United States: Estimates, Methods, and
Characteristics.” OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers No. 57. Paris:
OECD Working Party on Migration, September.
Rosenbaum, Dottie. 2020. “Boost SNAP to Capitalize on Program’s Effectiveness and Ability to
Respond to Need.” Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, July 18.
Schanzenbach, Diane Whitmore and Abigail Pitts. 2020. “Estimates of Food Insecurity During
the COVID-19 Crisis: Results from the COVID Impact Survey, Week 1 (April 20-26, 2020).”
IPR Rapid Research Report, May 13, 2020.
Tedeschi, Ernie. 2020. “U.S. Fiscal Tracker: Major Disbursements Fall to $31 Billion.” Evercore
ISI Macro Note, June 12.
Wozniak, Abigail, Joe Willey, Jennifer Benz, and Nick Hart. COVID Impact Survey: Version 1
[dataset]. Chicago, IL: National Opinion Research Center, 20




                                              21
Figure 1. Food Insecurity Rates, 2011-2018 and During COVID-19

                                       40%
  % of respondents saying food "just
  didn't last," no money to get more


                                       30%


                                       20%


                                       10%


                                       0%




                                             Respondents Overall   Respondents w/ Children


Notes: Authors’ tabulations from the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) and the COVID Impact Survey. The
blue (orange) line is the annual average share of respondents (respondents with children) reporting that over the past
30 days it was sometimes or often the case that their “food just didn’t last” and they didn’t have money to get more,
calculated from the NHIS 2011-2018. The three connected blue (orange) dots at the right are share of respondents
(respondents with children) reporting that over the past 30 days it was sometimes or often the case that their “food
just didn’t last” and they didn’t have money to get more, calculated from the COVID Impact Survey collected April
20-26, May 4-10, and May 30-June 8 and labelled April, May, and June 2020, respectively. Statistics are
respondent-weighted.




                                                                         22
Figure 2. Received Food from a Food Bank/Pantry or Church, All Households and Households
with Children

 4.5%
                                                                      Food Bank Use
                                                                                    3.8%
 4.0%                                                                   Last Week
 3.5%

 3.0%
           Food Bank Use                                                                 2.7%
 2.5%       Last Month
              CPS-FSS
 2.0%

 1.5%

 1.0%

 0.5%

 0.0%
        2002     2004     2006     2008     2010     2012     2014     2016     2018    May-20

                                       Overall        w/Children


Notes: Authors’ tabulations of CPS Food Security Supplement (CPS-FSS) and Census Pulse Survey. The blue and
orange lines plot the share of households (blue) or households with children (orange) who reported using a food
bank, pantry or church sometime in the last month from the CPS-FSS for December 2002-2018. The blue square
(orange circle) plot the share of households (households with children) who visited a food pantry in the past week,
based on the Census Pulse Survey pooled across April 23-May 26. Statistics are weighted to be representative of all
U.S. households, using household weights in the CPS-FSS and calculating pseudo-household weights in the Census
Pulse Survey by dividing the respondent weight by the number of adults in the household.




                                                        23
Figure 3. Percentage Increase in SNAP Participation and Spending Since Business Cycle Peak:
COVID-19 vs. Great Recession

                                                    120%
  Percent increase in SNAP participants, spending




                                                    100%
                                                               Spending,
                                                    80%        COVID-19
             since business cycle peak




                                                    60%

                                                                                                                  Spending,
                                                    40%                                                           Great Rec.
                                                                       Participation,
                                                    20%
                                                                       COVID-19

                                                                                                              Participation, Great Rec.
                                                     0%
                                                           0   1   2       3      4     5     6     7     8       9    10      11   12

                                                    -20%
                                                                               Months since business cycle peak


Notes: Authors' calculations of Great Recession spending and caseload data, and February 2020 caseload data, from
USDA, Food & Nutrition Service, SNAP Data National Level Annual Summary. Growth in caseloads in March-
May 2020 calculated from states that have reported caseload data as of July 31, 2020. 43 (42) states have released
April (May) SNAP participation, and these states made up 97% (97%) of all SNAP participation in February.
Growth in SNAP spending in 2020 is reported in Daily Treasury Statements through July 31, 2020. All series are
plotted as growth by month since the business cycle peak, which was December 2007 for the Great Recession and
February 2020 for the COVID-19 recession.




                                                                                             24
Figure 4. Weekly Spending on Unemployment Insurance, Economic Impact Payments, and
SNAP by Week (Billions of 2020$)

                                    160

                                    140
  New spending per week, billions




                                    120

                                    100

                                    80

                                    60

                                    40 CARES Act
                                           Passed
                                    20

                                     0



                                          Unemployment Insurance   Economic Impact Payments        SNAP

Notes: Authors' tabulations of Daily Treasury Statements through July 31 for SNAP, Unemployment Insurance
Benefits, and IRS Tax Refunds to Individuals. We difference expenditures from the inflation-adjusted same-week
payments in 2019 to net out the seasonality in payments and to separate Economic Impact Payments from usual tax
refunds. We censor Economic Impact Payments at zero prior to the week of April 17.




                                                                   25
Figure 5. Timing of Pandemic Assistance Payments for P-EBT




Notes: The blue (red) line displays the share of children who participate in the National School Lunch Program who
live in states that have disbursed Pandemic-EBT (P-EBT) payments to families receiving free or reduced-price
meals who also participate in SNAP (do not participate in SNAP).




                                                        26
Table 1. Program Receipt Among the Unemployed

                                                                       Both UI +
                                      Any UI         Any SNAP                             Neither
                                                                        SNAP
                                 (1)          (2)                          (3)              (4)
 Panel A: Furloughed Individuals, June 2020
 <=High School                  42%          11%                          6%               52%
 Some College                   55%          24%                          18%              38%
 BA +                           52%           9%                          6%               46%
 Panel B: Short-term Unemployed Individuals, 2008
 <=High School                  29%          29%                           6%              48%
 Some College                   37%          21%                           5%              47%
 BA +                           47%           6%                           3%              50%

Notes: Panel A is authors’ tabulations of the COVID Impact Survey for the sample of furloughed workers, survey
week 3 (collected May 30-June 8). We tabulate data on receipt of UI and SNAP, where the survey asks “In the past
7 days, have you either received, applied for, or tried to apply for any of the following forms of income assistance,
or not?” The sample consists of those reporting they are unemployed due to furlough at the time of the survey. Panel
B is authors’ tabulations of the 2008 SIPP Panel and includes individuals ages 20-59 who were unemployed and
looking for work for at least a week in the first month of wave 6 of the 2008 SIPP (January – April 2010) and had
been unemployed for fewer than 4 months. Receipt of UI and SNAP is measured for the first month of wave 6. UI
refers to own receipt and SNAP refers to receipt within the household. All statistics are weighted to be
representative of the adult population.




                                                         27
APPENDIX TABLES & FIGURES




                            28
Appendix Table 1. Changes in Measures of Unemployment, Has a Job but Not at Work, and Not in the
Labor Force, Adults 18-64, All and by Education Group

                       Unemployed          Unemployed/has Unemployed/has                   Has job, not           NILF
                                           job not at work      job not at                  at work
                                                               work/NILF
                              (1)                (2)               (3)                          (5)                 (8)
                                             Panel A: Means in February
             All            3.0%                4.8%              27.5%                        1.8%               22.7%
     HS DO/HS               4.3%                5.9%              36.2%                        1.7%               30.3%
            grad
   Some college        2.8%            4.5%               28.9%             1.8%           24.4%
   4-year degree       1.8%            3.9%               16.7%             2.1%           12.7%
                 Panel B: All 18-64, coeff. from regressions with month fixed effects
     March 2020        0.5%            1.0%                1.3%             0.6%          0.2% (NS)
      April 2020       8.0%            11.2%              14.1%             3.3%            2.9%
      May 2020         6.9%            8.8%               10.8%             1.8%            2.1%
      June 2020        5.5%            5.8%                7.1%             0.3%            1.3%
          Panel C: HS DO/HS grad. 18-64, coeff. from regressions with month fixed effects
     March 2020        0.7%            1.4%                2.2%             0.7%            0.8%*
      April 2020       9.4%            13.7%              17.8%             4.3%            4.1%
      May 2020         8.2%            10.3%              13.4%             2.2%            3.0%
      June 2020        5.8%            6.4%                9.1%             0.6%            2.7%
          Panel D: 18-64 with some college, coeff. from regressions with month fixed effects
     March 2020        0.3%*           0.8%                1.6%             0.6%         0.8% (NS)
      April 2020       9.6%            13.3%              17.1%             3.7%            3.8%
      May 2020         8.7%            11.1%              13.9%             2.4%            2.7%
      June 2002        6.8%            7.3%                9.0%             0.6%            1.6%
         Panel E: 18-64 with 4-year degree, coeff. from regressions with month fixed effects
     March 2020        0.4%            0.8%                0.6% (NS)        0.4%*       -0.1% (NS)
      April 2020       5.3%            7.3%                8.8%             2.0%            1.5%
      May 2020         4.4%            5.5%                6.5%             1.1%            1.0%
      June 2002        4.4%            4.1%                4.7%          -0.3% (NS)      0.6% (NS)
Notes: Author's calculations based on pooled monthly CPS data, Panel A; and 24 months ending in June 2020 in
Panels B-E. Regressions in Panel B-E show coefficients on dummies for March 2020, April 2020, May 2020, and
June 2020. Regressions in Panel B-E control for month in year dummies and use using monthly CPS weights. Panel
C shows outcomes for Panel B specification for HS DO/HS graduates. Panel D is same but for some college adults.
Panel E is same but for those with a 4-year degree. Outcomes are own occurrence for adults 18--64. Estimates all
significant at at least the 5% level with state level clustering unless marked * (10% level) or (NS) (insignificant). N
is 1,652,477 for the full sample; 606,065 for the HS DO/HS graduate sample; 466,257 for the some college sample;
and 557,431 for the 4 year college degree sample. 22,722 members of the full sample did not report their education
level.




                                                          29
Appendix Table 2. Changes in Probability Child Lives with Someone 18-64 by Employment Outcomes

                        Unemployed  Unemployed/has Unemployed/has Has job, not               NILF
                                     job not at work      job not at         at work
                                                         work/NILF
                         (1)               (2)                (3)               (5)            (8)
           Panel A: Means in February, children in HH with 18-54 year old with HH head ed.
               All      6.4%              10.0%             61.3%             3.9%           55.8%
      HS DO/HS          9.3%              12.7%             70.4%             3.8%           64.2%
             grad.
    Some college        6.4%              9.8%              60.2%             3.5%           54.8%
    4-year degree       3.6%              7.8%              53.3%             4.2%           48.3%
      Panel B: Children living with any 18-64 YO, coeff. from regressions with month fixed effects
     March 2020         1.3%              2.3%           1.0% (NS)            1.2%          0.2% (NS)
       April 2020      12.6%              18.0%             10.1%             6.2%            2.5%
       May 2020        12.1%              15.2%              8.4%             3.7%            2.1%
       June 2020        9.9%              10.6%              6.8%             1.2%            2.3%
      Panel C: Children living with HS DO/HS grad. HH head and at least 1 18-64 YO, coeff. from
                                  regressions with month fixed effects
     March 2020         2.1%              3.1%              2.0%*             1.3%         0.3% (NS)
       April 2020      15.1%              21.7%             11.8%             8.0%            3.4%
       May 2020        14.8%              18.2%              9.3%             3.8%            3.2%
       June 2020       12.0%              12.1%              9.3%          0.5% (NS)          5.7%
        Panel D: Children living with some college HH head and at least 1 18-64 YO, coeff. from
                                  regressions with month fixed effects
     March 2020       0.9% (NS)           2.8%              2.3%*             2.0%        2.1% (NS)
       April 2020      14.7%              20.4%             13.6%             6.5%            5.2%
       May 2020        14.8%              19.3%             13.7%             5.4%            5.4%
       June 2002       11.2%              13.0%              9.6%             2.1%            3.5%
        Panel E: Children living with 4-year degree HH head and at least 1 18-64 YO, coeff. from
                                  regressions with month fixed effects
     March 2020         0.9%*             1.4%              -0.8% (NS)      0.4% (NS)    -1.1% (NS)
       April 2020       9.5%              13.7%              6.9%             4.5%        0.1% (NS)
       May 2020         8.0%              9.9%               5.7%             2.5%        0.4% (NS)
       June 2002        7.8%              7.6%               4.5%           0.6% (NS)     0.7% (NS)
Notes: Author's calculations based on pooled monthly CPS data, Panel A; and 24 months ending in June 2020 in
Panels B-E. Regressions in Panel B-E show coefficients on dummies for March 2020, April 2020, May 2020, and
June 2020. Regressions in Panel B-E control for month in year dummies and use using monthly CPS weights. Panel
C shows outcomes for Panel B specification for HS DO/HS graduate household (HH) heads. Panel D is same but for
some college HH heads. Panel E is same but for those with heads with a an 4-year degree. Outcomes are any
occurrence for children living with at least 1 adults 18--64. Estimates all significant at at least the 5% level with state
level clustering unless marked * (10% level) or (NS) (insignificant). N is 604,766 for the full sample; 207,987 for
the HS DO/HS graduate sample; 171,209 for the some college sample; and 202,432 for the 4 year college degree
sample.


                                                            30
Appendix Table 3. Person-level Food Hardship Measures, NHIS and CPS-FSS

                                                      Panel A. CPS-FSS (annual recall)
                                                                            3-Category Food           2-Category Food
                   Food Insecurity           Food Just Didn't Last            Insufficiency             Insufficiency
             Respondents   Respondents    Respondents   Respondents   Respondents   Respondents   Respondents   Respondents
               Overall     w/ Children      Overall     w/ Children     Overall     w/ Children     Overall     w/ Children
                 (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)
      2005     12.1%         15.5%          13.1%         16.1%         22.6%         26.5%          3.5%          4.0%
      2006     12.1%         15.7%          13.1%         16.4%         22.7%         26.9%          3.8%          4.4%
      2007     12.2%         15.8%          13.4%         16.8%         23.1%         27.7%          4.0%          4.8%
      2008     16.4%         21.2%          17.0%         21.2%         28.3%         33.3%          5.4%          6.5%
      2009     16.6%         21.8%          17.4%         21.9%         28.1%         33.6%          5.3%          6.3%
      2010     16.1%         20.5%          16.8%         20.8%         27.6%         32.2%          5.1%          5.9%
      2011     16.4%         20.8%          17.7%         21.7%         27.5%         32.1%          5.2%          5.9%
      2012     15.9%         20.3%          17.1%         21.1%         26.9%         31.2%          5.2%          6.0%
      2013     15.8%         20.1%          16.8%         20.7%         26.5%         31.3%          5.2%          6.0%
      2014     15.4%         19.4%          16.8%         20.8%         25.9%         30.3%          5.4%          6.2%
      2015     13.4%         16.7%          14.7%         17.7%         23.1%         27.1%          4.8%          5.3%
      2016     12.9%         16.3%          13.8%         16.7%         21.7%         25.0%          4.3%          4.8%
      2017     12.5%         15.7%          13.3%         15.9%         21.2%         24.3%          4.1%          4.5%
      2018     11.5%         14.0%          12.5%         14.8%         20.4%         23.5%          3.8%          3.9%




                                                           31
                                    Panel B. NHIS (30-day recall)


                  Respondents        Respondents        Respondents         Respondents
                    Overall          w/ Children          Overall           w/ Children
                      (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)
         2011       13.3%              15.7%              16.3%               19.7%
         2012       12.5%              14.9%              15.4%               18.8%
         2013       11.3%              13.5%              14.2%               17.3%
         2014       11.2%              13.2%              13.6%               16.4%
         2015        9.9%              11.4%              12.2%               14.5%
         2016        9.8%              11.5%              12.1%               14.4%
         2017        9.2%              10.5%              11.4%               13.3%
         2018        8.8%               9.6%              11.0%               12.5%
Notes: Panel A is authors’ calculations from the Current Population Survey-Food Security Supplement (CPS-FSS), 2005-18; Panel B is authors’ calculations
from the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), 2011-18. All columns are respondent-weighted, with odd columns representative of all adults and even
columns representative of adults with children living in the same household. Columns (1)-(2) represent food insecurity status, coded from the full food security
battery, following USDA guidelines to code a respondent as 1 if he or she answered yes (including “often”, “sometimes,” “almost every month,” and “some
months but not every month”) to at least 3 of the 10 food security questions (3 of 18 questions if a child is in the household). Columns (3)-(4) indicate whether a
respondent indicated that it was often/sometimes true that “the food that (I/we) bought just didn’t last, and (I/we) didn’t have money to get more.” Columns (5)-
(6) in Panel A are coded as one if the respondent described the food eaten in the household in the last 12 months as “enough but not always the kinds of food we
want,” “sometimes not enough” or “often not enough.” Columns (7)-(8) of Panel A are coded as one if the respondent answered only sometimes/often enough to
the question described in columns (5)-(6). The food sufficiency screener question is not collected in the NHIS. CPS-FSS asks about food hardship over prior 12
months, while NHIS asks about the prior 30 days.




                                                                                32
Appendix Table 4. Share of Adults Reporting Mental Health Problems in the Past Week

                                 2017-2018                  During COVID-19

                              (1)                          (2)
              Panel A: Had little interest in doing things
 Overall                   24.5%                         53.4%
 <= High School            28.6%                         56.5%
 Some College              26.3%                         56.2%
 College +                 17.2%                         47.0%
            Panel B: Felt Down, Depressed, or Hopeless
 Overall                   23.4%                         50.3%
 <= High School            26.0%                         53.1%
 Some College              26.4%                         51.9%
 College +                 17.0%                         45.3%
            Panel C: Felt Nervous, Anxious, or Worried
 Overall                   33.8%                         59.8%
 <= High School            34.3%                         58.1%
 Some College              35.5%                         61.3%
 College +                 31.5%                         60.4%

Notes: Authors’ tabulations of National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 2017-18 and Census
Household Pulse Survey averaged across April 23 – May 26, 2020. The reference period for NHANES is the past
two weeks for “little interest” and “feeling down” and the past week for “felt nervous”. The reference period for the
Census Pulse is the prior week for all three questions. Statistics are weighted to be representative of adults in the
United States.




                                                         33
Appendix Table 5. Confidence in Ability to Afford Food, Pay Rent/Mortgage During COVID-19


                         Confidence in ability to          Confidence in ability to
                          pay for food in next 4           make next rent/mortage
                                  weeks                           payment
                   “Not at all Not “very                    “No       Not “high
                   confident” confident”                 confidence” confidence”
                       (1)          (2)                      (3)         (4)
 Panel A. Households Overall
 Overall               9%          53%                         9%              43%
 <= High School       14%          66%                         14%             57%
 Some College          9%          58%                         9%              47%
 BA +                  3%          31%                         3%              24%
 Panel B. Households with Children
 Overall              11%          61%                         11%             51%
 <= High School       17%          77%                         18%             68%
 Some College         11%          66%                         11%             54%
 BA +                  4%          34%                         4%              25%

Notes: Authors’ tabulations of the Census Household Pulse Survey averaged across April 23 – May 26, 2020.
Respondents are asked to rate their confidence in their ability to afford food over the next four weeks, choosing an
answer from the following options: not at all confident, somewhat confident, moderately confident, very confident.
Respondents are separately asked to rate their confidence in their ability to pay the next month’s rent/mortgage
payment on time, choosing an answer from the following options: no confidence, slight confidence, moderate
confidence, high confidence, or the payment is/will be deferred. Statistics are weighted to be representative of adults
in the United States.




                                                          34
Appendix Table 6. UI First Payments as a Ratio of the Unemployed


                                       UI First Payments:
                                     Includes Regular State              UI First Payments:
                                       Payments and PUA                    Includes PUA

                                        (1)                     (2)
 Panel A: Ratio of Cumulative UI First Payments to Unemployed
 March 2020                            0.064                     0.000
 April 2020                            0.539                     0.016
 May 2020                              0.849                     0.110
 Panel B. Cumulative UI First Payments
 March 2020                         1,700,460                       0
 April 2020                         14,210,795                  416,911
 May 2020                           22,391,176                 2,899,797
 Panel C. Number of Unemployed
 Average March-May                  26,365,418              Same as column 1



Notes: This table presents tabulations of the ratio of cumulative first monthly payments for unemployment insurance
by month to the average stock of unemployed persons across March 2020-May 2020 (Panel A) as well as the
numerator (Panel B) and denominator (Panel C) presented separately. The cumulative first payments represent the
number of persons receiving a first UI payment. The numerator in column 1 is the sum of first payments for PUA
(from the Department of Labor's (DOL) 902P report) and first payments for state UI (from DOL 5159 report). The
numerator in column 2 is the PUA first payments. These are reported in the analogous columns of panel B. Panel C
contains the denominator--the average number of those unemployed from the monthly CPS data adjusted to include
the year over year change in those with a job and not at work and not in the labor force. CPS measures are averaged
using population weights.




                                                        35
Appendix Figure 1. Unemployment and Food Price Growth
Panel A. Great Recession vs. COVID-19

                      16                                                                                                 8%


                      14 Unemployment                                                                                    7%
                         rate, COVID-19                                           Food Price
                            (left axis)                                            Increase,
                      12                                                                                                 6%
                                                                                  Great Rec.
                                                                                  (right axis)
  Unemployment rate




                                                                                                                               Food price increase
                      10                                                                                                 5%


                      8               Food Price                                                                         4%
                                       Increase,
                      6
                                       COVID-19                                                                          3%
                                      (right axis)                                                   Unemployment
                      4
                                                                                                     rate, Great Rec.    2%
                                                                                                        (left axis)
                      2                                                                                                  1%


                      0                                                                                                  0%
                            0     1       2        3      4      5      6     7         8        9    10     11     12
                                                        Months since business cycle peak


Panel B. Great Recession Peak vs. COVID-19 Start

                      16                                                                                                 6%
                         Unemployment
                      14 rate, COVID-19                                                                                  5%
                            (left axis)
                                                                                                      Unemployment
                      12                                                                                                 4%
                                                                                                      rate, Great Rec.
                                                                                                         (left axis)
  Unemployment rate




                      10                                                                                                 3%    Food price increase

                      8                                                                                                  2%

                                               Food Price Change,                                    Food Price
                      6                                                                                                  1%
                                              COVID-19 (right axis)                                    Change,
                                                                                                     Great Rec.
                      4                                                                                                  0%
                                                                                                     (right axis)
                      2                                                                                                  -1%


                      0                                                                                                  -2%
                            0    1        2        3     4       5     6      7        8         9    10    11      12
                                                              Months into recession




                                                                       36
Notes: Authors' calculations of seasonally adjusted monthly unemployment rates (in blue) for the Great Recession
(dotted lines) and COVID-19 crisis (solid lines). The figure also plots the change, relative to base period, in food
prices (purple lines) for the two periods. COVID-19 plotted by month since the February 2020 economic peak. In
Panel A, the Great Recession is plotted relative to the December 2007 economic peak; in panel B the data are plotted
for the 12 months leading up to the November 2009 unemployment rate peak (November 2008-November 2009).




                                                        37
Appendix Figure 2. Food Hardship Measures, Overall and Households with Children
Panel A. Percent of Households Reporting Food Insecurity

                                   35%


                                   30%


                                   25%
  % food insecure




                                   20%


                                   15%


                                   10%


                                   5%


                                   0%
                                         2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 May June July
                                                                                                               2020 2020 2020

                                                                HHs Overall        HHs w/ Children


Panel B. Percent of Households Reporting Food Insufficiency

                                   60%


                                   50%
  % reporting food insufficiency




                                   40%


                                   30%


                                   20%


                                   10%


                                   0%
                                         2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 May June July
                                                                                                               2020 2020 2020

                                                                HHs Overall        HHs w/ Children




                                                                                   38
Panel C. Percent of Households Reporting Sometimes/Often Not Enough to Eat on Food
Sufficiency Question

                                                  16%
  % reporting sometimes/often not enough to eat




                                                  14%

                                                  12%

                                                  10%

                                                  8%

                                                  6%

                                                  4%

                                                  2%

                                                  0%
                                                        2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 May June July
                                                                                                                              2020 2020 2020

                                                                               HHs Overall        HHs w/ Children


Notes: All panels are authors’ calculations from the Current Population Survey-Food Security Supplement (CPS-
FSS), 2005-18, and the Census Household Pulse Survey averaged across 3 periods in 2020: 4/23-5/26; 5/28-6/30;
7/2-7/21. The CPS-FSS asks both about food sufficiency and administers the full food security questionnaire, asking
about experiences over the previous 12 months. The Census Household Pulse Survey includes a single question on
food sufficiency and asks about experiences over the past week. Panel A 2005-18 represent food insecurity status,
coded from the full food security battery, as recommended by USDA and described in notes to Appendix Table 3.
Panel A 2020 data points are food security projections based on food sufficiency responses and the usual
relationship between food security and food sufficiency in the CPS-FSS. Panel B represents the share of households
responding that the food eaten in the household was “enough but not always the kinds of food we want,”
“sometimes not enough” or “often not enough.” Panel C represents the share of households responding that the food
eaten in the household was sometimes/often enough. Statistics are weighted to be representative of all U.S.
households, using household weights in the CPS-FSS and calculating pseudo-household weights in the Census Pulse
Survey by dividing the respondent weight by the number of adults in the household.




                                                                                                  39
Appendix Figure 3: Change in State Unemployment vs. SNAP Participation, February-April
2020




Notes: Plot of percent change in SNAP participation (y-axis) vs. change in seasonally adjusted unemployment rate
(x-axis) by state. Percent change in SNAP caseloads from February to April 2020 calculated from 43 states that have
reported caseload data as of July 31, 2020, covering 97% of all SNAP participation in February. Percentage point
change in state unemployment rate covers February to April 2020 and comes from the BLS LAUS. The upward-
sloping line represents the OLS regression line relating change in SNAP participation to change in unemployment
rate.




                                                        40
Appendix Figure 4. Percentage Increase in SNAP Participation and Spending Since Business
Cycle Peak: COVID-19 vs. Great Recession (Alternate Start Date)

                                                    120%
  Percent increase in SNAP participants, spending




                                                    100%
                                                                   Spending,
                                                                   COVID-19
                                                    80%


                                                    60%
                                                                                                                       Spending,
                                                                                                                       Great Rec.
                                                    40%

                                                                    Participation,
                                                    20%             COVID-19
                                                                                                                 Participation, Great Rec.
                                                     0%
                                                           0   1     2     3     4      5     6      7       8     9    10    11     12
                                                                                     Months into recession


Notes: Authors' calculations of Great Recession spending and caseload data, and February 2020 caseload data, from
USDA, Food & Nutrition Service, SNAP Data National Level Annual Summary. Growth in caseloads in March-
May 2020 calculated from states that have reported caseload data as of July 31, 2020. 43 (42) states have released
April (May) SNAP participation, and these states made up 97% (97%) of all SNAP participation in February.
Growth in SNAP spending in 2020 is reported in Daily Treasury Statements through July 31, 2020. The COVID-19
series are plotted as growth by month since the February 2020 business cycle peak; the Great Recession data are
plotted for the 12 months leading up to the November 2009 unemployment rate peak (November 2008-November
2009).




                                                                                               41
Appendix Figure 5. Continuing UI Claims, by Source




Notes: Data from Department of Labor and report not seasonally adjusted continuing claims by week of the claim
for the United States. Usual UI represents the state and Federal-state extended benefit programs as well as Federal
UI for federal employees and veterans, STC job sharing, and very small state programs which provide coverage after
other benefits are exhausted (never exceed 5000 persons). The Pandemic programs include PUA and PEUC.




                                                        42
Appendix Figure 6. Cumulative New Spending on UI, Relief Rebates, and SNAP by Week
(Billions of 2020$)

                                               700
  Cumulative new spending per week, billions




                                               600
                                               500
                                               400
                                               300
                                               200 CARES Act
                                                      Passed
                                               100
                                                 0



                                                     Economic Impact Payments   Unemployment Insurance   SNAP

Notes: Authors' tabulations of Daily Treasury Statements through July 31 for SNAP, Unemployment Insurance
Benefits, and IRS Tax Refunds to Individuals. We difference expenditures from the inflation-adjusted same-week
payments in 2019 to net out the seasonality in payments and to separate Economic Impact Payments from usual tax
refunds. We censor Economic Impact Payments at zero prior to the week of April 17.




                                                                                43
Appendix Figure 7. Eligibility for Unemployment Insurance Among Workers, and Reasons for
Ineligibility, by Income

 100%
              87%

   80%                77%

                               63%
   60%


   40%


   20%                                                  17%                                                   14%
                                                  8%                                7%                 10%
                                          5%                         4%      5%                 4%
    0%
                    Eligible            Some earnings, fail          Self-employed               Unauthorized
                                          work history
                        All        Income <200% poverty                Income <100% poverty
Notes: Authors' calculations use the 2019 CPS-ASEC and the UI calculator in Ganong et al. (2020). Sample
includes individuals 20-59 who had any earned income in calendar year 2018. The blue bars are for the full sample,
green bars are for the sample income under 200% of poverty, and yellow bars are for the sample under 100% of
poverty. The first set of bars, labeled “Eligible”, plot the share of workers predicted to be eligible for UI benefits if
the workers lost their jobs, based on earnings during the previous year and immigration status. The three sets of
additional bars (right 9 bars) show the reasons the worker would be ineligible for UI. If a worker fell into multiple
categories, we assigned based on the following hierarchy: 1) categorize as unauthorized if they are Hispanic, non-
citizens, arrived in the United States after 1986, have a high school degree or less, and are 15 years of age or older;
2) categorize as some earnings, fail work history if not categorized as unauthorized and have some earnings; 3) had
self-employment income, no wage and salary earnings. The CPI-U is used to inflate calendar year 2018 earnings to
2020 values for use with the 2020 UI calculator. Statistics are weighted to be population representative.




                                                           44
Appendix Figure 8: UI Eligibility and Replacement Rates in 2020, Workers in Families below
200 Percent of Poverty
Panel A. Eligibility Rate                                 Panel B. Median Replacement Rate




Notes: Authors' calculations use the 2019 CPS ASEC and the UI calculator in Ganong et al. (2020).
Sample includes workers ages 20-59 living in families with income below 200 percent of the
Supplemental Poverty Measure. The figures show the share eligible (left) and the median replacement
rate (right) by state. Calculations use all workers (for eligibility) and all eligible workers (for the
replacement rate) and simulate UI benefits in the event that they are unemployed. The CPI-U is used to
inflate calendar year 2018 earnings to 2020 for use with the 2020 UI calculator. Statistics are weighted to
be population representative.




                                                    45
Appendix Figure 9. Anti-Poverty Effects of the Social Safety Net, by Group (2018)




Notes: Calculations based on authors' tabulations of 2019 CPS ASEC, covering annual data for calendar 2018.
Poverty is calculating using the Supplemental Poverty Measure following Fox (2019), with no adjustment for
underreporting of income. Each data point shows the impact on poverty rates of zeroing out a given income source.
Statistics are weighted to be population representative. Bars represent the percentage-point reduction in SPM
poverty in 2018, separately for children, adults 18-64 living with children, adults 18-64 not living with children, and
the elderly age 65+.




                                                          46
