                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DO BLACK AND INDIGENOUS COMMUNITIES RECEIVE THEIR FAIR SHARE
              OF VACCINES UNDER THE 2018 CDC GUIDELINES?

                                        Parag A. Pathak
                                        Harald Schmidt
                                        Adam Solomon
                                         Edwin Song
                                        Tayfun Sönmez
                                        M. Utku Ünver

                                      Working Paper 27817
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27817


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




We are grateful to Chetan Patel for excellent assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Parag A. Pathak, Harald Schmidt, Adam Solomon, Edwin Song, Tayfun Sönmez, and
M. Utku Ünver. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Do Black and Indigenous Communities Receive their Fair Share of Vaccines Under the 2018
CDC Guidelines?
Parag A. Pathak, Harald Schmidt, Adam Solomon, Edwin Song, Tayfun Sönmez, and M.
Utku Ünver
NBER Working Paper No. 27817
September 2020
JEL No. D47,I14,I28

                                          ABSTRACT

A major focus of debate about rationing guidelines for COVID-19 vaccines is whether and how
to prioritize access for minority populations that have been particularly affected by the pandemic,
and been the subject of historical and structural disadvantage, particularly Black and Indigenous
individuals. We simulate the 2018 CDC Vaccine Allocation guidelines using data from the
American Community Survey under different assumptions on total vaccine supply. Black and
Indigenous individuals combined receive a higher share of vaccines compared to their population
share for all assumptions on total vaccine supply. However, their vaccine share under the 2018
CDC guidelines is considerably lower than their share of COVID-19 deaths and age-adjusted
deaths. We then simulate one method to incorporate disadvantage in vaccine allocation via a
reserve system. In a reserve system, units are placed into categories and units reserved for a
category give preferential treatment to individuals from that category. Using the Area
Deprivation Index (ADI) as a proxy for disadvantage, we show that a 40% high-ADI reserve
increases the number of vaccines allocated to Black or Indigenous individuals, with a share that
approaches their COVID-19 death share when there are about 75 million units. Our findings
illustrate that whether an allocation is equitable depends crucially on the benchmark and highlight
the importance of considering the expected distribution of outcomes from implementing vaccine
allocation guidelines.

Parag A. Pathak                                  Edwin Song
Department of Economics, E52-426                 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
MIT                                              song22@mit.edu
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142                              Tayfun Sönmez
and NBER                                         Boston College
ppathak@mit.edu                                  Department of Economics
                                                 140 Comm. Ave.
Harald Schmidt                                   Chestnut Hill, MA, 02467
Perelman School of Medicine at the               tayfun.sonmez@bc.edu
University of Pennsylvania
423 Guardian Drive
Philadelphia, PA 19104
schmidth@upenn.edu                               Boston College
                                                 Department of Economics
Adam Solomon                                     140 Commonwealth Avenue
Massachusetts Institute of Technology            Chestnut Hill, MA, 02467
adamsol@mit.edu                                  unver@bc.edu
   I. Introduction

There is widespread evidence that the burden in terms of unemployment, hospitalizations, and
deaths due to COVID-19 is disproportionately higher in minority populations, particularly Black
communities, as well as American Indian or Alaska Natives (hereafter, “Indigenous”) (see, e.g.,
Tai, et al. 2020). Current estimates are that Blacks are dying at 2.4 times the rate of whites and
Indigenous are dying at 1.5 times the rate of Whites (Covidtracking 2020).

This reality has led many to argue that the hardest-hit racial and ethnic groups should receive
priority access to COVID-19 vaccines. For example, Melinda Gates, a prominent funder of
vaccine development efforts, has suggested that after health care workers, “Black people [should
be] next, and many other people of color” (Ducharme 2020). Likewise, Schmidt (2020)
articulates reasons why rationing approaches should give priority to groups that have been
structurally and historically disadvantaged.

Others have argued that a rationing policy that prioritizes disadvantaged groups would be
inefficient and unfair. In public comments to the National Academy of Sciences, Engineering,
and Medicine (NASEM) Committee on Vaccine Allocation, Dr. Marc Lipsitch raised the
possibility that if herd immunity develops in disadvantaged communities due to higher
incidence, then these patients may be immune and therefore would not need prioritized vaccines
(Lipsitch 2020). There is also the concern that without public trust in a vaccine, disadvantaged
communities may believe they are being used as ‘guinea pigs’ if given priority (Toner et al.
2020). Some question whether allocation based on race or ethnicity would be legal or equitable
and undermine broader trust in the health system (see, e.g., McCaughey 2020, Twohey 2020).

Furthermore, the ACIP COVID-19 Working Group does not consider race or ethnicity in their
August 26, 2020 interim framework for COVID-19 vaccine allocation (Dooling 2020). A draft
report on equitable vaccine allocation by NASEM published on September 2, 2020 emphasized
that the allocation framework had to be sensitive to the disproportionate impact on minority
populations. Instead of directly using race or ethnicity as a criterion for allocation, the report
proposed to allocate within each of the subgroups of populations in four priority tiers by their
level of deprivation, as captured in the CDC’s Social Vulnerability Index (however, race and
ethnicity are included in the 15 criteria in this index). Guidance issued to states by the CDC in
the week prior to the publication of the NASEM report recommends drawing on ACIP and
NASEM’s eventual conclusions, but also encourages that in identifying priority populations,
planners should consider “people from racial and ethnic minority populations” as one of several
subgroups at increased risk for severe illness (Kaplan, Wu, and Thomas 2020).

The issue of prioritizing racial and ethnic minority populations raises two important questions.
First, under existing guidelines, do minority communities receive a fair share of vaccines
(however “fair” is operationalized)? Second, how would one implement a priority for racial and
ethnic minority populations in practice?

This paper examines the allocation of vaccines to disadvantaged communities and across US
states under the 2018 CDC Influenza Vaccine Allocation guidelines. We focus on these



                                                 2
guidelines since, at the time of writing, all proposed allocation frameworks by ACIP, NASEM,
and the CDC are in considerable flux. The 2018 CDC Vaccine guidelines underwent
comprehensive consultation and review, and as such are an important precedent and benchmark
for on-going discussions about allocation of a COVID-19 Vaccine (Cohen 2020, Splete 2020).
While a comprehensive analysis of the impact on minorities would, of course, require
considering all types, including ethnic subtypes, given the complexity of the issue at hand and
our overall goals, we focus the discussion here on allocations to Black (both Hispanic and non-
Hispanic) and Indigenous populations relative to white ones (both Hispanic and non-Hispanic),
by reference to the respective population size, COVID-19 related deaths, and age-adjusted deaths
using data from the American Community Survey. For ease of illustration, throughout, we
combine data for Black and Indigenous groups. We then consider a suggestion by Schmidt
(2020) to use the Area Deprivation Index (ADI), an index made available by Kind and
Buckingham (2018), which ranks neighborhoods by socioeconomic status disadvantage, as part
of the allocation system. To implement priority for hardest-hit groups, we use a reserve system
proposed by Pathak, Sönmez, Ünver, and Yenmez (2020a,b). For pragmatic reasons, we
simulate by how much a 20% and 40% high-ADI reserve with a gradient cut-off as described
below, would change vaccine access for Black and Indigenous individuals and how an ADI
reserve would influence distribution across states.


   II. The 2018 CDC Influenza Vaccine Guidelines

In 2018, CDC guidelines place patients into five tiers based on occupation and demographic
factors indicating risk for contracting or spreading influenza. Table 1, from the CDC guidelines,
contains the definitions of the tiers. Tier 1 includes essential occupational groups and high-risk
populations such as pregnant women and infants and toddlers. Individuals are placed in Tiers 2-
4 based on the occupational groups and risk status, shown in the table. Tier 5 is the largest
group, consisting of healthy adults between 19-64 years old. If there are not enough vaccines for
those in the first tier, the first tier is further portioned into seven ranked sub-tiers. For each of
Tiers 2-5, all those in the same tier have equal priority.

To estimate the number of patients in each tier, we need information on the joint distribution of
all individual characteristics used to identify the tier in which an individual belongs. As far as
know, such data do not exist. We therefore use the American Community Survey (ACS) 2014-
2018 5-year Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) to identify patients eligible for each tier. We
combine this with information from the 2018 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System
(BRFSS) data to identify information on high-risk conditions.

For many of the CDC’s occupation-based groups, the PUMS data does not have adequate detail
to definitively identify an individual as a member of the group. For example, one of the CDC’s
groups consists of manufacturing staff of pandemic vaccine and antiviral drugs. The PUMS data
identifies those working in the pharmaceutical manufacturing industry, but provides no
additional detail. Our approach in such a situation is to construct a superset of the group (such as
all those working in pharmaceutical manufacturing) and then randomly and independently assign
each observation in the superset to the group with a fixed probability for the group. The fixed
probability is calibrated so that the number of people in the US population represented by the



                                                  3
observations assigned to the group is approximately equal to the number of people in the group
as confirmed or estimated from a secondary source.

The PUMS data does not contain information on the health characteristics of surveyed
individuals. We define an individual as high risk if they have a comorbidity such as cancer,
kidney disease, heart disease, diabetes, or high BMI in the BFRSS. We then group the BRFSS
data by age bin, sex, race, and for each combination, we compute the proportion of the
population that is high-risk. Then we return to the PUMS data, and each individual is assigned to
the “high risk” category with the probability relevant to their group in the BRFSS.

Finally, we must impute an ADI score for each individual. We cannot assign the actual ADI of
each person in the PUMS data because ADI is computed using census block level averages and
the PUMS geographic specificity is only at the Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA) level. Singh
(2003) reports the 17 components and their coefficients used to determine the census tract level
ADI in 1990. We use these coefficients to find ADI at the household level. Each coefficient is
assigned a weight for the household using PUMS data at the household level. The weighted sum
of coefficients gives the raw numerical ADI score of the household. Since PUMS links
households to individuals, we assign these scores to each individual of the household in PUMS.
We divide the distribution in deciles and assign each decile scores 1 to 10.

We are mindful that there are several limitations to our simulation because of data constraints.
The most important limitation stem from certain data omissions in PUMS data and the fact that
we compute ADI at the family level rather than the census block level. We omit 8 million people
living in group quarters such as prisons, nursing facilities, and college and university housing as
most PUMS variables do not exist for them and they are automatically excluded from the high-
ADI group.8 Some missing variables for people living in household setting are assumed to be 0.
The Appendix provides more detail on our methodology.


    III. Vaccine Allocation under 2018 CDC guidelines

Figure 1 reports the proportion of vaccines allocated to Black and Indigenous populations
(combined) as we vary the total doses of vaccines under the 2018 CDC guidelines assuming a
single type of vaccine. The five tiers are demarcated as the number of vaccines increases. We
estimate that there are just under 25 million individuals in Tier 1.9 Figure 1 shows that after
allocating these 25 million units, about 18% of vaccines will be allocated to Black and
Indigenous recipients in Tier 2. The proportion of vaccines allocated plateaus at 18%, until it
converges to the population fraction Black and Indigenous at which point there are enough
vaccines to accommodate the entire US population of about 325 million.



8
  ADI computed at the census block level also omits computing an ADI for census blocks with more than 33% of the
population living in group quarters.
9
  The CDC guidelines estimate about 26 million individuals are in Tier 1. We find 25 million in Tier 1 because of a
difference in the count of pregnant women. The CDC guidelines estimate 4 million pregnant women in the United
States. Our estimate using the ACS is the number of people who gave birth in the last year multiplied by the length
of a pregnancy as a fraction of a year results in 3 million.


                                                        4
We report three benchmarks for comparison in the Figure: the population fraction of Black and
Indigenous groups, the fraction of COVID-related deaths among Black and Indigenous
populations, and the age-adjusted fraction of COVID deaths among them. Data on death rates
and age-adjusted death rates come from APM Research Lab’s Color of Coronavirus database,
and are as of August 5, 2020. Figure 1 shows that while 15.5% of the US population is Black or
Indigenous, the two groups account for 24.6% of COVID deaths and 28.7% of COVID age-
adjusted death.

The proportion of vaccines allocated to Black and Indigenous recipients is above their population
share, but well below their share of COVID deaths or age-adjusted deaths. Therefore, when
judged compared to their population share, Black and Indigenous individuals receive a larger
share of doses for all scenarios on vaccine supply. However, this comparison by itself does not
settle the question of whether the allocation is fair, and rather, draws attention to the justification
of the reference point. When compared to the share of COVID deaths or age-adjusted deaths, the
proportion of vaccines allocated to Black and Indigenous recipients is well below these
benchmarks. If there are 100 million units of a vaccine, under the CDC guidelines, about 17.5%
units would go to Black and Indigenous individuals, while they represent 28.7% of COVID age-
adjusted deaths. As a result, whether an allocation is judged to be fair depends crucially on the
benchmark used for comparisons.

Figure 2 reports on the share of vaccines allocated to each state under the 2018 CDC guidelines
for two scenarios on vaccine supply: 20 million and 50 million total vaccines. At 20 million
units, the CDC priority system would allocate units partway through Tier 1, while at 50 million
units the CDC priority system would allocate units partway through Tier 3. For each assumption
on the total number of vaccines, the Figure shows the state share of vaccines compared to three
benchmarks: the state population share, the state case share, and the state death share. For each
normalization, a value of one means that the state share of vaccines is equal to the population
share, case share or death share. A value greater than one means that the state obtains a greater
share of vaccines relative to the benchmark, while a value less than one means the state obtains a
smaller share relative to the benchmark.

The top panel of Figure 2 shows that relative to population, states like California, Florida, and
Michigan, receive a smaller share of vaccines relative to their population. This remains true
when the number of vaccines increases to 50 million units. At 50 million units, several
northeastern states receive a ratio less than one, while their ratio was greater than one at 20
million units. For example, at 20 million units, Massachusetts’s share of vaccines is 1.02, while
at 50 million units, its share is 0.94.

The second panel of Figure 2 shows that relative to the state case share, southern states receive
much less than their proportionate share, while mountain and midwestern states receive more
than their proportionate share. The comparison relative to state population share in the top panel
did not indicate major differences between these states. For example, Louisiana’s share of
vaccines relative to its share of cases is 0.59 at 20 million units and 0.58 at 50 million units.
Relative to state population, Louisiana is at 1.06 and 1.04, respectively. Montana’s share of
vaccines relative to case share is over 3 at both levels of vaccine supply, but it is close to one
when judged by population share. For the state case share benchmark, there is relatively little



                                                  5
difference across states as vaccine supply increases. This can be seen by comparing the colors
across the two scenarios in the second panel of Figure 2.

The third panel of Figure 2 shows that relative to the share of deaths in the state, northeastern
states receives less than their share of deaths, while southeastern states receive more than their
share of deaths. New Jersey and New York stand out under both the 20 and 50 million scenarios
as receiving the least compared to the share of deaths. Large states like California and Texas
receive more than their share of vaccines relative to share of deaths.

The variation across these three metrics illustrates that how an equitable allocation is defined
matters a great deal for regional comparisons.

   IV. Prioritizing the Hardest-Hit in the 2018 CDC system

   A. How to Prioritize?

There is no explicit consideration for prioritizing hardest-hit groups in the 2018 CDC vaccine
allocation system. Pathak, et. al (2020a,b) illustrate that despite widespread consensus on the
desirability of incorporating multiple ethical criteria into an allocation system, many medical
rationing guidelines struggle to do so because they employ a priority system. If hardest-hit
individuals receive heightened priority, there is a potential that all units will go to the group with
heightened priority, leaving no units available for the rest of society. For example, this is a
major challenge in formulating guidelines of rationing ventilators during influenza pandemics,
with some states like New York and Minnesota abandoning priority for essential personnel, and
a few states like Michigan adopting essential personnel priority. Several other states are vague
about implementation (see Pathak et. al. 2020b for details).

Imprecision on vaccine allocation is a major hurdle for public acceptance of any rationing
scheme. The inability to accommodate various desirable ethical goals may be a consequence of
the mechanical structure of a priority system that allocates all units using the same priority order
of individuals. A more flexible alternative is a reserve system, which divides resources into
multiple categories and uses a potentially different criteria for allocation of units in each
category. These category-specific criteria reflect the balance between ethical values guiding
allocation of units in the category.

If units are placed into a reserve for hardest-hit groups, there are two important remaining
questions: how are the hardest-hit defined and what share of units will be placed into the
category in which the hardest-hit obtain preferential treatment?

We focus on using the Area Deprivation Index (ADI) to identify hardest-hit areas, following the
suggestion of Schmidt (2020). The Area Deprivation Index assigns each census block group to a
decile of relative disadvantage by taking a weighted combination of various measures of
disadvantage (Kind and Buckingham 2018) and ranking all census block groups nationally.
Unlike directly using race or ethnicity, which may be subject to court challenges, ADI does not
directly condition on race or ethnicity, but on neighborhood characteristics like education,
income, and homeownership rates. There is precedent for using neighborhood proxies in



                                                  6
rationing, for the context of school seat assignment. In the 2007 Parents Involved in Community
Schools vs. Seattle case, the United States Supreme Court decision ruled against directly using
race as a factor in K-12 admissions. Starting in 2009, Chicago Public Schools adopted a
neighborhood-based affirmative action system, using only census tract level measures of
disadvantage (Dur, Pathak and Sönmez 2020; Ellison and Pathak 2020).

ADI has also been used in recent weighted lottery-based schemes, a special case of reserve
systems, to allocate anti-viral drugs (Pathak et. al. 2020b). The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
has used ADI as part of the state’s official policy for allocating scarce COVID-specific
medications, including Remdesivir. COVID patients who reside within the most disadvantaged
neighborhoods in Pennsylvania receive higher priority weights to receive these scarce
medications as part of the State’s allocation lottery (Pennsylvania 2020). An identical system
was first deployed as part of the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center’s triage protocol design
for Remdesivir. In both systems, if a neighborhood has an ADI score of 8 or greater (on a scale
of 1-10), patients receive heightened priority for the anti-viral drug (White et al. 2020). For
pragmatic reasons, and we follow this precedent and refer to an ADI score of 8 or greater as a
high ADI.

Figure 3 reports on the proportion of vaccine doses allocated to high ADI areas under the 2018
CDC Vaccine allocation guideline. ADI is calculated in deciles, so a score of 8 or higher
corresponds to 30% of US neighborhoods. The Figure illustrates that high ADI neighborhoods
receive less than 30% of vaccines if the total supply of vaccines is less than 26 million. That is,
if there are not even enough units to allocate to first tier of patients, then high ADI areas will be
underrepresented. However, as soon as the number of units is enough for Tier 2, roughly 30% of
units will be allocated to high ADI areas, a fair share relative to their geographic representation.

To use ADI as part of a vaccine rationing scheme, we illustrate a reserve system with two
possibilities: either a 20% or 40% high-ADI reserve, implemented in an over-and-above way.
This means that for a given total number of vaccine units, we categorize them in two groups.
The first group is offered vaccine doses based on the as-is, unmodified 2018 CDC priority
system. After allocating those units (it is expected that the first tranche will be fully exhausted),
the system then allocates the high-ADI reserve units, by giving any individual in a high ADI area
the highest priority. If all high-ADI individuals receive a vaccine, then any remaining units in
the high-ADI reserve will be awarded based on the 2018 CDC priority system. In other words,
once all high-ADI individuals receive their vaccines, the overall system reverts back to the 2018
CDC priority system.

The allocation system we consider only uses the high-ADI reserve after allocating all units to
individuals in Tier 1. That is, after all units are allocated to individuals in Tier 1 according to the
2018 CDC vaccine guidelines, any remaining units are then categorized according to the
specified reserve size. We introduce the reserve only after Tier 1 because Tier 1 covers essential
homeland and national security personnel, critical healthcare workers, law enforcement
personnel, pregnant women, and infants and toddlers. We believe that if there are not enough
vaccines to even reach this initial group, considerations associated with targeting the hardest-hit
would be subject to increased scrutiny.




                                                   7
Figure 4 illustrates how a reserve system would work for vaccines with a high-ADI reserve
category in addition to the original 2018 CDC category. The top panel shows the proportion of
incremental vaccine units awarded to the high ADI population as the total supply of doses
increases. When there are fewer than 5 million doses, no more than 25% of units are awarded to
the high ADI population. However, as the number of doses increases, the marginal share jumps
to nearly 40%. This results in the cumulative share of vaccines going to high-ADI areas being
30% when there are enough doses to accommodate all individuals in Tier 1, shown in Figure 3.

The second panel of Figure 4 illustrates how the 20% high-ADI reserve works. Since the reserve
system only applies after units are allocated to al Tier 1 recipients, the first change in the
marginal share is at Tier 2. At that point, the marginal share of high-ADI population receiving a
vaccine is roughly 45%, compared to 30% in the absence of any high-ADI reserve given in the
top panel. With a 20% high-ADI reserve, the fraction jumps because a fifth of vaccines are
awarded to the high ADI areas on top of the existing units (80% of 30%) they obtain without
such a reservation. Therefore, the high-ADI reserve provides an additional boost that amounts to
20% for the reserve in addition to the 0.8×30% = 24% through the unreserved units, for a total of
44%.

The second panel also shows how a high-ADI reserve works by placing high ADI individuals
ahead of where they would be prioritized without a high-ADI reserve. When the total number of
vaccines is 230 million, there are no remaining high-ADI individuals left and each has been
allocated a vaccine.

The third panel repeats the same calculation for a 40% high-ADI reserve. As before, the reserve
applies only after units are allocated to individuals in Tier 1. At that point, the marginal share of
units allocated to high ADI jumps to nearly 60%. (As before, 40% + 0.6×30% = 58%). With a
higher reserve size, the number of high-ADI individuals without a vaccine is exhausted by 175
million person-unit vaccines.

   B. High-ADI Reserve in Action

A high-ADI reserve results an increase in the proportion of vaccines allocated to Black and
Indigenous recipients. This is shown in Figure 5, which plots the combined Black and
Indigenous allocation for a 20% and 40% high-ADI reserve as well as the 2018 CDC guidelines.
The ADI increases the proportion of vaccines allocated to Black and Indigenous, with a peak
when there are about 75 million units of a vaccine. At that level of supply, a 20% high-ADI
reserve results in 20% of vaccines allocated to Black and Indigenous and a 40% high-ADI
reserve results in about 22% of vaccines allocated to them. Both fractions are still well below
the proportion of COVID deaths or age-adjusted deaths for Black and Indigenous communities.

While the ADI results in an increase in the share of vaccines allocated to Black and Indigenous
persons, it has a modest effect on the regional distribution of vaccines. This can be seen in
Figure 6, which shows how the share calculated either relative to a state’s share of population,
share of cases, or share of deaths changes with a high-ADI reserve. Relative to the state share, a
high-ADI reserve increases the representation of several southern states, but by a modest




                                                  8
amount. The effect on the other two measures of fair shares due to a high-ADI reserve is
negligible.

The Appendix reports on several other dimensions of vaccine allocation. Figure A1 adds
Hispanic populations to Figure 5 and shows that a high-ADI reserve results in a higher share of
Black, Indigenous, and Hispanic recipients. At 75 million units, a 40% high-ADI reserve results
in more vaccines to this group than both their share of the population and their share of COVID
deaths. Figure A2 compares a high-ADI reserve to a direct racial reserve for Black and
Indigenous individuals. For levels of vaccines under 100 million person units, a 40% high-ADI
reserve has a similar effect as a 5% reserve for Black and Indigenous individuals. Figure A3
shows that the average age of vaccine recipients is lower than the population average under 2018
CDC guidelines for most levels of vaccine supply. Figure A4 shows that the share of vaccines
allocated to females is higher than the population fraction for vaccine supply less than 100
million person units, but is close to the population female fraction when supply is greater than
100 million person units.

   V. Conclusion

The current debate on how to prioritize vaccine allocation for hardest-hit communities has not
wrestled with specific details of whether existing systems are equitable based on empirical data
or how to actually implement heightened priority for particular groups. Since major groups have
not yet finalized guidelines on allocation despite work, we report on how the 2018 CDC
Pandemic Influenza Vaccine guidelines would allocate vaccines to Black and Indigenous
individuals and across states.

Our analysis illustrates the importance of a precise definition of equitable allocation in setting
vaccine allocation policy. We estimate that Black and Indigenous populations combined receive
more vaccines compared to their total population share for all levels of vaccine supply. However,
they receive a substantially lower share compared to their share of COVID deaths or age-
adjusted deaths. Moreover, whether the CDC guidelines provide an equitable distribution of
vaccines across states depends crucially on whether population, case-count, deaths, or other
reference points are the appropriate benchmark.

This paper also reports on an implementation of a vaccine allocation system targeting the
hardest-hit communities using a reserve system. In our illustrative reserve system, individuals
from neighborhoods with a high ADI receive preferential treatment for a subset of the total
vaccine supply. A reserve system offers flexibility over a priority system because not all units
have to be assigned according to the same priority order. A 40% high-ADI reserve increases the
share of vaccines to Black and Indigenous individuals, with a modest effect on the distribution of
vaccines across states. A larger reserve size would increase the share for Blacks and Indigenous
individuals further. There are many levers in a reserve system we could consider beyond the
reserve size. However, a reserve system offers a feasible way to implement heightened priority
for disadvantaged groups and has more flexibility than a priority system.

Aside from alternative parameters in a reserve system, there are several directions for further
study. First, our estimate required extrapolation from ACS and BRFSS data, and current



                                                 9
estimates of COVID cases and deaths. As improved data become available, it would be
worthwhile to revisit these estimates. The second issue involves take-up. Several studies
suggest that Black and Hispanic (both Hispanic-black and Hispanic-white) adults are among the
least likely to voluntarily take vaccines compared to whites and Asians (Lu et al. 2014, Quinn et
al. 2017). If the goal is to protect the health of these groups, then the system must consider who
is allocated the declined unit, once reasonable efforts to convey the benefits of vaccinations have
been exhausted. Likewise, there may be instances where a high priority individual does not take
a vaccine and instead wishes to give her vaccine access to a lower priority individual, such as a
family member. These kinds of situations may alter the overall distribution of vaccine recipients.
Finally, our analysis has focused on the case where there is a single type of vaccine that is
distributed nationally. New complications and opportunities arise when distribution is not
nationally coordinated and there are multiple vaccines that differ in their effectiveness, safety, or
cost.




                                                 10
References

Centers for Disease Control. 2018. “Allocating and Targeting Pandemic Influenza Vaccine
During an Influenza Pandemic.” US Department of Health and Human Services.

Cohen, Jon. 2020. “The Line is Forming for a COVID-19 Vaccine. Who Should Be at the
Front?” Science, June 29. doi:10.1126/science.abd5770

Covidtracking.com. 2020. “The COVID Racial Data Tracker.” Available at:
covidtracking.com/race. Last accessed: August 28, 2020.

Dooling, Kathleen. 2020. “COVID-19 Vaccine Prioritization: Work Group Considerations.”
ACIP COVID-19 Vaccines Work Group. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/meetings/downloads/slides-2020-08/COVID-08-Dooling.pdf.
Last accessed August 28, 2020.

Ducharme, Jamie. 2020. “Melinda Gates Lays out her Biggest Concern for the Next Phase of the
Covid-19 Pandemic.” Time Magazine, June 4.

Dur, Umut, Parag A. Pathak, and Tayfun Sönmez. 2020. “Explicit vs. statistical targeting in
affirmation action: Theory and evidence from Chicago’s exam schools.” Journal of Economic
Theory, 187, 104996.

Ellison, Glenn and Parag A. Pathak. 2016. “The Efficiency of Race-Neutral Alternatives to
Race-Based Affirmation Action.” NBER Working Paper 22589.

Kaplan, Sheila, Katherine J. Wu, and Katie Thomas. 2020. “CDC Tells States How to Prepare
for COVID-19 Vaccine by Early November.” New York Times, September 2.

Kind, Amy J. H. and William R. Buckingham. 2018. Making Neighborhood Disadvantage
Metrics Accessible: The Neighborhood Atlas. New England Journal of Medicine, 378: 2456-
2458. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMp1802313. PMCID: PMC6051533.

Lipsitch, Marc. 2020. “Committee on Equitable Allocation of Vaccines for the Novel
Coronavirus: Meeting 3.” (2:23:33) August 12. National Academy of Medicine. Available at:
https://www.nationalacademies.org/event/08-07-2020/committee-on-equitable-allocation-of-
vaccine-for-the-novel-coronavirus-committee-meeting-3

Lu, Peng-Jun, Alissa O'Halloran, Leah Bryan, Erin D. Kennedy, Helen Ding, Samuel B.
Graitcer, Tammy A. Santibanez, Ankita Meghani, James A. Singleton. 2014. “Trends in
racial/ethnic disparities in influenza vaccination coverage among adults during the 2007-08
through 2011-12 seasons.” American Journal of Infection Control, 42(7), 763-769/

McCaughey, Betsey. 2020. “The Lunatic Drive for Racial Quotas for COVID-19 Vaccines.”
New York Post, July 16.



                                               11
Pathak, Parag A., Tayfun Sönmez, M. Utku Ünver, and M. Bumin Yenmez. 2020. “Triage
Protocol Design for Ventilator Rationing in a Pandemic: Integrating Multiple Ethical Values
through Reserves.” NBER Working Paper 26951.

Pathak, Parag A.,Tayfun Sönmez, M. Utku Ünver, and M. Bumin Yenmez. 2020. “Fair
Allocation of Vaccines, Ventilators and Antiviral Treatments: Leaving No Ethical Value Behind
in Health Care Rationing.” August, Available at: https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.00374.

Quinn, Sandra Crouse, Amelia Jamison, Vicki S. Freimuth, Ji An, Gregory R. Hancock, Donald
Musa. 2017. “Exploring racial influences on flu vaccine attitudes and behavior: Results of a
national survey of White and African American adults.” Vaccine, 35(8), 1167-1174.

Singh, Gopal K. 2003. “Area Deprivation and Widening Inequalities in US Mortality, 1969–
1998.” American Journal of Public Health, 93(7): 1137–1143.

Allman, Richard L. Judith Black, Sonia Brookins, Terri Cathers, Alejandro Delgado-Daza,
Jennifer Garman, Douglas Jacobs, Steven Joffe, David Kelley, Laval Miller-Wilson, David
Nitsch, Andrew Pickett, Christine Roussel, Eric Sachinwalla, Lloyd Wertz, Douglas White,
2020. “Ethical Allocation Framework for Emerging Treatments of COVID-19.” Available at:
https://www.health.pa.gov/topics/disease/coronavirus/Pages/Guidance/Ethical-Allocation-
Framework.aspx

Schmidt, Harald. 2020. “Vaccine Rationing and the Urgency of Social Justice in the Covid-19
Response.” Hastings Center Report, 50: 46-49.

Splete, Heidi. 2020. “ACIP Plans Priority Groups in Advance of COVID-19 Vaccine.” MDedge
Hematology News, Conference Coverage, June 29. https://www.mdedge.com/hematology-
oncology/article/224632/coronavirus-updates/acip-plans-priority-groups-advance-covid-19

Tai, Don Bambino Geno, Aditya Shah, Chyke A. Doubeni, Irene G. Sia, and Mark L. Wieland.
2020. “The Disproportionate Impact of COVID-19 on Racial and Ethnic Minorities in the
United States.” Clinical Infectious Diseases, June 20, doi: 10.1093/cid/ciaa815

Toner, E, A Barnill, C Krubiner, et al. 2020. “Interim Framework for COVID-19 Vaccine
Allocation and Distribution in the United States.” Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Center for
Health Security.

Twohey, Megan. 2020. “Who Would Get Vaccinated First? US Considers Race in Its Plans,”
The New York Times. July 10. Section A, Page 8.

White, Douglas, Mark Schmidhofer, Erin McCreary, Ryan Bariola, Graham Michael Synder,
Rachel Sackrowitz, Naudia N. Jonassaint, Jessica Daley, Donald M. Yealy, Tayfun Sönmez, M.
Utku Ünver, Parag Pathak, Govind Persad, and Robert Truog. “A Model Hospital Policy for
Fair Allocation of Medicines to Treat Covid-19.” University of Pittsburgh, Department of
Critical Care Medicine.



                                              12
 Figure 1.
 Vaccination tiers and population groups for a high/very high level of pandemic severity.
 Accessible version at https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-resources/national-strategy/planning-guidance/guidance_508.html#figure-1
 This figure illustrates how vaccination is administered to population groups by tiers until the entire U.S. population has
 had the opportunity to be vaccinated during a pandemic with a high or very high level of severity, and how tiers integrate
 population groups, balancing vaccine allocation to occupationally defined groups and the general population.
 (See Appendix A for description of Occupational and High Risk Population Groups)

                                                                                                                                 HEALTHY
                                                                                                                                 ADULTS
                                                                                                                           • 19-64 years old
                                            OCCUPATIONAL
                                               GROUPS
                                            • Essential military
                                                support personnel
                                            • National Guard           OCCUPATIONAL
                                            • Intelligence services       GROUPS
                   OCCUPATIONAL             • Other domestic           • Other active duty          HIGH RISK
                      GROUPS                    national security      • Other healthcare          POPULATIONS
U.S. POPULATION*




                   • Deployed personnel     •   Mortuary services      • Other critical          • High risk adults
                   • Public health          •   Other health care        infrastructure          • Adults > 65 years old
                     personnel                  personnel                sectors
                   • Critical healthcare    •   Community services     • Other critical                                       132 MILLION
                                            •   Communications,          government
                   • Pharmacists and
                     pharmacy technicians       IT and utilities
                                            •   Critical government
                                                                          HIGH RISK
                   • EMS, law enforcement                                POPULATIONS
                     and fire services          operational and
                                                regulatory personnel   • Healthy children
                   • Pandemic vaccine
                     and antiviral drug
                     manufacturers
                                                 HIGH RISK                                          79 MILLION
                                                POPULATIONS
                     HIGH RISK              • Household contacts of
                    POPULATIONS                 Infants <6 mos.
                   • Pregnant women         • High risk children
                   • Infants & toddlers                                   68 MILLION
                                                 16 MILLION
                     26 MILLION
                          TIER 1                      TIER 2                   TIER 3                   TIER 4                     TIER 5




    Vaccination of Tier 1 at All Pandemic Severities

    T
                      Table 1. Vaccination Tiers in 2018 CDC Guidelines
       ier 1 includes the highest priority popu- high level of severity. Occupationally-defined
(Available  at: https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-resources/pdf/2018-Influenza-Guidance.pdf)
            lation groups identified in each of the                                    groups are included in Tier 1 during a high or
            four categories (Table 1) and may vary                                     very high level of pandemic severity as societal
    based on pandemic severity and supply. Howev-                                      disruption is likely during those scenarios, and
    er, Tier 1 is the highest priority group to receive                                they are critical to maintaining the effective
    vaccination if there is limited vaccine supply for                                 functioning of society. The burden of illness
    any level of pandemic severity; groups within                                      and absenteeism may be markedly increased
    Tier 1 may change depending on the character-                                      in a pandemic, and the risk of occupational
    istics and epidemiology of the pandemic and its                                    exposure and infection may be high because of
    impact. For instance, people over age 65 years                                     contact with ill persons, living conditions,
    are in Tier 2 for a low level of pandemic severity,                                or geographic location.
    but are in Tier 4 for a pandemic with high/very


                                                                              ◆ 10 ◆
                        Figure 1: Proportion of vaccine doses allocated to Black and Indigenous recipients,
                                         By cumulative number of vaccine doses allocated

          Tier 1       Tier 2                Tier 3                                         Tier 4                                                      Tier 5

30%
                                                                                                                                                  Covid age-adjusted deaths fraction
                                                                                                                                                  Black and Indigenous: 28.7%

25%
                                                                                                                                                  Covid deaths fraction Black and
                                                                                                                                                  Indigenous: 24.6%


20%



15%                                                                                                                                               Population fraction Black and
                                                                                                                                                  Indigenous: 15.5%



10%



5%
                                                                                                                                                 2018 CDC guidelines

0%
      0          25m           50m          75m          100m 125m 150m 175m 200m 225m 250m 275m 300m 325m

                                               Cumulative number of vaccine doses allocated (millions)

          Notes: Death rates may be inaccurate in the presence of multi-racial groups and racial groups outside of Indigenous, Asian, Black, Latino, White, and Pacific Islander.
          Sources include CDC Vaccine Allocation Guidelines, American Community Survey (ACS) 5-Year, and APM Research Lab, Color of Coronavirus.
                                                                                                                               Figure 2: State share of vaccines


                           Normalized by state population share                                                                                                                                              Normalized by state population share
                                20 million total vaccines                                                                                                                                                         50 million total vaccines

                                                                                                                                                                         1.35                                                                                                                                                                                      1.35
          WA                                                                                                                                                                            WA
          1.00                                                                                                                                                                          1.01
                                   MT                ND
                                                                                                                                                    ME                   1.00                                         MT               ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ME                     1.00
                                                                                                                                                    0.97                                                                                                                                                                                    0.91
                                   1.02              1.19                                                                                                                                                             1.01             1.13
     OR                                                              MN                                                                                                  0.85      OR                                                                   MN                                                                                                         0.85
     0.93            ID                                              1.05                                                                                                          0.92                ID                                               1.03
                    1.02                                                              WI                                                                                                              1.07                                                              WI
                                                      SD                                                                                NY                                                                                              SD                                                                                  NY
                                                     1.13                            0.97            MI                                1.03                                                                                            1.12                            0.96              MI                                0.97
                                      WY                                                            0.96                                                                                                                 WY                                                             0.94
                                      1.00                                                                                                                                                                               1.04
                                                                        IA                                                       PA                                                                                                                        IA                                                        PA
                                                      NE               1.01                                                     1.01                                                                                                    NE                1.02                                                      0.95
              NV                                     1.08                                                      OH                                                                              NV                                      1.10                                                        OH
             0.87           UT                                                             IL      IN          1.04                                                                           0.94            UT                                                          IL          IN           0.99
   CA                      1.12              CO                                           0.98    0.99                 WV                             CT          0.93           CA                          1.22              CO                                        0.97        0.99                  WV                                 CT            0.93
  0.92                                       0.98           KS                                                         1.01      VA                                             0.96                                           1.02            KS                                                          0.94     VA
                                                                            MO                                                                       DC           1.08                                                                                         MO                                                                            DC             1.02
                                                           1.07             1.05                         KY                     1.12                                                                                                          1.08             1.03                          KY                    1.11
                                                                                                        0.99                                          DE          0.99                                                                                                                      0.98                                              DE            0.98
                                                                                                                                NC                                                                                                                                                                                 NC
                                                                                                    TN                          1.02                                                                                                                                                    TN                         1.02
                                                             OK                                    1.01                                               HI          1.21                                                                          OK                                     1.00                                                   HI            1.19
                       AZ                                                                                                                                                                               AZ
                                          NM                 1.05             AR                                              SC                                                                                         NM                     1.11             AR                                           SC
                      0.98                                                                                                                           MA           1.02                                 1.02                                                                                                                                  MA             0.94
                                          1.02                               1.00                                            0.99                                                                                        1.05                                   1.03                                         0.99
                                                                                                    AL           GA                                  MD           1.15                                                                                                                 AL            GA                                      MD             1.08
                                                                                          MS                     0.98                                                                                                                                                        MS                      1.02
                                                                                          1.04     1.00                                                                                                                                                                      1.04     0.99
                                                                                                                                                     NH           0.99                                                                                                                                                                       NH             0.92
                                                      TX                                                                                                                                                                                TX
                                                                               LA                                                                                                                                                                                 LA
                                                     1.04                                                                                             NJ          0.97                                                                 1.10                                                                                                   NJ            0.96
                                                                              1.06                                                                                                                                                                               1.04
           AK                                                                                                             FL                                                            AK                                                                                                                    FL
                                                                                                                                                      RI          0.99                                                                                                                                                                        RI            0.94
          1.27                                                                                                           0.93                                                          1.34                                                                                                                  0.91
                                                                                                                                                      VT          0.93                                                                                                                                                                        VT            0.85




                                                                                                                                                Powered by Bing                                                                                                                                                                         Powered by Bing
                                                                                                                                                  © GeoNames                                                                                                                                                                              © GeoNames




                                  Normalized by state case share                                                                                                                                                     Normalized by state case share
                                     20 million total vaccines                                                                                                                                                          50 million total vaccines

                                                                                                                                                                         6.59                                                                                                                                                                                       6.59
          WA                                                                                                                                                                              WA
          1.80                                                                                                                                                                            1.81
                                                                                                                                                    ME                                                                                                                                                                                        ME
                                   MT               ND                                                                                                                                                                 MT               ND
                                                                                                                                                    5.10                                                                                                                                                                                      4.75
                                   3.12             1.73                                                                                                                                                               3.09             1.64
     OR                                                             MN                                                                                                   0.54          OR                                                                MN                                                                                                         0.54
     2.73            ID                                             1.47                                                                                                               2.70             ID                                               1.45
                    1.04                                                             WI                                                                                                                1.08                                                              WI
                                                     SD                                                                                 NY                                                                                               SD                                                                                     NY
                                                    1.59                            1.33             MI                                0.77                                                                                             1.57                            1.31                 MI                                0.73
                                      WY                                                            1.54                                                                                                                     WY                                                             1.51
                                      2.97                                                                                                                                                                                   3.09
                                                                       IA                                                        PA                                                                                                                         IA                                                           PA
                                                      NE              1.01                                                      1.71                                                                                                      NE               1.03                                                         1.62
              NV                                     1.12                                                      OH                                                                               NV                                       1.14                                                       OH
             0.69           UT                                                             IL      IN          1.84                                                                            0.74            UT                                                              IL       IN          1.77
   CA                      1.19              CO                                           1.00    1.37                 WV                             CT          1.06            CA                          1.30              CO                                            1.00     1.36                 WV                                CT            1.06
  0.97                                       1.68           KS                                                         3.63     VA                                               1.02                                           1.75            KS                                                          3.37     VA
                                                                            MO                                                                       DC           0.92                                                                                           MO                                                                          DC             0.86
                                                           1.50             1.59                         KY                    1.45                                                                                                            1.51              1.56                         KY                    1.43
                                                                                                        1.87                                          DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.85
                                                                                                                               NC                                 0.93                                                                                                                                              NC                        DE            0.92
                                                                                                    TN                         1.18                                                                                                                                                      TN                         1.18
                                                             OK                                    0.84                                               HI          6.59                                                                           OK                                     0.83                                                  HI            6.52
                      AZ                                                                                                                                                                                 AZ
                                          NM                 1.33             AR                                          SC                                                                                                 NM                  1.40             AR                                              SC
                     0.58                                                                                                                            MA           0.91                                  0.60                                                                                                                                 MA             0.84
                                          1.50                               0.93                                        0.76                                                                                                1.54                                0.95                                            0.76
                                                                                                    AL          GA                                   MD           1.12                                                                                                                   AL           GA                                     MD             1.06
                                                                                          MS                    0.71                                                                                                                                                          MS                      0.74
                                                                                          0.71     0.75                                                                                                                                                                       0.71      0.74
                                                      TX                                                                                             NH           3.10                                                                    TX                                                                                                 NH             2.89
                                                                               LA                                                                                                                                                                                  LA
                                                     0.91                                                                                             NJ          0.75                                                                   0.96                                                                                                 NJ            0.74
                                                                              0.59                                                                                                                                                                                0.58
          AK                                                                                                              FL                                                              AK                                                                                                                      FL
                                                                                                                                                      RI          0.84                                                                                                                                                                        RI            0.79
         3.77                                                                                                            0.56                                                            3.97                                                                                                                    0.55
                                                                                                                                                      VT          6.27                                                                                                                                                                        VT            5.75




                                                                                                                                                Powered by Bing                                                                                                                                                                           Powered by Bing
                                                                                                                                                  © GeoNames                                                                                                                                                                                © GeoNames




                                  Normalized by state death share                                                                                                                                                    Normalized by state death share
                                     20 million total vaccines                                                                                                                                                          50 million total vaccines

                                                                                                                                                                    22.22                                                                                                                                                                                     22.22

          WA                                                                                                                                                                             WA
          2.16                                                                                                                                                                           2.17
                                   MT                                                                                                            ME                                                                                                                                                                                      ME
                                                    ND                                                                                                                                                                MT               ND
                                   6.79                                                                                                          5.29                                                                                                                                                                                    4.93
                                                    3.85                                                                                                                                                              6.73
    OR                                                              MN                                                                                              0.27           OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3.63
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MN                                                                                                    0.27
    5.09             ID                                             1.73                                                                                                           5.04                ID                                               1.70
                    3.38                                                            WI                                                                                                                3.54                                                             WI
                                                     SD                                                                                NY                                                                                               SD                                                                                 NY
                                                    3.38                           2.82             MI                                0.32                                                                                                                            2.77              MI
                                      WY                                                                                                                                                                                 WY            3.34                                                                               0.30
                                                                                                   0.75                                                                                                                                                                                0.74
                                     10.02                                                                                                                                                                              10.41
                                                                      IA                                                        PA                                                                                                                        IA                                                        PA
                                                     NE              1.70                                                      0.90                                                                                                     NE               1.72                                                      0.85
             NV                                     2.95                                                   OH                                                                                  NV                                      3.01                                                    OH
            1.22            UT                                                         IL         IN       1.65                                                                               1.32            UT                                                          IL          IN       1.58
                           4.90                                                       0.82       1.10                                                 CT          0.39                                       5.35                                                                    1.10
   CA                                       CO                                                                        WV                                                         CA                                            CO                                        0.81                             WV                                  CT            0.39
  1.69                                      1.48        KS                                                            6.09     VA                    DC           0.64          1.77                                           1.55        KS                                                             5.65     VA
                                                                           MO                                                                                                                                                                                  MO                                                                            DC
                                                                                                     KY                       2.05                                                                                                                                                       KY                       2.02                                      0.61
                                                       4.02                2.48                                                                                                                                                           4.05                 2.43
                                                                                                    2.83                                              DE          0.82                                                                                                                  2.80
                                                                                                                              NC                                                                                                                                                                                  NC                          DE            0.81
                                                                                                   TN                                                                                                                                                                                  TN                         2.31
                                                                                                                              2.31                    HI          22.21                                                                        OK
                      AZ                                    OK                                    2.61                                                                                                  AZ                                                                            2.58                                                    HI            21.98
                                      NM                    3.31             AR                                          SC                                                                                              NM                    3.49             AR                                           SC
                     0.79                                                                                                                            MA           0.41                                 0.83
                                      1.57                                  2.65                                        1.15                                                                                             1.61                                  2.71                                         1.15                             MA             0.38
                                                                                                  AL           GA                                    MD           0.98                                                                                                                AL            GA
                                                                                       MS                                                                                                                                                                                MS                                                                  MD             0.93
                                                                                                 1.33          1.15                                                                                                                                                                  1.32           1.20
                                                                                       0.79                                                          NH           1.62                                                                                                   0.79
                                                     TX                                                                                                                                                                                 TX                                                                                                   NH             1.51
                                                                             LA                                                                                                                                                                                  LA
                                                    1.57                                                                                              NJ          0.28                                                                 1.66
                                                                            0.58                                                                                                                                                                                0.57                                                                          NJ            0.28
                                                                                                                         FL                           RI          0.53                   AK                                                                                                                  FL
          AK                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RI            0.50
                                                                                                                        1.09                                                            19.02                                                                                                               1.06
         18.07
                                                                                                                                                      VT          5.16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VT            4.73




                                                                                                                                              Powered by Bing                                                                                                                                                                         Powered by Bing
                                                                                                                                                © GeoNames                                                                                                                                                                              © GeoNames




Notes: Area Deprivation Index (ADI) is based on measure created by the Health Resources & Services Administration (HRSA) to allow for rankings of neighborhoods by
socioeconomic disadvantage in a region of interest. Sources include CDC Vaccine Allocation Guidelines, American Community Survey (ACS) 5-Year, and APM Research
Lab, Color of Coronavirus.
                             Figure 3: Proportion of vaccine doses allocated to recipients with ADI >= 8,
                                          By cumulative number of vaccine doses allocated

          Tier 1       Tier 2               Tier 3                                       Tier 4                                                   Tier 5

40%




30%




20%




10%


                                                                                                                                            2018 CDC guidelines

0%
      0          25m          50m          75m         100m 125m 150m 175m 200m 225m 250m 275m 300m 325m

                                             Cumulative number of vaccine doses allocated (millions)
          Notes: Area Deprivation Index (ADI) is based on measure created by the Health Resources & Services Administration (HRSA) to allow for rankings of neighborhoods by
          socioeconomic disadvantage in a region of interest. Sources include CDC Vaccine Allocation Guidelines, American Community Survey (ACS) 5-Year, and APM Research
          Lab, Color of Coronavirus.
                                     Figure 4: Marginal share of high ADI population obtaining a vaccine



           Tier 1     Tier 2             Tier 3                                   Tier 4                                             Tier 5

60%
                                                                                                                                  2018 CDC guidelines
50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%
      0             25m        50m      75m        100m        125m        150m       175m        200m        225m       250m        275m       300m          325m



60%
                                                                                                                                  20% ADI Reserve
50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%
      0             25m        50m      75m        100m        125m        150m       175m        200m        225m       250m        275m       300m          325m




60%
                                                                                                                                  40% ADI Reserve
50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%
      0             25m        50m      75m        100m        125m        150m       175m        200m        225m       250m        275m       300m          325m

                                          Cumulative number of vaccine doses allocated (millions)

          Notes: Area Deprivation Index (ADI) is based on measure created by the Health Resources & Services Administration (HRSA) to allow for rankings of
          neighborhoods by socioeconomic disadvantage in a region of interest. Sources include CDC Vaccine Allocation Guidelines, American Community
          Survey (ACS) 5-Year, and APM Research Lab, Color of Coronavirus.
                        Figure 5: Proportion of vaccine doses allocated to Black and Indigenous recipients,
                               By reserve scenario by cumulative number of vaccine doses allocated


30%

                                                                                                                                                 Covid age-adjusted deaths fraction
                                                                                                                                                 Black and Indigenous: 28.7%
25%
                                                                                                                                                 Covid deaths fraction Black and
                                                                                                                                                 Indigenous: 24.6%


20%



15%                                                                                                                                              Population fraction Black and
                                                                                                                                                 Indigenous: 15.5%



10%

                                                                                                                                               40% ADI Reserve
5%                                                                                                                                             20% ADI Reserve
                                                                                                                                               2018 CDC guidelines

0%
      0          25m          50m          75m          100m 125m 150m 175m 200m 225m 250m 275m 300m 325m

                                              Cumulative number of vaccine doses allocated (millions)
          Notes: Area Deprivation Index (ADI) is based on measure created by the Health Resources & Services Administration (HRSA) to allow for rankings of neighborhoods by
          socioeconomic disadvantage in a region of interest. Death rates may be inaccurate in the presence of multi-racial groups and racial groups outside of Indigenous, Asian,
          Black, Latino, White, and Pacific Islander. Sources include CDC Vaccine Allocation Guidelines, American Community Survey (ACS) 5-Year, and APM Research Lab, Color
          of Coronavirus.
                                                                                                                                                                         0.1
                                                                                                                                                                               1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                100.0



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10.0
                                                                                                                                                              New Jersey                                                                                                                                                            Florida                                                                                                                                                 Vermont
                                                                                                                                                                New York                                                                                                                                                         Louisiana                                                                                                                                                    Florida
                                                                                                                                                          Massachusetts                                                                                                                                                            Arizona                                                                                                                                                     Maine
                                                                                                                                                             Connecticut                                                                                                                                                       Mississippi                                                                                                                                                   Oregon
                                                                                                                                                            Rhode Island                                                                                                                                                         New York                                                                                                                                          New Hampshire
                                                                                                                                                                Louisiana                                                                                                                                                         Alabama                                                                                                                                               Connecticut
                                                                                                                                                    District of Columbia                                                                                                                                                          Georgia                                                                                                                                                    Nevada
                                                                                                                                                                Michigan                                                                                                                                                           Nevada                                                                                                                                              West Virginia
                                                                                                                                                              Mississippi                                                                                                                                                      New Jersey                                                                                                                                              Rhode Island
                                                                                                                                                                Delaware                                                                                                                                                   South Carolina                                                                                                                                                  Michigan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20% ADI Reserve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40% ADI Reserve




                                                                                                                                                                   Illinois                                                                                                                                                  Rhode Island                                                                                                                                            Massachusetts
                                                                                                                                                                  Arizona                                                                                                                                                       Tennessee                                                                                                                                              Pennsylvania
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2018 CDC guidelines




                                                                                                                                                            Pennsylvania                                                                                                                                                   Massachusetts                                                                                                                                                  Wisconsin
                                                                                                                                                                Maryland                                                                                                                                             District of Columbia                                                                                                                                                  California
                                                                                                                                                                   Florida                                                                                                                                                       Delaware                                                                                                                                                New Jersey
                                                                                                                                                                  Indiana                                                                                                                                                         Arkansas                                                                                                                                                 New York
                                                                                                                                                          South Carolina                                                                                                                                                             Texas                                                                                                                                                    Illinois
                                                                                                                                                                 Georgia                                                                                                                                                            Illinois                                                                                                                                               Delaware




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Fair share => share of vaccines / share of cases = 1
                                                                                                                                                                  Nevada                                                                                                                                                         California                                                                                                                                                Kentucky




                                                                                                                                                                                 Fair share => share of vaccines / share of deaths = 1
                                                                                                                                                                 Alabama                                                                                                                                                               Iowa                                                                                                                                          South Carolina
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Fair share => share of vaccines / share of population = 1




                                                                                                                                                        New Hampshire                                                                                                                                                         Connecticut                                                                                                                                                    Indiana
                                                                                                                                                                Colorado                                                                                                                                                         Maryland                                                                                                                                                   Alabama




Survey (ACS) 5-Year, and APM Research Lab, Color of Coronavirus.
                                                                                                                                                                     Ohio                                                                                                                                                            Idaho                                                                                                                                                      Ohio
                                                                                                                                                             New Mexico                                                                                                                                                          Nebraska                                                                                                                                                 Tennessee
                                                                                                                                                                    Texas                                                                                                                                                  North Carolina                                                                                                                                               Washington
                                                                                                                                                               Minnesota                                                                                                                                                               Utah                                                                                                                                                 Montana
                                                                                                                                                                      Iowa                                                                                                                                                      Wisconsin                                                                                                                                            North Carolina
                                                                                                                                                                California                                                                                                                                                         Indiana                                                                                                                                     District of Columbia
                                                                                                                                                                  Virginia                                                                                                                                                      Oklahoma                                                                                                                                                     Arizona
                                                                                                                                                             Washington                                                                                                                                                            Virginia                                                                                                                                                Colorado
                                                                                                                                                          North Carolina                                                                                                                                                        Minnesota                                                                                                                                                        Iowa
                                                                                                                                                                 Missouri                                                                                                                                                           Kansas                                                                                                                                                  Georgia
                                                                                                                                                               Tennessee                                                                                                                                                         Michigan                                                                                                                                                   Arkansas
                                                                                                                                                                 Arkansas                                                                                                                                                     New Mexico                                                                                                                                                    Missouri
                                                                                                                                                               Wisconsin                                                                                                                                                          Missouri                                                                                                                                                Minnesota
                                                                                                                                                                Kentucky                                                                                                                                                    South Dakota                                                                                                                                                   Wyoming
                                                                                                                                                                Nebraska                                                                                                                                                     Pennsylvania                                                                                                                                                  Louisiana
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6b. State share of vaccines / State share of cases




                                                                                                                                                           South Dakota                                                                                                                                                     North Dakota                                                                                                                                                 Mississippi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6a. State share of vaccines / State share of population




                                                                                                                                                               Oklahoma                                                                                                                                                          Colorado                                                                                                                                               New Mexico




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6c. State share of vaccines / State share of deaths (log scale)
                                                                                                                                                                    Idaho                                                                                                                                                             Ohio                                                                                                                                                     Idaho
                                                                                                                                                           North Dakota                                                                                                                                                       Washington                                                                                                                                                      Kansas
                                                                                                                                                                   Kansas                                                                                                                                                        Kentucky                                                                                                                                                  Maryland
                                                                                                                                                                 Vermont                                                                                                                                                           Oregon                                                                                                                                                      Texas
                                                                                                                                                                    Maine                                                                                                                                                New Hampshire                                                                                                                                                     Nebraska
                                                                                                                                                                  Oregon                                                                                                                                                         Wyoming                                                                                                                                                     Virginia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 6: Vaccines per state as proportion of “fair share” for 50 million total vaccines




                                                                                                                                                                      Utah                                                                                                                                                        Montana                                                                                                                                                 Oklahoma
                                                                                                                                                            West Virginia                                                                                                                                                    West Virginia                                                                                                                                            South Dakota
                                                                                                                                                                 Montana                                                                                                                                                            Alaska                                                                                                                                            North Dakota
                                                                                                                                                                Wyoming                                                                                                                                                              Maine                                                                                                                                                    Hawaii




neighborhoods by socioeconomic disadvantage in a region of interest. Sources include CDC Vaccine Allocation Guidelines, American Community
                                                                                                                                                                   Alaska                                                                                                                                                         Vermont                                                                                                                                                        Utah




Notes: Area Deprivation Index (ADI) is based on measure created by the Health Resources & Services Administration (HRSA) to allow for rankings of
                                                                                                                                                                   Hawaii                                                                                                                                                           Hawaii                                                                                                                                                    Alaska
             Figure A1: Proportion of vaccine doses allocated to Black, Indigenous, and Hispanic recipients,
                          By reserve scenario by cumulative number of vaccine doses allocated


60%
                                                                                                                                   Covid age-adjusted deaths fraction Black,
                                                                                                                                   Indigenous and Hispanic: 58.6%

50%


                                                                                                                                   Covid deaths fraction Black, Indigenous
40%                                                                                                                                and Hispanic: 43.8%




30%                                                                                                                                Population fraction Black, Indigenous, and
                                                                                                                                   Hispanic: 32%




20%

                                                                                                                                               40% ADI Reserve
10%                                                                                                                                            20% ADI Reserve
                                                                                                                                               2018 CDC guidelines


0%
      0          25m          50m           75m         100m 125m 150m 175m 200m 225m 250m 275m 300m 325m

                                              Cumulative number of vaccine doses allocated (millions)
          Notes: Area Deprivation Index (ADI) is based on measure created by the Health Resources & Services Administration (HRSA) to allow for rankings of neighborhoods by
          socioeconomic disadvantage in a region of interest. Death rates may be inaccurate in the presence of multi-racial groups and racial groups outside of Indigenous, Asian,
          Black, Latino, White, and Pacific Islander. Sources include CDC Vaccine Allocation Guidelines, American Community Survey (ACS) 5-Year, and APM Research Lab, Color
          of Coronavirus.
                             Figure A2: Proportion of doses allocated to Black and Indigenous recipients,
                                By reserve scenario by cumulative number of vaccine doses allocated

25%




20%




15%                                                                                                                         Population fraction Black or Indigenous: 15.5%




10%

                                                                                                                               5% Black and Indigenous Reserve
                                                                                                                               40% ADI Reserve
5%




0%
      0          25m          50m          75m         100m 125m 150m 175m 200m 225m 250m 275m 300m 325m

                                             Cumulative number of vaccine doses allocated (millions)
          Notes: Area Deprivation Index (ADI) is based on measure created by the Health Resources & Services Administration (HRSA) to allow for rankings of neighborhoods by
          socioeconomic disadvantage in a region of interest. Sources include CDC Vaccine Allocation Guidelines, American Community Survey (ACS) 5-Year, and APM Research
          Lab, Color of Coronavirus.
                                                 Figure A3: Average age of vaccine dose recipients,
                                        By reserve scenario by cumulative number of vaccine doses allocated


50 years

     45

     40                                                                                                                                                                             Population avg.
                                                                                                                                                                                    age: 39
     35

     30

     25

     20

     15                                                                                                                                              40% ADI Reserve
                                                                                                                                                     20% ADI Reserve
     10                                                                                                                                              2018 CDC guidelines

      5

      0
           0          25m          50m          75m         100m 125m 150m 175m 200m 225m 250m 275m 300m 325m

                                                  Cumulative number of vaccine doses allocated (millions)
               Notes: Area Deprivation Index (ADI) is based on measure created by the Health Resources & Services Administration (HRSA) to allow for rankings of neighborhoods by
               socioeconomic disadvantage in a region of interest. Sources include CDC Vaccine Allocation Guidelines, American Community Survey (ACS) 5-Year, and APM Research
               Lab, Color of Coronavirus.
                                  Figure A4: Proportion of vaccine doses allocated to Female recipients,
                                  By reserve scenario by cumulative number of vaccine doses allocated


80%


70%


60%


50%                                                                                                                                      Population fraction female: 51%



40%


30%
                                                                                                                                               40% ADI Reserve
20%                                                                                                                                            20% ADI Reserve
                                                                                                                                               2018 CDC guidelines
10%


0%
      0          25m          50m          75m         100m 125m 150m 175m 200m 225m 250m 275m 300m 325m

                                             Cumulative number of vaccine doses allocated (millions)
          Notes: Area Deprivation Index (ADI) is based on measure created by the Health Resources & Services Administration (HRSA) to allow for rankings of neighborhoods by
          socioeconomic disadvantage in a region of interest. Sources include CDC Vaccine Allocation Guidelines, American Community Survey (ACS) 5-Year, and APM Research
          Lab, Color of Coronavirus.
                        Online Appendix: Simulation Procedure and Data Sources

             to “Do Black and Indigenous Communities Receive their Fair Share of
                        Vaccines Under the 2018 CDC Guidelines?” By
Parag A. Pathak, Harald Schmidt, Adam Solomon, Edwin Song, Tayfun Sönmez, M. Utku Ünver

        Contents
A1.     Overview .............................................................................................................................. 2
  A1.1.       Data Sources .................................................................................................................. 2
  A1.2.       Simulation Procedure .................................................................................................... 3
A2.     Tier Labelling Criteria .......................................................................................................... 4
  A2.1.       CDC groups and tiers .................................................................................................... 4
  A2.2.       Data issues and imperfect workarounds ........................................................................ 8
      A2.2.1.        Occupational specificity and supersetting ............................................................. 8
      A2.2.2.        National security group size................................................................................... 9
      A2.2.3.        High-risk conditions and the BRFSS ................................................................... 10
      A2.2.4.        Pregnant women................................................................................................... 11
  A2.3.       Comment on tier and group sizes ................................................................................ 13
  A2.4.       Tier by tier criteria details for labelling of PUMS data............................................... 13
      A2.4.1.        National security personnel.................................................................................. 13
      A2.4.2.        Healthcare personnel ............................................................................................ 14
      A2.4.3.        Employees of critical industries ........................................................................... 15
      A2.4.4.        High-risk demographics ....................................................................................... 18
A3.     Calculation of ADI values .................................................................................................. 19
  A3.1.       Overview ..................................................................................................................... 19
  A3.2.       Missing values and omitted observations.................................................................... 20
  A3.3.       Component by component details ............................................................................... 21
A4.     Notes on Graphing .............................................................................................................. 22
  A4.1.       Death rates (actual and age-adjusted) by race/ethnicity .............................................. 22
  A4.2.       State by state distribution ............................................................................................ 23
A5.     Table of files ....................................................................................................................... 23
    A1. Overview

        A1.1. Data Sources

We base our priority tiers off of the priority tiers for a severe pandemic outlined in the 2018
CDC guidance (CDC 2018a) on vaccine prioritization during an influenza pandemic. The US
population is partitioned into 5 tiers based on essential or high-risk occupations and demographic
factors indicating risk for spreading/contracting severe disease. In case there are not enough
vaccines to go around for even the first tier, the first tier is further partitioned into 7 subtiers. For
tiers 2-5, those in the same tier have equal priority. We assume that among individuals with the
same priority, the vaccine will be distributed at random.

The 2018 CDC document contains estimates, to the nearest 50k, of the number of people within
each group within each tier. These numbers come from “information provided by Department of
Defense, Department of Homeland Security, Department of Health and Human Services, and
U.S. Census Bureau.” These priority tiers sometimes overlap. If someone qualifies for two or
more tiers, they are vaccinated with the highest tier they qualify for. However, the document and
surrounding CDC sites do not specify whether they would be included in each tier's estimated
numbers or only that of the highest tier. In our process, we are assuming that the CDC numbers
encompass those who qualify for higher tiers as well.

As the CDC's data is unavailable to us, we use the American Community Survey (ACS) 2014-
2018 5-year Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) (U.S. Census Bureau 2014-2018). The 5-
year PUMS contains two datasets, one containing housing unit characteristics for a sample of
housing units and another containing individual characteristics for the individuals within those
same housing units. We use the person data, which has over 15 million observations, for our
labelling of tiers.

The PUMS person data is a weighted sample. Every observation of an individual in the PUMS
person data is associated with a weight called “person's weight for generating statistics on
individuals” (PWGTP). This weight is “used to bring the characteristics of the sample more into
agreement with those of the full population by compensating for differences in sampling rates
across areas, differences between the full sample and the interviewed sample, and differences
between the sample and independent estimates of basic demographic characteristic estimates of
population characteristics”, according to the ACS Design and Methodology report (U.S. Census
Bureau 2014).

PWGTP was also scaled such that the size of any population group could be estimated by the
sum of PWGTP across observations in the PUMS belonging to the group. Further details about
calculation of weights in the ACS can be found in the PUMS technical documentation (U.S.
Census Bureau 2020a).

In our tier labelling, we have assumed that the CDC-provided numbers include those who may
also qualify for a higher tier, unless the CDC-provided group definitions say otherwise. Our
procedures allow each observation to be marked for as many tiers as the observation qualifies
for. There are specific pairs/sets of groups within tiers that cannot overlap, either by the CDC’s
explicit statement (“not included in higher priority groups”), the CDC’s implicit statement
(“other groups”), or common sense (two groups that the PUMS doesn’t differentiate but should
not actually overlap). Our understanding of those restrictions has been accounted for in our
labelling criteria.

Due to data limitations, we rely on randomization for the assignment of people to certain CDC
groups.

The ACS PUMS does not include data on the presence of high-risk conditions, which impacts
one’s tier priority. We supplement with 2018 data from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance
System (BRFSS) (CDC 2018b). As the observations in the BRFSS are unrelated to those in the
PUMS, we rely on randomization to link the two datasets by computing the proportion with a
high-risk condition for each characteristic demographic group in the BRFSS and assigning each
observation in PUMS person data as high-risk using weighted coin flips. More details are in the
“Tier inclusion criteria” section of this document.

We chose to run the tier assignment process only once due to the large size of the dataset and the
large sizes of groups and demographic categories relative to PWGTP. This is not a Monte Carlo
simulation.

We use both the person and the housing unit PUMS data for assigning Area Deprivation Index
(ADI) 2.0 (University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health 2015) to individuals,
as the components of the ADI involve both individual-level attributes found only in the person
data and household-level attributes found only in the housing unit data. We were able to link the
two datasets, as well as identify residents of the same housing unit within the person data, using
the variable SERIALNO, an ID number unique to the housing unit that is present in both the
person and the household data.

We cannot assign the actual ADI of each person in the PUMS data because ADI is computed
using census block level averages and the PUMS geographic specificity only goes down to the
Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA) level. We instead approximate the ADI of each family
using averages taken at the family level. We then use SERIALNO to assign to each individual in
the person data the ADI of her family We do not perform any randomization in computing ADI.
Data on proportion of COVID deaths by race/ethnicity and age-adjusted proportion of COVID
deaths by race/ethnicity are sourced from APM Research Lab (2020). The data was accessed
August 11, 2020 and released August 5, 2020, reflecting data releases through August 4.

   A1.2.       Simulation Procedure

We consider three treatment groups for strict CDC guidelines, a reserve system with 20% over-
and-above high-ADI reserve, and a reserve system with 20% over-and-above high-ADI reserve
while the units within the unreserved category and reserve category, including the unreserved
category are allocated using the CDC guidelines. We follow the following procedure in our
simulation analysis.
1. Approximate the ADI of each household as explained in “Calculation of ADI Values”
    section of this appendix.
2. Label every person in the PUMS with every group they qualify for. PUMS variables do not
   perfectly match up to the groups but can be used as a crude approximation. Our inclusion
   criteria for each tier is outlined in the “Tier inclusion criteria” section of this appendix.
3. Determine the highest-ranking tier for which each person qualifies. Determine, also, whether
   each person has an ADI in the top 30% of people in the nation we calculate an ADI for
4. For each tier, calculate the demographic averages (proportion breakdown of race, gender,
   age, etc.) and total populations of those in the PUMS who qualify for that tier but do not
   qualify for any higher tier.
5. Changing total vaccine quantity in 10,000-unit increments of total vaccines from 0 to
   100,000 and then in increments of 100,000 vaccine units from 100,000 to 325.7 million (the
   US population plus duplicated entries for pregnant women, see the A2.2.4), for each total
   vaccine quantity, do the following:
   5.1. Using the tier and ADI priority and group size, calculate how many of each group would
        receive a vaccine for each amount of total vaccine units under the CDC guidelines and
        the reserve system for each high-ADI reserve category size. Assume that for those of the
        same priority, vaccine distribution is randomized.
   5.2. Using the PUMS data, calculate the proportion Black or Indigenous; proportion Black,
        Indigenous, or Latino/Hispanic; proportion female; and average age of individuals who
        are allocated vaccines under the CDC guidelines and the reserve system for 20% and
        40% high-ADI reserve category.
6. For each state, estimate state population using PUMS individual-level data set, and number
   of deaths and cases for each state using CDC data retrieved August 14 (CDC 2020b).
7. For two total vaccine quantities, 20 million and 50 million, do the following:
   7.1. Using data vaccine allocation shares found in Step 5, and population estimates found in
        Step 6, calculate allocation for each state under the CDC guidelines and the reserve
        system for 20% and 40% high-ADI reserve category size. Note that for 20 million
        vaccines, the allocation under the CDC guidelines and both reserve sizes are the same.
   7.2. Calculate “fair share” indices relative to population, deaths, and cases using the
        estimates per state under the CDC guidelines and the reserve system for 20% and 40%
        high-ADI reserve category size.

Details about graphing are summarized in the last section of this appendix.

We use statistical open-source R software (version 3.6.1) and Microsoft Excel in our simulation.
the names of program files are given in a table at the end of this appendix. The programs and
data files are available from the authors upon request.

   A2. Tier Labelling Criteria

   A2.1.       CDC groups and tiers

We integrate Box 1 and Table 3 of the 2018 CDC guidance (CDC 2018) to arrive at the
following group-to-tier mapping:
   Tier                                                                                                           CDC’s
(High/Very   subtier/rank                                                                                        Estimated
   High       within tier                                                                                        Number in
 Severity)    (for tier 1)                  Group                                 Definition                      Group
    1              2           Deployed and mission critical     Military forces and other mission critical         850,000
                               personnel for national security   personnel not limited to active duty
                                                                 military or U.S. government
                                                                 employees. Includes some diplomatic and
                                                                 intelligence service personnel, and public
                                                                 and private sector functions identified by
                                                                 federal agencies as unique and critical to
                                                                 national security



    1              7           Public health personnel           Public health responders at federal, state         300,000
                                                                 and local levels

    1            1 for         Inpatient healthcare providers    Includes two-thirds of personnel at acute        3,200,000
              frontline, 7                                       care hospitals who would be identified by
                for rest                                         their institution as critical to provision of
                                                                 inpatient health care services; primarily
                                                                 will include persons providing care with
                                                                 direct patient exposure but also will
                                                                 include persons essential to maintaining
                                                                 hospital infrastructure.



    1        4 for frontline   Outpatient and home health        Includes two-thirds of personnel identified      2,600,000
                7 for rest     providers                         by their organization at outpatient
                                                                 facilities, including but not limited to
                                                                 physicians’ offices, primary care clinics,
                                                                 dialysis centers, urgent care centers, retail
                                                                 health clinics, and blood donation
                                                                 facilities; and skilled home health care
                                                                 personnel providing care with direct
                                                                 patient exposure.



    1              7           Health care providers in long     Includes two-thirds of personnel at LTCFs        1,600,000
                               term care facilities (LTCFs)      identified by their organization as critical
                                                                 to the provision of care.


    1              4           Pharmacists and pharmacy          Includes pharmacists dispensing drugs at           725,000
                               technicians                       retail locations and pharmacy technicians
                                                                 who interact with the public and are
                                                                 essential for pharmacy operations (note
                                                                 that pharmacists in hospitals or outpatient
                                                                 centers may be targeted as part of those
                                                                 groups).
1   3 for frontline   Emergency services and public      Includes groups supporting emergency             2,000,000
      EMS, 5 for      safety sector personnel (e.g.      response and public safety. Emergency
     frontline law    emergency medical service, law     medical service personnel include those
     enforcement      enforcement and fire services)     who are fire department based, hospital-
        and fire                                         based, or private; firefighters include
    services, 7 for                                      professional and volunteers; law
          rest                                           enforcement local police, sheriff officers,
                                                         state troopers; and corrections officers
                                                         include those in prisons and jails.




1         7           Manufacturers of pandemic          Includes critical personnel required for           50,000
                      vaccine and antiviral drugs        ongoing production of pandemic medical
                                                         countermeasures to support a pandemic
                                                         response.


1         6           Pregnant women                     Women at any stage of pregnancy                  4,000,000

1   6 for age 6-11    Infants and toddlers (6-35         Infants and toddlers in the specified age       11,000,000
    months, 7 for     months old)                        group
      age 1 or 2



2                     Essential military support and     Military and other essential personnel            650,000
                      sustainment personnel              needed to support and sustain deployed
                                                         forces


2                     Intelligence services              Critical personnel in the intelligence            150,000
                                                         community serving at domestic and
                                                         international posts that are not included in
                                                         tier 1



2                     National Guard personnel           National Guard Personnel not included in          500,000
                                                         tier 1, but who are likely to be activated to
                                                         maintain public order during a pandemic
                                                         or to support pandemic response services
                                                         or critical infrastructure


2                     Other domestic national security   Includes other groups that are essential to       150,000
                      personnel                          national security such as guards at nuclear
                                                         facilities and critical personnel providing
                                                         border protection.
2   Community support service          Personnel from community organizations          600,000
    personnel (emergency               who will provide essential support and
    management and community           have direct contact with persons and
    and faith-based support and        families affected during community
    response organizations)            pandemic outbreaks, and emergency
                                       management personnel who coordinate
                                       pandemic response and support activities




2   Mortuary services personnel        Includes funeral directors                       50,000

2   Communications, information        Personnel who are critical to support          2,200,000
    technology (IT), electricity,      essential communications, information
    nuclear, oil & gas, and water      technology, utility, financial and other
    sector personnel, financial        services provided by the defined sectors
    clearing and settlement
    personnel



2   Critical government personnel –    Federal, state, tribal, and tribal              425,000
    operational and regulatory         government employees and contractors
    functions                          who perform critical regulatory or
                                       operational functions required for essential
                                       operations of other critical infrastructure
                                       sectors



2   Household contacts of infants      Household contacts of infants under 6          4,500,000
    under 6 months old.                months old

2   Children 3 – 18 years old with a   Children in the specified age group with a     7,000,000
    high risk medical condition        chronic medical condition that increases
                                       their risk of severe influenza disease,
                                       including heart and lung disease,
                                       metabolic disease, renal disease and
                                       neuromuscular diseases that may
                                       compromise respiratory function, as
                                       defined by ACIP recommendations for
                                       seasonal influenza vaccination.



3   Remaining active duty military     Active duty personnel not included in          1,500,000
    and essential support              higher priority groups and essential
                                       support personnel

3   Other health care personnel        Includes groups that provide important          350,000
                                       health care services but are at less
                                       occupational risk, such as laboratory
                                       personnel
     3                    Banking & finance, chemical,        Personnel who are critical to support             3,400,000
                          food & agriculture,                 essential services provided by the defined
                          pharmaceutical, postal &            sectors
                          shipping, & transportation sector
                          personnel. (Critical
                          infrastructure with greater
                          redundancy)


     3                    Other critical government           Federal, state, tribal, and local government       400,000
                          personnel                           employees and contractors who perform
                                                              important government functions included
                                                              in agency continuity-of-operations plans


     3                    Children 3 – 18 years old           Children in the specified age group who          62,000,000
                          without a high risk                 do not have a chronic medical condition
                          medical condition                   that increases their risk of severe influenza
                                                              disease.




     4                    Adults 19 – 64 years with a high    Adults in the specified age group with a         38,000,000
                          risk condition                      chronic medical condition that increases
                                                              their risk of severe influenza disease,
                                                              including heart and lung diseases,
                                                              metabolic diseases, renal disease, and
                                                              neuromuscular diseases that may
                                                              compromise respiratory function, as
                                                              defined by ACIP recommendations for
                                                              seasonal influenza vaccination




     4                    Adults 65 years and older           Older adults in the specified age group          41,000,000



     5                    Healthy adults, 19 – 64 years old   Adults in the specified age group not           132,000,000
                                                              included above




   A2.2.       Data issues and imperfect workarounds

   A2.2.1.     Occupational specificity and supersetting

For the CDC’s occupation-based groups (the national security, healthcare, and critical industries
groups), the PUMS data does not have the necessary specificity to definitively identify someone
as a member of the group. For example, one of the CDC’s groups is manufacturers of pandemic
vaccine and antiviral drugs. The PUMS data identifies those working in the pharmaceutical
manufacturing industry but does not distinguish people making a COVID vaccine from people
making non-COVID medicines.

Our work-around for the lack of required specificity needed to identify a specific group (such as
manufacturers of pandemic vaccine and antiviral drugs) in the PUMS data is to construct a
reasonable superset of the group (such as all those working in pharmaceutical manufacturing)
and then randomly and independently assign each superset observation to the group with a fixed
probability for the group. The fixed probability is chosen so that number of people in the US
population represented by the observations assigned to the group approximately equal an
externally provided estimate of number of people in the group.

The fixed probability is calculated as follows for assigning observations in a superset S to a
group G that has an external size estimate of N:

                                                                           3
                    !(#$%&'()*+#, ∈ .|#$%&'()*+#, ∈ 0) =
                                                                  ∑8 ∈ 9   !6.7!8

PWGTP, the variable representing the weight of each observation in the PUMS person data, is
scaled so that ∑8 ∈ 9 !6.7!8 serves as an estimator for the size of S in the US population.
Subset sizes are all large relative to observation weights.

In the below tier-by-tier details, when we use this supersetting procedure to assign observations
in a superset S to a group G that has an external size estimate of N, we will refer to it with the
following: “Of the superset S, randomly assign N to group G.”

We were not able to find a good external estimate of how many critical inpatient healthcare
providers, outpatient healthcare providers, firefighters, EMS, firefighters, and law enforcement
are frontline vs not frontline. The differences due to these values are confined to shifts between
the subtiers of tier 1 and these values have no impact on cumulative demographics of vaccine
recipients when there is enough vaccine for tier 1. As our reserve system does not kick in until
tier 2, we have decided not to focus on defining frontline personnel and arbitrarily set the size of
each frontline group to 0.5 the size of the critical group (e.g. our external estimate for the size of
the group of frontline EMS is half the size of the group of critical EMS).

   A2.2.2.     National security group size

The PUMS data seems to frequently greatly undercount the number of national security and
military personnel in the population. Several times during our group identification exercise, we
constructed what should have been a reasonable superset of a national security-based group only
to have the total person weight of the PUMS superset be several times smaller than the CDC’s
estimate of the group size.

As we do not have access to the data that the CDC uses to come up with their numbers, we
decided to go with the PUMS’s numbers of national security personnel in these cases. More
details can be found in the tier by tier criteria section of this document.
   A2.2.3.     High-risk conditions and the BRFSS

The PUMS does not have data on the health conditions of the surveyed individuals. We therefore
impute COVID-19 risk for each observation in the PUMS using the BRFSS data.

We label each observation in the BRFSS as high-risk for COVID-19 if at least one of the
following is true:
   •   The individual has been “(Ever told) you had skin cancer”
   •   The individual has been “(Ever told) you had any other types of cancer”
   •   The individual has been “(Ever told) you have kidney disease” not including kidney
       stones, bladder infection or incontinence
   •   The individual has been “(Ever told) you have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
       C.O.P.D., emphysema or chronic bronchitis”
   •   The individual is obese, defined as having a BMI >= 30
   •   The individual has been “(Ever told) you had angina or coronary heart disease”
   •   The individual has been “(Ever told) you have diabetes,” not including diabetes only
       while pregnant, pre-diabetes, or borderline diabetes

For each of the above statements, we consider each statement false if the variable takes any value
other than the one listed, including values for “don’t know/not sure,” “not asked or missing,” and
“refused.” The above variable definitions and question wordings are sourced from the 2018
BRFSS codebook (CDC 2018c).

The medical conditions chosen are an approximation of the CDC list of conditions (CDC 2020a)
that make one of “increased risk of severe illness from COVID-19.” As of 8/29/20, the
conditions where people “are at increased risk,” not including the conditions where people
“might be at an increased risk,” are as follows:
   •    Cancer
   •    Chronic kidney disease
   •    COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)
   •    Immunocompromised state (weakened immune system) from solid organ transplant
   •    Obesity (body mass index [BMI] of 30 or higher)
   •    Serious heart conditions, such as heart failure, coronary artery disease, or
        cardiomyopathies
     • Sickle cell disease
     • Type 2 diabetes mellitus
Our approximation of COVID-19 risk factors omits immunocompromised state from solid organ
transplant and sickle cell disease due to lack of data in the BRFSS. Our risk factors also include
all diabetes, not just type 2 diabetes, as the BRFSS does not distinguish between different types
of diabetes.

Using the BRFSS data, labelled with whether or not there is high COVID-19 risk, we group the
data by age bin, sex, whether or not the person is Hispanic, and race/ethnicity other than
Hispanic. For each interaction of those variables, we find the proportion of the population that is
high-risk. We omit any observations where one or more of these demographic variables are
unknown or missing.

The age bins are the following:
   • 18-24
   • 25-29
   • 30-34
   • 35-39
   • 40-44
   • 45-49
   • 50-54
   • 55-59
   • 60-64
   • 65-69
   • 70-74
   • 75-79
   • 80-84
   • 85+
For non-Hispanic race, those of known race are categorized into the following:
   • White only
   • Black or African American only
   • American Indian or Alaskan Native only
   • Asian Only
   • Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander only
   • Other race only
   • Multiracial
Hispanic status is coded in a separate variable from non-Hispanic race.

We considered adding income bins to the interaction of demographic variables, but the
introduction of income resulted in lack of data for some variable interactions. We leave income
out to avoid this and for simplicity.

We use to output the high-risk proportion of each demographic interaction in the BRFSS data.
Then, we find the demographic probability of each PUMS person data observation being high
risk based on the proportions calculated from the BRFSS. We then throw a weighted coin for
each individual in the PUMS to label each individual as high risk or not. As the BRFSS does not
have risk factor data for people under 18, we extrapolate the calculated risk probabilities of 18 to
24-year-olds of the same sex, race, and ethnicity for those under 18.

   A2.2.4.     Pregnant women

The PUMS data does not have data on whether or not each observation is of someone currently
pregnant. It does denote whether or not a person has given birth in the past 12 months. We create
a cohort of pregnant women in the data via the following steps:
    1. Identify the entries in the PUMS data where:
            a. The person has given birth in the past 12 months AND
            b. We throw an independent weighted coin with heads probability equal to the
               length of a pregnancy as a fraction of a year and the coin comes up heads AND
            c. The observation is not included in any tier of a higher rank than tier 1 subtier 6.
    2. Duplicate the entries identified in tier 1. Mark the duplicates but not the originals as
        pregnant. Mark all other entries as non-pregnant.
    3. Subtract 1 from the age of the duplicates
The goal of this process is to minimize the differences when comparing the calculated
demographics and size of each tier based on our synthesized dataset with the duplicated entries
versus the calculated demographics and size of each tier based on a counterfactual PUMS dataset
that included pregnancy data. We will refer to this counterfactual dataset in this section as
“pregnancy-complete data” and the calculated values based on it as “pregnancy-complete data
values”.

Note that we could not have simply labelled those marked in step 1 as pregnant without creating
a large and incorrect overlap between entries marked as pregnant and entries that are household
contacts of a baby under 6 months. With the counterfactual pregnancy-complete data, there
would have not been that overlap as most pregnant people intuitively would not also have a
young infant in the house. This issue would cause many of those who would have been Tier 2
with pregnancy-complete data due to being household contacts of babies under 6 months would
have instead been marked pregnant and counted with Tier 1, not Tier 2, potentially causing a
noticeable difference from the pregnancy-complete data for the calculated demographic
composition of Tier 2.

Our method of duplicating some entries and only marking the duplicates as pregnant has the
effect that our calculated demographics and sizes of tiers strictly higher than tier 1 subtier 6 are
identical to those tiers’ pregnancy-complete values. For tiers strictly lower than tier 1 subtier 6,
the difference between the dataset generated with our method and the pregnancy-complete data
is that those that do not qualify for any tier strictly higher than tier 1 subtier 6 AND would have
been known to be pregnant in the pregnancy-complete data are included in the lower tier’s
demographic summary with our method and excluded in the complete data values. As long as
pregnant women compose a small minority of each lower tier, our method minimizes deviations
from the pregnancy-complete data values for all higher and lower tiers.

The demographics and size of tier 1 subtier 6 itself can be reasonably considered similar to the
pregnancy-complete data values. The synthetic cohort of pregnant women are of a size and racial
composition comparable to the true number of pregnant women by nature of our large-scaled
randomization as long as there is little year-to-year variation in pregnancy counts and
demographics and little in- and out-flow of pregnant women and new mothers in the US.
The length of pregnancy used in our calculation was 268 days, referencing Jukic et al. (2013).
The length of a year used in our calculation was 365 days, referencing simplicity and common
sense.

We note that our count of pregnant women using only the ACS (the number of people who gave
birth in the last year, multiplied by the length of a pregnancy as a fraction of a year) is only about
3 million rather than the CDC’s provided 4 million. We do not know the reason for this
discrepancy.


   A2.3.       Comment on tier and group sizes

Except for the national security groups affected by the counting issue, our numbers for the sizes
of each occupation-based group are tied to the CDC estimates of group size via the supersetting
procedure.

We do not align the numbers for high-risk demographics with the CDC's numbers, as they're
either fully identifiable or imputable with ACS data (e.g. age-based and pregnancy) or differ for
COVID-19 rather than influenza such that CDC numbers do not apply (e.g. high-risk status).
Our numbers for the sizes of the tiers differ from the CDC estimates of tier size for 2 reasons:
    1. The sizes of our demographic-based groups are not tied to CDC estimates and often
        differ.
    2. We remove those belonging to a higher tier from the count for each tier. As we
        understand, the CDC does not.

   A2.4.       Tier by tier criteria details for labelling of PUMS data

   A2.4.1.     National security personnel

   A2.4.1.1. Tier 1
   •   Deployed and mission critical personnel for national security (tier 1 subtier 2)
          o CDC size estimate: 850k
          o Of the superset of active duty military personnel randomly assign 200k to group
             as “deployed personnel.” 200k as an estimate of the number of deployed
             personnel comes from Gibbons-Neff and Schmitt (2019).
          o Of the superset of observations that have not been assigned as deployed and have
             a NAICS code of 928P .ADM-National Security And International Affairs,
             randomly assign 650k (850k – 200k) as mission critical personnel
   A2.4.1.2. Tier 2
   •   Critical intelligence services and other domestic national security personnel
           o This is the 2nd and 4th groups in Tier 2 combined
           o CDC combined size estimate: 300k
           o Superset: people in the NAICS industry code of 928P .ADM-National Security
               And International Affairs who have not already been included in Deployed and
               mission critical personnel for national security (tier 1 subtier 2)
           o Randomly assign 300k of this superset to this combined group
   •   National guard personnel not included in tier 1
           o CDC size estimate: 500k
       o We attempted to use the superset of those with a NAICS code of 928110P6 .MIL-
           U.S. Armed Forces, Branch Not Specified or 928110P7 .MIL-Military Reserves
           Or National Guard who have not already been assigned to tier 1 subtier 2.
           However, this set only represents 72k people in the US population, significantly
           less than the CDC’s estimate of 500k. As we could not increase our number
           without including people from other branches of the military and non-military
           individuals, we decided to assign everyone in our attempted superset to this group
           instead of going through our supersetting procedure.
•   Essential military support and sustainment personnel
       o CDC size estimate: 650k
       o Superset: those with a military NAICS code (928110P1 .MIL-U.S. Army,
           928110P2 .MIL-U.S. Air Force, 928110P3 .MIL-U.S. Navy, 928110P4 .MIL-
           U.S. Marines, 928110P5 .MIL-U.S. Coast Guard, 928110P6 .MIL-U.S. Armed
           Forces, Branch Not Specified, 928110P7 .MIL-Military Reserves Or National
           Guard) who have not been assigned to any of the above national security groups
       o Randomly assign 650k of this superset to this group
A2.4.1.3. Tier 3
•   remaining active duty military and essential support
       o CDC size estimate: 1.5 million
       o We attempted to use the superset of those not assigned to a higher-ranking
           national security group who are active duty military personnel (MIL == 1) OR
           who have a military NAICS code (928110P1 .MIL-U.S. Army, 928110P2 .MIL-
           U.S. Air Force, 928110P3 .MIL-U.S. Navy, 928110P4 .MIL-U.S. Marines,
           928110P5 .MIL-U.S. Coast Guard, 928110P6 .MIL-U.S. Armed Forces, Branch
           Not Specified, 928110P7 .MIL-Military Reserves Or National Guard). However,
           this set only represents 254k people in the US population, significantly less than
           the CDC’s estimate of 1.5 million. As we could not increase our number without
           including non-military individuals, we decided to assign everyone in our
           attempted superset to this group instead of going through our supersetting
           procedure.

A2.4.2.     Healthcare personnel

A2.4.2.1. Tier 1
•   critical inpatient healthcare providers (tier 1 subtier 1 if frontline, 1 subtier 7 if not)
         o CDC size estimate: 3.2 million
         o Superset: those with a NAICS code of 622M MED-General Medical And Surgical
             Hospitals, And Specialty (Except Psychiatric And Substance Abuse) Hospitals
         o Randomly assign 3.2 million of the superset to the group
         o Of those assigned in this group, randomly assign half to tier 1 subtier 1 as
             frontline inpatient HCWs and half to tier 1 subtier as non-frontline inpatient
             HCWs.
•   critical outpatient healthcare providers (tier 1 subtier 4 if frontline, tier 1 subtier 7 if not)
         o CDC size estimate:2.6 million
       o Superset: those with a NAICS code of NAICS of 6211 MED-Offices Of
           Physicians OR 6214 MED-Outpatient Care Centers OR 6216 MED-Home Health
           Care Services
       o Randomly assign 2.6 million of the superset to the group.
       o Of those assigned in this group, randomly assign half to tier 1 subtier 4 as
           frontline outpatient HCWs and half to tier 1 subtier 7 as non-frontline outpatient
           HCWs.
• critical long-term care facility (LTCF) personnel (tier 1 subtier 7)
       o CDC size estimate:1.6 million
       o Superset: those with a NAICS code of 6231 MED-Nursing Care Facilities
           (Skilled Nursing Facilities) OR 623M MED-Residential Care Facilities, Except
           Skilled Nursing Facilities
       o Randomly assign 1.6 million of the superset to the group
• public health personnel (tier 1 subtier 7)
       o CDC size estimate:300k
       o Superset: those in a NAICS industry in the MED category and have not already
           assigned to any a previous healthcare group
               § MED category: "6211", "6212", "62131", "62132", "6213ZM", "6214",
                   "6216", "621M", "622M", "6222", "6231", "623M"
               § There is no industry code for public health, so we are randomly labelling
                   members of the medical industry as public health personnel.
       o Randomly assign 300k of the superset to the group
A2.4.2.2. Tier 3
•   Other healthcare personnel
       o CDC size estimate:350k
       o Superset: those in a NAICS industry in the MED category and have not already
           assigned to any a previous healthcare group
               § MED category: "6211", "6212", "62131", "62132", "6213ZM", "6214",
                  "6216", "621M", "622M", "6222", "6231", "623M"
       o Randomly assign 350k of the superset to the group


A2.4.3.    Employees of critical industries

A2.4.3.1. Tier 1
•   critical pharmacists and pharmacy technicians (tier 1 subtier 4)
         o CDC size estimate:725k
         o Superset: those with a SOC occupation code of 291051 MED-Pharmacists or
             292052 MED-Pharmacy Technicians
         o Randomly assign 725k of the superset to this group
•   critical EMS, law enforcement, and fire services (tier 1 subtier 3 for frontline EMS; tier 1
    subtier 5 for frontline law enforcement and frontline fire services; tier 1 subtier 7 for non-
    frontline critical EMS, law enforcement, and fire services)
         o CDC size estimate: 2 million
         o Superset: those with a SOC code of one of the following:
               §   292042 MED-Emergency Medical Technicians
               §   292043 MED-Paramedics OR
               §   533011 TRN-Ambulance Drivers And Attendants, Except Emergency
                   Medical Technicians
               § 331011 PRT-First-Line Supervisors Of Correctional Officers
               § 331012 PRT-First-Line Supervisors Of Police And Detectives
               § 331021 PRT-First-Line Supervisors Of Fire Fighting And Prevention
                   Workers
               § 333050 PRT-Police Officers
               § 333012 PRT-Correctional Officers And Jailers
               § 332011 PRT-Firefighters
       o Randomly assign 2 million of the superset to this group
       o For those that have been assigned to this group and are EMS (SOC code of
           "292042", "292043", "533011"), randomly assign each to tier 1 subtier 3 as
           frontline or tier 1 subtier 7 as non-frontline with probability ½.
       o For those that have been assigned to this group and are law enforcement or
           firefighters (SOC code of "331011", "331012", "331021", "333012", "333050",
           "332011"), randomly assign each to tier 1 subtier 5 as frontline or tier 1 subtier 7
           as non-frontline with probability ½.
• critical antivirals/vaccine manufacturers (tier 1_7)
       o CDC size estimate: 50k
       o Superset: those with NAICS code of 3254 MFG-Pharmaceuticals And Medicines
       o Randomly assign 50k of the superset to this group
A2.4.3.2. Tier 2
•   community support service personnel (emergency management and community and faith-
    based support and response organizations)
        o CDC size estimate: 600k
        o Superset: those with a NAICS code of one of the following:
               § 6241 SCA-Individual And Family Services
               § 6242 SCA-Community Food And Housing, And Emergency Services
               § 6243 SCA-Vocational Rehabilitation Services
               § 6244 SCA-Child Day Care Services
        o Randomly assign 600k of the superset to this group
•   mortuary services personnel
        o CDC size estimate: 50k
        o Superset: those with a SOC code of one of 394031 .PRS-Morticians, Undertakers,
            And Funeral Arrangers OR 3940XX .PRS-Embalmers, Crematory Operators, And
            Funeral .Attendants
        o Randomly assign 50k of the superset to this group
•   Communications, information technology (IT), electricity, nuclear, oil & gas, and water
    sector personnel, financial clearing and settlement personnel
        o CDC size estimate: 2.2 million
        o Superset: those with a NAICS code of one of the following:
               § 211 .EXT-Oil And Gas Extraction
               § 2211P .UTL-Electric Power Generation, Transmission And .Distribution,
               § 2212P .UTL-Natural Gas Distribution,
               § 22132 .UTL-Sewage Treatment Facilities,
               § 2213M .UTL-Water, Steam, Air Conditioning, And Irrigation Systems,
               § 221MP .UTL-Electric And Gas, And Other Combinations,
               § 22S .UTL-Not Specified Utilities,
               § 517311 .INF-Wired Telecommunications Carriers,
               § 517Z .INF-Telecommunications, Except Wired Telecommunications
                 .Carriers,
              § 522M .FIN-Nondepository Credit And Related Activities
       o Randomly assign 2.2 million of the superset to the group
• critical government personnel - operational and regulatory functions
       o CDC size estimate: 425k
       o Superset: those with a NAICS code of one of the following:
              § 92113 .ADM-Public Finance Activities,
              § 92119 .ADM-Other General Government And Support,
              § 9211MP .ADM-Executive Offices And Legislative Bodies,
              § 923 .ADM-Administration Of Human Resource Programs,
              § 92M1 .ADM-Administration Of Environmental Quality And Housing
                 Programs,
              § 92M2 .ADM-Administration Of Economic Programs And Space
                 Research,
              § 92MP .ADM-Justice, Public Order, And Safety Activities
       o Randomly assign 425k of the superset to the group
A2.4.3.3. Tier 3
•   Banking & finance, chemical, food & agriculture, pharmaceutical, postal & shipping, &
    transportation sector personnel
        o CDC size estimate: 3.4 million
        o Superset: those who were not assigned as critical vaccine/drug manufacturers (tier
           1 critical industries) or financial clearing personnel (tier 2 critical industries)
           AND have one of the following NAICS codes:
                § 5221M .FIN-Savings Institutions, Including Credit Unions,
                § 522M .FIN-Nondepository Credit And Related Activities,
                § 5241 .FIN-Insurance Carriers,
                § 5242 .FIN-Agencies, Brokerages, And Other Insurance Related
                    .Activities, 52M1 .FIN-Banking And Related Activities,
                § 52M2 .FIN-Securities, Commodities, Funds, Trusts, And Other .Financial
                    Investments,,
                § 111 .AGR-Crop Production,
                § 112 .AGR-Animal Production And Aquaculture,
                § 115 .AGR-Support Activities For Agriculture And Forestry,
                § 3254 .MFG-Pharmaceuticals And Medicines,
                § 481 .TRN-Air Transportation,
                § 482 .TRN-Rail Transportation,
                § 483 .TRN-Water Transportation,
                § 484 .TRN-Truck Transportation,
                § 4853 .TRN-Taxi And Limousine Service,
                § 485M .TRN-Bus Service And Urban Transit,
                   § 486 .TRN-Pipeline Transportation,
                   § 488 .TRN-Services Incidental To Transportation,
                   § 491 .TRN-Postal Service, 492 .TRN-Couriers And Messengers,
                   § 493 .TRN-Warehousing And Storage,
                   § 3252 .MFG-Resin, Synthetic Rubber, And Fibers And Filaments,
                   § 3253 .MFG-Agricultural Chemicals,
                   § 3254 .MFG-Pharmaceuticals And Medicines,
                   § 3255 .MFG-Paint, Coating, And Adhesives,
                   § 3256 .MFG-Soap, Cleaning Compound, And Cosmetics,
                   § 325M .MFG-Industrial And Miscellaneous Chemicals
          o Randomly assign 3.4 million of the superset to the group
   •   Other critical government personnel
          o CDC size estimate: 400k
          o Superset: those who were not assigned as part of the tier 2 critical government
              personnel group AND who have a NAICS code of one of the following:
                   § 92113 .ADM-Public Finance Activities,
                   § 92119 .ADM-Other General Government And Support,
                   § 9211MP .ADM-Executive Offices And Legislative Bodies,
                   § 923 .ADM-Administration Of Human Resource Programs,
                   § 92M1 .ADM-Administration Of Environmental Quality And Housing
                       Programs,
                   § 92M2 .ADM-Administration Of Economic Programs And Space
                       Research,
                   § 92MP .ADM-Justice, Public Order, And Safety Activities
          o Randomly assign 400k of the superset to the group

   A2.4.4.    High-risk demographics

Note that our labelling procedures for these groups do not involve the CDC estimates of group
size.
    A2.4.4.1. Tier 1
   •  Pregnant women (tier 1 subtier 6)
          o Assign observations labelled as pregnant via the procedure described in the
             “Pregnant women” section of this document to this group.
   • Infants age 6-11 months (tier 1 subtier 6)
          o For every individual with an age of 0, independently and randomly assign to
             either age 0-5 months or 6-11 months.
          o Assign those labelled 6-11 months to this group.
   • Toddlers age 1-2 years (tier 1 subtier 7)
          o Assigned individuals with an age of 1 or 2 to this group.
   A2.4.4.2. Tier 2
   •   household contacts of infants under 6 months
          o Identify and assign to this group those sharing a household ID number
             (SERIALNO) with an individual labelled as age 0-5 months via our Infants age 6-
             11 months identification procedure above.
   •  children age 3-18 with a high-risk medical condition
          o Assign to this group individuals age 3 to 18, inclusive, who have been labelled as
             having a high-risk condition via the procedure described in the “High-risk
             conditions and the BRFSS” section of this document.
   A2.4.4.3. Tier 3
   •  children 3-18 without a high-risk medical condition
          o Assign to this group individuals age 3 to 18, inclusive, who have NOT been
             labelled as having a high-risk condition via the procedure described in the “High-
             risk conditions and the BRFSS” section of this document.
   A2.4.4.4. Tier 4
   •   Adults 19-64 with a high-risk condition
          o Assign to this group individuals age 19-64, inclusive, who have been labelled as
              having a high-risk condition via the procedure described in the “High-risk
              conditions and the BRFSS” section of this document.
   •   Adults 65 and older
          o Assign to this group individuals with age >= 65.

   A3. Calculation of ADI Values

    A3.1.      Overview
We calculate raw numerical ADI values using the 1990 components and weighing formula from
Singh (2003). Table 1 of Singh (2003), copied below, defines each component in the “Census
Variable” column and provides each component’s weights in the “Factor Score Coefficient”
column.
The raw numerical ADI score of each family is calculated as the weighted sum of its value for
each component using the weights above. For a family F, the raw numerical ADI is as follows:

                   :;<=>?@ =      A        ()BC&DEFGEHIHJ,= ∗ M&+Nℎ*DEFGEHIHJ
                               DEFGEHIHJ


We then assign the raw numerical ADI of each family to each member of the family. We
estimate the raw numerical ADI distribution of the entire U.S., treating each observation i in the
PUMS person data as !6.7!8 people in the US population. We then divide this national
distribution into 10 national deciles and label them from 1 to 10, where 10 represents the highest
ADI. We define an observation in the PUMS as high-ADI as belonging to a national ADI decile,
or simply “having an ADI”, of >= 8.

   A3.2.       Missing values and omitted observations

Most of the PUMS variables we use are not counted for the ~8 million living in group quarters,
which include prisons, nursing facilities, and college/university housing (US Census Bureau
2017). We do not compute a raw numerical ADI for those people and those people are excluded
from the deciles. People in group quarters are automatically excluded from the high-ADI for
reserve purposes. High-ADI is defined as being in the top 3 deciles of people who do not live in
group quarters. Thus, the proportion of people designated as high-ADI is slightly less than 30%.
We note that the actual ADI computed at the census block level also omits computing an ADI for
census blocks with more than 33% of the population living in group quarters (University of
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health 2015).

For those living in households, any missing components will be considered 0. Every household
has at least 1 missing component, as property value and mortgage are missing for all renters and
gross rent is missing for all who own the houses they live in.

For averages computed at the family level, we consider the household of those living in a
household with a non-missing family income variable to be a family. This includes households
headed by same-sex couples. For those not living with family due to living by themselves or with
non-family roommates, we consider each person to be their own family.

   A3.3.      Component by component details

   1. Population aged ≥25 y with < 9 y of education, %
          a. Calculate the family proportions of those 25 and over in the family whose highest
               educational attainment is under grade 9. Families with no member over 25 have
               this value missing.
   2. Population aged ≥25 y with at least a high school diploma, %
          a. Calculate the family proportions of those 25 and over in the family whose have
               graduated high school, have a GED, or completed at least some college. Families
               with no member over 25 have this value missing.
   3. Employed persons aged ≥16 y in white-collar occupations, %
          a. Calculate the family proportion of those over 16 and employed whose NAICS
               industry code is in the MGR, BUS, FIN, CMM, ENG, SCI, CMS, LGL, EDU,
               ENT, MED, SAL, or OFF categories. Families with no employed member over 16
               have this value missing.
   4. Median family income, $
          a. Use the family income adjusted to constant dollars. For those not living with
               family, use individual income adjusted to constant dollars.
   5. Income disparity
          a. Skipped and set to 0 for all, due to data constraints
   6. Median home value, $
          a. Use household property value adjusted to constant dollars. Non-homeowners
               have this value missing.
   7. Median gross rent, $
          a. Use monthly gross rent adjusted with to constant dollars. Non-renters have this
               value missing.
   8. Median monthly mortgage, $
          a. Use the first mortgage payment adjusted with to constant dollars. Non-
               homeowners and those who did not mortgage have this value missing.
   9. Owner-occupied housing units, %
          a. Home ownership is 100% if the house is owned by its resident and 0% if
               otherwise
   10. Civilian labor force population aged ≥16 y unemployed, %
          a. Calculate the family proportion of those over 16 in the civilian labor force who
              are unemployed. This component is missing for families whose members over 16
              are all in the armed forces or not in the labor force.
   11. Families below poverty level, %
          a. For households containing families, 100% if family-income-to-poverty percentage
              < 100%. For individuals not living with family, compare unadjusted individual
              income to poverty thresholds of the sample’s year (U.S. Census Bureau 2020b).
   12. Population below 150% of the poverty threshold, %
          a. For households containing families, 100% if family-income-to-poverty percentage
              < 150. For individuals not living with family, compare unadjusted individual
              income to 150% of poverty thresholds of the sample’s year (U.S. Census Bureau
              2020b).
   13. Single-parent households with children aged < 18 y, %
          a. 100% if the household is a family not headed by a same sex married couple and
              with a man and no wife or a woman and no husband with related children under
              18. 0 otherwise.
   14. Households without a motor vehicle, %
          a. 100% if at least 1 vehicle available
   15. Households without a telephone, %
          a. 100% if no telephone service AND no cell data plan for smartphone or other
              mobile device
   16. Occupied housing units without complete plumbing, %
          a. 100% if there are complete plumbing facilities
   17. Households with more than 1 person per room, %
          a. 100% if the number of people in the household is greater than the number of
              rooms.

   A4. Notes on Graphing


   A4.1.      Death rates (actual and age-adjusted) by race/ethnicity

The 8/5/20 release of APM Research Lab’s Color of Coronavirus data only provides actual death
rates and age-adjusted death rates for the racial categories of Indigenous, Asian, Black, Latino,
White, and Pacific Islander, omitting actual death rates and age-adjusted death rates for those
who are multiracial, some other race, or unknown race.
Therefore, to approximate the actual proportion of deceased Covid-19 victims who are Black or
Indigenous, we use the following formula:

                            T#TCB)*+#,Q ∗ P&)*ℎ')*&Q + T#TCB)*+#,R ∗ P&)*ℎ')*&R
               S QR =
           P&)*ℎ%ℎ)'&
                              ∑>?DI V R,W,Q,X,Y,ZR T#TCB)*+#,>?DI ∗ P&)*ℎ')*&>?DI

This equals the true value of Black or Indigenous share of Covid-19 actual deaths with the
following sufficient assumptions:
    1. APM Research Lab’s values for each race’s share of population and actual death rate are
       accurate given their assumptions, and data deficiencies (APM Research Lab 2020).
    2. Of the deceased victims counted by APM Research Labs as multiracial, some other race,
       or unknown race, the proportion who identified as Black or Indigenous is equal to
            S QR
       P&)*ℎ%ℎ)'&
The procedure and assumptions for calculating age-adjusted death share for Black and
Indigenous people and the two death rates for Black, Indigenous, and Latino people are
analogous.

    A4.2.       State by state distribution

State maps were created as Excel filled maps with a “Diverging (3-color)” color scheme with the
“Midpoint” (yellow) value set at 1.0. The “Maximum” (green) and “Minimum” (red) values are
displayed at the top and bottom of the legend, respectively.

The estimated vaccines received per state under the various reserve systems was calculated in
our main procedures above. The population per state was computed from the ACS data with their
weights. The “fair share” index relative to population is then the ratio of the proportion of the
total vaccines received by a state to the proportion of population living in a state.

To calculate analogous fair share indices relative to case and death incidence, first data on total
confirmed cases and deaths in each state was extracted on August 14 (CDC 2020b). Then the
ratio of cases in each state relative to total cases in the country, and deaths in each state relative
to total death sin the country, were calculated. The fair share index is then the ratio of the
proportion of total vaccines a state received to the proportion of total national cases each state
recorded. This was done analogously for deaths.

All three of these fair share indices were calculated at different total supply levels of vaccines
(e.g. 20 million, 50 million), and for different reserve systems (0% reserve, 20% reserve, 40%
reserve).


    A5. Table of Program Files


 File name                                         Description

 personal_adi_calculation.R                        Assigns ADI to PUMS data.

 brfss.R                                           Calculates proportion of each demographic
                                                   group that has a high-risk condition, using the
                                                   BRFSS.

 pums_tier_labelling.R                             Assigns all qualifying CDC tiers to PUMS
                                                   data.

 tier_demographic_summary.R                        Summarizes demographic characteristics of
                                                   population by highest tier and ADI
tier_demographic_graphing.R                Implements 2018 CDC priority system or ADI
                                           reserve system and outputs recipient
                                           characteristics.

racereserve_demographic_summary.R          Summarizes demographic characteristics of
                                           population by highest tier and
                                           Black/Indigenous status

racereserve_demographic_graphing.R         Implements Black/Indigenous reserve system
                                           and compares results to ADI reserve system.

New State Analysis.xlsx                    Creates maps and graphs for state-by-state
                                           allocations.

cumulative counts of high ADI recipients   Calculates the high-ADI proportion of the
over n_vaccinesMarginal.xlsx               marginal vaccine recipient.

ColorOfCoronavirus_Data_File_        Calculates proportion of COVID deaths and
ThroughAug4_2020_APMResearchLab.xlsx age-adjusted deaths attributed to each race.
References for the Appendix

APM Research Lab. 2020. Color of Coronavirus: COVID-19 Deaths by Race and Ethnicity,
August 5 2020 Data Release. Retrieved on August 11, 2020 from
https://www.apmresearchlab.org/covid/deaths-by-race

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2018a. “Interim Updated Planning Guidance
on Allocating and Targeting Pandemic Influenza Vaccine During an Influenza Pandemic.”
Atlanta, Georgia: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention. Retrieved on August 11, 2020 from https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-
resources/pdf/2018-Influenza-Guidance.pdf

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2018b. Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance
System Survey Data. Atlanta, Georgia: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2018c. “LLCP 2018 Codebook Report”
Atlanta, Georgia: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention. Retrieved on August 11, 2020 from
https://www.cdc.gov/brfss/annual_data/2018/pdf/codebook18_llcp-v2-508.pdf

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2020a. “People with Certain Medical
Conditions.” Atlanta, Georgia: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved on August 11, 2020 from
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/need-extra-precautions/people-with-medical-
conditions.html?CDC_AA_refVal=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.cdc.gov%2Fcoronavirus%2F2019-
ncov%2Fneed-extra-precautions%2Fgroups-at-higher-risk.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2020b. “COVID-19 Response. COVID-19
Case Surveillance Public Data Access, Summary, and Limitations”, Atlanta, Georgia: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Retrieved on August 14, 2020 from https://data.cdc.gov/Case-Surveillance/COVID-19-Case-
Surveillance-Public-Use-Data/vbim-akqf

Jukic, A. M., Baird, D. D., Weinberg, C. R., McConnaughey, D. R., and Wilcox, A. J. 2013.
“Length of human pregnancy and contributors to its natural variation.” Human Reproduction,
28(10): 2848–2855.

Singh, Gopal K. 2003. “Area Deprivation and Widening Inequalities in US Mortality, 1969–
1998.” American Journal of Public Health, 93(7): 1137–1143.

University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health. 2015 Area Deprivation
Index 2.0 Retrieved on August 11, 2020 from
https://www.neighborhoodatlas.medicine.wisc.edu/

U.S. Census Bureau, 2014. “American Community Survey Design and Methodology, Chapter
11: Weighting and Estimation.” Washington, D.C. :U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved on August
11, 2020 from https://www2.census.gov/programs-
surveys/acs/methodology/design_and_methodology/acs_design_methodology_ch11_2014.pdf

U.S. Census Bureau. 2014-2018. ACS Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS). Washington, D.C.
: U.S. Census Bureau.

U.S. Census Bureau. 2017. “American Community Survey Group Quarters Data Collection.”
U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved on September 5, 2020 at
https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/programs-
surveys/acs/Library/OutreachMaterials/ACSFlyers/2017%20Group%20Quarters%20flyer_508.p
df

U.S. Census Bureau. 2020a. “About PUMS.” Washington, D.C. : U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved
on September 4, 2020 at https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/technical-
documentation/pums/about.html

U.S. Census Bureau. 2020b. Poverty Thresholds Data. January 22, 2020 Update. Washington,
D.C. : U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved on August 11, 2020 from
https://www.census.gov/data/tables/time-series/demo/income-poverty/historical-poverty-
thresholds.html
