                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           TARIFFS, CAPITAL ACCUMULATION, AND THE CURRENT ACCOUNT
                          IN A SMALL OPEN ECONOMY




                                 Partha Sen

                            Stephen J. Turnovsky




                           Working Paper No. 2781




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                December 1988




Thia research is part of NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                  NBER Working Paper #2781
                                                                  December 1988


                  TARIFFS, CAPITAL ACCUMULATION, AND THE CURRENT ACCOUNT
                                  IN A SMALL OPEN ECONOMY


                                                         ABSTRACT



                          the effects
           Thispaperanalyzes                  of a tariffin an intertemporal optimizing       model, emphasizing the

role   of capital accumulation.    Three types     of increases   in the tariff rate are considered: (i) unanticipated

permanent; (ii) unanticipated temporary; (iii) anticipated permanent.                 There are two main general

conclusions to be drawn from the analysis.


           The first is that the introduction (or increase)   ofa tariffis contractionary, both in the short run and
in the long run. In particular, employment         is reduced both in the   shortrun and in the long run, so that there

is   no significant intertemporal tradeoff, as obtained by previous authors. The fail in the long-run capital

stock causes an immediate reduction in the rate of investment, which in turn leads to a current account

surplus. While this response      of the current   account is in accordance with much (but not all) of the existing

literature, the mechanism by which it is achieved, namely the decummulation                  of capital, has not been

previously considered. Also, the fact that the declining capital stockis accompanied by an accumulation of

foreign bonds means that the savings effect           of the tariff is unclear,    depending upon which influence

dominates. This ambiguity       of savings is, however, vely different        from those occurring in other studies.

The second major conclusions stems from the fact that the steady state depended upon the initial stocks             of
the assets. As a consequence, a temporary tariff, by altering these initial conditions for some later date

when the tariff is removed, leads to a permanent effect on the economy.




Partha Sen                                                         Stephen J. Turnovsky
Department        of Economics                                     Department of Economics
University of          Illinois at                                 University of Washington
         Urbana-Champaign                                          301 Savery Hall
330 Commerce West                                                  Seattle, Washington              98195
1260 S. Sixth Street
Champaign, Illinoia 61820
1.   INTRODUCTION
     Recently, there has been a revival of interest in the macroeconomic effects of com-
mercial policies under flexible exchange rates. Discredited after the thirties, they have
returned to playing a much more central role in policy discussions. Theoretical models
have been slow to appear, but by now a substantial literature has developed. This lit-
erature has addressed the two issues which are at the forefront of the policy discussions;
namely the effects of commercial policies on employment, on the one hand, and on the
current account, on the other. Most of the attention has focused on tariffs, but unlike the
analysis of tariffs in pure trade theory, no retaliatory action is assumed to occur.
     The modern theoretical literature analyzing the macroeconomic effects of tariffs origi-
nated with Mundell (1961), who established the proposition that a tariff is contractionary.
The essential steps of the argument were that a tariffwill ralse the terms of trade, thereby
increasingsavings, reducing aggregatedemand, and necessitating a fall in aggregate supply
in order for the goods market to clear. While the result was based on a very simple model,

relying on the Laursen—Metzler effect, subsequent work by Chan (1978), and more recently
Krugman (1982), suggests that the result is in fact quite robust with respect to various
extensions of the basic   IS — LM model.' Krugman also demonstrated that by reducing
income niore than expenditure, the tariff will lead to a deterioration of the current account
balance.

     The basic Mundell model is static. The first analysis of tariffs in a macrodynamic

setting was Eichengreen(1981) who, using a currency substitution model, emphasized the
intertemporal tradeoffs involvedin a tariff. Whereas the contractionary effects suggested
by Mundellwere found to hold in the long run, the short—mn effects of a tariffare likely to
he expansionary.2 This however, is gradually reversed over time through savings and the
current account surplus which occurs. Kimbrough (1982) introduced a nontraded good and
showed how the effect of the tariff on the current account balance depends critically upon
the complementarity or substitutability of the imported good and the nontraded good in
                                              1
consumption demand.

    Optimizing models analyzing the effects of tariffs are fewer, unless one includes the
contributions studying the Laursen— Metzler effect.3 ill van Wijnbergen (1987) a two

country— two period model is laid out and    the effects of a tariff are analyzed in both
a full employment and real wage rigidity (in the tariff imposing country) setting. In the
full employment case,   a permanent tariff has no effect on the current account, because
permanent income and permanent consumption both fall by the same amount. However,
a temporary tariff leads to a current account surplus. With rigid real wages, on the other

hand, these results are subject to substantial modification;for example, a permanent tariff
may now plausibly lead to a current account deficit.4 Engel and Kletzer (1987) analyze
the effects of a tariff in a two sector model (with labor mobile between the sectors) and
capital employed in the import competing sector. Two alternatives are postulated for the
consumers, the first where they have a variable rate of time preferenceas in TJzawa (1968),
and the second where they face a constant probability of death as in Yaari (1965). In the
former case it is demonstrated that current account surpluses characterize the adjustment
path; in the uncertain lifetime case, deficits are possible, but not inevitable. Brock (1986)
discusses trade liberalization in a model which resembles ours in some respects. He, how-

ever, has the small open economy facing a given terms of trade importing all its capital
from abroad and with employmentfixed.

     In this paper, we analyze the effects of an increase in the tariff rate within an infinite
horizon utility maximizing framework. The key feature of the model is that it incorpo-
rates capital accumulationby means of a q—theoretic investment function as in Abel and
Blanchard (1983) and Hayashi (1982). In introducing capital, for reasons which will be-
come evident in due course, it is important to endogenize the employment of labor, and

we do so by introducing the labor—leisure choice as an integral part of the intertemporal

optimization. We also allow the terms of trade to be determined endogenously. Our anal-
ysis therefore focuses on the dynamics of employment, capital accumulation, the terms of
                                               2
trade, and output, all of which are important aspects of the macrodynamics of tariffs.
     By contrast, most of the existing literature abstracts from investment, in which case
the current account surplus is identical to savings. To the extent that capital accumulation
is considered,it is introduced in restrictive ways. Engel and Kletzer (1987), for instance,

do have capital, but in order to maintain equality between the return to capital and the

given foreign interest rate, the stock of capital jumps at the moment the tariff is imposed.
(This is brought about by a swap of foreign bonds with capital.) In Broth (1986) all the
capital stock is imported but there are installation costs in the various domestic sectors
(i.e., the allocation is not costless). In an extension to his basic model, van Wijnbergen
(1987) discussesendogenousinvestment which dependsupon the ratio ofthe value offuture

output relative to the cost of producing capital.5
    Three types of tariff changes are analyzed; namely an unanticipated permanent, an
unanticipated temporary, and a future anticipated permanent, increase. Using this frame-
work we show how a tariff reduces output and employment both in the short run and in
the long run. At the same time, we show that a tariff reduces the rate of investment, while

generating a current account surplus along the adjustment path.
    These findings represent something of a combination of the Mundell—Krugman and

Eichengreen results. The contractionary effect of the tariff is as in Mundell, but contrary
to the short—run expansionary effect discussed by Eichengreen. On the other hand, the
current account surplus is consistent with Eichengreen, although the mechanismis entirely
different. In our analysis it   is the result of reduced investment, rather than additional
savings, and the latter may or may not increase.
     The paper is organized as follows. Section        2   sets out the model, while the follow-

ing section considers the dynamics. The     long—run       and dynamics effects of the tariff are

analyzed in Sections 4 and   5 respectively. Section   6 provides some concludingremarks.


2.   THE MODEL
                                              3
       We consider an economy which is specializedin the production of a single commodity.
Householdsin this economy, however, also consume another good which is imported from
abroad. The economy is large enough to affect the terms of trade. It can borrow or lend as
much as it wants at a given world interest rate, though subject to an intertemporal budget
constraint. However, by being able to influence the terms of trade, the real interest rate
relevant for the economy is endogenously determined.


A.       Structure of Economy
         Consider first the representative consumer. His decisions are made by solving the

following intertemporal optimization problem:



                                Max
(la)                                  f[U(xv) +V(l)]e6tdt
subject to



(lb)                            b= !k+wl_xj_yy+i*b+T

and initial condition



(ic)                                       b(O)   =

where

x = consumption of the domestic good,
p = consumption of the imported good,
c = relative price of the foreign good in terms of the domesticgood (i.e., the real exchange
rate),
     =    labor suppliedby the representative household,

                                                  4
5= stock of foreign bonds held by the household (in units of foreign output),
w = real wage rate, measured in terms of the domestic good,
     = real profits distributed to the household,
-y   =   one   plus the tariff rate,
         the world rate of interest, taken as given,
5 = consumer's discount rate, taken to be constant,
T = lump—sum transfers from the government.

      The instantaneous utility function is assumed to be additively separable in goods and
labor. We also assume that the utility function is increasing in the consumption of goods,
but decreasing in labor, and that it is strictly concave. Finally, the two goods are taken
to be Edgeworth complementary,so that         U>       0.6

    In determininghis optimal plansfor r, y, 1, and 5, the representative consumer is
assumed to take a, ir, w, z, as given. These decisions are made subject to the budget
constraint (ib), which is expressed for convenience in units of the foreign good. Note that
the tariff rate, r say, which is the focus of our analysis,is absorbed in the term y = 1 + r.
      The current value Hamiltonian for the householdmaximization problem is given by



                      14 E U(x,y)+ V(l)+ A{1{r + wi — x] — y + i5+ T}

where A is the costate variable associated with (ib). The first order optimality conditions,
with respect to the decision variables r, y, and 1 are respectively.7



                                          U(r,y) =



                                          U(x,y) = ky
                                                 5
(3c)                                          V'(l) =   2w.

In addition, the costate variable evolves according to



(3d)                                           A=A(6—i)

Since S and i are both fixed, the ultimate attainment of a steady state is possible if and
only if S =      i.
              Henceforth we assume this to be the case. This implies A = 0 everywhere,
so   that   A   is always                        (to be determined below).
                            at its steady—state value   A

        To rule out Ponzi—type situations we need to impose the transversality condition



(3e)                                         lim
                                             t-+oo   b(t)e' = 0
        The representativefirm produces domesticoutput z by means of a production function
with capital   and labor as inputs. This function is assumed to have the usual neoclassical
                   Ic



properties of positive, but diminishing, marginal products and constant returns to scale,
i.e.,


                              r = F(k,l)

 (4)                                    F5>0, F,>0
                                        Fkk<O,        Fc0,
                                                     F55F11—F=0.
 Profit net of investment expenditure at time t say, is defined to be



 (5)                                     ir(t) = F(k, 1)    —   wi — C)

 where
                                                        6
     I =     rate of investment.

The function C(I) represents the installation costs associated with the purchase of I units
of new capital. It is assumed to be an increasing, convex function of I; C' > 0, C" > 0. In

addition,we assume


                                   C(0) = 0, C'(O) = 1

so that the total cost of zero investment is zero, and the marginal cost of the initial
installation is unity. This formulation of the installation function follows the original
specification of adjustment costs introduced by Lucas (1967), Gould (1968) and Treadway

(1969). More recent work by Hayashi (1982) and Abel and Blanchard (1983) postulates
an installation function which depends upon /c, as well as I. This modification makes
little difference to our analysis and for simplicity we retain the simpler formulation. The
specification implies that in the case that disinvestment occurs (for example as we shall
show following a tariff increase), C(I) .c 0 for low rates   of disinvestment. This may be
interpreted as reflecting the revenue as capital is sold off. The possibility that all changes
in capital are costly can be incorporated by introducing sufficiently
                                                                         large fixed costs, so
that C(0) > 0. This does not alter our analysis in any substantive way.8
     Thus the firm's optimization problem is to



             Max       ir(t)e E        =
                                           j[F(k, 1)
                                                       —   wi — C(I)]e   f   t(s)da&


subject to




                                           jc=I

and the initial condition

                                             7
(6c)                                      k(O)   =

and    where i(t) denotes the domestic real interest rate. Given the assumptioli of interest
rte parity, this is related to the world rate i by


                                         i(t) = +i
where   is the (expected) percentage change in the terms of trade. Three further points
                                                                                    ab-
should be noted about the formulation of the firm's problem. First, equation (Gb)
                                                                                          of
stracts from depreciation. This simplifies the d3inamics considerably,without much loss
                                                                   firm finances investment
generality;iecond, for expositional simplicity, we assume that the
                                                                      as is well known, in a
through retained earnings. This assumption is unimportant, since
 model such as this, which abstracts from taxation, all forms of financing yield the same
                                                                                     ,
 optimality conditions. Third, the real interest rate appropriate to firms is i z + while
 that relevant to households is i5. The difference arises from the fact that it is convenient
 to express the real accumulation equation for households, (ib), in terms of the unit of the
 traded bond, namely foreign output, while profit for domestic firms is expressed in terms
                                                                              i
 of domestic output. If we were to transform (ib) to domestic good units, then would
 become the relevant interest rate for households.'°
        The current—value Hamiltonian for the firm maximization problem is


                                 H1_F(k,l)—wl—C(I)+qI
 where q is the costate variable associated with (Gb). The relevant optimality conditions
 for firms with respect to 1 and I are



  (7a)                                     F,(k,l)=w
                                                 S
                                           C'(I) = q

while q evolves according to




(7c)                                    =i(t)q—Fk.
In addition there is the accumulation equation (6b), the initiai condition (6c), as well as
the transversality condition



(7d)                                 limqkefo i(r)dr = o.
       The government's role in this economy is  a simple one. It just collects the tariff
revenue from the public and redistributes it in a lump sum fashion, so that



                                         (y — l)y = T.

     Finally, adding the household'sbudget constraint (ib), the government's budget con-
straint (8), and noting the definitionof ir(t) in (5), we find that the current account surplus
of the economy is given by



                            b   = I[F(k, 1) — x — C(fl] — y + ib

i.e., income less absorption.
B. Macroeconomic Equilibrium
       The macroeconomicequilibrium we consider is defined     to be one where the planned
demand arid supply functions derived from the optimizations, consistent with the accu-
mulation equations, clear all markets at all points of time. Combining the optimality

                                              9
conditions for households (3a) -   (3e),   and for firms (7a) - (7d), together with the accumu-
lation equations (ib), (5) and   (Gb),   the following equilibrium conditions are obtained




(lOa)                                      U(x,y) =



(lOb)                                      U(x,y) =




(lOc)                                    V'(l) = —F1(k, 1)




(lOd)                                        C'(I) = q




(lOe)                              F(k, 1) = x + Z() + C(I)




(lOf)                                = (i + /a)q — Fk(k,1)



 (lOg)                                        ic=I(q)



 (lOh)                      b    = -[F(k, 1) — C(I) — x] — y + i*b
                                                  10
where Z(.) is the amount of domesticgood exported, with Z'() > 0. As noted, the costate
variable A remains constant over time at its steady state value A, determined below. In
addition, the transversality conditions (3c) and (7d) must also hold.
     Equations (lOa) - (lOc) define the short—run equilibrium. Pairwise, (lOa) - (lOc) define
the usual rate of substitution conditions for consumers. Note that the distortionary effect
of the tariff is included in y. Equation (lOd) equates the marginal cost of capital to the
shadow price of investment, which is essentially a Tobin q theory of investment.11 Finally,

equation (lOe) describes market clearing in the domesticgoods market.
    These five equations may be solved for           x,y,l,I, and o, in terms of A,k,q, and   ,
namely




(ha)               x   = x(A, k, q, y)    x < 0,     xk   > 0, z5 < 0,      r<       0




                    y   = y(.X,k,q,7)     y <0      yj    >0,   Yq   <0,        <0



                       I = l(,k,q,7)          0,     1k    ,    1q   >0,   L1   <0



                       = a(A, k, q,   )       0,     k > 0,      0q   <0, a. > 0



                                          I=I(q) F>0.

An increase in the marginal utility of consumption A, leads to a reduction in the domestic

consumption of both goods. The reduction in demand for the domestic good causes its

                                                   11
relative price to fall, i.e.,   a rises,   thereby stimulating exports. The overall effect on the
demand for domestic output depends uponwhether or not this exceeds the reduction in r.
If so, domestic output and employment rises; if not, employment falls. An increasein the
stock of capital raises output and the real wage. The higher domestic income stimulates
the consumption of x, though by a lesser amount, and the relative price a rises, i.e., Uk > 0.
With the two goods being complementaryin utility (U5 > 0), the increase in the demand
for the domestic good increases the demand for the import good. While the rise in the
real wage rate tends to decrease V', thereby stimulating employment, the rise in a has the

opposite effect; the net effect on employment depends upon which influence dominates.
An increase in q stimulates investment. This increase in the demand for domestic goods
and the relative price a falls, i.e., a5 < 0. This raisesthe marginal utility of the domestic

good, implying that the consumption of x must fall, and with U, > 0, p falls as well.
On balance, the increase in investment exceeds the fall in demand stemming from the
reduction in   r and lower exports, so that domestic output and employment rises.         Finally,
an increase in the tariff rate reduces the demand for the import good, and with              > 0,
the demand for      r as well.     This lowers the relative price of the domestic good, thereby

reducing domestic output and employment. However, this describesonly the partial effect
of a short—run change in the tariff rate. In addition, it generatesjumps in A and q, thereby

inducing further responses. The complete short—run responses consists of a combination
of these two effects and will be discussed in Section 5 below.
      One further observation regarding the short—run solutionsis appropriate at this stage.
Even though both the increase in A and the partial effect of an increase in the tariff lead
to an increase in the relative price a, thereby stimulating exports, only in the case of the
former is the effect sufficiently large to give rise to the possibility that employment may
increase. To see the difference it is convenient to take the differential of (be)


                                       (V't + F11)d1      =
                                                     12
The increase in     resulting from a tariff lowers the marginal utility of the domestic con-
sumption good, there is substitution in favor of leisure and labor falls. On the other hand,
although an increasein A raises o, the net effect on the marginal utility         is indeterminate.
in which case employment may either rise or fall.
      The three final equations describe the dynamics. The first two equations can be
reduced to a pair of autonomous differential equations in q and        k   arid these constitute the
core of the dynamics. To see this, we first note that the path of the relative price o must
be consistent (from (lid)) with the dynamic paths of k arid q, as well as the constant value
of A, determined by the steady state equilibrium. As a consequence, differentiating (lid)
with respect to t, yields



                                              = o,k + crj

where   as already shown    a>   0, Uq   <   0.   Substituting this equation, together with      (lic)
and   (lid) into (10f) and (lOg), leads to a pair of dynamic equations in q arid ic.      Note   that
since this   pair of equations is determined in part by the constant steady state value of
the marginal utility A, the steady state in part determines the entire dynamic adjustment
path. Finally, (lOh) equates the accumulation of foreign assets by the economy to its
current account surplus. Using the domestic goods market clearing condition (iOe), this
may be expressed equivalently in terms of exports minus imports



                                   b   = ![Z() —         y + aib].
This equation in turn may be reduced to an autonomous differential equation in              b,   after

substituting the solutions for q and k.


3. EQUILIBRIUM DYNAMICS

                                                    13
       Carrying out the procedure outlined above, (lof) and (lOg) can be expressed as the
following pair of linearized differential equations around the steady state:



                    q       —        O[i   + oj'q/c — Fkllq] —O[Fkk           Fkjlk] ) (   q
                                                                                               —
(12                     1   —
                    kJ                           I/C"                     0         )lk—k
where 0      (aqq) > 0, and                denotes steady—state values.
    The determinant of the coefficient matrix in (12) is negative and therefore the long—
run equilibrium is a saddlepoint with eigenvalues P1 < 0,                      P
                                                               > 0. It is clear that while
the capital stock always evolves continuously, the shadow price of capital, q, may jump

instantaneously in response to new information. Along the stable arm, therefore, k and q
follow the   paths


(13o)                                            k   = k + (k0 — k)eMht



(135)

       To determine the dynamics of the current account, we consider (lOh') in the form



                                           b=
(14)
                                                ZAk)] _y(X,k,q)+i*b
Linearizing this equation around steady state yields


                 S   = [(fiak - cyk)(k - k) + ($c - ay5)(q                    -    + i(b —5)

where fi     z, +    b      —
                                p.   Using (13a), (13b), this equation may be written as



(15)                                        b=Q(k0 _k)e1t+i*(b_b)
                                                            14
where


                                              - Yk) + (flc5 -
                                                                      aqq)%fl.
Assuming that the economy starts out with an initial stock of traded bonds b(O)       = b0, the
solution to (15) is


                     b(t) =    °                +[bo   —   —          __(k0 — Je1t.
Invoking the intertemporal budget constraint for the economy, (3c), implies



                                    b0    =b+     ci(k         —k)

so   that the solution for b(t) consistent with long—runsolvency is


                                          -                       -
                                 b(t)   = b+     ci
                                                 —    . (k0   —
                                                                  k)eMhi.


      Equation (17) describes the relationship between the accumulation of capital and the
accumulation of traded bonds. Of particular significance is the sign of this relationship.
Writing ci as


                              11=

emphasizesthat ci measuresthe effects of two channelsof influence of capital on the current
account. First, an increase in k raises the relative price            o,
                                                           both directly, but also through
the accompanyingfall in q, as seen in (13b). What this does to the trade balance depends
upon   /9.   Evaluating /9 at steady state, we may show12


                                        = Z' + i5b — y = Z' —

                                                 15
so that $ > U if and only if the relative price elasticity of the foreign demand for exports
exceeds unity. At the same time, the increase in k increases imports both directly and

again through the fall in q, and this reduces the trade balance. While either case is possible,
we shall assume that the relative price effect dominates, so that Q > 0.
     The steady state of the economy is obtained when k = =         b   =0   and is given by the

following set   of equations:


                                                           A
(iSa)                                    U1(,y) =




(iSb)




(iSc)                                 V'(i)   = -F1(k,



 (iSd)




 (i8e)                                 F(Jc,l)
                                                 = 1+ Z(&)



                                          Fk(k, 1)
                                                       =
 (1Sf)




 (18g)                              F(k,l)    =i+&_&i*b
                                                  16
                                       —   =             —
                                               —i*

These equations jointly determine the steady—state equilibrium values of          i, Q, 1, k, A, &,
arid b.

     This long—runequilibrium is straightforward, although several aspects merit comment.
Note that the steady—state value of q is unity, consistent with the Tobin q theory of in-
vestment. The steady—state marginal physical product of capital is equated to the foreign
interest rate. Equations (18e) and (18g) together imply that in steady state equilibrium,
the balance of payments on current account must be zero; the trade balance must offset
net interest earnings on the traded bonds. Equation (ISh) describes the equilibrium re-
lationship between the change in the equilibrium stock of capital and the change in the
equilibrium net credit of the economy. Note further, that the steady state depends upon
the initial stocks   k0   and   b0. As we will show below,   this has important consequences for
the effects of temporary changes in the tariff rate.


4. LONG-RUN EFFECTS OF AN INCREASE IN THE TARIFF RATE
     The long—run effects of an increase in the tariff rate, obtained by differentiating the

steady—state relationships (18), are reported in Table 1.
     Since the world interest rate   i is assumed to remain fixed, the marginal product
condition (1Sf) implies that the capital—labor ratio is a constant, independent of -y. Capital
and labor therefore change in the same proportions, so that the marginal product of labor,
and hence the real wage rate, also remain constant. From this table it is seen that the
increase in the tariff leads to a long—run reduction in both employment and capital, and
therefore in output. Intuitively, the imposition of a tax, in the form of a tariff, on the
imported good leads to a substitution away from that good towards the two other goods
favored by consumers, namely the domestic good and leisure. Consumers are willing to

                                                 17
supply less labor so that equilibrium employment fails. This reduces the marginal physical
product of capital, so that the equilibrium capital stock, and hence output, fall as well.
The long—run effects of the tariff are therefore contractionary, consistent with long—run
results of Eichengreen. The decline in output raises the relative price of the domestic
good, i.e., a falls. On the other hand, the relative price of good p facing the consumer, -ye,
is higher than before. The decline in the stock of capital leads to a long—run increase in

the stock of traded bonds held by the economy. Also, the decline in employment, coupled
with the fall in a, means that the (constant) marginal utility of consumption A must also
decline.

     Combining (18e) and (lSg) in the form



                                     Z(&) —     =    i&b

we see that the imposition of the tariff certainly causes the steady state trade balance,
when measured interms of the foreign currency (_i*b) to fall. When measured in terms
of domestic currency, however, it will also fall as long as the country is a debtor nation
(b cc 0). For a creditor nation, it may either rise or fall, depending upon the size of the
relative price effect.
     The overall impact of the higher tariff on the domestic consumptions of the two good
  arid Q is unclear. While the substitution effect is away from p in favor of r, the income
effectis ambiguous. One effect of the reduction in domestic output resulting from the
higher tariff is to reduce domestic income. But at the same time, the reduction in the
relative price serves to raise income as measured in terms of domestic goods. The net
effect depends upon which dominates.


5. TRANSITIONAL DYNAMICS AS TO INCREASE IN TARIFF
     We considernow the dynamic adjustment path of the economy following an increasein

the tariff rate. As noted previously, the dynamics of q and k are described by a saddlepoint
                                              18
in k    —
            q   space. The stable arm XX is given by



                                           q=
and is negatively sloped; the unstable arm YY is described by




and is positively sloped. The phase diagram is illustrated in Fig. 1.
    As long as no future shock is anticipated, the system must lie on the stable locus XX.

The initial jump in q(0), following an unanticipated permanent increase in y is



(20)                                            —
                                          dy         rd-y
The long—runfall in the capital stock is seen to give rise to a short—run drop in the shadow
price q(0).
     The dynamics following an unanticipated permanent increase in the tariff rate is il-
lustrated in Figs. 2A and 2B. Part A describes the dynamics of q and k, while Part
B describes the accumulation of traded bonds. Suppose that the economy is initially in
steady state equilibrium at the point P on the stable arm XX and that there is a perma-
nent increase in       .   The new steady state is at    the point Q, having a reduced equilibrium
capital stock k, with an unchanged shadow price of capital. In the short run q drops from
P to A on the new stable locus X' X'. From (lOg) it is seen that the decrease in q has an
immediate contractionary effect on investment and capital begins to decumulate. Likewise
upon reaching point A,         q immediately   begins to rise.
       The initial responses of other key variables are



(21a)                            —=
                                 dl(0)81 8! dX 81 dq(0)
                                     .—+—--.-—+—--—-——<0
                                     87 8Ad-y
                                 d-y                       Og    d7
                                                    19
                               dc(O)   — Sc + Sc dA + Sc dq(O)
                                d7        &y       SAd7     Sq dy




                               dx(O) — Ox          Ox d.\   Sx dq(O)
                                               +
                                 d7       57       aAd7+aq      dy




(2id)
                                 dy       57       SAd7     Sq d7



derivatives such as   ,
which consist of two kinds of effects. First, there axe the direct effects, given by the partial
                          discussed    in Section 2. Seccndiy, there axe indirect effects, which

operate through induced jumps in A, and q. These may, or may not, work in the same
direction as one another or as the direct effect.
     In the case of employment, for example, the direct effect of the higher tariff is             con-

fractionary. This is accentuated by the fact that it also generates a short—run reduction in
the shadow price of investment. At the same time, the fall in the marginal utility A has a
further impact on employment, though for reasons noted in Section 2 the direction is not
entirely clear. However, one can establish that on balance, the contractionary effects dom-
inate, so that the impositionof the tariff reduces employment and output in the short run.
There are various ways to see why this must be so. One way is to considerwhat happens to

(lOf) on impact. We have already seen that the immediate effect of the tariff is to cause q
to drop instantaneously to the point A on the new stable locus X'X', where q immediately
begins to start rising, while Ic starts to fall; i.e., dq(O) < U,    d4(O)   > U,   dk(O)   c U. It then
follows from (lid')   that dbU) < U, so that interest rate parity implies an instantaneous
fall in the domestic interest rate; i.e., di(U) c U. Given these responses, the only way for
(lUf) to hold is for the marginal physical product of capital to fall instantaneously and
with the stock of capital being predetermined, this occurs through a fall in employment.

                                                   20
The resulting increase in the capital—labor ratio means of course a higher short—run real

wage. Over time, however, as capital is decumulated, the capital—labor ratio falls and the
real wage returns to its original    long—run level.

    The initial response of the relative price (real exchange rate) a is in general unclear.
The direct effect of a higher tariff, together with the induced reduction in the shadow price
  causes   a to rise; the fall in A causes it to fall. The fact that 4 >  <0, at all points
                                                                           0, k

on the new stable locus, implies from (lid') that a falls steadily over time, so that there

is continuous real exchange rate appreciation, leading ultimately to a lower relative price
a. The fact that & < 0 also meansthat the initial reduction in the domestic real interest
rate persists along the transitional path, until equilibrium is restored, when it returns to
the given world rate.
     The initial reductions in   q     both serve to stimulate consumption. In the case of
                                     and   A


the import good, this is offset by the negative effect of the higher tariff. This is also true
in the case of the domestic good, as long as U, > 0. If the utility function is additively

separable in the two consumption goods, then in this latter case only the indirect effects
occur; the tariff on the import good stimulates the consumption of the domestic good in
the short run.
     These dynamic responses to the tariff depend critically upon two aspects of the model;

(i) the endogeneityof employmentand (ii) the endogeneityof the relative price a. Of these,
the former is the more important. To see its role consider the steady—state relationships

(18) and assume now that employment is fixed, so that the optimality condition (18c) is no
longer applicable. The marginal productivity condition now implies that the steady—state
capital stock Ic (rather than the capital—labor ratio) is determined by    i   and is independent
of the tariff. It therefore follows from the dynamic equations (i3a), (i3b) that the capital
stock and the shadow price q remain constant at all points of time. The tariff therefore
leaves output unchanged! There are no dynamics. The only effect of the tariff is to

generate a once—and—for—all adjustment in the relative price and in the consumptions, z
                                                 2i
and p. Turning to the role of the relative price, suppose that the economy is sufficiently
                be fixed exogenously. It is clear from (iDa), (lOb) that consumptions
small for this to

  p are determined by the constant values of A,y, and a and are therefore constant over
time. On the other hand, employment being a function of the capital stock via (lic),
does evolve over time, as capital is decumulated.      In order to restore dynamics to the
consumption levels x and y, the assumption of additive separability of utility in goods and
labor being made in this analysis must be dropped. In that case, z and p will depend upon
the dynamics of k in the same way as does employment.
     Part B of Fig. 2 illustrates the relationship between   b   and k, which combining (13a)
and (17) is given by


                                  b—b=-.3* — (k-k).
                                            p1
This is a negatively sloped locus, denoted by ZZ. Since neither k nor b are jump variables,
this line remalns fixed over time. The movement along A to Q in Part A is translated
to a movement along LM in Part B. From this figure it is seen that an increase in the
tariff rate causes an immediate accumulation of foreign bonds. This stems from the fact
that our assumption Q > 0 implies that the net effect of the decumulation of capital is
to create a current account surplus. With b being predetermined, the trade balance, as
measured in terms of the foreign good, also rises. In terms of the domestic good, it will
rise if the relative price a increases; but it may fall if a falls sufficiently. Over time, the
initial accumulation of foreign bonds is reversed. This occurs through the fall in    a and k,
which causes the trade balance to decline over time.
     Consider now a temporary increase in the tariff. Specifically, suppose that at time 0,7

increases, but is expected to be restored to its original level at time T. The transitional
adjustment is now as follows.'3 As soon as the increase in -y occurs, the stable arm XX
will drop instantaneously (and temporarily) to X'X', while the shadow price q falls to the

point B, which lies above X'X'. At the same time, the marginal utility of consumption
                                              22
  will fall by precisely the same (constant) amount as if the shock were permanent. On
the other hand, since the fall in the shadow price q(O) is only to the point B, the fall in
initial investment is moderated. The same is true of employment As a result of the initial
fall in q, capital begins to decumulate and q begins to rise, for analogous reasons to those
noted in connection with the permanent shock. Moreover, the decumulation of capital is

accompaniedby an accumulationof traded bonds. Immediately following the initial jump,
q and k follow the path BC in Fig. 2.A, while k and b follow the correspondingpath LH
in Fig. 2.B. At time T, when the tariff is restored to its original level, the stock of capital
and traded bonds will have reached a point such as H in Fig. 2.B. The accumulated stocks
of these assets, denoted by kT and bT respectively,will now serve as initial conditions for
                                         '
the dynamics beyond time T when reverts permanently to its original level. As noted in
Section 3, they will therefore in part determine the new steady state equilibrium. With no
new information being received at time T (since the temporary nature of the shock was
announced at the outset), and no further jumps, the stable locus relevant for subsequent

adjustments in   q   and k beyond time       T is the locus X"X", parallel to XX which passes
through the point    k   = kT.   Likewise, the relevant locus linking the accumulationof capital
and traded bonds is now Z'Z'.

     After time T, q and     k follow   the stable locus CR in Fig. 2.A to the new steady state
equilibrium at R, while correspondinglyk and b follow the locus HN in Fig. 2.B to the new
equilibrium point N. One can establish formally that X"X" lies below the original stable
locus XX, while           lies above ZZ, as these curves have been drawn. In the new steady

state, the shadow price q reverts to 1, but with a lower stock of capital and a higher stock of
traded bonds than originally. The striking feature of the adjustment is that the temporary
tariff leads to a permanent reduction in the stock of capital, accompaniedby a higher
stock of traded bonds. This is because during the transitional adjustment period, during
which the higher tariff is in effect, the accumulation of capital and bonds will influence

subsequent initial conditions, which in turn will affect the subsequent steady state.
                                                  23
    As the figures are drawn, C lies below R and H lies below N, respectively. The complete
adjustment paths BCR and LHN are therefore monotonic. We are unable to rule out the
possibility of C lying above R and H lying above N, in which case, the accumulation of
capital and accumulation of bonds would be reversed at some point during the transition.
in any event, the temporary increase in the terms of trade generates an initial current
account surplus, which continues as long as capital is being decumulated.

    As a third disturbance, we briefly consider a future permanent increase in the tariff
which is announced at time 0, to take effect at time T. This is not illustrated in the figure.
At the time of the announcement, q drops instantaneously to a point such as B, which lies

above A on X'X'. This reduction in q implies a smaller initial decumulation in the capital

stock,   than when the permanent deterioration occurs instantaneously.
     Since neither   y     change until time T, when the announced increase in the tariff
                         nor
cate actually occurs, the initial responses of 1, c, x, and y are determined solely by the
nitial downwardjump in q(0). Hence the announcement causes employment and output
to fall, while the relative price and the two consumptionsboth rise. However, the reduction
n employment is smaller than for an unanticipated increase.     Consequently,   the full in the
marginal physical product of capital is moderated and q continues to fall; see (lof). Thus
following the announcement both q and k decline, while foreign bonds are accumulated.
At time T, when the announced increase in the tariff rate occurs, the stocks of capital
and bonds at that time, kT, bT, will determine the stable paths X"X" and Z'Z' relevant
for subsequent adjustments, beyond T. Because of the changed initial conditions at time

T, from time 0, these paths will not coincide with X'X', ZZ the corresponding paths for
unannounced changes. In particular, X"X" can be shown to lie above X'X' in Fig. 2.A.
This implies that the long—run contraction in the capital stock following an increasein the
tariff rate is reduced by announcing this change in advance.


 6. CONCLUSIONS
                                              24
    This paper has analyzed the effects of a tariff in an intertemporal optimizing model,
emphasizing the role of capital accumulation. Three types of increases in the tariff rate
have been considered: (i) unanticipated permanent; (ii) unanticipated temporary; (iii)
anticipated permanent. There are two main general conclusions to be drawn from the
analysis.
     The first is that the introduction (or increase) of a tariff is contractionary, both in
the short run and in the long run. In particular, employment is reduced both in the short
run and in the long run, so that there is no significant intertemporal tradeoff, as obtained
by Eichengreen. The fall in the long—run capital stock causes an immediate reduction
in the rate of investment, which in turn leads to a current account surplus. While this
response of the current account is in accordance with much (but not all) of the existing
literature, the mechanism by which it is achieved, namely the decurnalation of capital,
has not been previously considered. Also, the fact that the declining capital stock is
accompanied by an accumulation of foreign bonds means that the savings effect of the
tariff are unclear, depending upon which influence dominates)4 This ambiguity of savings
is, however,very different from those occurring in other studies. For example, the absence
of capital accumulation in the Edwards (1987) model means that the ambiguity of the
current account to a tariff translates directly to an ambiguity in savings. In the Engel—
Kletzer (1987) model, the response of savings is shown to depend upon the formulation
of consumer behavior. The second major conclusion stems from the fact that the steady
state depends upon the initial stocks of the assets. As a consequence, a temporary tariff,

by altering these initial conditions for some later date when the tariff is removed, leads to
 a permanent effect on the economy.

     The qualitative conclusions we have obtained are based on the assumption that the
 two goods are complementary in the sense U, > 0. As noted previously (footnote 6),

 we view this as being plausible, particularly when dealing with aggregate commodities.
 Since the main driving force of the results are the long—runresponse of the capital stock,

                                              25
it is evident from Table 1 that the key qualitative aspects of the results will continue even
if   U is mildly negative.    However, if   U is strongly negative, so that the effect of the
tariff is to raise the long—run capital stock, then both the short—run and long—mn effects
c the tariff on employment are expansionary. The detailed analysis of this case can be
carried out following the procedures of this paper. However, we should caution that this
case raises the possibility
                        that the dynamics may no longer be a saddlepoint. In this case
with capital being assumed to evolve smoothly, the perfect foresight equilibrium, which
now coincides with the steady state, cannot be sustained without some active form of

governmentintervention.15
       The model is obviously simple and could be extended in several ways. For instance,
monetary considerationscould be introduced and the exchange rate regime would deter-
mine how much of a change in the terms of trade would pass into domestic prices and how
much into a change in the nominal exchange rate. The issue of real wage rigidity could
also be discussed. Finally, one could extend the frameworkinto a two country setting and

introduce game—theoretic considerations.




                                                26
                        Y



x




                            x
    Y




           Figure   1



        Phase Diagram
q




     x,-



                                                            P

                                                                              Temporary Increase

                                                                              x
           Permanent
            Increase                      I       I
                                          I       u

                                          I       I         I
                                          I       I         I           x.
                                          I       I         I
                                          I       I         I
                                          I._     I         I
                                                  T
                       I—.
                       1k1                ik2               1k0
                       I                  I       I
                 z,    i     Figure 2.A   I
                       I                  I       I
b            Z         I                  I       I
                       I                  I       I
                       I                  I       I
                                          I       I
                                          I       i
                                          I       I
                                          I       I


b1


                                              N




                                                                    Temporary Increase
           Permanent




b0
                                                                         z,

                                                                    z
                                                                                  k


                                      Figure 2.B
                                                      in   Tariff
                                                   TABLE       1

             LONG RUN EFFECTS OF INCREASE IN TARIFFS


        Capital—labor ratio:


                                                   d( k/i)   =0.
                                                     d'y

2.   Capital, employment and output:

                                                             A F1
                              — dz/dy
                        — dl/dy
                 dk/d'y —
                     k
                              —
                                  1            z
                                                     —
                                                             ——[—UcrZ
                                                             D1             +$U] <0.
3.   Relative Price:


                            d=        A
                                      —[V' +                        + ,L'UFj] <0.

4.   Domestic Good:


                            d         A        F1                               0.

5.   Import Good:


                            d
                            a-y
                                  —
                                  —
                                    A

                                    D xx
                                    —1    r (F/i + Z) + V"]                    0.


6.   Marginal    Utility:


            dA       A
                 =                         +        + /3U) +           [aFU/i + bU]] <0.
where


                         L—(k/i)<0;                           f3Z'—y+i'b>0
         0   <          -
     —           —           —
[n                   [xflZ       + ,zfl],,n—   a
                                       FOOTNOTES


     The paper has benefitedfrom seminar presentationsat the University of Washington
and the Universityof Toronto, as well as from the constructivecomments of two referees.

     1lKrugman (1982) presentsa comprehensive survey of this model. His analysis includes
the cases of nominal and real wage rigidity; fixed and flexible prices; immobile and mobile

capital.
     2Eichengreen (1981) considers two forms of expectations, static and rational. In the
former case, the short—runeffect of the tariff is definitely expansionary. In the latter case, it
may or may not be, depending upon the extent to which the domesticcurrency appreciates
in the short run.

     3See, e.g., Obstfeld (1982) and Svensson and Razin (1983).
     4A recent paper by Edwards(1987) develops a two period optimizing model to analyze
the effects of changes in tariffs and shocks in the terms of trade on both the real exchange
rate and the current account. In general he shows how in his model a tariff may lead to
either an appreciation or depreciationof the real exchange rate, in which case the response
of the current account is also ambiguous. By imposing additional restrictions, a tariff is
shown to lead to    a real depreciationin both periods.
     tOther papers which examine the current account with capital accumulationinclude
Buiter (1987), Chosh (1987) and Matsuyama (1987). However, these authors do not
analyze issues related to tariffs, which are the focus of this paper.
    6while this assumption is restrictive, at the aggregateit is reasonably plausible and
is met by a variety of widely used utility functions. For example, it holds if U(x,y) is

any utility function, homogeneous of degree one.        It   also holds for more specific utility

functions, such as the CES, when these are homogeneous of any arbitrary degree less than
one. It is also clear, that our results hold if U(x, y) is additivelyseparablein the two goods.

     7Throughout the paper we shall adopt the following notational convention. Where
appropriate, primes shall denote derivatives, subscripts shall denote partial derivatives,
and a dot shall denote a derivative with respect to time.
       8For an alternative interpretation of C(I) C        0,   see Hayashi(1982).
                                                    = F(k, 1) — wi, the assumption that
       5More specifically, letting gross profits ir'(t)

investment C(I) is financed from retained earnings (RE), implies that Dividends = 7r'(t) —
RE = ir(t), as defined in (6a).

       '°Suppose    6'   = ab is the stock of bonds expressed in terms of domesticoutput.   Then
6'   = &b + cr6.   Combining this with (ib), and using the interest arbitrage relationship, the
household accumulationequation becomes


                                    6'   = ir + wi — x — cry + ib' + T.

Alternatively (but less conveniently), if the real stock of bonds were expressed in terms
of a representative consumptionbasket, then the relevant real interest rate would be the
rate defined in terms of that basket. Since any change in unit leads to a corresponding
adjustment in the shadow price               and its evolution, the choice is arbitrary and can be
dictated by convenience,        as we    have done.
          the case where the installation costs are specified by C(I/k), the investment
       111n

function (lie) is modifiedto I/k = 1(q).
       '2This can be immediatelyestablished by considering equations (iSe) and (lSg), be-
low.

       '3The formal derivations of these adjustment paths are omitted, but are availablefrom
the authors on request.
       14Savings S along the transition path is given by


                                  S=k+          + &b = I + Z — cry + jab
and this may be either positive or negative during the adjustment.
    151t is well known that    in order for a unique equilibrium solution to exist, the number
of unstable roots must equal the number of jump variables, a condition that is met by a

saddlepoint. The case U1, C       0   raises   the possibility of there being more unstable roots
(two)   thanjump variables (one) and it is this insufficiency of the latter that requires active
intervention by the government, if the system is not to diverge.
                                    REFERENCES


Abel, A.B. and O.J. Blanchard, "An Intertemporal Model of Saving and Investment,"
    Econometrica51,     1983, 673—692.

Brock,   FL., "Permanent and TemporaryTariff Reductions," Unpublished Working Paper,
    1986.

Buiter, 'N.H., "Does an Improvement in the Current Accountof the Trade Balance at Full
    Employment Require a Depreciation of the Real Exchange Rate?" Paper presented
    at NBER Summer Institute, 1987.
Chan, K.S., "The Employment Effects of Tariffs Under a Free Exchange Rate Regime."
   Journal of International Economics 8, 1978, 414—424.
Edwards, S., "Tariffs, Terms of Trade, and the Real Exchange Rate in an Intertemporal
   Optimizing Model of the Current Account," NBER Working Paper 2175, 1987.
Eichengreen, B.J., "A Dynamic Model of Tariffs, Output, and Employment Under Flexible

    Exchange Rates," Journal of International Economics 11, 1981, 341—359.
Engel, C. and K. Kletzer, "Tariffs, Saving and the Current Account," National Bureau of
    Economic Research, Working Paper No. 1869, 1987.

Ghosh, A.R., "The Terms of Trade and the Current Account: An Investment Dynamics
    Approach," Harvard University, 1987.

Could, J.P., "Adjustment Costs in     the Theory of Investment of the Firm," Review of
    Economic Studies 35, 1982, 213—224.

Hayashi,    F., "Tohin's q, Rational Expectations, and Optimal Investment Plan," Econo-
    metrica 50, 1982, 213—224.

Kimbrough, K.P., "Read Disturb.nces, the Current Account, and the Real Exchange Rate:
    The Case of a Tariff," Journal of International Economics   13, 1982, 291—300.

Krugman, P., "The Macroeconomics of Protection with a Floating Exchange Rate," in
   MonetaryRegimes and Protectionism, K. Brunner and A.H. Meltzer (eds.), Carnegie—
    Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 16, 1982.
Lucas, RE., "Adjustment Costs and the Theory of Supply," Journal      of Political Economp

    75, 1967. 321-334.

Matsuyama, K., "Current Account Dynamics in a Finite Horizon Model," Journal of
   International Economic3 23, 1987. 299—313.
Mundell, R., "Flexible Exchange Rates arid Employment Policy," Canadian Journal of
    Economics and Political Science 27, 1961, 509—517.

Obstfeld, M., "AggregateSpending and the Terms of Trade: Is There a Laursen—Metzler
    Effect?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 97, 1982, 251—270.

Svensson,   LEO. and     A. Razin,   "The Terms of Trade and the Current Account: The

    Harberger—Laursen—MetzlerEffect," Journal of Political Economy 91, 1983,      97—125.

Treadway, A., "On Rational Entrepreneurial Behavior and the Demand for Investment,"
    Review of Economic Studies 36, 1969, 227—240.

Tjzawa, H., "Time Preferences, the ConsumptionFunction,and Optimum Asset Holdings,"
    in J.N. Wolfe (ed),   Value, Capital,   and Growth: Papers in Honor of Sir John Hicks,
    Aldine, Chicago, 1968.
Yaari, M., "Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the Consumer," Review

    of Economic Studies 32, 1965, 137—150.
