NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPLICATIONS OF THE ILLINOIS REEMPLOYMENT BONUS EXPERIMENTS
FOR THEORIES OF UNEMPLOYMENT AND POLICY DESIGN

Bruce D. Meyer

working Paper No. 2783

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1.050 Massachusetts

Avenue

MA 02138
December 1988

Cambridge,

I would like to thank Bo Honore, Dale Mortensen, and Paula Worthington for
many uaeful discussions, and seminar participants at the NBER, Northwestern,
and Princeton for their comments. Julie Ho provided excellent research
assistance.
This paper was written while the author was visiting the
This research is part of
Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University.
NEERs research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2783
December 1988

IMPLICATIONS OF THE ILLINOIS REEMPLOYMENT BONUS EXPERIMENTS
FOR THEORIES OF UNENPLOYNENT AND POLICY DESION

ABSTRACT

Reemployment bonus experiments offer large lump sum payments to
unemployment insurance (UI) recipients who find a job quickly. Such
experiments are underway or have been recently completed in four states. This
paper analyzes the results from Illinois and discusses the implications of the
experiments for theories of unemployment and policy design. I examine the
hazard rate of exit from unemployment and find that it is significantly higher
for the experimental groups, but only during the period of bonus eligibility.
Both labor supply and search theories of unemployment are shown to suggest a
rise in the reemployment hazard just before the end of bonus eligibility and
to suggest larger effects of the fixed amount bonus for lower income groups.
Only weak support is found mr these hypotheses, which suggests limitotious of
Some modifications of the models are suggested.
the models of unemployment.
The experiments demonstrate the effects of economic incentives on job
finding behavior but they do not show the desirability of a permanent
reemployment bonus program. Evidence from another sample suggests that as
many as half of those who received a reemployment bonus returned to their
previous employer, so that a bonus program that pays people returning to their
last employer would provide a strong encouragement to temporary layoffs. A
discussion of UI claim filing behavior suggests that a permanent program could
well increase the frequency or promptness of filing, thus reducing any
financial advantages of a bonus program.

Bruce D. Meyer
Northwestern University
Department of Economics
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60201

1.

Introduction

Reemployment bonus experiments ate a new type of social experiment

designed

to find cost effective

experiments
unemployment
time.

ways of ahortening unemployment spells.

These

offer large lump sum payments to people who have filed for
insurance (UI) if they find a job within a specified period oi

The first experiments were conducted in Illinois, and three others are

underway or have been recently completedJ
the Illinois experiments and discusses

This paper analyzes the results of

their implications ior theories of

unemployment and policy design.

In the Illinois experiments, randomly assigned UI recipients were
eligible icr a large monetary bonus

if they returned to work with either theIr

old employer or a new employer within 11 weeks.

The results of the

experiments were striking; the mean spell of UI receipt was significantly
reduced by the bonus ro employees.
bonuses,

Even after subtracting the cost of the

the stare UI office appears to have saved money by shortening

unemployment

spells.

Surprisingly,

the shorter spells of those eligible for

bonus payments do not appear to have come at the expense of lower quarterly
earnings after finding a job.
possibility

The strength of these results and the

that they may affect UI policy2 indicate that the experiments

merit a closer examination.

This paper mostly discusses the results of the

1Furrher experiments are in progress or have been recently completed in
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, snd Washington.
The experiments in New Jersey and
Pennsylvania provide job finding services to some participants as well as
bonus payments. These services include job search sssistace, training,
relocation assistance and other services. Experiments which will provide
funds for self-employment are also planned.
2The Department of Labor is currently funding these experiments. As
stated in U.S. Department of Labor (1988) '[t]he goal is to find innovative,
cost-effective ways to reduce structural unemployment, increase economic
activity, and speed up the return of unemployed workers to productive jchs.

2

Illinois experiments, although the experimental design and some of the tesulrs

of the other experiments are mentioned.
The reemployment hazards for the control and experimental groupa are

analyzed using parametric end nonparametric techniques.

The reemployment

hazard rate for those eligible for the bonus is found to be significantly
higher than the hazard for the Control Group, and this pattern is evident only

during the period of eligibility for the reemployment bonus.

the job

However,

finding rate is not found to rise appreciably just before the end of the

period of bonus eligibility.

A rise would be predicted by most labor supply

and search theories of unemployment.
The empirical findings of the paper have additional implications
theories of unemployment.

for

Low income individuals, which are predicted by

labor supply and search theories of unemployment to respond more to the fixed
bonus amount, do not reduce their unemployment spells by more than high income
individuals.

Contrsry to some sesrch models, reemployment earnings do not

fall for the experimental groups even though they find jobs more quickly.
Difficulties with extrapolating

the experimental results to a permanent

reemployment bonus program ste emphasized

in the later parts of the paper.

In

a sample similar to the Illinois experiment sample, it is found that about

half of those that would qualify for a bonus returned to their previous
employer.
temporary

This suggests that a reemployment bonus program would subsidize
layoffs by firms.

Furthermore, the timing of the bonus offer can

lead to strong incentives for individuals to prolong unemployment or to file
for UI when it would not otherwise be worthwhile.
greatly reduce the desirability of a bonus program.

Either outcome would
Other difficulties

bonus program such as displacement affects are also discussed.

with a

The next two sections set the stage for the remainder of the paper.
Section 2 summarizes the design of the Illinois experiments and their results,
while Section

3

describes theories of unemployment that give predictions about
The hazard rate of exit from the UI

the effects of a reemployment bonus.
rolls is examined nonparametricaily
other variables

in Section

experiments on different
experiments,

4.

and then parametrically with controls for

Section

income groups.

5

examines the effects of the
To check the validity of the

Section 6 considers the possibility that the results are spurious

Hawthorne or placebo effects.

Some implications of the experiments for 'abor

in Section 7.
supply and search theories of unemployment are discussed
Section 8 discusses problems with extrapolating
permanent

and

reemployment bonus program.

the experimental results to a

Section 9 offers some closing comments

conclusions.

2.

A Summary of the Illinois Experiments and Their Results

The Illinois experiments were directed by Robert Spiegelman and Steven

1oodbury of the Upjohn Institute and a complete description of the experiments
and an excellent summary of the results can be found in Spiegelman and
Woodbury (1987) and Woodbury and Spiegelman (1987).

The Illinois experiments

assigned those in the eligible population to one of three groups on the basis
of the last two digits of their Social Security number.

I will call the three

and Employer Experiment.
groups the Control Group, Claimant Experiment,

The

Claimant Experiment gave a $500 bonus to individuals who found a job in less

than 11 weeks after filing for UI and who held that job for at least 4 months.
The Employer Experiment gave a $500 bonus to employers who hired an individual

4
less than Il weeks after the individual filed for UI and who employed tEa
individual for at least 4 months afterwards.3
The eligible population

that was randomly assignd to one of the three

groups ronsisted of those who satisfied three requirements.

to file a monetarily eligible initial claim

(i.e.

First, they hed

they h.: to satisfy base

period earnings requirements, and not file a transitional, additional or
reopened claim) for UI between July 29, 1984 and November 17, 1984.

Surh

people were eligible for 26 weeks of state regular benefits and up to 12
additional

weeks of Federal Supplemental Compensation benefits.4

had to register with one of
Illinois.

22 Job Servire offices in

Second, they

Northern and

These 22 included about half of the offices in the area.

Illinois and many other states the unemployment

Centrsl.

In

insurance offices and the

employment or job service offices are separate entities.

Two important groups

are exempted from the requirement of going to the Job Service as
part of tha
search efforr required to receive UI.

Individuals who are members of unions

that allocate jobs through a hiring hall and individuals with a definite

recall date within 4 weeks are excluded from the Job Service requirement.
Third, they had to be between ages 20 and 54.

The 17,306 people satisfying

these three requirements were randomly assigned to one of three
groups.

A fourth requirement (and apparently a reconfirmation

that the first and

third requirements above were satisfied) further reduced the sample to 12.101.
The final requirement was that claimants had to be
nonmonetarily

eligible

3In both experiments, the individual had to be employed for at least 30
hours per week.
weeks

4it was possible for a person to receive UI benefits ovet more than 38
in a benefit year if he or she received partial UI
during periods of

part time work.

5
(i.e.

not have quit or been fired by their last employer,

availabiliry

for work requirements)

locate their records.

,

and have satisfied

and the state UI office had to be able to

4000

These screens left approximately

people in each

of the three groups: the Control Croup, the Claimant Experiment and the
Employer Experiment.

The randomness of the assignment

of individuals to the

groups is supported by comparisons of the mean values of many attributes of
the groups reported in tioodbury and Spiegelman

(1987)

Individuals who were assigned to either the Claimant Experiment or the
Employer Experiment were interviewed by a Job Service employee who explained
the bonus for which they were potentially eligible.

These individuals wete

further asked to sign an agreement to participate in the experiment.

84

percent of those assigned to the Claimant Experiment signed the agreement.
but only 65 percent of those in the Employer Experiment signed.
The data source for the empirical work on the experiments is the PublicUse Data File documented in Woodhury et al.

(1987).

This data set contains

demographic variables, quarterly earnings, measures of the amount and timing

of UI benefit receipt, and some demographic information.

However, only the

variables that were used in the American Economic Review paper by Woodbury and
Spiegelman (1987) are included.

Information on recall to previous jobs, and

industry or occupation are unavailable.

Most of the analysis in the paper will center on the Claimant Experiment
in which the bonus was paid to UI recipients.
this emphasis.

There are several reasons for

The experiments in other states tend to follow the pattern of

the Claimant Experiment, so it seem likely that any permanent program would
take this form.

The Claimant Experiment is a less complicated treatment than

the Employer Experiment since the employer's cooperation ia less important.

6
Thus, the Claimant Experiment

results are likely to he more pronounced which

makes their examination easier and less likely to be inconclusive because of
sampling error.
Table 1 displays some of the major findings of the experiments.
findings were previously discussed

in Woodhury and Spiegelmen

(1987)

These
.

The

results indicate a strong effect of economic incentives on job finding
behavior.

The measures of unemployment are always weeks of UI benefIts

received.

The mean number of weeks of compensated unemployment

are lower fcc

both the Claimant Experiment and the Employer Experiment compared with the
Control Group.

Table 1 reports numbers for both the first spell of

unemployment end the benefit year (the 52 weeks following the clsim date)
Those assigned to the Clsimsnt Experiment bad 1.37 fewer weeks of unemployment

then the Control Group in the first spell end 1.15 fewer weeks in the benefit
year.

Both of these numbers are significantly different from zero in tests

with conventional sizes.

The differences between those in the Employer

Experiment end the Control Group are much smeller; .67 weeks
spell on average and .36 weeks
difference is significantly

in the benefit year.

in the first

Only the first spelt

different from zero at the .05 level.

One should

note that the means being compared are everages over the entire populstion
assigned to each of the three groups, not only those that agreed to
participate.

Therefore,

selection bias is not an issue in these comperisons.

Line (3) of Table 1 indicates that the reductions
unemployment corresponded to large reductions
paid.

in weeks of compensated

in mean dollars of UI benefits

Even after accounting for the $500 bonuses paid which are reported in

line (5), both the Clsimsnt end Employer Experiments appear to have reduced
government expenditures.

Even more surprisingly, rhe reduced length of unemployment does not

appear to have been achieved st the cost of lower earnings by UI recipienrs.
Tables 2 and
Table

2

3

report a vsriety of earnings measures.

Lines (B) and (9) of

indicate that the differences between the Control Croup and either of

the experimental groups in terms of mean quarterly earnings after the cod of
the first unemployment spell are not significantly different

from zero.

The

point estimates of the reemployment earnings measures are in fact higher for
the Claimant Experiment than the Control Croup.

The reemployment earnings

measures are calculated using only individuals whose spells concluded before
the relevant quarter.
Because of the presence of several very large earnings observations,

median and trimmed mean esrnings are reported in Table
meosures

3.

The earnings

reported in lines (1) through (7) of Table 3 sre for rhe subsoripie

positive observations.
post-UI earnings.

of

A significant fraction of individuals have no reported

The different earnings measures give similar conclusions

even though the measures are estimated using different samples.5

3.

Theoretical Effects of the Bonus Offer

This section describes labor supply and search theories of unemployment
and how they provide

can be examined.

sri

analytical

framework in which the bonus experiments

The short run effects of the experiments are discussed here:

it is assumed thst the experiments did not affect layoff or recall behavior of
5

If

.

one is concerned that the bonus offer may have reduced migration our
of Illinois, then using all observations (including zeros) would bias upward
the Claimant Experiment post-UI earnings. Measures conditional on positive
earnings (such as most of those in Table 3) would not be subject to this
source of bias.

firms or the propensity of individuals to file for Ut benefits.

This

assumption seems reasonable given that the experiments only lasted 17 weere
snd were not widely publicized, so that firms likely did not rake long terr
adjustments to the program.

The long run effects of adopting a permanent

reemployment bonus program are discussed towards the end of this paper.

Labor supply theories such as Moffitt and Nicholson (1982) model
unemployment

in a static labor-leisure choice frarework.

An individual's

utility is an increasing function of income and unemployment, where
unemployment

is

valued because of its leisure component.

An individual can

become reemployed at any time and search behavior does not affect the
reemployment wage,

The maximization ia done subject to a budget constraint

that is altered by UI.

The period over which this constrained maximization

takes place is moderately

long, such as a year.

The incentives of the Illinois bonus experimenta can be analyzed in this
framework.

Assume that any leisure during the period must be taken in the

first spell of unemployment.

The Claimant txperiment then raises by $bOO the

budget constraint of any person who chooses 11 weeks or less of unemployment.
Figure 1 displays the original and modified budget constraint created by the
bonus program.

The change in the budget constraint has different effects

depending on a person's location on the original budget constraint.

effect of the bonus on the combined population is uncertain.

The

If initially a

person was unemployed for 11 weeks or less, then the income effect will cause
them to lengthen their unemployment spell.
On the other hand, if a person was originally unemployed for more than
weeka, there is an incentive to reduce the unemployment spell to 11 or Lees
weeks.

Because of the discontinuity

in the budget set at

11.

weeka, many

ii

9
people will maximize their utility by receiving exactly 10 weeks of UI.6

One

muat argue informally, aa Moffit and Nicholoson do in their paper, that the
random nature of job finding leads people to cluster around this discontinuity
point.

This modification would lead to the prediction of a rising hazard just

before then end of bonus eligibility.7

A different approach is provided by search theory.

Search theory

provides a reason other than the consumption of leisure for why an individual
might choose some unemployment.

This approach models the unemployed

sampling job offers until an acceptable one has been found.

as

This process

makes the time until the beginning of a job a random variable for a given
individual, snd simultaneously explains the determination

of the person's wage

rate.
Using a aimplified version of the models described in Mortensen
Mortensen

(1987) analyzes the effects of

individuals are wealth maximizing

a

reemployment bonus.

(1986)

In his model,

and have a constant search intensity.

wage offers are assumed to arrive at a rate A0 per week when unemployed

when employed.

New
and A1

A wage offer w, is alwaya a random draw from a stationary

distribution of weekly wages with c.d.f. F(x).

Individuals are permanently

6Levine (1988) simulates the effects of the bonus using four different
aeta of preferencea and finds that between one-quarter and one-half of the
sample is located at the discontinuity in the budget set. lila results might
be softened if incomplete participation were aaaumed and if preferences
conaistent with the initial diatribution of spell lengths were choaen.
7An alternative way of examining the Illinoia experiments has been
Aaaume that it is
suggested by David Card and is diacusaed in Levine (1988)
the year.
costless
to reallocate
Then the Illinois
unemployment
during
experiment should only change the behavior of those who wanted to work for
less than 17 weeks a year, since 17 weeks (approximately 4 montha) is required
to receive the bonua payment. Thus, in thia acenario the budget constraint is
raiaed by $500 if one chooses 35 or leas weeks of unemployment rather than 11
or less.
.

10
laid off from their joba at a rate

S

per week.

The unemployed receive a

B if they find
weekly UI benefit b, and are eligible for a reemployment bonus
a job within the first T weeks of unemploymenr.
Given the wealth maximization assumption, the optimal job acceptance
which is the
policy when unemployed sets a time dependent reservation wage
lowest acceptable wage offer.

Let

t=0, I

T, denote

this reservation

in the reemployment bonus qualification
wage when there are t weeks remaining
period.

Define W(w) to be the expected wealth of an individual employed at

wage w and following the optimal job offer acceptance policy.
define

V,

Similarly

T, to be the expected wealth of an individual with

t=0, 1

weeks remaining in the reemployment bonus qualification period.

The

definition of the reservation wage then implies that at time t=0, when the
at
reemployment bonus offer has just expired, expectad wealth when employed
the reservation wage R0, equals the value of being unemployed, f. e.

(3.1)

V0

W(R0)

When there are t weeks remaining in the bonus qualification period, the
reservation wage is the wage

R at which the value

of employment

plus the

amount of the bonus equals the value of being unemployed with t-l weeks
remaining in the bonus period.

(3.2)

V1

where t=l, 2,.

=

.

51(R)

In other words,

solves the equation

÷ B,

.T.

The qualitative implications of this model for the pattern df the hazard

11
rate of exit from unemployment
Since

V0

W(R0)

—

W(R1)

+

can be easily seen from theae two equations.

>

B, one sees that

R.

Since the reservation

wage is lower during the bonus qualification period (at least at the very end

of the period), the probability of a job being acceptable is higher and
hazard rate of exit from unemployment
unemployment

is higher.

the

The hazard of exit from

is just the product of the arrival rate of wage offers and the

probability of that offer being acceptable,

i.

e.

The only

Ao.(lF(R)).

force leading the value of unemployment to change over riae is the length of
time remaining in the eligibility period.

Since it is unambiguously

have more weeks remaining than less, one finds that Vt >

Vtl

herterto

implying

k

and the hazard must be lower earlier in the bonus period than later.
Thus, the model implies that the hazard rises as an unemployment

spell

progresses until one reaches the point where bonus eligibility ends.
the hazard drop discretely to a constant lower level.

Then,

But, one cannot tell

without making additional assumptions, whether the new level of the hazard is
higher or lower than the hazard at the beginning of a spell.
The operation of the Mortensen

(1987) search model is clarified by the

expressions for maximal expected wealth in the different employment or
unemployment

states.

(3.3)

V0

= b +

(3.4)

V

t—l, 2,.

.

=

.T,

b

+

and

These expressions are

[A0fmax[V0,W(x)]dF(x)

[A0fmax[V

+

1,W(x)]dF(x)

(l-A0)V0]

+

(l-A0)V1],

12
W(w) = w +

(3.5)

=

where
rare.

l/(l+r)

$[A1Jmsx[W(w),Yx)]dF(x)

+

SVT

+

(61)W(w)j,

is rhe weekly discount factor and r is the weekly interest

These equations

indicate that expected wealth is the sum of income

received during the week and the present value of the expected end of veek
wealth.

Most of the simulations performed by Mortensen using this model show e
sharp increase in the reemployment hazard just before the end of the
eligibility period.

hons

Thus, both the labor supply end search models predict

rise in the hazard just before II weeks.

4.

Analysis of the Hazard of Exit from Unemployment

Art

While Table

1

reported the effeors of the experiments on the mean length

of unemployment spells, this section anslyzes the effects of the experiments
on the entire distribution of spells.

Table 4 displays the distribution of

weeks of compensated unemployment in the first unemployment spell for the
Control Croup and the two experimentsl groups.
distributions

Table S displays the analogous

of weeks of compensated unemployment in the benefit year.8

tot

each of the three groups the size of the risk set and the number of
spells
ending in esch week is reported.

The risk set is the set of individuals who

could potentially have their spells end in the next time intetvsl.

The number

8The large number of spells of compensated
unemployment with 26 or 38
weeks is explained by the potentiel duration of benefits in Illinois
during
this time period.
Regular UI benefits lasted 26 weeks, while Federal
Supplemental Compensation (FSC) was svailable during the early part of the
experiment and lasted up to 12 weeks. No new FSC cleims were accepted sftet
3/31/85.

13
of spells ending divided by the risk set gives the empirical hazard which is
The empirical hazsrd in week

reported in Tsbles 6 snd 7.

C

is the tate at

which spells end in week t given thst they have lasted until week

t.

The differences in the distribution of weeks of compensated unemplcvment
between the Control Croup and the experimental groups is most easily seen in
terms of rhe empirical hazard.

The Claimant Experiment hazard is shove

the Control Croup hazard especially up until and including 10 weeks.

The

difference between the Employer Experiment hazard and the Control Crcup hz:nrd
sppears to fall over time,

but no clear pattern is evident.

differences in Figures 2 and
is higher in odd weeks

3.

A pronounced even-odd effect where the hszard

is also apparent.

This pattern is likely explained by

the Illinois requirement that one send in a certification
to receive benefits,

Cne can see Cheer

form every two weeks

The certification form must list places where an

individual has looked for work, interviews, etc.

The fitst form covers the

2nd and 3rd weeks of benefits, the next form covets the 4th and 5th weeks of
benefits, and so on.

It appears that an appreciable number of people clsim an

additional week of UI thst they are nor entitled to, or do not bother to claim
the last week that they could receive.
The differences between the experimental group hazards and the Control
Group hazard may be more easily seen in Figures 4 and 5.
the hszsmd for two intervals.

These figures show

The experimental group hazards are clearly

higher than the Control Group for weeks 0 to 10.

There is some indication nf

a higher relative hazard in the last few weeks an individual would be eligible
for the bonus payment in the Claimant Experiment.

Ten weeks of benefits would

correspond to eleven weeks after filing for benefits because of the waiting
week in Illinois.

Any tendency for the experimental group hazards

to he

14
higher or lower than the tontrol Group hazarda is difficult

to aee between

Il

and 24 weeka.
To teat the viaual impreaaiona given by Figurea 2 through 5,
several ecore teats of the null hypothesis
experimental hazards are the same.

1

perforred

that the Control Group and

These tests oompare one hazard to another

and have greatest power against the alternative that one hazard ia
proportionately

higher than the other.

Tests for the both the Claimant

Experiment v. the Control Group and the Employer Experiaent v. the Control
Group were conducted.
The teat statistics

S.

E (d .n
it

- d .n jd.
2i ii 1

2t

1J

.

k
I

where

p.a.

the

n.(n.t

-

a.

1log(l

d.)
a.

d.n.
1.

2

d.
log(,l

-

1.

.n .n.
q.n
1 1: 2t a.

1J
=

take the following form:
2

k
=

Si k

-

2

a. )

d.

n.

a.

a.

first week of the period under examination,

k

the laat week of the period under examination,

n1

= the aize of the riak sat for the control
group in week i,
= the aize of the tiak set for the experimental
gtoup in weak

n2.

n + n
1
la.
2a.
= the numbet of
d1.
= the number of
d2.
=
d + d
d.

i,

n. =

.

a.

11

control group spells ending in week

i.

experimental group spells ending in week i, and

2i

Theae teat statistics

are discussed in Kalbileisch and Prentice (198C, pp.

102-3), except that here they are uaed to teat hypotheaea
the hazard rather than the entire hazard at once.

about intervals of

The teat is conattucted so

15
that if two hazards have different shapes, but neither hazard is on average
The test is very similar to the

above the other, the test will not reject.

Savage log-rank test, but is more appropriate for grouped data.
The test statistics which are asymptotically distributed chi-square vith
one degree of freedom are reported in Table
for weeks 0-10 and weeks 11-24.

8.

Separate tests are teported

The tests indicate a sharp divergence in the

patterns of the hazards between the two intervals.

There is strong suppott

for differences between the Control Group hazard and the experimental group
hazards over the interval 0-10 weeks.

There is no support at all for a

difference over the 11-24 week interval.
weeks to avoid complicating

I chose to end the comparisons at 24

the comparison with the possible effects of

nearing the exhaustion of UI benefits.

A difficulty with the nonparamerric hazard plots analyzed above, is that
they implicitly assume that the samples are homogeneous, i. e. that all
individuals in a given sample have the same hazard.
that the distribution of heterogeneity

Random assignment means

is the same for the three groups.

But,

it is possible that the experimental treatments interacted with differences
across individuals and caused the hazard plots to give an incorrect picture of
the true effects of the experiments on the time pattern of the hazards.

For

example, if the experimental treatments affected those with higher underlying
hazards proportionately

more, an effect of the experiments on individuals

after 11 weeks might be present, but might not be observable

hazard plots that do not control for such interactions.

in the empirical

Those with higher

hazards would be swept out of the distribution of remaining

individuals rots

quickly, thus leading one to think that the experiment had no effect after 11
weeks.

16
This section describes hazard models which control for differencea across
There are several addirional advantages

individuals.
models.

to escimaring parametric

Hazard models can provide estimates of the effect of an experiment on
By controlling for individual

the hazard or an interval of the hazard.
attributes

the explained variance in the model oay be increased, thus

improving the precision of esrimared experimental effects.

Lastly, the

interactions between individual attributes and experimental effects may
themselves be of interest.

Interactions between previous earnings and

experimental effects are examined in Section 5 using the hazard model
estimates.

Hazard model estimates of several specifications are reported in Table
Time-varying

explanatory variables and censoring are easily incorporated in

the hazard model approach.

1(t)

unemployment,

,

for

proportional hazards form.
unemployment spell.

1(t) =

(4.1)

Formally the hazard, or exit rate from
individual
Let

T

i

at time t is assumed to take the

be the length of individual i's

Then the hazard at spell length r

iim

prob(t÷h>T.t

h—U

is

I

h

A(t)exp(z.(t)'$),
where

1(t)

is the baseline

hazard at time

t, which

is unknown,

z.(t) is a vector of rime dependent explanatory variables for
individual i, and
$

is

a vector of parameters which is unknown.

The estimation approach taken here minimizes functional
allowing

1(t)

form assumptions by

to take any form, and by incorporating in z.(r) many

9,

17

The approach follows Prentice

interactions between the covariares and time.

(1978) , and is extensively analyzed in Meyer

and Gloeckler

covariate coefficients $ and the baseline hazard parameters

(1988a) .
y(t)

are

The
estimated

osing maximum likelihood techniques, where

(4.2)

1(t)

Table

—

lnt

r

I

A(u)du}.

jt

9 reports specifications

estimated using the 8.138 people in the
The hazard examined is the rate at

Control Croup and the Claimant Experiment.

which people end their first spell of UI receipt.

Excluding the interactions

with time and experimental status, the explanatory variables are the log of
the log of the weekly UI
average quarterly earnings during the base period,

benefit amount including dependents
race and sex,

for

allowances, age, and dummy variables

hut

Ideally, one would like additional demographic variables,

they are not available on the public use tape.
The key variables
CE.<llweeks,

to examine in Table

and CE.week9orlO

(Spike).

9

are Claimant Experiment

(CE)

The last two variables are

interactions between the Claimant Experiment dummy variable and intervals of
the hazard.

CE<l1weeks corresponds

to the interval during which

the Claimant

Experiment should be operative, and CE.week9orlO is intended to capture the
predicted rise in the hazard just before bonus eligibility ends.
All five specifications

give similar conclusions.

The coefficient

estimate on CE.<llweeks is always positive and significant.

It indicates that

the hazard is about 14 percent higher in the first ten weeks for the Claimant
Experiment than the Control Croup.

The point estimate of the CE.week9orlO

coefficient indicates that the Claimant Experiment hazard rises another
percent relative to the Control Group in the last two weeks of bonus

8

18
eligibility, but the coefficient is nevet close to being significantly
diffetent

from zeto.

to interpret.

The Claimant Experiment coefficient is mote complicated

In specifications (1) and (3) one can see that the Claimant

Expetiment and Control Ctoup hazards ate indistinguishable aftet the bonus

To assess the effect of the Claimant Experiment variable

eligibility petiod.

in the other specifications one must account for the interaction terms.
Interaction terms also need to be taken into account for CE.<llweeka in
(5)

specification

.

When interaction

terma

are

included

the

total

of

eifects

the Claimant Experiment and CE.<llweeka are exttemely close to the estimates
in specification

(1)

.

The demographic variable coefficients have the expec:ed

signs, with younger workers, men and whites having higher hazards.

The

previous earnings and UI benefit coefficients are very close (particularly
specifications

(3) through (5)) to those found in Meyer

In summary,

the Claimant Experiment is estimated

(1988b)

to raise

the hazard by

about 14 percent, but only during the first 10 weeks of unemployment.

The

hazard is estimated to rise an additional 8 percent just before the end of
bonus

eligibility, but one cannot reject the hypothesis of a constant hazard.

There is little evidence of any interaction effects between the Claimant
Experiment and individual characteristics

as indicated by teats of individual

interaction term coefficients, and likelihood ratio teata of groups of
coefficients

that can be conducted with the log-likelihood values reported at

the bottom of Table 9.

tried adding gamma distributed unobserved heterogeneity to
specification (5), but the unreatricted estimate of the variance waa zero.

19
5.

in Experimental Effects by Earnings and Benefit Levels

Differences

One might expect that formal search or labor supply models of

unemployment would predict that those with lower earnings, or lower weekly l'I
benefit payments, would respond more to s bonus of a given dollar amount.

The

next few paragraphs describe theories that imply larger effects of the
experiment on low income groups.
The effects of s reemployment bonus on different income groups csn be

predicted using the labor supply model of Aahenfelter (1980).
individual would choose to work
where

h

h'

C

h

weeks if not for the reemployment bonus.

and that the bonus requires at least

,

Suppose an

h' weeks

of work.

For

now, ignore the effect of the bonus on those who work rore rhan h' weeks.
Accepting

the bonus will increase an individual's utility if the amount of

additional monetary compensation

(besides the wage) required for rhis change

in weeks worked is less than the bonus amount.

The additional monetary

compensation can be written as

C(h'

(5.1)

where R(h'

,

,

w, v)

w, v)

-

w.h'

R(h'

,

w, v)

-

w•h'

-

E(w, v),

is the constrained excess expenditure

bonus eligibility requires h' weeks of work.

function when

w is the wage rare, v is the

utility level at the unconstrained optimum, and v is the level of expenditures
at that optimum.

All prices other than the wage rate have been suppressed.

Equation (5.1) can be approximated using a second-order Taylor series
expansion around the unconstrained optimum

h.

This expansion gives the

20
10
approximation

(5.2)

C(h'

,

w, v)

*2

w(h' -h

)

*
/2eh

This equation implies that an individual will accept the bonua offet and
increase his leisure to h' if

< $500.

w(h' h*)2/2eh

(5.3)

Thia inequality

implies that for a given e and

h,

those with a low w are acre

likely to take the reemployment bonus, since the left-hand side of (5.3)

more likely to be less than $500.

is

This conclusion requires that differences

in the labor supply elasticity e across income gronps do not counterbalance
the differences

in w.

One should note that h

can be taken to be equal for

different income groups in the sample since the differences in mean weeks

.of

unemployment are small.11

A similar prediction of larger effects of the experiment on lower inccae
groups can be derived from Mortensen's (1987) search model.12
this is to assume that there is a scale parameter p

which

One way to see

proportionately

shifts the distribution of wage offers and the weekly 01 benefit b.

10See Ashenfelter

(1980,

pp. 552-553) for the derivation.

In other

The

approximation proceeds by expanding the right-hand side of (6) around h

to

(BR/Bh-w)(h'-h ) ÷ l/2(a2R/3h)(h'-h)2, and then uses
of
the
derivatives
of the right-hand side of (6) with respect to
properties
obtain C(h'

,

w, v)

and h'.
11
12

See Table 12 for the income group means.

The approach here follows Mortensen (1988)

21
words, b — 1ib' for some b' snd the c.d.f. of wage offers can he written

=
F(x,p), where F(x/p, 1)
B=pB' for some B'.

F(x,

p).

Also

assume for now rhat the bonus amount

Under these assumptions, the reservation wages and the

expected income functions are also shifted proportionately by
can be seen by exsmining equation

(3.3)

through (3.5)

all income groups.

This

result

above, and it implies

that the hazard rate is the same for all income groups.

main empirical deviation from the shove assumptions

p.

Now note that the

is that B is constant

iuc

b is proportional to high quarter earnings in Illincis

(except for the effect of dependents' allowances and the benefit cap).

It

seems reasonable to think of previous earnings as a proxy for the scale of the
wage offer distribution.

But B, the bonus payment, is a fixed dollar amount.

so that the effect of the bonus will be larger for lower income groups.

Thus.

both the labor supply and search models imply that the effects of the fixed
dollar amount bonus will be greatest for the low income groups.
Evidence on whether this pattern is found in the experimental results is
shown in Table 10.

This table reports for a number of earnings level groups

the difference between the mean weeks of unemployment for the Control Croup

and those in the Claimant Experiment.

There is no evidence of a strong

tendency of those in lower earnings brackets to respond more to the fixed
dollar amount bonus.

The responses are remarkably similar for the different

groups except for the lowest bracket in Table 10.
Analogous

tabulations are shown for benefit level groups in Table 11.

there is any effect, lower benefits should also increase the effect of the
bonus since lower benefit individuals would be giving up less in UI paxmen:s
if they took a job more quickly.

in this direction.

Again, there is nor a pattern in the table

That no effect of earnings is found is even more

Cf

22
surprising when one scknowledges that earnings and benefits are correlated

arid

their efferrs should work in the same dirertion.
Table 12 reports mean characteristics for different earnings level
groups.

The demographic variables

might predict.

tend to differ across the groups as one

However, the key variables which might be correlated with the

effects of the bonus such as aean spell length and frequency of satisfying

the

conditions for the bonus in the Control Croup, and the fraction agreeing to
participate

in the Claimant txperiaent do not differ appreciably across the

earnings groups.
The lack of a relationship between previous eatnings and the effect cf
the bonus is also evident in the hacard model estimates reported in Tahie 9.
These estimates control for all other available individual characteristics.
The coefficients on BPE*CE and BPE*CEa<llweeks

have the expected signs, hut

are never close to being significantly different from zeta.

Thus,

the hacacd

model estimates do not provide any support fat different effects of the
Claimant Experiment an different earnings groups.
hypothesis

It may

be that this

is too subtle to detect in the data, despite having

observations.

13

6.

The Possibility of Hswthorne Effects

Since the shorter unemployment

spells and apparent cost savings of the

experiments are so striking, one might wonder if there could be a noneconomic

13Another possible explanation for the lack of an earnings effect is the
presence of other social insurance programs which could raise marginal tax
rates for low earnings individuals. This issue cannot be tested ditectiy in
the data set, but it is not likely to be important if only 9 percent of those
on UI receive other cash benefits as suggested by Storey (1980)

23
explanation for the experimental effecta.
experimentation

Responses that come from the act cf

itself rather than the treatment are sometimea called

Hawthorne effects.14

In the final report on the experiments Spiegelman and

Woodhury give two possible ways a Hawthorne effect might have appeared.

They

suggest that Job Service personnel could have more energetically tried to
place experimental

claimants.

I believe they adequately

respond to this

possibility by pointing out that the number of placements for the Control
Group and the experimental groups is the same.

Alternatively,

effects could have occurred because firms and unemployed
shortening unemployment

Hawthorne

individuals knew that

spells was the goal of the experiments and they wanted

to please the researchers.

Spiegelman and Woodbury respond that there is

already a requirement that those receiving UI search for a new job.
The response to this second possibility seems less convincing, and an
additional possibility should he added.

Those assigned to the Claimant and

Employer Experiments had an interview with Job Service Personnel who explained
the experiments and asked individuals to sign an agreement

to participate.

Those assigned to the Control Group did not go through an analogous procedure.
Because of this extra attention,

individuals may have received the impression

that they were being observed and that their job search requirement would he
more strictly enforced or that they better not claim if they were really

14The term Hawthorne effects comes from experiments conducted at the
Hawthorne plant of the Western Electric Company in Chicago between 1924 and
1933, The first of the experiments appeared to show that changes in the level
of illumination resulted in increases in worker productivity and job
satisfaction whether the lighting was increased or decreased.
For a critical
examination of these experiments see Franke and Kaul (1978).

24
employed in some manner.15
Despite my concern shout the possibility of Hawthorne effects,

I

think

that several aspects of the results indicate that Hawthorne effects aro rot a
serious problem.
Tables

6

The pattern of the hazards seen in Figures 4 and 5 and

and 7 show that the differences between the experimental hacards

(particularly the Claimant Experiment) and the Control Group are concentrated

in the first ten weeks when the incentive effects of the experiment ate most
relevant.

This does not fit with Hawthorne effects which should operate

throughout the entire spell.
Furthermore, the effects of the Claimant Experiment are much larEer rhan
the effects of the Employer Experiment.

The difference

in mean weeks ci

unemployment between the Claimant Experiment and the Control Group was 1.37
weeks

in the first spell and 1.15 weeks in the benefit year compared to .68

and .36 weeks for the Employer Experiment compared with the Control Group.
The Claimant Experiment effects are two and three times as large as those of
the Employer Experiment.

Larger responses are expected because the Employer

Experiment was a much more complicated treatment that required the
participation

of both the employer and employee.

Potential employees had to

explain the details of the experiment to potential employers
experiment

to work.

As previously mentioned, a much smaller fraction ci

individuals agreed to participate
Claimant Experiment.

for the

in the Employer Experiment

than in the

In addition, only 43 percent of those assigned to tho

Employer Experiment "actively participated"

in the experiment while 83 percenr

151f interviews with UI recipients could reduce the length of
unemployment, this would be an interesting result in its own right. This
point was emphasized to me by Martin Weitzman and has been made for Hawthorne
effects in general by Sommer (1968).

25

of those sssigned to the Claimant expetiment
survey described in the final report.16

did,

according to a follow-up

Because those in the Employer

Experiment went through the same interview procedure, it seems safe to
conclude that most of the Claimant Experiment effects ate true effects tathec
than Hawthorne

effects.

A furthet check that the experimental effects ate the tesult of the hocus
rather than the interviews with job Service personnel will come from the

Washington State Experiment.

This experiment has six experimental groups with

three different levels of the bonus and two different lengths of time by which
an individual must be reemploed.''

If one sees much latger effects for the

larger bonus amounts then these differences are the result of the bonuses
themselves and not Hawthotne effects.

7. Implicarions

for Theories of Unemployment

This section examines the implication of the experiments for labor
theories and search theories of unemployment.

suppi

The results of the experiments

call into question the applicability of the standard labor-leisure model for
describing unemployment.

This model predicts a sharp rise in the hazard

around 10 weeks and larger effects for lower income groups.
discontinuity

Because of the

in the budget set at 10 weeks of UI receipt, this model predicts

a much higher reemployment hazard at and just before 10 weeks.

Thile

the

difference between the Claimanr Experiment hszsrd and that for the Control

16Donohue (1988) examines the differences between the effects of the
Claimant Experiment and Employer Experiment snd their implications for the
Coase theorem.
17The Pennsylvania Experiment has a similar design.

26
than in the immediately preceding
Group is slightly larger around 10 weeks
weeks, it is even larger earlier.
spike

predicted

To see this pattern examine Figure 0.

The

by the theory is not evident.18

Labor supply models also suggest greater effects for lower income groups
as shown in Section 5.

This hypothesis is not supported by the data shown io

9.
Tables 10 and 11, and the hszsrd model estimates of Table

The experirencol

of
effects by earnings mod benefit level groups suggest thet m component
unemployment may be mote "discretionmry" for higher income groups, possibly
because

can mote eosily vary scorch
they have better opportunities or they

intensity.

Even though benefit yest differences ste smaller then first spell
differences,

one cannot conclude (at least for the Claimant Experiment) that

from before the
bonus payments cause a reallocation of weeks of unemployment
11 week cutoff to later petiods.

Smsller differences between the experimentol

found when one exsmines the weeks of
groups and the Control Group ste
unemployment
1, lines

in the benefit year rather than just in the first spell.

Toble

to 1.15
(2s) end (2b) indicate that the difference fells from 1.37

weeks for the Claimant Experiment and from
Experiment.19

68 to 36 weeks for the Fmp1oer

The problem with this comparison is that the unemployment

will
measures are weeks of compensated unemployment, end a shorter first spell
18A rise in the hazard is also not found just before 35 weeks of
a model where an individual can costlessly
unemployment as predicted by
be exploined by
reallocate unemployment between different periods. This could
there being large fixed costs to starting or ending unemployment spells.

19Even after adjusting for the longer remaining period left on average in

the benefit year for the experimental groups, one continues to find s tendency
for more weeks of unemployment after the end of the first spell of
unemployment.

27
leave more weeka of UI entitlement for future spells.

If one accounts

for

this problem by comparing those with first spells shorter than II weeks, one
finds that the Control Group and Claimant Experiment have the same number of
weeks of compensated unemployment after the first spell.

Cne should note chat

there is an incentive to keep a job for four months, once one baa been found.
under the bonus experiments.

There is some evidence that thoae in the

Claimant Experiment are mote likely to keep a job once it has been located,
but there is no difference between the Employer Experiment and the Control
20
Group.
The experiments also have implications for search theories of
unemployment.

As discussed in Section

5,

a simple search model predicta

larger experimental effects for those with lower earnings, but this ia not
found in the data.

In standard search models, indi','iduala can find a job more

quickly by reducing theft reservation wage or increasing their search
intensity.

The results of the experiments suggest that changes in search

intensity hy individuals are more important than changes in reservation wages.
The earnings measures

in Tables

2

and 3 indicated that the reemployment wages

of those assigned to the Claimant Experiment did not fall relative

to those in

the Control Group even though they spent significantly less time finding a
j oh.

21

2074,79 percent of those in the Claimant Experiment who find a job within
11 weeks do not file for additional UI benefits within 120 days. The figute
for the control group is 73.03 percent.
210ne might wonder if the sample is large enough to detect a drop in
earnings if it were present. This is a difficult question since it requires a
number of assumptions, but I will give a tentative answer.
First, auppoae an
individual only reduces his reservation wage by an amount that will not teduce
his total earnings over the expected lifetime of a new job. Individuals do
gain the $500 bonua amount if they satisfy the bonus requirements. The 1.37
week drop in weeks unemployed (from Table 1) then translates into a $411

28
Standard search models where an investmenr in search instantaneously
produces job offers also conflicr wirh some of rhe experimenral results.
Models like rhe one proposed by Mortensen

(1987) and described in Section 3

suggest a rapid rise in the reemploymenr hazard just before the 11th week of
As previously observed, rhis pattern ie nor evident io the

unemployment.
hazard.

The evidence from the experiments seems to fit a search model where
choice of search intensity is important and where there is a distributed lag
in the time until the start of a new job after a given investment in search.

It

is plausible

applications,

that it would take time to arrange interviews, process

check references, and decide on who to employ, and then there

may be a delay until the job begins because of a need to schedule training,
for example.

Suppose there is a lag between an in'vstment in search and when

an individual begins a job.

Then if someone ever searches intensively, they

would do so at the beginning of their unemployment spell, since then the
investment would have a higher probability of producing a job starting before
the 11 week bonus payment cutoff.

Such a pattern of investment in seatch

could produce the hazard pattern seen in Figure 4.

The importance put on

search intensity in this model also fits with findings that people reject very

increase in earnings (assuming a $300 weekly wage) which could be balanced
against lower earninga over the life of the job. The mean life of a job can
be approximated by using the percentage of individuals who return to the UI
rolls over a four month period (26.97 %) calculated from the Control Croup.
Assuming a constant hazard of job breakup, a mean job length of 4.94 quarters
is implied. This figure is biased downward because the hazard probably
declines over time, but it is biased upward because most people change jobs
without receiving UI.
Dividing the $411 by 4.94 yields $83.2 which is 1.53
standard deviations of the difference between 1st quartet after end of first
spell earnings for the Control Croup and the Claimant Experiment. Thus, this
suggests that about 94% of the time one should see a fall in post-unemployment
earnings if it is present.

29
few wage offers.22

8.

Implications of the Experiments for Policy Design

This section describes in turn rhe possibilities of firm or worket
sttategic behavior

in response to a permanent bonus program, and the

possibility of displacement effects.

A key consideration in evaluating the

results of the experiments and their implications for policy is the potential
use of UI by firms to subsidize temporary layoffs of their employees.

Firms

seem attuned to the incentives created by UI systems as shown by work on the
effects of incomplete UI experience rating by Brechling
and others.

(1981), Topel (1983)

The experimental design attempted to exclude those likely tc be

recalled by their previous employer.

However evidence from a sample of Ut

to have been
recipients in Missouri23 indicates that recalls are still likely
important in the Illinois sample.

To be eligible inc assignment to one of

the

three groups in the Illinois experiment, an individual had to register with
the state employment service2 (which is generally separate from the UI
office).

To receive a bonus an individual had

to find a jab

within

11 weeks.

In the Missouri data set almost half (48 percent) of those registering wirh
the employment service and finding a job within 11 weeks were recalled.
characteristics

of this Missouti data set are reported in Table

11.

Some

People

22See U.S. Department of Labor (1975) for example. Blau (1987) provides
some evidence which seems to conflict with the conventional wisdom.
23The recoded version of this data set is described in Katz and Meyer

(1983

241n both Illinois and Missouri all Ut claimants are required to register
with the employment service unless they have a definite recall date or are
members of unions hiring through hiring halls.

30
who register with the Employment Service ate less likely to he recalled rhoo
others, hut those with the short spells needed to qualify for the bonus
payments are more likely to have been recalled.

It

is likely that a similar

Illinois were recalled,25

fraction of those receiving bonuses in

It is also unlikely that firms' layoff and reoall

policies were changed by the Illinois expariments beoausa they lasted
weeks and were not publicized.
their policies,

However,

aol'.' i

in the long run firma would adjust

and a bonus system like that in the Illinois experiments 'aouid

be an anormous subsidy to temporary layoffs.

An employer or employee could

receive almost $1500 each year from rho state if rho system were adopted oo a
2g
long term basis and recalls were eligible for the bonus,

On alternative is no exclude recalls

(as

is being done

in New Jersey and

Washington Stare) but this provides some incentive ro break up valuable job
matches,
valuable.

The elasticity of match breakups may be small if they are in fact
If recalls are ineligible, oot only would it

eliminate

the subsidy

to temporary layoffs, but it might even further reduce the layoff frequency if
firma want to avoid having their employees join another firm.

In any case, if

recalls are excluded one might still see employees rotating between similar
firms.
Another issue is raised by the high frequency of recalls in the analogous
Missouri sample.

If the Olaimant Experiment only affected half of those

assigned to the experiment because the rest were awaiting recall, then the
25The New Jersey experiment sample had similar exclusions to Illinois and
yet 33 percent of the sample expected to be recalled. Actual recall among
those finding a job within eleven weeks was likely higher since spells coding
in recall are typically short.
26The four month work requiriment after starting a job would limir one tO
just under three bonuses per year.

31

elasticities

of job finding behavior with respect to the bonus rust have been

almost twice as large for the remaining population.27

Finally, one shnuld

note that if recalls are excluded, a UI bonus experiment would only be
applicable to a small fractinn of the unemployed.

Only about one-third of the

unemployed receive UI, and only about one-third of this group is not
recalled.

28

The possibility of srrategio worker behavior would atise with the longrun adoption of a reemployment bonus program.

It is diffioult, if not

impossible to choose a point in the unemplo;rsent spell when individuals becoce
eligible for a bonus that doer
does not appear in the experii:

'

.t

:.nts

have important aide effects.

This problem

because they are only temporary and the

problem affects experimentals and controls equally because of the
randomization.

Two

examples

froe differont atatea uill illustrate the

problem.
The New Jersey experiment offered individuals large bonuses (initially
$1,600 on average) beginning about the seventh veek after filing for UI.
bonus amount was about five weeks wages on average.

This

If the program were

instituted on a permanent basis in this form, it would cause people with
previously short spells to lengthen them to be eligible for this large bonus
payment.

Anyone who was planning to start a job after two weeks of UI,

could

increase his or her income (and leisure) by waiting another few weeks to be

27A sizable fraction of those in the Olaimant Experiment did not actively
One
participate in the experiment (maybe because it was a temporary program)
could make a similar argument about inflating elaaticires to account for
incomplete participatiod in the experimenra.
.

28See Burtless (1983) and Blank and Oard (1981) for the evidence on the
insured unemployment rate, and Katz and Meyer (1981) icr the evidence on the
prevalence of recall among UI recipients.

32
eligible for the bonus.
The experiments in Illinois and Washington have taken the opposite
approsch of msking a person immediately eligible for the bonua aftet filing
for UI.

This choioe is likely to cause many people

otherwise would not bother.

to file for

UI who

For example, people who already have a new job

lined up may now decide it is worth filing for benefits.

deny people vait a

few weeks before filing, and many currently never do, so that many people
The mean rime between rhe boginning

nould potentially adjust their behavior.

of unemployment and filing for UI
unemployment

in a sample of 380,000

is 4.3 weeks

spells from eight atstea that I am currently examining.

Blank

and Card (1988) eatimate that 72 percent of those eligible for UI in the
Current Population Survey (CPS) during 1980-82 and 83 percent of household
heads eligible for UI in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (P510) during
1980-82 did not receive benefita.29

Even this undoubtedly miaaea many people

vith short spells or people who change jobs without unemployment who could
become claimenta if there were strong financial incentives to do so,

The

larger number of benefit payments caused by added claimants could very well
eliminate any coat savings of a bonus program.

A final issue about the interpretation of the experiments is the
possibility of displacement effects.

Even though those in the Claimant

Experiment found jobs more quickly, they may have done so at the expense of
other people who took longer to find jobs.

These displacement effects are an

important issue when determining the welfare effects of many labor market
policies.

29

The experiments in Pennsylvanis and Wsshington will try to examine

.

.

See Blank and Card (1988) for a d:acuaaion of the drfferences between
the CPS and PSID numbers. The population of unemployment spells in the two
surveys differ along aeversl dimensions.

33
this issue by comparing tha control group to individuals in geographically
separated labor markets.

While I am skeptical of the ability of these

experiments to measure such affects given the small fraction of job chentes
affected by the axperiments.

I

plan to examine the data as they become

available.

9.

Some Additional

Comments and Conclusions

The Illinois experiments show that economic incentives have strong
effects on the job finding hehoior of UI recipience.

On the other hand, che

experiments do not provide ccu"incing evidence on the suitability of a
reemployment bonus ptogcem for pecmanent adoption.

The desirability of

permanent bonus progrem would dcpend on fito and cocker strategic responsos :0

such a program.

These respuuccs right work to inccease unemployment and

increase UI payments.
of a bonus program.

Oisplscemenc effects could

.ilso

reduce the desirabilic':

In a permanent program, a larger fraction of those who

qualify for a bonus might complete the paperwork necessary to receive it.
numbers

The

in Table 1 indicate that this would drsmsricall'c reduce the cost

savings of a bonus program.
Furthermore, any full welfare analysis of s bonus system should examine
the effect of the bonus on earnings of UI recipients.

The savings in payments

by the state UI office are just reductions in UI payments received by
individuals.

However, the ñecressed earnings of 01 recipients might well

greatly outweigh the lost benefit payments.

The numbets in Tables

2

and

3

encouraging in this regard; those in the Olsimsnt Oxperiment earn several
hundred dollars more in the year following the initial claim for UI

This

ace

34

amount is much larger than the reduction in UI benefits received.
Finally, many of the issues discussed here implicitly deal with the issns
of the design nf an optimal UI system as previously discussed by Shevell end
Weiss

(1979) and Haueman (1984) .

A permenent

pattern of payment of UI benefits over time.

bonue system is just another
Niany

of the issues discussed

here could be applied to this literature and would suggest that the dssipn of

an optimal UI system must account for incentives foc teapocacy layoffs
as the possibility

of encouraging cc discouraging edded UI claimants.

as

nell

For

example, if one were to move towards a payment scheme which provided a isrce
lump sum payment at the beginning of an unemployment spell, this aight veil
dramatically

increase the fraction of individuals who bother to file for UI

end would thus increase UI payments.

35
References
Ashenfelter, Orley (1980):
"Unemployment as Disequilibrium
Aggregate Labor Supply," Econometrics, 48, 547-564.

in a Model of

Blank, Rebecca, and David Card (1988): "Recent Trends in Insured and
Uninsured Unemployment: Is There an Explanation?" Mimeo, Princeton
University
Blsu, David (1987): "An Analysis of Employed end Unemployed Job Seetch
Behavior," Mimeo, University of North Carolina.
Brechling, Frank (1981): "Layoffs and Unemployment Insurance," in
Studies in Labor Markets, edited by Sherwin Rosen. The University
of Chicago Press: Chicago, pp. 187-202.
Buttless, Cary (1983): "Why Is the Insured Unemployment Rate So Low?,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 225-259.
Coraon, Walter and Susan Hilton (1982): "Unemployment Spells Public Use File
Documentation," Mimen, N0H amatica Policy Research.
Donohue, John 2. (1988): "Difl etting the Coasian Rivet: Incentive Schemes to
"
Reduce Unemployment Spelis, Mimeo, Northwestern University School of
Law,

Franke, Richard H., and James 0. Kaul (1978): "The Hawthorne Experiments:
First Statistical Interpretations," American Sociological Review, 43,
623-643.
Nauaman, Jerry A. (1064): "Tax Policy and Unemployment Insurance Effects en
Labor Supply," in Removing Obataclea to Economic Crcwth, ed. by Michael
L. Wachtet and Susan N. Wachter.
Philadelphia: Univetsity of
Pehnsylvania Preas, 70-96.

and R. Ptentice (1980):
Kaibfleisch, J.
Time Data. New York: Wiley.
,

Statistical Analysis of Failure

Katz, Lawmence F., and Btuce 0. Meyer (1988): "Unemployment Insurance, Recall
Expectations and Unemployment Outcomes," NBER Working Paper No. 2594.
Levine, Phillip 8. (1988):
"Anaiyaia of the Illinois Unemployment Insutance
Experiment: A Case Against Leisure-Induced Unemployment," unpuhlished,
Princeton University.
"Semiparametric
Meyer, Bruce 0. (1988a)
Northwestern University.
:

Estimation of Haeard Models," mimee,

Meyer, Bruce 0. (1988b): "Unemployment Inaurance and Unemployment Spells,"
NBER Working Paper Nc, 2546.
Moffitt, Robert, and Walter Nicholson (1982):

"The Effect of Unemployment

36

Insurance on Unemployment:
The Case of Federal Supplemental Benefirs,
The Review of Etonomita and Statistics, 64, 1-11.
Dale T. (1986): "Job Search and Labor MacRet Analysis," in
Handbook of Labor Economics, ed. by Orley Ashenfelter and Richard

Mortensen,

La'.'ard

Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Mortensen, Dale T. (1987): "The Effects of a UI Bonus on Job Search,' oireo,
Northwestern University.
Mortensen, Dale T. (1988): "A Structural Model of UI Benefit Effects on
the Incidence and Duration of Unemployment," mimeo. Northwestern
University.
Bhavell, Steven and Laurence Weiss (1979): "The Optimal Payment of
Unemployment Insurance Benefita over Time," Journal of Political Ecnnocv,
87, 1347-1362.
Sommer, Robert (1968):
595

"Hawthorne Dogma," Psychological Bulletin,

J.

Spiegelman, Robert c. and Christopher J. O'Leary (1988): "The Waahingron
Reemployment Bonus Demonstration: The Experimental Design," The U. E.
Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Spiegelman, Robert D. , and Stephen A. Woodbury (1957):
"The Illinois
Unemployment Insurance Incentive Experiments: Final Report," Kalooocoo:
W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Storey, James R. (1980)
"Overlap of UI Benefits and Other Income
Transfer Payments," Unemployment Compensation: Studies and Research.
Volume 3, National Commission on Unemployment Compensation.
:

"On Layoffs and Unemployment
Topel, Robert H. (1983):
American Economic Review, 73, 541-559.
U.S. Department of Labor (1975):
Bulletin 1886.

Insurance," The

Jobseeking Methods Used by Amerinan Norhera,

U.S. Department

of Labor, Employment and Training Administration (l98): "Tho
New Jersey Unemployment Insursnce Reemployment Demonstration Project
Interim Report."

U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration (l9dS
"Alternative Uses of Unemployment Insurance: The UI Reemployment
Demonstrstion Initiative."
Woodbury, Stephen A., and Robert C. Spiegelman (1987): "Bonuses to Norkers
and Employers to Reduce Unemployment: Randomized Trials in Illinois,"
American Economic Review, 77, 513-530.

37
Table 1
Key Results from the Illinois Unemployment
Insurance Incentive Experiments
Control

(1)

Claimant

Group

Experiment

18.3

(.203)

17.0
(.199)

20.1
(.191)

18.9
(.189)

Empln:et
Expericsn:

Mean Weeks of insured
unemployment

(2)

(a)

First spell

(b)

Benefit year

13.7

Differente in weeks betwon
experimental group and
control group
(Experimental-Control)

(3)

(a)

First spelt

-1.37
(.280)

-0.68
(.289)

(b)

Benefit year

-1.15
(:269)

-0.30
(.273)

Difference in total benefits

($)

paid

between experimental
group and control group
(Experimental
(a)

-

Control)

First spell

---

-229
(47.1)

(b)

Benefit year

---

-194
(46.1)

(4)

Percentage qualifying for bonus

(5)

Percentage receiving $500 bonus

(6)

Sample size

20.7
(0.64)

3,952

25.0

-il2
(48.2)
-61
(07.1)

(0.67)

22.8
(0.67)

13.6
(0.53)

2.8
(0.26)

4.l86

3,963

data for these
(2) The
(1) Standard errors ste in parentheses.
calculations came from the Public-Use Data File documented in Woodbuty et
Notes:

(1987)

sl.

38

Table

2

Mean Earnings Measures for Control Croup,
Claimant Experiment, and Employer Experiment
--

Mean Earnings

Time Pericd

(I)

Average

in

(2)

Quarterly Earnings

Base Period

Quarter before initial claim

Control

Claimant

Ecp1oo

Croup

Experiment

Experiment

3188.31
(35.89)

(5)

Second full quarter after
initial

(6)

claim

Third full quarter after
initial claim

3631.07
(43.25)

3622.55

9=4118

9=3875

2474.26
(50.12)

2s21.32

2445.71

1230.45

(31.67)

Year beginning with quarter
of initial claim (sua of
(3)

(8)

(9)

through (6))

First full quarter after
end of first spell
Second full quarter after
end of first spell

(42.52)

[*54

9=4118

9=55'S

1370.70
(38.41)

1272.23
(32. 57)

9=3866

9=4118

9=2875

1676.04
(36.92)

1870.42

1674.20

(88.66)

(37,52:

9=3866

9=4118

9=3875

2069.94

2072.93
(39.60)

193,56

9=4118

9=2876

7788.31
(149.21)

7244.48

(42.17)
9=3866

(7)

(37.S3

3640.39

9=3866
First full quarter after
initial claim

3214.7
9=3962

(45.9u)

(4)

(36.91)

9=4186

9=3866
Quarter of initial claim

3221.98

9=3952

(43.43)
(3)

in Dollats

7422.41

(117.88)

(39.41)

(114.04)

N=3866

9=4118

9=3878

2057.52
(39.12)

2145.53

9=3865

9=4111

2038.22
(29.16(

2703.37

2750.25

(57.40)

9=2443

(38.63)

(128.81)

9=2784

9=2875

2524.08
(50.79)

9=2572

Notes: (1) Standard Errors are in parentheses.
(2) The data for these
calculations came from the Puhlic-Use Data File documented in Woodhuty et a).
(1987).

39

Table

3

Median and Trimmed Mean Earnings Measures for Control Group,
Claimant Experiment, and Employer Experiment
Earnings in Dollars
Time Period

Control
Croup

(1)

Average Quarterly Earnings
in Base Period (median)

2784
(48.97)

2=2738

2=2753

1990
(42.49)
2=2898

963
(50.97)
2=2668

First full quarter after
initial tlaim (median)

826
(52.24)
2=2652

(3)

Setond full quarter after

l962
(54.16)
2=2652

(4)

Third full quarter after
initial claim (median)

(5)

(6)

Year beginning with quorter
of initial claim (median)
Fimst full quarter after
end of first spell (median)

Employer
Experiment

2696
(46.23)
2=2966

(2)

initial claim (median)

Claimant
Experiment

2552
(62.92)
2=2652
7859
(154.61)
2=2652

2989
(45.87)
2=2898

2559
(43.22)

2=2898
8056
(114.81)

2=2898
2794

2666

(1339:

1934
(70.86:
2=2668
2544
(62.16)
2=2665
7936
(121.61!
2=2668

27CC
(74.36)
2=2541

2=2776

2682
(54.53)
2=2547

(35.36)

(7)

Second full quarter after
end of first spell (median)

3254
(79.19)
2=1795

3172
(39.32)
2=2979

3158
(51.23)
2=1862

(8)

First full quarter after
end of first spell
(trimmed mean)

2955.15
(38.82)
2=3865

2112.58
(38.25)
2=4111

2437,6)'

Second full quarter after
end of first spell
(ttimmed mean)

2662.25
(53 55)
2=2439

2634.73
(49.88)
2=2754

(9)

(39.48)
2=3875
2524.98
(54.79'!

2=2572

Notes: (1) Standard Errors are in parentheses.
(2) The data for these
calculations came fmom the Public-Use Data Pile docuinen ted in :Jcodhury

et

al

(3) Lines I to 5 are calculated using only the ohaervations with
positive earnings in the second and third full quartets after the initial
claim. Lines 6 and 7 are calculated using only the positive obsetvotions for
each series. In all cases the standard error of the median is calculated
using a Normal kernel with standard deviation 15. (4) The trimmed means
include only the first $20,090 of quarterly earnings for an individual.
(1987) .

40
Table 4
Distribution of Weeks of Compensated Unemployment in First Spell for
the Control Group, Claimant Experiment, and Employer Experiment
Control
Group

Week

Risk
Set

0
1
2
3

4
5
6
7
8
9

10

Il
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

20
21
22
23

24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31

32
33
34
35

36

Completed

Spells

Claimant
Experiment

Risk
Set

Completed
Spells

EmploYer
Experiment
Risk

Set

Comple:ed
Speils

310
190

4186
3817

369
257

3963
3619

344
193

3452

95

3560

137

3357
3173
3093
2958
2885

184

3423
3224
3124
2983
2890
2749
2677
2557

199
100
141
93

3421
3303
3125

118
178
113

3012
2863

149
81

2782
2666
2602
2502
2441
2365
2323
2225
2180
2104

116
64
100
61
76
42
93

2063
2007
1972
1911

56
35

3952
3642

80
135

73

2773

112
58

2715

103

2612
2557
2480

55

2432
2348
2305
2245
2206

77

48

2108
2042

84
43
60
39
62
36
66
43

1999

84

1915
1883
1813
1767

32
70

2144

1669

46
98
879

790
729
704
691
670
653
642
629
612
590

61
25
13
21
17
11
13
17
22
30

2477
2397
2346
2261
2215
2145
2108
2038
1998
1937
1901

1844
1812
1740
1700
1607
760
698
678
659
636
615
604
591
565
549

141
72
120

80
80
51
85

46
70
37
70

40
61
36
57
32
72

1873

76
41
61
38
53

1820

33

63

40

1787
1724

93

1683

29

847

1604

305

62
20
19
23
21
11
13
26
16
13

799
739
717
693

60

680
661

19
15

646
633

13
19

614

19

595

15

41

22

24
13

(con inued

41
Table 4--Continued

Claimant

C ontrol

Week

Risk
Set
37
38
39

40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48

Experiment

Croup
Completed
Spells

Risk
Set

Completed
Spells

Ersplover

Experiment
Risk
Sos

Completed
Spells

580
559
39
13

21
520
15

7

4

9

5

536
515
35
12

4

2

8

20
081
23
4
4

2

1

4

2

3

1

1
1
1
1
1
1

0

2

0

2

1

0
0
0
0
1

2

1

1
1
1
1

0
0
0
1

1
1
1
0
0

0
0
1
0
0

560
54C
28

20
512
19

5

(1) The data for rheso calculations came from the Public-Use Dots
File documented in Woodbumy cc al. (1987).

Notea:

42
Table 5

Distribution of Seeks of Compensated Unemployment in Benefit Year for
the Control Group, Claimant Experiment, and Employer Experiment
Control
Group

eek

Risk
Set
0
1
2
3

4
5
6
7
8
9

10
11
12

13
14
15
16
17
18
19

20
21
22
23

24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36

3952
3745
3617
3549
3395
3330
3229
3163
3062
3003

2910
2856
2786

2732
2647
2602
2532
2475
2392
2349
2287
2249
2171
2131
2047
1999
1890
843
761
730
713
691
673
659
645
628
605

Claimant

Experiment

Completed
Spells

Risk

207
128
68
154
65
101
66
101
59
93
54
70
54
85

4186
3932
3754
3658
3501
3422
3300
3207
3093
3014
2903
2830
2744
2690
2600
2561
2486
2447
2366
2318
2249
2208
2146
2110
2025
1967
1866
837
730
706
684
657
633
620
606
579
562

45
70
57
83

43
62
38
78

40
84
48
109
1047
82

31
17

22
18
14
14
17
23
31

Set

Employer
Experiment

Completed
Spells

Risk

256

3963
3716
3581
3499
3356
3279
3165
3098
3003
2949
2852
2793
2719
2676
2593
2537
2457
2409
2346
2306
2235
2192
2123
2082
1994
1937
1840
868
780
747
721
705
683
667
653
633
813

178
96
157
79
122
93
114
79
111
73
86

54
90
39
75
39

81
48
69
41
62
36
85
58
101
1029
107
24
22
27
24
13
14
27
17
13

Set

Completed
Spells

24
135
32
143

6

95
54
97
59
74
33
54
80
iS

63
40
71

43
69
41
38
57

97
972
88
33
26
16
22
16
14
20
20
15
(coot Iue 4)

43
Table 5--Continued

Week

Control

Claimant

Employer

Group

Experiment

Experiment

Completed
Spells

Risk

549
529
38
13
9
4
2
2
1
1

20
491
25
4

1

21
522
21
6
2
1
0
0
0
0
0

1

0

1

1

1

1

Risk
Set
37
38
39

574
553
31

40

10
4

41
42
43

44
45
46
47

48

2
1
1
1
1

Set

Completed
Spells

Risk
Set

5

3

22
523
29
6
4

2

4

1

0

3

2

1

1
1
1
0
0

0
0

0
0

598
576
43
14

Completed
Spells

1

0
0

(1) The data for these calculations oame from the public-Use Data
File documented in Tvoodbucy et al. (1987).

Notes:

44
Table 6
Empirical Hazard for the First Spell of Compensated Unemployment
for the Control Group, Claimant Experiment, and Employer Experiment

Empirical Hazard

1eek

0
1
2
3

4
5
6
7
8
9

10
11
12
13

14
15
16
17
18
19

20
21
22
23

24
25
26
27
28

Control
Group

Claimant
Experiment

0.0784
0.0522
0.0275
0.0548
0.0252
0.0436
0.0247
0.0388
0.0209
0.0379
0.0211
0.0301
0.0194
0.0345
0.0183
0.0260
0.0174
0.0281

0.0882
0.0673
0.0385

0.0868

0.0581.

0.0539

0.0310
0.0451
0.0312
0.0488
0.0262
0.0448
0.0313
0.0323
0.0213
0.0362
0.0203
0.0316
0.0172
0.0332
0.0196
0.0305
0.0186

0.0362
0.0492
0.0283
0.0417
0.0240
0.0384
0.0244
0.0311
0.0178
0.0422
0.0202
0.0349

0.0168
0.0313
0.0211
0.0420
0.0167
0.0372
0.0254

0.0300
0.0174
0.0397
0.0230
0.0547

29

0.0555
0.5267
0.0772
0.0343
0.0185

30

0.0304

31
32
33
34
35

0.0254
0.0168
0.0202
0.0270

0.0349
0.0330
0.0179
0.0215
0.0440
0.0283
0.0237

36

0.0359
0.0508

0.5271
0.0816
0.0287

0.0280

Employer
Experimenc

00547
0.0345

0.0195
0.0271
0.0174
0.0309
0.0199
0.0283
0,01.81

0.0353
0.0238
0.0469
0.5019
0.0751
0.0298
0.0335
0.0188
0.0279
0.0227
0.0201
0,0300
0.0309

0.0252
(continued)

45
Table 6- -Continued
Empirical Hazard

week

37

38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48

Control

Claimant

Group

Experiment

0.0357
0.9481
0.6786
0.5556
0.5000
0.5000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
1.0000

0.0373
0.9322
0.6571.

0.3333
0.5000
0.5000
0.0000
0.5000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
1.0000

Employer

Experiment
0.0362
0.9302
0.6667
0.4615
0.5714
0.3333
0.5000
0.0000
0.0000
1.0000
0.0000
0.0000

Notes: (I) The data for these Calculations came from the Public-Use Data
File documented in Woodbury et al. (1987).

46
Table 7

Empirical Hazard for Weeks of Compensated Unemployment in the Benefit Year
for the Control Group, Claimant Experiment, and Employer Experiment
Empirical Hazard

Week

Control

Claimant

Group

Experiment

0

0.0524

1
2
3

0.0342
0.0188

4

0.0191
0.0303

0.0607
0.0453
0.0256
0.0429
0.0226
0.0357
0.0282
0.0355
0.0255
0.0368
0.0251

5
6
7
8
9
10
11

12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

29
30

31
32
33
34
35
36

0.0434

0.0204
0.0319
0.0193

0.0310
•

0.0186
0.0245

0.0194
0.0311

0.0170
0.0269
0.0225
0.0335

0.0180
0.0264
0.0166
0.0347

0.0184
0.0394
0.0234
0.0545
0.5540
0.0973
0.0407
0.0233
0.0309

0.0260
0.0208
0.0212

0.0264
0.0366
0.0512

0.0304
0.0197
0.0335
0.0150
0.0293
0.0157
0.0331
0.0203
0.0298
0.0182
0.0281
0.0168
0.0403
0.0286
0.0513

0.5514
0.1278
0.0329
0.0312
0.0395
0.0365
0.0205
0.0226
0.0446
0.0294
0.0231

Employer
Experiment

00623
0.0363
0.0229
0.0409
0.0229
0.0348
0.0212
0.0307

0.0180
0.0329
0.0207
0.0265
0.0158
0.0310
0.0216
0.0315
0.0195
0.0262

0.0171
0.0308
0.0192
0.0315
0.0193
0.0423
0.0286
0.0501
0.5283
0.1014
0.0423
0.0348
0.0222
0.0312
0.0234
0.0210
0.0306
0.0316
0.0245
(continued)

47
Table

7--Continued

Empirical Hazard

Week

Control

Claimant

Group

Experiment

Employer
Experiment

38

0.0366
0.9439

39
40

0.6774
0.6000

0.0364
0.9282
0,6572

0.0368
0.9253
0.6744

0.3077

0.4286

41

0.5000

0.5556

0.5000

42
43

0.5000

0.5000

0.2500

0.0000

0.0000

44

0.0000

0.5000

45
46
47
48

0.0000
0.0000

0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

0.6667
0.0000
0.0000

1.0000

1.0000

37

0.0000

6.0000

0.0000
0.0000

Notes: (1) The data for these calculations came from the Public-Use
File documented in k'oodburv ct al. (1987).

Dato

48
Table 8
Score Tests for a Proportional Shift in the Hazard Between
the Conrrol and Experimental Groups

0-10 Peeks

(1)

(2)

11-21 Peeks

Control Group v. Claimant Experiment
(a)

First spell

25.36

.26

(N)

Benefit year

20.33

19

Control Group v. Employer Experiment
(a)

First spell

8.33

.00

(N)

Benefit year

3.48

.22

Notes: (1) See the text for the ronstrurtion of the teat statistics.
(2) Under the null hypothesis of equal hazards the cesr statistics are
asymptotirally chi-square with one degree of freednm. The critical values
for the test are 3.84 and 6.64 at the .05 and .01 level respectively.

49
Table

9

Estimates of the First Spell Hazard Rate
for the Combined Control Group and Claimant Experiment Sample a
(Sample Size = 8138)

Specification
Variable

(1)

(2)

.0126

- .0117

(0.0017)

(0.0025)
.2972
(0.0593)

-

Age
Log Base Period
Earnings (BPE)

.2700

(0.0400)

Blaok=l

-

.5205

(0.0367)
Msle=1

Benefit

(BEN)

-

.4655

(0.0660)

Claimant

Experiment

CE. <llweeks

CE.week9orlo

(Spike)

(CE)

.0146

.5195
. 1006

.0899

(0.0301.)
Log UI

-

(0.0534)

(0.0441)
-

.5715

(0.0976)
-

.4871

(3)

(4)

(5)

.0125

- .0117

- .0146

(0.0030)

(0.0035)

(0.0042)

.4751
(0.0693)

.4937
(0.0811)

(0.1022)

-

-

.5919

. 1706
(0.0526)

(0.0606)

-

.51)5

1779

.7063

.

12!3

(0.0739)
-

.6545

(0.3414)

(0.5961)

.5565

(0.1705)

- .5883

(0.3381)

.0)40
(0.0507)

.1432
(0.0635)

.1437
(0.0636)

(0.0637)

.1490
(0.0639)

.1629
(0.0647)

.0849
(0.1133)

.0844
(0.1134)

.0851
(0.1133)

.0848
(0.1134)

.0839
(0.1134)

-.0019
(0.0035)

(0.0061)

-

.

1552

.0018

---

-

.0505

---

---

- .0028

---

-.0202

---

---

(0.0603)
---

.2006
(0,1324)

-

- .0367

(0.0796)

(0.0737)

BEN'CE

-

.5366

(0.1357)

(0.0802)

Msle.CE

.

-

(0.0865)

(0.1.1)8)

(0.0035)

Blaok.CE

.5889

(0.0735)

(0.0508)

Age•CE
BPE•CE

-

(0.0640)

.4737

- .0073

.0032
(0.1388)
-

.1176

(0.0743)

(0.1284)

- .0141

.0921
(0.1053)

(0.0605)
---

.0040

.1917
(0.1323)

.0855
(0.2359)

(continued)

50

Table

9--Continued

Specification

Variable

(1)

(2)
-

Age .<llweeks

.0003

(0.0037)

BPE•<llweeks

-

-

-

- --

-

Black•<llweeks

--

Male• <llweeks

--

-

BEN<llweeks

-

--

-

-

--

-

- .3031

.3030

(0.0843)

(0.0645

1114

.1114

(0.0790)

- .0002
(0.OOY

.0002
(0. 0037)

.3047

(0.0843)

(5

(4)

(3)

1147

(0.0792)

- .1212

- .1208

(0.0646)

(0. 0647)

(0.0792
-

.1195

(0.0647

.2195

.2099

(0.1449)

(0.1450)

(0.
-

AgeCE<llweeks

IC 52)

.0090

(0.0074
- .064

BPE•CE<llweeks

(0. 1692 i
.1680

Black. CE.<llweeks
Male•CE•<llweeks

(0.15841
-

- -.

---

--

-

--

. .160w

(0.1295)
1674

BENCE•<l1weeks

(0.2906)

Log-likelihood valueb

566.25

568. 12

584.95

582. 88

587. 16

(±20000)

aSdd

The aeans and standard
errors are shown in parentheses.
deviations of the key variables in the specifications are:

Mean
Standard Dev.

First Spell
16.33

9.98

Age
32.95

BPE
7.83

6.66

.73

.26

.56

BEN
4.63

CE
.51

.44

.50

.43

.50

Black

Mate

bThe critical values of a test with 4 chi-square distribution
degrees of freedoa are 11.07 and 15.09 at the .05 and .01 levels
respectively.

with five

51

Table 10
The Responsiveness of Different Income Groups
to the Claimant Experiment
Average Quarterly
Base Period Earnings
(dollars)
<1200

Difference in Mean
Weeks in First Spell

Difference in Mean
Weeks in Benefit Year

(experimenrals minus controls)
-

.370

-

074

N = 613
Nc

(.564)

(.626)

-1.445
(.562)

-1.221

-1.091
(.647)

-1.175

-1.558
(.726)

-1.832

4001-5000

-2.192
(.870)

-1.299
C 838)

N

>5000

-1.456
(.657)

-1.353

N

1200-1999

2000-2999

3000-4000

(.621)

(.605)

(.687)

(.630)

N
722
N° =

N
N°

N

778
866
= 639

NL
= 4T
N° = 414
660
N° = 724

Notes: (1) Standard Errors are in parentheses. (2) TUe data for these
calculations came from the Public-Use Data File docuicenred in Woodhury or al.
(1987).
(3) N is the sample sire for the Control Croup and N is the sample
size for the Claimant Experiment.

52

Table 11
The Responsiveness of Different Benefit Level
Groups to the Claimant Experiment
Weekly Benefit
Amount
(dollars)
<86

Difference in Mean
Weeks in First
Spell
(experimentala
-

.898

(.599)
86-12D

121-lED

209

-

.691

(.568)

-2.090

(.682)

(.644)

-

.102

-1.583

-

.367

(.634)
-

.820

(.581)

(.554)

-2.260

-2.002
(.620)

(.660)

Sample
S icea
.

minus controls)

-2.D14

(.667)

161-208

Difference in Mean
.
Weeks in Benefit
Year

N = 897
N°
925
N = 960
N°
746
N

N

710
= 783

N
N°

973
953

N = :38
N°
709

Notes: (1) Standard Errors are in parentheses. (2) The data for these
calculations came from rhe Public-Use Data File docurented in Woodhury at al,
(1987)
(3) N is the sample sire for the Control Group and N is the sample
size for the Cleiment Experiment. (4) Weekly Benefit Amount includes dependeua
allowances.
.

53
Table 12
Income Group Means of Key Variables

Claimant
Experiment

Control Group
Mean Quarterly
Baae Period
Earnings
(dollara)

<1200

1200-1999

2000-2999

3000-4000

4001-5000

>5000

Mean
First
Spell

Percent
Eligible
for Bonus

Percent
Agreeing to
Participate

Mean
Age

Percent
Black

Percent
Male

16.73

30.64

37.50

48.36

21.73

90.29

(0.48)

(0.33)

(1.87)

(1.93)

(1.59)

(1.13)

18.67

31.42

35.32

49.03

(0.33)

(1.78)

(1.86)

19.67
(1.48)

87.73

(0.47)

18.76

32.01

26.09

50.90

(0.32)

(l.SB)

(1.79)

19.92
(1.43)

86.86

(0.46)

19.56

33.11

18.62

48.20

18.62

88.14

(0.51)

(0.36)

(1.54)

(1.98)

(1.54)

(1.25)

19.18

33.81

20.34

57.63

22.46

91.14

(0.58)

(0.38)

(1.85)

(2.28)

(1.92)

(1.43)

17.28

37.42

16.74

75.78

90.22

(0.49)

(0.31)

(1.44)

(1.66)

22.57
(1.62)

(weeks)

(1.23)

(1.19)

(1.13)

Mores: (1) Standard Errors are in parentheses. (2) The data for these
calculations came from the Public-Use Data File documented in Woodhury et ml.
(1987).
(3) Sample sizes for the income classes in the Control Croup and the
Claimant Experiment can be seen in Table 10.

54
Table 13
The Frequency of Recall in Subsamples of the Missouri Data
(1)

Total sample size

(2)

Individuals recalled by
their previous employer
Number

As a percentage of total sample
(3)

As a percentage of total sample

51

468
58

Those using ES who are recalled
by their previous employer
Number
As a percentage of those using ES

(5)

413

Individuals using state
employment service (ES)
Number

(4)

808

173
37

Those using ES who have short
unemployment spells (less
than or equal to 11 weeks)
Number

206

As a percentage of those using ES
(6)

Those using ES, with short spells,
who are recalled
Number

99

As a percentage of those using ES with short spells
48
Note: The data for these calculations came from the data set constructed
by
Coraort and Nicholson and documented in Corson and Hilton (1982).
Ihe data era
extenaively recoded aa indicated in Katz and Meyer (1988).

Figure

1

Income
($)

bonus offer budget segment

500

1T
= -w(1—R) where

R =

[1ope
=

11

26

Unemployment
(weeks)

I

0

r)

I) I) 5

(.) ( )4C)

I.) 06u

0.100 p

3

12 14 16 18 26 21 24

Weoks of Bene6ts

10

Lki ii ii j I

Control Croup ond Clomont Expenmen

Pirs SpeM ErnpHcol Hozord Plot for

FIGURE 2

24 22 20
18
14

12

10

Benefits of Weeks
16

8

(5

4

Sped

U

020 U

0040

().U(5O

p 0.100

Pirst

Experiment Employer and Croup Control

for flot Hazard ErnpiHccl
3 FIGURE

I

0

N.J

0

C)

C)

C)

(T

Sped Hozord Difference Fiot for

)(

( ).( )(

)

0010

(I
2

I
'1

I
H

0

10

W tI

14

tJI Ii 1

12

10

10

I 11111 I

11)

I
22

I
24

Cia iman I Lxper imeri t M inns Con Col Croup

First

FIGURE 4

ci Ur

1
)I

24

Cr

Ha I

22
I

oil

1

21)

C

ice

18

in

of
12
I

ED

ii M

-

I

it I3oriet
14
11)

i

far if

5 FIGURE

Wiik
11)

I

I

t-t

I

4
I

2
I

L

()

11

.

U

c ()

OO15

mployer

ReH irs

men xfler
ci Hazer I

C)

ii'
U

