NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PANDEMICS THROUGH THE LENS OF OCCUPATIONS
Anand Chopra
Michael B. Devereux
Amartya Lahiri
Working Paper 27841
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27841

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2020

We are grateful for comments from seminar participants at the Bank of Canada, the Vancouver
School of Economics, and the Government of British Columbia. Devereux and Lahiri thank
SSHRC for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Anand Chopra, Michael B. Devereux, and Amartya Lahiri. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Pandemics Through the Lens of Occupations
Anand Chopra, Michael B. Devereux, and Amartya Lahiri
NBER Working Paper No. 27841
September 2020
JEL No. E0,I0
ABSTRACT
We outline a macro-pandemic model where individuals can select into working from home or in
the market. Market work increases the risk of infection. Occupations differ in the ease of
substitution between market and home work, and in the risk of infection. We examine the evolution of a pandemic in the model as well as its macroeconomic and distributional consequences.
The model is calibrated to British Columbian data to examine the implications of shutting down
different industries by linking industries to occupations. We find that endogenous choice to selfisolate is key: it reduces the peak infection rate by 2 percentage points but reduces the trough
consumption level by 4 percentage points, even without policy mandated lockdowns. The model
also produces widening consumption inequality, a fact that has characterized COVID-19.

Anand Chopra
University of British Columbia
anandchopra13@gmail.com
Michael B. Devereux
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
CANADA
and NBER
mbdevereux@gmail.com

Amartya Lahiri
Vancouver School of Economics
University of British Columbia
6000 Iona Drive
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
CANADA
amartyalahiri@gmail.com

Pandemics Through the Lens of Occupations
Anand Chopra

Michael B. Devereux

Amartya Lahiri

UBC

UBC and NBER

UBC

anandchopra13@gmail.com

michael.devereux@ubc.ca

amartya.lahiri@ubc.ca

August 31, 2020

Abstract
We outline a macro-pandemic model where individuals can select into working from home
or in the market. Market work increases the risk of infection. Occupations differ in the ease of
substitution between market and home work, and in the risk of infection. We examine the evolution of a pandemic in the model as well as its macroeconomic and distributional consequences.
The model is calibrated to British Columbian data to examine the implications of shutting down
different industries by linking industries to occupations. We find that endogenous choice to selfisolate is key: it reduces the peak infection rate by 2 percentage points but reduces the trough
consumption level by 4 percentage points, even without policy mandated lockdowns. The model
also produces widening consumption inequality, a fact that has characterized COVID-19.

1

Introduction
As the coronavirus and the disease it spawns, COVID-19, has spread across the globe, it has

unleashed fearsome challenges for epidemiologists, public health professionals, economists and public policy officials to both understand and devise methods to arrest its spread and attenuate its
effects. The particular challenge in managing the crisis is the tradeoff between the public health
and economic costs of the disease.
In this paper we formalize a macroeconomic model and blend it with the standard SIR model for
pandemics. Relative to standard macroeconomic models, our structure has two main innovations.
First, we conceptualize aggregate output as being the outcome of the labour effort of different

1

occupations. We believe this focus is important since a significant source of contagion of infections
is the interaction of people while working. However, labour is supplied through many different
occupations with different degrees of required social proximity and interaction. Hence, the economic
costs of pandemics are likely to vary significantly with different occupation mixes in society.
A second innovation of the model is that it allows individuals to choose whether to work from
the market or work from home. The ease with which individuals can substitute into working
from home varies across occupations. Our model and empirical implementation incorporates this
variation. Allowing individuals to choose the location of their work allows them to self-insure
against infection risk. This appears to be a key decision facing private agents and policymakers
alike as they decide on the methods of dealing with the crisis.
Our model is calibrated to British Columbian occupation and labour force data from the Canadian Census 2016. We show that the endogeneity of market participation is quantitatively important
with the peak infection rate lower by 2 percentage points. Risk aversion is the key driver for this
result. Moreover, the effect of lockdowns and their relaxation is also significantly impacted by the
endogeneity of market participation. Lockdowns that are relaxed while infections are still growing
result in slower recoveries as individuals endogenously choose to stay away from market work, even
without coercion.
We conduct a number of robustness checks on our results. We uncover three important insights
from these exercises. First, our baseline model assumes a common infection risk from market work
for all occupations. Relaxing this assumption and allowing for occupation specific infection risk
from market work does not change the baseline results by much. Second, the degree of risk aversion
is very important. With risk-neutrality, the difference between endogenous and exogenous choices
of work location almost disappears. Third, the productivity of individuals contingent on becoming
infected is important. The lower the productivity of the infected, the lower is the peak of the overall
infection rate.
The structure that we formalize also has distributional implications. Since individual skills are
occupation specific and occupations have different degrees of substitutability between market and
home work, a pandemic induces heterogeneity in infection rates and consumption across occupations. Occupations which are easy to perform from home without significant loss of income allow
individuals to insulate themselves from infection risk without sacrificing consumption. Contrarily,
2

occupations that are harder to perform from home see higher infections and lower consumption.
The model matches the data fact that the higher the income group the greater the initial drop in
consumption and the slower the consumption recovery. The model also predicts that the trough of
consumption of the lowest income groups comes much later than for relatively richer groups. Hence,
we may not have seen the worst yet in terms of the distributional consequences of COVID-19.
We believe our results point to the importance of public health initiatives that prioritize building
societal confidence in the safety of market work. One such measure is widespread and frequent
testing of the general population. Absent such measures, economic recovery from COVID-19 may
be prolonged, possibly until the commercial development of an effective vaccine.
Since the beginning of the global Covid-19 pandemic, there has been an explosion of research
studies analyzing the links between macroeconomic and epidemiological models. The work has
been so prolific that already there are a already number of reviews of the recent literature (Brodeur
et al. (2020), Hur and Jenuwine (2020)) We do not attempt here to provide a complete summary
of new papers in this area. Our paper is closest on the economic side to Eichenbaum et al. (2020),
and takes its calibration of disease dynamics from Atkeson (2020). Recent work in Chetty et al.
(2020) documents the evolution of inequality along various margins in the aftermath of COVID-19.
We use the consumption inequality facts presented in their work as a benchmark to compare the
distributional dynamics of our model.
Other papers closely related to ours are Dingel and Neiman (2020), who construct a measure of
ease of home work by occupation from ONET data. We use a measure similar to theirs to benchmark
our simulations. Theoretical models that have some relation to ours, besides Eichenbaum et al.
(2020), mentioned above, are Krueger et al. (2020), Jones et al. (2020), and Bodenstein et al.
(2020). Acemoglu et al. (2020), Alvarez et al. (2020), and Jones et al. (2020) conduct optimal
policy experiments in richly parameterized SIR models. The message of our paper, that endogenous
adjustment by individuals accounts for a substantial part of the response to pandemic risk, beyond
official lockdowns, is also stressed in an empirical study by Goolsbee and Syverson (2020).
The next section presents the model while Section 3 describes the dynamics of a pandemic
and some theoretical results. Section 4 describes the calibration of the model and the quantitative
results. Section 5 explores the robustness of the quantitative results with respect to key parameters
while Section 6 compares the distributional predictions of the model with those in the data. The
3

last section concludes.

2

Model
We study a closed economy with a continuum of occupations with measure one. The economy

consumes a final good that is produced by multiple sectors. Sectoral goods are produced by
combining various occupations. Within each occupation i, there is a population Lt (i) of individuals
R1
at date t. Hence, the total population is Lt = 0 Lt (i)di.
Infinitely lived individuals in the economy have one unit of labour time that they supply inelastically to work every period. Individuals have occupation specific skills. These skills can be used
to supply work effort from home or the market. A representative individual within occupation i
receives wage wh (i) from working at home and wage wm (i) from working in the market. Labour
markets are competitive so that wages reflect the marginal products of labour from home and market work in each occupation. Note that for some occupations, the value of work from home may
be extremely small or close to zero. Our model allows for arbitrarily small values of wh for some
occupations.
We assume that occupations are arranged in order of the wage from working in the market
relative to working from home. Thus

wm (j)
wh (j)

>

wm (i)
wh (i)

for j > i. An individual within each occupation

will work in the marketplace if the value of market work V m (i) exceeds the value of home work
V h (i). So if occupation i decides to work in the marketplace, then occupation j > i will also work
in the marketplace. We denote θ as the share of occupations working in the market rather than
home. Thus, defining ī as the marginal occupation that is indifferent between home and market
work, θ = 1 − ī.
Individuals maximize the present discounted value of lifetime utility. Thus, an individual j in
occupation i maximizes
j

V (i, t) =

∞
X

ln cjt (i)

t

Individuals are hand-to-mouth consumers so that every period they consume their current period
earnings completely: cjt (i) = wt (i)
The epidemiological structure of the model is very similar to recent papers noted above. At
every date, within each occupation, there are potentially three types of agents in the economy:
4

Susceptible (S), Infected (I), or Recovered (R) with the total population being Lt = St + It + Rt .
The measure of agents in each of these groups changes over time as a function of the cumulated
decisions made by individuals regarding home versus market work, as well as through infections
occurring through consumption activities as well as random infections, as described more fully
below. In the following we shall use the notation Kt (i) to denote the measure of people of type
K = S, I, R in occupation i at date t.
For an individual, working in the market entails the risk of becoming infected by a virus. This
risk is a function of the interaction between infected people and susceptible individuals working in
the market. Once infected, individuals either continue to remain infected or recover with probability
πR or die with probability πD .

2.1

Production

The production structure of the economy consists of a final good that is produced by combining
a set of J-intermediate goods corresponding to different sectors. The final good is the numeraire
for the model. The final goods technology is

1
J
 ρ ρ
X
Yt = 
η j(1−ρ) Ytj 

(1)

j=1

where ρ ≤ 1 controls the elasticity of substitution between sectoral goods and

P

j

η j = 1 is assumed.

Ytj denotes output of sector j used by the final goods sector at date t. Using Ptj to denote the price
of sector-j goods, we can derive the demand function for sector-j goods as
1

Ytj = Yt η j Ptj ρ−1

(2)

Equation 4 can be used to derive the price of the basket of final goods, which is unity, as it is the
numeraire:
J
X

ρ

η j Ptj ρ−1 = 1

(3)

j=1

In the special case where sectoral goods are perfect substitutes in producing the final good, or
ρ = 1, all sectoral prices must be equal and therefore: Ptj = 1

5

Output for each sector produced by combining the effective labour supply by the continuum
of occupations. This labour supply is adjusted for occupation specific productivity, as we shall
describe below. The sector j technology is given by

Ytj

Z

1

(1−ρj )

j

=

δ (i)
i=0



 1j
ρ
di
, ρj ≤ 1

ρ j

Ljt (i)

(4)

Here, labour usage Ljt (i) is defined over a continuum of occupations i, and ρj ≤ 1 controls the elasticity of substitution between occupations in sector-j. ρj = 1 is the case of perfect substitutability
j

while ρj = −∞ is the Leontief case of no substitutability between occupations. δ j (i)(1−ρ ) denotes
R1
the input weight of occupation i in sector j, and we assume that 0 δ j (i)di = 1. Since both ρj and
j)

δ j (i)(1−ρ

are indexed by j, our specification allows the occupational intensity of labour to vary

across sectors.

1

The demand by sector j for labour of occupation i is

Ljt (i)

=

Ytj δ j (i)

Pt (i)

!

1
ρj −1

(5)

Ptj

where Pt (i) represents the price of occupation i good It is straightforward to check from equation
(5) that the price of sector-j output is

Ptj =

Z

1

δ j (i)Pt (i)

ρj
ρj −1

 ρj −1
j
ρ

di

i=0

Labour of occupation i is produced by using the linear technology:
m
m
m m
Lt (i) = Am
i {St (i) + Rt (i) + γI It (i)}
n
o
+ Ahi Sth (i) + Rth (i) + γIh Ith (i)

(6)

where S k (i), Rk (i) and I k (i) denote the measures of susceptible, recovered and infected individuals,
respectively, in occupation i who are working in k = h, m. Note that h denotes home and m denotes
market. The productivity of occupation i working from home or market is denoted by Aki . We
1

In subsequent analysis, we can allow for sectoral use of other sector’s output as part of the production technology,
thereby allowing for intermediate input usage in gross production. This can allow us to incorporate different sectoral
centrality measures in that analysis of alternative lockdown policies.

6

assume throughout that γIk < 1 for k = h, m, so that the productivity of infected individuals is
strictly less than non-infected workers in every occupation. The productivity terms are not indexed
by the time subscript t indicating the assumption that productivity is constant.2
In addition, we allow for a tax rate on market work equal to τm . This tax may be rebated
to each affected occupation as a lump-sum rebate, although we also allow for the tax as a pure
deadweight cost. We think of this parameter as controlling a policy of health-driven shutdowns in
market activity.
Competitive labour markets then imply that wage rates for market and home work are given
by

wm (i, t) = (1 − τ m )Pt (i)Am
i ,

(7)

wh (i, t) = Pt (i)Ahi ,

(8)

wIm (i, t) = (1 − τ m )Pt (i)γIm Am
i ,

(9)

wIh (i, t) = Pt (i)γIh Ahi

(10)

These conditions determine the after-tax wages in each occupation i for all groups of individuals.
Wages in every occupation are constant over time here because both occupational productivity and
prices are constant, and assuming also that taxes are constant.

2.2

The Pre-Infection Economy

Take an initial situation where there is no risk of being infected in the marketplace. We also
assume that there is no tax on market labour during this period. Then
ln wh (i)
1−β
ln
wm (i)
V m (i, t) = ln wm (i) + βV m (i, t + 1) =
1−β
V h (i, t) = ln wh (i) + βV h (i, t + 1) =

where the second equality in both equations above follow from the fact that since there are no shocks
in this economy and there are no sticky variables that evolve gradually over time, wages have to
be constant over time. With all other exogenous variables being constant, in each occupation the
2

It is straightforward to allow for exogenous productivity growth in the model.

7

choice between home and market work depends only on the wage comparison wm (i) − wh (i). Since
this is constant, the choice between home and market work remains unchanged over time in every
occupation i. Thus, an occupation that is performed from home today yields a lifetime utility of
ln wk (i)
1−β

for k = h, m.

There is a cutoff occupation ī that is determined by the condition V h (ī) = V m (ī). From the
expressions for the value functions derived above, the cutoff condition reduces to wh (ī) = wm (ī).
All occupations for which i > ī will be performed through market works while those below the
threshold occupation will work from home. The threshold then determines the total number of
R ī
individuals working in the marketplace as Lm = L − 0 L(i)di. The cutoff and the distribution of
market versus homework remains unchanged over time.
Occupational output produced by occupation i is given by

L(i) =



L0 (i)Ahi

if i < ī


L0 (i)Am if i ≥ ī
i
where L0 (i) is the measure of individuals in occupation i, which is constant over time absent any
pandemic dynamics.
Sectoral output, which is produced by combining occupations, is given by

Yj =

"Z

ī

1−ρj

δ j (i)

ρj

Lj,h (i) di +

i=0

Z

1

# 1j
1−ρj

δ j (i)

ρj

Lj,m (i) di

ρ

, j = 1, .., J

i=ī

Note that all sectoral outputs remain constant over time because occupational goods are constant
over time.
Given sectoral outputs, output of the final good in the uninfected economy is is given by
(1). This is a stationary economy with the occupations choices, population distribution across
occupations, sectoral output, the final good as well as all prices remain constant over time.

2.3

A Special Case

There is a special case of the model which will be useful to analyze below. Specifically, consider
the case where the following condition holds:

8

Condition 1.
ρ = ρj = 1 for all j
Under Condition 1, equations (2) and (5) imply that Pt (i) = Ptj = 1. Hence, all prices are
constant and equal to one. This directly implies that we must have wtk (i) = wk (i) = Aki and
wIk (i) = γIk wk (i). Thus, all occupational wages are also constant.
It is straightforward to verify that under Condition 1 we must have
Z

1

Yt =

Lt (i)di
i=0

3

A Pandemic
We shall now study the outbreak of a pandemic in the context of the special case of the model

outlined in Section 2.3 above. Suppose that starting at some date t = 0, a fraction 0 of the
population becomes infected with the virus. Hence, the measure I0 = 0 L0 of individuals becomes
infected. This information is public knowledge. Infection can be spread in multiple ways. Our focus
is infection through the workplace, but we also allow for infection through random association (e.g.
through leisure activities), and through consumption activities, such as retail. We assume that
these second types of infection cannot be avoided, but individuals can reduce risk by choosing to
work at home.3
In the following we shall denote the lifetime utility value of susceptible, infected and recovered
individuals in occupation i at date t with V S (i, t), V I (i, t), V R (i, t), respectively. It will prove useful
to first describe the choices of recovered agents, then those of infected agents and finally the choices
of susceptible agents.

3.1

Recovered individuals

Recovered individuals are those who contracted the disease and survived. They are as productive
in the labour market as susceptible individuals. The choices of a recovered agent i at date t working

3

Endogenous choice of activities with respect to leisure and shopping activity are of course important, but our
objective in this study is essentially on the implications of the pandemic for the labour market and employment
differences across occupations.

9

in location j = h, m are determined by
n
o
V Rh (i, t) = ln wh (i) + βMax V Rh (i, t + 1), V Rm (i, t + 1)
n
o
V Rm (i, t) = ln wm (i) + βMax V Rh (i, t + 1), V Rm (i, t + 1)

Since the continuation values from both home and market work (the second terms on the right
hand side of the two equations above) are the same, the threshold occupation for recovered agents
is given by
wh (īR ) = wm (īR )
This defines the measure of occupations in which recovered agents work in the market as θR = 1−īR .
Crucially, the constancy of occupational wages implies that this measure of recovered agents working
in the market remains constant over time.
The preceding implies that (a) a recovered agent in occupation i chooses to always work at
home or always in the market; (b) V Rk , k = h, m remains constant over time; and (c) the threshold
īR remains constant. We collect these results in the following:
ln wh (i)
1−β
ln wm (i)
V Rm (i, t) = V Rm (i) =
1−β
n
o
(1 − β)V R (i) = Max ln wh (i), ln wm (i)
V Rh (i, t) = V Rh (i) =

3.2

Infected individuals

To determine the lifetime utility of an infected agent V I (i), we assume that infected individuals
can earn wIh (i) in home work, and wIm (i) in market work. As noted above, we assume that wIh (i) <
wh (i) and wIm (i) < wm (i) for all i. The assumptions capture the realistic scenario of an infected
worker being less productive than a healthy worker. Infected individuals recover with probability
πR and die with probability πD . These probabilities are assumed to be time invariant in the current
formulation.

4

4

In subsequent analysis we can allow for πD to vary based on the degree of congestion in the capacity of the
health system.

10

An infected individual’s value functions from working either at home or in the market are
defined as
h
n
o
i
V Ih (i, t) = ln wIh (i) + β (1 − πR − πD )Max V Ih (i, t + 1), V Im (i, t + 1) + πR V R (i, t + 1)
h
n
o
i
V Im (i, t) = ln wIm (i) + β (1 − πR − πD )Max V Ih (i, t + 1), V Im (i, t + 1) + πR V R (i, t + 1)
The cutoff market occupation for the set of infected individuals will be determined by V Ih (īI , t) =
V Im (īI , t). Since the continuation values from both market work and home work today are identical,
the cutoff condition reduces to
wIh (īI ) = wIm (īI )
The associated measure of occupations with infected people working in the marketplace is θI =
1 − īI . Note that the constancy of occupational wages implies that both īI and θI are constant
over time.
These results can be collected in the following expressions:

ln wIh (i) + βπR V R (i)
1 − β(1 − πR − πD )
ln wIm (i) + βπR V R (i)
V Im (i, t) = V Im (i) =
1 − β(1 − πR − πD )
n
o
V I (i) = Max V Ih (i), V Im (i)
V Ih (i, t) = V Ih (i) =

In deriving these expressions we have used the fact that the lifetime value of a recovered agent
V R (i) is a constant over time. We established that above.

3.3

Susceptible individuals

Having described the choices of recovered and infected agents, we now turn to susceptible agents.
For these individuals, their current choices have implications for their utility continuation values
since susceptible agents are at risk of contracting the virus.
There are three ways in which an individual can get infected. The first is through interactions
with infected people while working in the market, which we denote by πtm . The second is in the
11

process of random interactions with infected people, through physical closeness in leisure activities
or through travel, for instance. We denote this risk by πtI . Finally, we allow for infections through
consumption activity, intended to capture the interaction of individuals through retail activity. We
denote this risk as πtc . While πtI and πtc are common to all susceptible individuals, the risk of
infection at work is specific to agents who choose to work in the market rather than at home. πtc ,
πtI and πtm fluctuate over time as the market participation of agents changes in the economy and
as the overall number of infected people changes.
When there is a risk of infection from market work, the value functions for a susceptible individual in occupation i are
h
n
oi
V Sh (i, t) = ln wh (i) + β (πtI + πtc )V I (i) + (1 − πtc − πtI )Max V Sh (i, t + 1), V Sm (i, t + 1)
h
n
oi
V Sm (i, t) = ln wm (i) + β (πtm + πtI + πtc )V I (i) + (1 − πtm − πtI − πtc )Max V Sh (i, t + 1), V Sm (i, t + 1)
where V I (i) is the function that we solved for above.
From the point of view of a susceptible person, the probability of being infected in the market
place is equal to πm =

Stm Itm
Stm

= Itm . Individuals take this probability of getting infected to be

given exogenously when they make their decisions regarding market versus home work in their
occupations.
The cutoff īS is determined by
h
n
oi
ln wh (īS ) = ln wm (īS ) + βπtm V I (īS ) − Max V Sh (īS , t + 1), V Sm (īS , t + 1)

We now prove the following result that will be crucial in characterizing the solution:

Condition 2. V I (i) < Max V Sh (i, t), V Sm (i, t) for all i and all t.5
Proposition 1. Condition 2 is necessary and sufficient for the threshold occupation īSt to be increasing in the probability of infection πtm .

5

There always exists a weakly positive wage from home or market work which will guarantee that this condition
holds.

12

Proof. From the expressions for V Sh (i) and V Sm (i) above we get
h
n
oi
V Sh (i, t) − V Sm (i, t) = ln wh (i) − ln wm (i) − βπtm V I (i) − Max V Sh (i, t + 1), V Sm (i, t + 1)
Differentiating this with respect to πtm gives

 h
n
o
i
∂ V Sh (i, t) − V Sm (i, t)
Sh
Sm
I
=
Max
V
(i,
t
+
1),
V
(i,
t
+
1)
−
V
(i)
∂πtm
This derivative is positive under Condition 2. The threshold condition is V Sh (īS ) = V Sm (īS ). Since
∂ [V Sh (i)−V Sm (i)]
m > πm.
> 0, it follows that V Sh (īS , t + 1) > V Sm (īS , t + 1) if and only if πt+1
t
∂π m
t

m > π m since ln w m (i) − ln w h (i) is increasing in i.
Hence, the threshold īSt+1 > īSt when πt+1
t

Q.E.D.

Corollary 1. Along paths with a falling probability of infection from market work πtm , the threshold
occupation īS declines so that more occupations become market based over time, or θS = 1 − īS
rises.
The Proposition says that as long as getting infected reduces lifetime utility sufficiently, a
higher risk of infection raises the benefit of working from home. Consequently, along paths with
monotonically rising πtm , the threshold θS falls as īS rises.
More generally however, during the evolving dynamics of the pandemic, πtm will typically be nonmonotonic, rising initially as more infected individuals come in contact with susceptible individuals,
but then falling as both the population of infected and susceptible individuals falls. In this case, īS
will move in a non-monotonic direction also. The path of īS is then determined by the peak value
of π m that is attained as the pandemic spreads. In this case we can establish Proposition 2
Proposition 2. Take a sequence of infection probabilities π1m . . . πTm such that π1m < π2m < . . <
m , and π m > π m
m
πM
M
M +1 > . . . > πT .
m , īS is governed by the dynamics:
Then for πtm < πM

h
i
ln wh (īS ) = ln wm (ī) + βπtm V I (īS , t + 1) − V sh (īS , t + 1)
h
i
V Sh (i, t) = ln wh (i) + β (πtI + πtc )V I (i) + (1 − πtc − πtI )V Sh (i, t + 1)

13

m , īS is governed by the dynamics:
and for πtm > πM



ln wh (īS ) = ln wm (ī) + βπtm V I (īS , t + 1) − V Sm (īS , t + 1)


V Sm (i, t) = ln wm (i) + β (πtm + πtI + πtc )V I (i) + (1 − πtm − πtI − πtc )V Sm (i, t + 1)

Proof. This follows directly from the proof of proposition 1 when combined with the non-monotonic
path of πtm

Q.E.D.

Proposition 3. Under Condition 2, the threshold occupation of susceptible individuals, īSt , is
greater than the threshold for recovered agents īR for all t. Hence, the share of occupations under
market work is greater for recovered individuals than susceptible agents, or θR > θtS .
Proof. The cutoff condition for recovered agents can be written as ln wm (īR ) − ln wh (īR ) = 0. The
threshold condition for susceptible agents is
h
n
o
i
ln wm (īS ) − ln wh (īS ) = βπtm Max V Sh (īS , t + 1), V sm (īS , t + 1) − V I (ī) > 0
where the last inequality holds under Condition 2. Since ln wm (i) − ln wh (i) is rising in i, we must
have īSt > īR . The statement on the share of market occupations for types R and I follows trivially
as θj = 1 − īj for j = R, I.

3.4

Q.E.D.

Occupation populations

The absolute measures of individuals working in the market in this economy at any date t is
the sum of susceptible, infected and recovered individuals working in market occupations: Ptm =
Stm + Itm + Rtm . The number of market workers within each group is given by
Stm

Z

1

=

St (i)di

(11)

It (i)di

(12)

Rt (i)di

(13)

īS
t
Z 1

Itm =
Z
m
Rt =

īI
1

īR

Equation 11 is the measure of susceptible individuals engaged in market work.
14

Since infections are dependent on whether susceptible individuals work in the market or at
home, we also need to describe the evolution of occupation specific populations in each of the three
groups S, I and R. The evolution of susceptible agents in occupation i is given by

St+1 (i) =



St (i) − St (i)Itm − πc CtS (i)CtI − πSt (i)It if i > īSt

St (i) − πc C S (i)C I − πSt (i)It
t
t

(14)

if i ≤ īSt

where  is the matching rate which generates new infections through work and π is the probability
of infection from random contact between susceptible and infected people. πc is the exogenous
probability of getting infected due to random interaction between consumption of the susceptible
and infected individuals. CtS denotes aggregate consumption of susceptible individuals while CtI is
total consumption of infected individuals. We shall solve for these below. In deriving the above,
we have used the fact that only susceptible agents in occupations that are provided in the market,
i > īSt , risk getting infected.
Integrating Equation 14 over all occupations gives the evolution of the number of susceptible
individuals as
St+1 = St − Stm Itm − πc CtS CtI − πSt It

(15)

Similarly, the number of infected people in occupation i evolves according to

It+1 (i) =



(1 − πR − πD )It (i) + St (i)Itm + πc CtS (i)CtI + πSt (i)It if i > īSt

(1 − πR − πD )It (i) + πc C S (i)C I + πSt (i)It
t
t

(16)

if i ≤ īSt

Integrating Equation 16 over all occupations gives the evolution of infected individuals in the
economy as
It+1 = (1 − πR − πD )It + Stm Itm + πc CtS CtI + πSt It

(17)

Lastly, the measure of recovered individuals in occupation i is given by

Rt+1 (i) = Rt (i) + πR It (i)

15

(18)

Integrating this over all occupations yields the evolution of recovered agents as

Rt+1 = Rt + πR It

(19)

Noting that the total population is Lt = St + It + Rt , we can sum equations 15, 17 and 19 to get
the evolution of the total populations as

Lt+1 = Lt − πd It

We assume that the initially infected population is distributed proportionally across all occupations so that

3.5

S0 (i) = (1 − ε0 )L0 (i)

(20)

I0 (i) = ε0 L0 (i)

(21)

R0 (i) = 0

(22)

Consumption

Aggregating over consumption by all individuals in each occupation gives the occupation specific
aggregate consumption as

CtS (i) = cSt (i)St (i)
CtI (i) = cIt (i)It (i)
CtR (i) = cR
t (i)Rt (i)

Hence, total consumption in the economy, which must be the sum of consumption by each
group, is
Z
Ct =



CtS (i) + CtI (i) + CtR (i) di = CtS + CtI + CtR

i

16

(23)

3.6

Government

The government maintains a balanced budget by rebating all its tax revenues through lump
sum transfers to individuals. This implies that

Gt = gt Lt = τ

m

Z

1
m
m m
m
Am
i {St (i) + γI It (i) + Rt (i)} di

(24)

i=0

3.7

Market clearing

We conclude the description of the key relationships by describing the market clearing condition
for the final good. Since, the government rebates all tax revenues to individuals in the form of lump
sum transfers we have
C t = Yt

4

(25)

Quantitative Results
We now turn to quantifying the special case of the model under Condition 1 where all the

elasticities of substitution between occupations in producing the sectoral output and between sectors
in the final goods technology are equal to unity, as are the sectoral weights. Recall that in this
special case, GDP becomes just a sum of all the occupational outputs. The model has a number
of margins that affect outcomes. We flesh out some of these through comparative static exercises
on the parameters that control these margins.

4.1

Calibration

There are ten key parameters in the model. The parameters are mostly taken from Eichenbaum et al. (2020). They calibrate the probability parameters , πC , and π to jointly match the
probabilities of infection from consumption, market work and random interactions in the USA.
They estimate these probabilities by combining the estimates of Ferguson et al. (2006) with the
Bureau of Labour Statistics 2018 Time Use Survey and the 2018 BLS data on total workers. Their
estimates imply that 16 percent of transmissions occur during consumption, 17 percent at work
and remainder are through random interactions.
We follow Atkeson (2020) in assuming that it takes 18 days to either recover from the virus
17

Table 1: Parameter Values for Calibration
Target Variable
Parameter
Probability of random infection
π
Probability of infection while consuming
πC
Probability of infection through market work ε
Probability of death
πD
Probability of recovery
πR
Share of work-from-home
ı̄
Weekly discount factor
β
Relative home productivity of infected
γIh
Relative market productivity of infected
γIm
Initial fraction infected
0

Value
0.40
1.5924e-07
0.11
0.002
0.387
0.06
0.999
0.8
0.8
0.001

or die from it. Since our time unit is a week, we set πD + πR = 7/18. Based on South Korean
data, Eichenbaum et al. (2020) estimate the mortality rate from the virus to be 0.5 percent. This
yields individual estimates for πR and πD . The baseline values for the relative productivity of
infected people is set to 0.8. They set this value based on the China Center for Disease Control and
Prevention’s estimate that 80 percent of infected people are asymptomatic and that symptomatic
individuals withdraw from work. The values of the discount factor and the initially infected are
also taken from Eichenbaum et al. (2020).
We estimate the share of individuals engaged in occupations classified as fully working from
home at 6 percent. This is based on estimates from the 2016 Canadian Census. The weekly
discount factor is computed by using the annual discount factor of 0.96 and converting it to its
weekly equivalent. Lastly, we start the pandemic off by assuming that there an exogenous infection
of 0.1 percent of the population at an initial date t = 0. The values for these parameters that we
use for the simulations are given in Table 1.

4.2

Data

We implement the model using occupations mapped into the share of occupations in British
Columbia using the National Occupational Classifications (NOC) from Statistics Canada Labour
Force Survey and partly from the Canadian Census of 2016. Figure 1 shows the different occupations
at the 2 digit NOC level with their share based on the November 2019 Labour Force Survey (left
hand side axis) as well as the measure of each occupation that reported some degree of working
from home from the Canadian 2016 census (right hand side axis).
18

Figure 1: NOC occupations and ‘Work From Home’

Figure 2 reports the change in employment by occupation from February to April, 2020, and
then from April 2020 to June 2020 (based on May Labour Force Survey from Statistics Canada).
Each change is weighted by the share of the occupation in the total labour force. The first two
months of the pandemic saw job losses on almost 400 thousand in BC. Hardest hit were occupations
in service sectors such as customer service sales representatives, and service support occupations.
Other occupations, such as senior managers, were almost untouched. In addition, occupations
related to essential services, such as nursing occupations, or occupations in front line protection
services increased in employment during the first period. The June Labour Force Survey then
shows a pick-up of approximately 200 thousand jobs from the April low point. The message from
Figure 2 indicates substantial heterogeneity in job losses among occupations.
The model set out above does not have an explicit role for unemployment. We assume each
occupation either works at home or in the market. However, we can connect the model to the data
by interpreting large job losses among occupations which face a major loss of income from home
working as being equivalent to unemployment, while other occupations such as senior management
or professional occupations in business and finance can easily remain in the category of being
employed while either continuing to work from home or switching to work from home following the
outbreak of the pandemic.

19

1.5

Figure 2: Change in Occupational Employment, February to June, 2020
1

0.5

0

Labourers in processing, manufacturing and…
Assemblers in manufacturing
Processing and manufacturing machine…
Processing, manufacturing and utilities…
Harvesting, landscaping and natural…
Workers in natural resources, agriculture…
Supervisors and technical occupations in…
Trades helpers, construction labourers and…
Transport and heavy equipment operation…
Other installers, repairers and servicers and…
Maintenance and equipment operation trades
Industrial, electrical and construction trades
Service support and other service…
Sales support occupations
Service representatives and other customer…
Sales representatives and salespersons -…
Service supervisors and specialized service…
Retail sales supervisors and specialized sale s…
Technical occupations in art, c ulture,…

-2

Apr-June
Feb-Apr

Professional occupations in art and culture

-1.5

20

Care providers and educational, legal and…
Occupations in front-line public protection…
Paraprofessional occupations in legal, social,…
Professional occupations in law and social,…
Professional occupations in education services
Assisting occupations in support of health…
Technical occupations in health
Professional occupations in health (except…
Professional occupations in nursing
Technical occupations related to natural and…
Professional occupations in natural and…
Distribution, tracking and scheduling co-…
Office support occupations
Finance, insurance and related business…
Administrative and financial supervisors and…
Professional occupations in business and…
Middle management occupations in trades,…
Middle management occupations in retail…

Estimating the home wage schedule
4.3

Specialized middle management occupations

-1

Senior management occupations
-0.5

There are two complications in mapping the available data on occupation distribution and wages

to the model. The first is that in the steady state of the model, occupations are characterized by
either all individuals working from home or in the market. The data however reveals a mix of
market and home work shares in each occupation. A second issue is the measurement of wages. In
the model individuals make labour supply decisions on the basis of occupation specific wages for

home versus market work. While we do have occupation specific wages from Census 2016, these
are equilibrium wages and in most cases refer to wages paid for working in the market. We do not
observe home wages separately.

We get around the first problem by adopting a threshold approach to classifying occupations

into working from home or in the market. Specifically, we classify all occupations with work-

from-home shares above the threshold to be entirely working from home while those below are

classified as working in the market. In a 2017 survey by Regus (2017) approximately 10 percent

of workers reported that they work exclusively from home. The 2016 Canadian census reports,

for each occupation, the share of workers who work from home. In order to match the overall 10

percent share of home work, we choose the threshold share of working from home as λ̂ = 0.194

6.

This represents the 90th percentile in the occupational distribution of work-from-home shares.

This chosen threshold leaves four occupations (professional occupations in art, insurance, middle
management, and senior management) that are classified as entirely working from home in the
initial steady state.
In order to map the model to the data we also need a measure of wages from working at home
in each occupation. Since our data on occupational wages only reveals equilibrium wages, the home
wage schedule for workers who work exclusively in the market during normal times needs to be
imputed. In order to make progress, we start with the assumption that the difference between the
home and market wage schedule in any occupation is a linear, increasing function of the ease of
performing the occupation specific tasks from home. We proxy the ease with which tasks can be
performed from home in an occupation by the fraction of workers in that occupation who work
from home.
Using λ(i) to denote the share of workers in an occupation that works from home, the home
wage schedule is computed as
h

i
wh (i) = wm (i) 1 + λ(i) − λ̂

(26)

where wm (i) is the median weekly wage in occupation i. Hence, occupations with home work
shares below the threshold will have home wages below the market wage while those with home
work shares above the threshold will have home wages that exceed the market wage. As noted
above, our data contains information on 40 2-digit occupations. Data on occupation wages comes
from the Census 2016.
Figure 3 shows the estimated relative home wage schedule along with the work-from-home
shares in all the occupations in our data.
In the following we shall use this estimated home wage premium schedule to determine optimal
choices by individuals within each occupation.

6

The employment share of individuals working at home over all occupations is estimated at 10 percent. But the
model definition of working at home instead requires that we compute the employment share of those occupations
which are performed at home. This estimate from the data is 6 percent.

21

Figure 3: Estimated Relative Home Wage Schedule
1.2

Relative home wage

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

Fraction working from home
0.2

0

4.4

Results

We now show the dynamics of the model starting from a steady state when 0.1 percent of the
population gets exogenously infected with a contagious virus. We start by showing the dynamics in
the baseline case of the model with parameter values as in Table 1. Figure 4 depicts the dynamic
behaviour of the key variables. The time unit for our analysis is weeks.
The solid blue line shows the dynamics in the baseline case of the model. The infection rate
peaks at slightly under 5 percent after around 7 months from the initial infection. The pandemic
kills a cumulated 0.25 percent of the population. These numbers imply that for a country with 30
million people, 1.5 million people get infected while 75,000 people die. Currently in Canada, total
reported cases are 128,000. But it is widely understood that infection rates are much higher than
actually counted in tests. The CDC in the US estimates that infection rates are up to 10 times
those officially reported Mandavilli (2020). With this adjustment, the infection rates implied by
the model are of the same magnitude as suggested by the data.
The economic costs of the pandemic occur due to both a decline in market employment as well
as a fall in productivity due to infection. At the deepest point of the recession, which occurs at the
same time as the peak of the infections, market employment falls by around 45 percentage points
22

Figure 4: Endogenous versus Exogenous Choice of Market and Home Work

while output and consumption decline by over 5 percent relative to steady state. These numbers
appear to be in line with the initial estimates of job losses and output contractions reported from
Canada and around the world.
A distinguishing feature of the model is that private agents endogenously select into market
versus working from home. Figure 4 shows the crucial role played by these endogenous work
choices made by individuals. The dashed black line shows the dynamic macro-pandemic responses
when the work location choices of individuals are shut down completely. The dashed lines in the
figure show that when work choices are constrained to remain at the pre-pandemic level, the peak
infection rate and the cumulated death rate is 2 percentage points and 0.05 percentage points higher,
respectively, than in the endogenous choice case. The higher infection and death rates occur due to
people continuing to work in the market instead of withdrawing to working from home. Relative
to the endogenous choice case, consumption declines by almost 4 percentage points less in the
exogenous choice case. Clearly, the effect of endogenous choice of work location is quantitatively
substantial.

23

4.5

Temporary Lockdowns

Countries globally have chosen various degrees of lockdowns to fight the spread of the infection.
This aspect of policy behavior can be captured in the model through taxes on market production.
How effective is shutting down markets in reducing the prevalence of infections? How costly is it?
Figure 5 shows the effect of two different lockdown intensities. The first is a lockdown for 36 weeks
with a τ = 0.05. The second is a shorter lockdown of 12 weeks but more intense with τ = 0.12.
The figure also shows the baseline case of τ m = 0 with the solid line. The dashed black line depicts
the case with τ m = 0.05 and the dashed red lines corresponds to τ m = 0.12.
Figure 5: Varying the Intensity of a Lockdown

Figure 5 makes clear that a more intense but shorter lockdown of market work for 12 weeks
does not materially alter either the peak infection rate or the cumulated number of deaths. It
essentially delays the peak by the duration of the lockdown. Market employment collapses by over
40 percentage points on impact of the shock with attendant output losses of almost 3 percent relative to steady state. However, these effects are relatively short lived as the end of the lockdown
results in a rapid recovery of market employment. Interestingly, the economy begins a fresh con-

24

traction in market employment and output after the end of the lockdown, but this is entirely due
to the endogenous response of individuals sheltering from infections and from the continuing rise
of infections in the economy.
The other case is where the lockdown is less intense with τ = 0.05 but lasts for 36 weeks. Figure
5 shows that this longer lockdown does have the effect of significantly lowering the peak infection
rate by 1 percentage point relative to the baseline. This policy is also less costly in terms of output.
The reasons are twofold. First, the initial collapse in market work is lower under the less intense
lockdown. Second, the lockdown lasts long enough to ensure that the pandemic reaches its peak
before the program ends. Consequently, there is no renewed endogenous decline in market work
and output after the end of the program.
An interesting feature of the temporary lockdown policies is that they have little impact on the
long run outcome of the pandemic, in terms of total infections and deaths. This contrasts sharply
with the impact of endogenous shifts out of market work. Comparing Figure 5 with Figure 4, we see
that the final death rate from the pandemic is reduced from 0.3 to 0.25 percent of the population
through endogenous response of individuals in their occupation location choices, which in itself
represents a temporary phenomenon. The additional reduction in deaths coming from lockdowns
is negligible.
While each of these policies have some impact on the infection curve, neither manages to
completely ’flatten the curve’ as described in media discussion of pandemic responses. Figure
6 shows a drastic lockdown policies, involving τ = 0.20 imposed for 52 weeks. This causes an
immediate and complete shift to working from home for all occupations, and significantly reduces
infections and final death rates, but this comes at a huge cost in terms of overall consumption.

5

Robustness of Results
Amongst the various assumptions underlying the baseline model, three appear to be potentially

crucial. First, the model assumes that the infection risk from working in the market is common
across all occupations. Second, we assumed that utility is log-linear in consumption. This leaves
open the question of the sensitivity of the model to the degree of risk aversion. Third, the size of
the output losses as well as the attitude to exposing oneself to the risk from market work has to

25

Figure 6: An Extreme Lockdown Policy

be dependent on the productivity of labour contingent on becoming infected. We now examine the
importance of these three margins.

5.1

Occupation-Specific Risk

Thus far we assumed that π m was independent of occupation i. This is a strong assumption.
The exposure to infection risk varies across occupations due to occupation specific characteristics
like proximity to others at work, the degree of IT intensity of the occupation, the number of people
one has to interact with at work, etc.. Using the VSE Risk-Tool, 2020, one can construct a 2digit NOC occupation level risk index. Figure 7 depicts the variation in this risk index across
occupations. The figure clearly indicate that different occupations experience different degrees of
infection risk, quite separately from their market versus home wage premium. Does this matter?
We examine the importance of occupation-specific risk by modifying the model. Recall that the
probability of getting infected through market work was πtm = Itm . We now modify this to
m
πit
= i Itm

26

Figure 7: Indices by Occupation

In order to compute the occupation-specific infection risk we first compute the mean risk factor
across all occupations based on the VSE risk tool. We then define the risk factor proportionality
of each occupation as

zi =

VSE risk index for occupation i − Mean risk index
Mean risk index

Using this, we compute the occupation-specific infection risk parameter i as

i =  (1 + zi )

where  is the common risk parameter that we were using before. Figure 8 compares the responses
of the model under occupation specific risk with those under common risk. The dashed lines are the
responses under common risk while the solid lines are the responses under occupation-specific risk.
The key point to note is that the differences are relatively minor. Put differently, the results that we
obtained under common infection risk across occupations are robust to accounting for occupation
specific risk.

27

Figure 8: Occupation-specific Infection Risk

5.2

Role of risk aversion

We now examine the importance of the degree of risk aversion of individuals in driving the
dynamics of the pandemic.
To study the importance of risk aversion, we assume that the periodic utility function of individuals is linear:
u(ct ) = ct
Figure 9 shows the key dynamics of the economy under risk neutrality. For comparison, we also
plot the responses under log-linear preferences, which was the baseline case. Figure 9 makes clear
that risk aversion is a key parameter underlying the effect of endogenous choices. The responses
when individuals are risk neutral are much closer to the responses under exogenous choices. This
is intuitively obvious. The greater the risk aversion of the individual, the more she avoids market
work when it entails the risk of exposure to infection.

28

Figure 9: Role of Risk Aversion

5.3

Costs of infection

The main focus of our work is on the salience of the individual’s endogenous response to minimize
the exposure risks posed by the pandemic. A key factor in assessing this risk is the impact of
infections on earnings potential. In our model, there are two consequences of becoming infected.
First, during the duration of the infection the individual’s productivity declines by 1 − γIm percent
for market work and 1 − γIh percent for home work. As γIm and γIh become smaller, the cost of
infection becomes higher. The second consequence of infection is the risk of death, which occurs
with probability πD . The higher this probability the greater the expected cost of infection. We
now explore the sensitivity of the responses to these two margins.

5.3.1

Productivity of infected

In our baseline simulations, we assumed that γIm = γIh = 0.8. To examine the sensitivity of
results to this parameter we compute the model responses to two different values: γIm = γIh = 0.9
and γIm = γIh = 0.6. Figure 10 shows the responses. The figure shows that a lower γI lowers the

29

Figure 10: Role of productivity when infected

peak infection rate by a full percentage point while also delaying the peak. The infection rises more
slowly and also declines less rapidly when γI = 0.6 relative to the baseline case. As a result, the
probability of infection perceived by susceptible individuals, π m , rises and falls more slowly relative
to the baseline. From Proposition 1 we know that more occupations switch to home work as the
probability of infection rises. This can be seen in the slower decline and rise of market employment
when γI = 0.6 relative to the baseline of γI = 0.8. This pattern is mirrored in the path of overall
consumption which declines more slowly but also recovers more slowly over time.
The fact that the probability of infection falls more while the share of market employment
declines less under a lower γI might seem counterintuitive at first glance. The reason for this is the
lower consumption of the infected. Since productivity of the infected is lower, their consumption
levels are lower now relative to the baseline case. Since the probability of susceptibles becoming
infected while consuming is proportional to the consumption of the infected, the overall infection
probability declines as γI falls. The lower risk exposure due to lower consumption of the infected
also open up greater space for risk taking by susceptibles who respond by withdrawing less from
risky market work.
30

5.3.2

Probability of death

The baseline simulations assume a mortality rate of 0.5 percent which implies that pid is 0.2
percent. We investigate the robustness of our results when pid is 0.5 percent (mortality rate of 1.29
percent).
Figure 11: Role of probability of death

Figure 11 shows that a higher probability of death lowers the peak of infection rate by 2
percentage points compared to the baseline scenario. The death rate increases dramatically from
0.2 percent to 0.6 percent. Risk averse individuals respond to a higher probability of dying by
further reducing market work. The share of individuals working in the market drop from 40
percent to 20 percent. But since now individuals with higher market productivity shift to working
from home, the effect on consumption is now more pronounced. Consumption falls by 8 percent
relative to steady state when the probability of death is higher compared to 5 percent. Thus, a
higher mortality rate increases the economic costs of the pandemic.

31

5.4

Which Occupations stay home?

Our model is calibrated to the BC labour force categorized according to the National Occupational Classification. We have described how occupations differ both according to the ease of
work from home and the infection risk in the labour market. It is interesting to see what the model
predicts for the distribution of market exits by occupation. Figure 12 lists the occupations that exit
the market and for how long, in the baseline case and in response to the two lockdown scenarios,
in the case of constant infection risk across occupations.
As one would expect, with constant risk, the occupations exiting the market are those whose
opportunity cost is lower - particularly professional occupations with less customer or client physical interaction. We see also that the lockdown policies have a relatively minor impact upon the
occupations that exit the market and the duration of exit.
Figure 12: Occupations exiting the market

When we introduce occupation specific risk, Figure 13 shows that the type of occupations exiting
the market changes quite considerably. Now individuals in ‘risky’ occupations such as health, retail,
or front line protection choose to exit market work. But comparing Figures 12 and 13 it is still true

32

that most of the time outside the market is accounted for by occupations with a lower opportunity
cost of working from home. This holds both for the baseline case and for the lockdown experiments.
This observation helps to explain the result in 8 above, where we saw that the model simulations
under constant risk and occupational specific risk differ by only a minor degree.
Figure 13: Occupations exiting the market

6

Distributional Consequences of Pandemics
The coronavirus epidemic has clearly disrupted economic life globally. Along with the aggregate

contractionary effects, it has also had huge distributional consequences. Recent work by Chetty
et al. (2020) uses credit card payments data to show that the overall consumption decline between
January and June 17, 2020 was 8.9 percent. However, underneath this overall decline lies huge
variation. This is shown in Panel (a) of Figure 14 which shows that during this period spending
by consumers in zip codes with the top quartile of median income declined by 13.3 percent while
spending by those in zip codes in the bottom quartile of incomes fell by a meagre 2.8 percent.
More broadly, the figure shows that the spending in the richest zip codes declined the most on

33

impact of the pandemic and has shown the slowest recovery. In contrast, spending fell the least in
the poorest zip codes and recovered fastest. Panel (b) of Figure 14, following simulations from our
Figure 14: Consumption distribution: by quartiles

(a) Data
(b) Model
Note: The figure in panel (a) is from the Opportunity Insights Economic Tracker. Work
using this data can be found in Chetty et al. (2020).
model shows the model counterparts consumption responses by quartile for the baseline simulation.
These responses are generated from the version of the model without any lockdowns, or for τm = 0.
A few features of panel (b) are noteworthy. First, as in the data, the consumption of the
lowest income quartile in the model recovers the fastest while the consumption recovery of the
top quartile is the slowest. Second, up to about 16 weeks after the start of the infection, the
consumption declines are positively ordered by the income quartiles: the largest declines are for
the richest quartiles followed by the 3 quartile, 2nd and poorest quartiles. This also fits the
qualitative features in panel (a). We should note that this is even without accounting for the the
transfer payments (made both in Canada and the US) that were directed at the relatively poorer
income groups.
Panel (b) of Figure 14 also suggests that even though the lowest income groups have held up
their consumption levels up until now, there may be significant consumption declines ahead for
this group as their incomes decline due to more infections that are induced by their inability to
substitute into home production. This is due to the fact that the lower income groups are mostly
34

in occupations where the home wage premium is negative and large.

7

Conclusion
We have developed a simple macro model which, in conjunction with a standard SIR model, gives

to rise to endogenous cycles in both infections and output. The model has the standard interaction
between economic and infection outcomes. Economic market activity increases infection risks while
lockdowns reduce infections at the cost of deeper recession. The key innovation of our model is
that it focuses on occupations and the endogenous choice by individuals whether to work in the
market or from home.
The quantitative results from the model calibrated to Canadian data from the 2016 census
suggest that the endogenous response of private agents to market risk can be significant with
the peak infection rate being 1 percentage point lower than when private supply of market work
is exogenously given. Correspondingly, the output loss at the deepest point (the trough) is 4
percentage points greater under the endogenous choice case.
Our results have a key policy implication. Since individuals are willing to pay to insure themselves against infection risk by withdrawing from the market, opening up the economy may not lead
to a sharp recovery. Until people develop confidence about the safety of market activity, they will
continue to self-isolate. While self-isolation may not be an option for people in occupations that
are intensive in social interactions, their returns from market activity are often dependent on the
market consumption activity by others. If a significant share of people withdraw from consuming
in the market, upstream suppliers of these services and goods will suffer income and job losses as
a result. Our results suggest that this effect can be quantitatively high. Dealing with this confidence problem may involve spending on intensive testing rather than direct fiscal infusions into the
economy.
The model also provided interesting insights into the effects of lockdowns. We found that intense
but shorter lockdowns do not materially change the infection dynamics or the cumulated number of
deaths except for marginally postponing the peak of the infection. Longer and possibly less intensive
lockdowns on the other hand may be more effective in lowering the infection peak. However, they
have the opposite effects on the economic costs of the pandemic. The shorter but more intensive

35

lockdown has lower cumulated output costs relative to the longer but milder lockdown.

References
Acemoglu, D., V. Chernozhukov, I. Werning, and M. Whinston (2020). A Multi-Risk SIR Model
with Optimally Targeted Lockdown. NBER Working Paper No. 27102 .
Alvarez, F. E., D. Argente, and F. Lippi (2020). A Simple Planning Problem for COVID-19
Lockdown. NBER Working Paper No. 26981 .
Atkeson, A. (2020). What Will Be the Economic Impact of COVID-19 in the US? Rough Estimates
of Disease Scenarios. NBER Working Paper 26867 .
Bodenstein, M., G. Corsetti, and L. Guerrieri (2020). Social distancing and supply disruptions in
a pandemic. Covid Economics - Vetted and Real-Time Papers (19), 1–52.
Brodeur, A., D. Gray, A. I. Suraiya, and J. Bhuiyan (2020). A Literature Review of the Economics
of COVID-19. IZA DP No. 13411 .
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, N. Hendren, M. Stepner, and The Opportunity Insights Team (2020).
How Did COVID-19 and Stabilization Policies Affect Spending and Employment? A New RealTime Economic Tracker Based on Private Sector Data. NBER Working Paper No. 27431 .
Dingel, J. and B. Neiman (2020). How Many Jobs Can be Done at Home? NBER Working Paper
26948 .
Eichenbaum, M., S. Rebelo, and M. Trabandt (2020). The Macroeconomics of Epidemics. NBER
Working Paper 26882 .
Ferguson, N. M., D. A. T. Cummings, C. Fraser, J. C. Cajka, P. C. Cooley, and D. S. Burke (2006).
Strategies for mitigating an influenza pandemic. Nature 442 (7101), 448–452.
Goolsbee, A. and C. Syverson (2020). Fear, Lockdown, and Diversion: Comparing Drivers of
Pandemic Economic Decline 2020. NBER Working Paper No. 27432 .
Hur, S. and M. Jenuwine (2020). Lessons on the Economics of Pandemics from Recent Research.
Economic Commentary (Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland) (2020-11), 1–7.
36

Jones, C., T. Philippon, and V. Venkateswaran (2020). Optimal Mitigation Policies in a Pandemic:
Social Distancing and Working from Home. NBER Working Paper 26984 .
Krueger, D., H. Uhlig, and T. Xie (2020). Macroeconomic Dynamics and Reallocation in an
Epidemic. NBER Working Paper No. 27047 .
Mandavilli, A. (2020). Actual Coronavirus Infections Vastly Undercounted, C.D.C. Data Shows.
Regus (2017). The workplace revolution. Technical report.

37

