                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 FIRM-LEVEL RISK EXPOSURES AND STOCK RETURNS
                            IN THE WAKE OF COVID-19

                                          Steven J. Davis
                                         Stephen Hansen
                                    Cristhian Seminario-Amez

                                       Working Paper 27867
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27867


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




We thank the Becker Friedman Institute for Research in Economics for financial assistance.
Davis also thanks the U.S. National Science Foundation (SES 1324257). Hansen gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council (Consolidator Grant
864863). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27867.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Steven J. Davis, Stephen Hansen, and Cristhian Seminario-Amez. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Firm-Level Risk Exposures and Stock Returns in the Wake of COVID-19
Steven J. Davis, Stephen Hansen, and Cristhian Seminario-Amez
NBER Working Paper No. 27867
September 2020
JEL No. E44,G12,G14,G18

                                          ABSTRACT

Firm-level stock returns differ enormously in reaction to COVID-19 news. We characterize these
reactions using the Risk Factors discussions in pre-pandemic 10-K filings and two text-analytic
approaches: expert-curated dictionaries and supervised machine learning (ML). Bad COVID-19
news lowers returns for firms with high exposures to travel, traditional retail, aircraft production
and energy supply -- directly and via downstream demand linkages -- and raises them for firms
with high exposures to healthcare policy, e-commerce, web services, drug trials and materials that
feed into supply chains for semiconductors, cloud computing and telecommunications. Monetary
and fiscal policy responses to the pandemic strongly impact firm-level returns as well, but
differently than pandemic news. Despite methodological differences, dictionary and ML
approaches yield remarkably congruent return predictions. Importantly though, ML operates on a
vastly larger feature space, yielding richer characterizations of risk exposures and outperforming
the dictionary approach in goodness-of-fit. By integrating elements of both approaches, we
uncover new risk factors and sharpen our explanations for firm-level returns. To illustrate the
broader utility of our methods, we also apply them to explain firm-level returns in reaction to the
March 2020 Super Tuesday election results.

Steven J. Davis                                  Cristhian Seminario-Amez
Booth School of Business                         Department of Economics
The University of Chicago                        University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                       1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637                                Chicago, IL
and NBER                                         USA
Steven.Davis@ChicagoBooth.edu                    seminarioamez@uchicago.edu

Stephen Hansen
Imperial College Business School
South Kensington Campus
London SW7 2AZ
United Kingdom
stephen.hansen@imperial.ac.uk
1         Introduction
The economic disruption wrought by COVID-19 is unprecedented in modern times.
Real GDP fell 11 percent in the United States and 15 percent in the Euro area in
the first half of 2020, easily the largest drops since World War II. The International
Monetary Fund forecasts the sharpest global output contraction on record in 2020.1
Because its effects differ so greatly across sectors and firms, the COVID-19 shock is
also likely to drive large-scale reallocation activity. Recent survey evidence (Barrero
et al., 2020) and historical evidence (Davis and Haltiwanger, 1992) suggest that most
of the reallocation response will involve shifts across firms within industries.
        Indeed, firm-level stock returns differ enormously in reaction to COVID-19 news
and policy responses. To highlight this point, Figure 1 plots daily market-level returns
against the same-day interquartile range of firm-level returns on all trading days in
2019 – and on 20 “jump” days from 24 February to 27 March 2020 when the market
rose or fell by at least 2.5%. Jump days show an extraordinary dispersion in firm-level
returns. On 18 March, for instance, the 75th percentile stock had a one-day return
advantage of 6.9 percentage points over the 25th percentile, more than 15 standard
deviations greater (in 2019 units) than the average cross-firm IQR in 2019. Recent
earnings announcements also underscore the asymmetric impact of COVID-19, with
Amazon and Facebook reporting Q2 2020 revenue growth of 40% and 11%, respectively,
both large upside surprises amidst a bleak earnings outlook for many firms.
        We use the discussions of Risk Factors in pre-pandemic 10-K filings to characterize
firm-level risk exposures, explain firm-level equity returns on jump days, and interpret
the drivers of those returns. The basic idea is simple: When the language firms use
to describe their risks explains their stock price reactions to news about the pandemic
(or other news), it reveals information about the channels through which the market
expects the pandemic to affect their future earnings. We implement this idea in multiple
ways. We focus on jump days, because the news event that drove market reactions on
    1
    See series GDPC1 (United States) and CLVMEURSCAB1GQEA19 (Euro area), both retrieved
from FRED on 16 August 2020, and (IMF, 2020) for the global output forecast.


                                               1
                                                                                              ŷ = 1.0 + 0.45 max{0, x} + 0.45 max{0, −x}
     Daily Cross-Security IQR of Equity Returns, %
                                                                                                  (0.04) (0.05)          (0.06)
                                                     Mar 16                                                                       Mar 24
                                             7                                    Mar 18
                                                                                    Mar 23

                                                                                                                                  Mar 13
                                                                               Mar 20                                  Mar 17

                                                                Mar 09
                            4




                                                       Mar 12                                                     Mar 10
                                                                                Mar 27                                Mar 26
                                                                           Mar 11         Mar 03                 Mar 02
                                                                                    Feb 24
                                                                             Feb 27
                                                                                        Feb 25                 Mar 04
                                                                                Mar 05
          1




                                                      -12                -6.75               -1.5              3.75                        9
                                                                            Daily Average of Equity Returns, %
                                                                   COVID-19 and Economic Fallout        Monetary Policy Easing
                                                                   Fiscal Policy Stimulus               Super Tuesday Aftermath
                                                                   Oil Price Crash                      Unclassified
                                                                   All trading days in 2019


 Figure 1: Value-Weighted Mean and Cross-Sectional IQR of U.S. Equity Returns,
                Daily for 2019 and for Large Daily Jumps in 2020
 We consider the value-weighted distribution of daily returns over 2,155 common stocks for all
 trading days in 2019 and all 20 jump days in 2020 through 27 March. The mean (s.d.) of the
 daily average return in 2019 is 0.12 (0.80) percent, and the mean (s.d.) of the daily IQR is 1.29
 (0.36). The regression has 271 observations and an R-squared of 0.66, with standard errors in
 parentheses. A test of the null hypothesis that the two rays have equal slopes with opposite signs
 yields a p-value of 0.99. Jump classifications follow Baker et al. (2020a), who rely on human
 readings of next-day newspaper accounts.



those dates is usually apparent. In this regard, we rely on the classifications in Baker
et al. (2020a), who consult next-day articles about the stock market jump in the New
York Times and the Wall Street Journal. For the vast majority of COVID-era jump
days, the two newspapers advance a common explanation for the jump.
   Our results show that the text in 10-K filings contains highly granular, quantifiable
information about the forces that drive firm-level returns. For example, bad news about
COVID-19 lowers returns for firms with high exposures to travel, aircraft production,
traditional retail and energy supply – directly and via downstream demand linkages –


                                                                                              2
and raises them for firms with high exposures to healthcare policy, e-commerce, web
services, drug trials and materials that feed into supply chains for semiconductors,
cloud computing and telecommunications. We also find that the structure of firm-level
return reactions differs systematically with the type of news that drove the market,
as captured by the jump classifications. For example, on jump days attributed to
monetary policy easing, firm-level returns depend on exposures to inflation, interest
rates, and real estate rather than exposures that matter in reaction to pandemic news.
   As the use of text-as-data expands in economics and finance (Gentzkow et al.,
2019a), it becomes ever more important to explore the strengths and weaknesses of
different text-analytic methods. Under the widely-used dictionary approach (Tetlock,
2007; Loughran and Mcdonald, 2011; Baker et al., 2016), the researcher relies on expert-
curated term sets to characterize and quantify the information content in relevant text
documents. After extracting content measures, the researcher uses them to explain
outcomes of interest. In our implementation of the dictionary approach, we use the
term sets that Baker et al. (2019) apply to interpret aggregate stock market volatility.
   A newer approach, growing in popularity, is supervised machine learning (ML).
Under this approach, an algorithm selects the terms in a very large feature space
that are useful in explaining an outcome of interest. To implement the ML approach,
we adopt the multinomial inverse regression (MNIR) method introduced by Taddy
(2013) and recently applied in economics by Gentzkow et al. (2019b). We adopt MNIR
because of its relative simplicity, its similarity to discrete-choice statistical models, and
its successful application in other economic settings.
   MNIR differs in two major respects from the dictionary approach. First, it considers
all terms that appear in the discussions of Risk Factors as candidates for explaining
returns. The set of all terms is an order of magnitude larger than the term sets
encompassed by the curated dictionaries. Second, MNIR weights each term based
on the strength of its association with the outcome of interest (firm-level returns, in
our case). In contrast, dictionary approaches typically weight terms based on their
frequency in the text documents of interest and perhaps in external sources as well.

                                             3
   Despite their differences, we find a remarkable congruence in predicted firm-level
returns between the dictionary and ML approaches. Return predictions from one
approach vary one-for-one, on average, with predictions from the other approach. In
addition, the adjusted R2 values in cross-sectional return regressions vary closely across
jump days under the two approaches. At the same time, MNIR achieves a uniformly
higher adjusted R2 . For example, our MNIR model explains one-half of firm-level
abnormal return variation on pandemic fallout days, as compared to one-third under
the dictionary approach. The superior fit arises entirely because MNIR draws on a
much larger feature space, as we show, rather than on other differences between the two
approaches. By tapping a much larger feature space, MNIR captures many systematic
aspects of the firm-level return structure that the dictionary approach misses.
   However, it is hard to obtain clear insights from raw MNIR results. To address this
challenge, we proceed in steps. First, we identify seed terms that MNIR weights highly
in explaining firm-level returns. In a second step, we use the seeds to automatically
generate a set of related terms based on similarity of linguistic context and MNIR
weights. Third, we prune the automatically generated lists to obtain term sets that
define our new risk exposure categories. This process for developing exposure categories
and associated term sets draws on both our high-dimensional MNIR model and our
domain expertise. In this sense, it incorporates elements of both ML and expert-
curated dictionary approaches. Armed with our new term sets, we quantify firm-level
exposures to each category. Finally, we incorporate the firm-level exposure measures
in straightforward regression models that yield easily interpretable results.
   When we apply this hybrid approach, we obtain a much richer characterization
of the forces that drive firm-level returns. It is how we uncover the role of expo-
sures to social distancing restrictions, drug trials, e-commerce and more. It is also
how we uncover the role of downstream demand linkages. For example, downstream
exposure to aircraft production predicts negative firm-level returns in reaction to bad
COVID-19 news. The same news predicts positive returns for firms with high exposures
to specific metals (e.g., tantalum and tungsten) that are critical for semiconductors,

                                            4
lasers, integrated circuits and for cloud computing and telecommunications. Acemoglu
et al. (2016) show how downstream demand shocks operate in theory by propagating
upstream through the production network.2 Our results highlight the role of the pro-
duction network for understanding the effects of the COVID-19 shock. While evidence
of COVID-19’s impact on final consumer spending is now plentiful (Andersen et al.,
2020; Baker et al., 2020b; Carvalho et al., 2020; Chetty et al., 2020; Cox et al., 2020;
Surico et al., 2020), we show that its impact on input demands is also important.
       Dictionary methods and supervised ML are sometimes seen to occupy opposite ends
of a methodological spectrum. Our study shows they are complements as much as sub-
stitutes. In this regard, our hybrid approach to uncovering risk factors and constructing
associated term sets is useful more broadly. As a further illustration, we use the hybrid
approach to characterize returns the day after the 2020 Super Tuesday elections. The
market rose 4% in reaction to these elections, widely regarded as a decisive victory for
Joe Biden that greatly raised his chances of securing the Democratic nomination. We
again apply our hybrid approach to uncover risk factors, build associated term sets,
and use them to explain firm-level returns. We find that Super Tuesday drove nega-
tive returns for firms with high exposure to hotels, gambling, fracking, and financial
management; and positive returns for firms with high exposure to healthcare, health
insurance, REITs, property rentals, communications and construction. Our hybrid
approach lends itself to many other applications as well, including text-based analyses
of what drives other outcomes.
       An active literature considers how firm-level equity returns have responded to
COVID-19. Here, we take note of a few studies that are particularly relevant to ours.
Hassan et al. (2020) use natural language processing methods and human readings to
quantify what firms say about COVID-19 and other infectious diseases in their earnings
calls. They aggregate over their firm-level measures to show how sentiments related to
COVID-19 vary by country and time.3 They also show that equity returns are lower
   2
     Other relevant theoretical analyses include Long and Plosser (1983), Atalay (2017), and Baqaee
and Farhi (2019). See Carvalho and Tahbaz-Salehi (2019) for a review.
   3
     Stephany et al. (2020) use the text in 10-K filings to track the evolution of COVID-related concerns


                                                   5
in 2020 for firms that express greater concern about COVID-19 in their earnings calls.
Our approach yields much more granular measures of business risk exposures, which we
use to explain firm-level return reactions to distinct types of news events. Our reliance
on 10-K filings before the pandemic struck yields an ex ante characterization of risk ex-
posures rather than an ex post one. Our approach also yields a fuller characterization
of risk exposures, because firms face legal and financial liabilities for failing to disclose
material risks in their regulatory filings (Mast et al., 2020). In contrast, earnings calls
tend to focus on a limited set of salient concerns.
    Papanikolaou and Schmidt (2020) and Pagano et al. (2020) use industry differences
in employee ability to work from home (WFH) to explain firm-level returns (and other
outcomes) in the wake of COVID-19. Their evidence fits well with our finding that bad
COVID-19 news triggers positive return reactions at firms with high exposure to web
services, the demand for which rises with reliance on remote interactivity. However, our
evidence about firm-level returns is largely distinct from the evidence in their study and
others that use industry-level variation to characterize risk exposures. When we control
for industry fixed effects, our text-based measures continue to have ample explanatory
power for firm-level returns, underscoring how risk exposures and return reactions vary
greatly even among firms in the same industry.
    Laeven (2020) finds that social distancing measures adopted in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic affect firms partly through input-output linkages. Ramelli and
Wagner (2020) stress the role of upstream supply shocks due to disrupted exports from
China, especially in the early stages of the pandemic. We focus on the period during
which COVID-19 emerged as a global, rather than Chinese, health crisis and find an
important role for many aspects of supply-chain linkages in driving firm-level abnormal
return reactions to news about COVID-19.
    A broader finance literature uses the Risk Factors to study equity returns, but
few papers incorporate machine learning methods. Hanley and Hoberg (2019) and
Lopez Lira (2019) use unsupervised learning approaches to group 10-K words into
at aggregate and industry levels.


                                             6
clusters that correlate with stock returns. Ke et al. (2019) propose a supervised learn-
ing framework for predicting stock returns using media text data, which they show
outperforms standard sentiment dictionaries at return prediction. Our study is more
focused on organizing terms into interpretable categories that inform our understanding
of what drives firm-level return reactions to common shocks.
    Our study proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses our data sources, the dictionary
approach, and MNIR. Section 3 presents results based on the dictionary approach.
Section 4 implements the MNIR approach, establishes a close relationship between the
return predictions generated by the two approaches, and shows that MNIR delivers
better fitting models. We also show that a standard clustering algorithm applied to
MNIR return predictions sorts jump days into categories that align closely with the
classification that Baker et al. (2020a) derive from next-day newspaper accounts of large
market-level moves. It is both remarkable and reassuring that two entirely different
methods, drawing on such dissimilar text sources, yield similar classifications of jump
days. Section 5 develops and implements our hybrid approach, first applying it to
pandemic-related jump days and then to Super Tuesday. Section 6 concludes.



2     Data and Empirical Methods

2.1    Firm-level returns and other financial measures

We consider daily returns for 2,155 equity securities on the 20 jump days from 24
February to 27 March that Baker et al. (2020a) identify and classify. To compute
returns, we obtain daily closing prices (PRCCD) of common equities traded on AMEX,
NYSE and NASDAQ from the Compustat North America Security Daily file. We
account for stock splits, dividends, etc. using the daily adjustment factor (AJEXDI)
and the daily total return factor (TRFD) in the same Compustat file. We restrict
attention to U.S.-incorporated firms with share prices quoted in U.S. Dollars. See
Appendix A for more information about our sample.


                                           7
       Figure B.1 displays an analog to Figure 1 that considers the cross-firm standard
deviation of daily returns in place of the IQR. Figures B.2 to B.4 display histograms of
daily market-level returns, the IQR of firm-level returns, and the standard deviation of
firm-level returns for trading days in 2019 alongside analogous statistics for the jump
days in 2020. These figures reinforce the chief message of Figure 1: The jump days
in our sample are extreme events with respect to both market-level returns and the
dispersion of firm-level returns.
       Our main outcomes of interest are firm-level abnormal returns constructed in the
standard way. Specifically, we generate daily security-level abnormal returns for jump
days as the difference between (i) a stock’s actual return in excess of the risk free rate
and (ii) its expected excess return per the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM):
                                           
                                    pi,t                                         
                    Abni,t   = log              − Rf,t − betai × RM,t − Rf,t                       (1)
                                   pi,t−1

where pi,t denotes the adjusted share price for stock i on day t, Rf denotes the four-
week treasury bill rate (a proxy for the risk free rate), betai is the stock’s CAPM beta,
and RM is the value-weighted average market return. We estimate each stock’s beta
using an OLS regression of its daily excess return on the contemporaneous market-level
excess return in the sample of all trading days in 2019.
       Our statistical models for (abnormal) returns include two controls for financial
characteristics. The first is a measure of the firm’s equity market capitalization, Mcapit ,
computed as shares outstanding (CSHOC) times closing price per share.4 The second
is firm leverage, computed as (long term debt (DLTT) + current liabilities (DLC))
divided by total assets (AT). We use the most recent data in the Compustat file for
this purpose, yielding leverage values based on fiscal year 2019 (2018) for 89 (11)
percent of firms. Appendix Table B.1 reports descriptive statistics for these and other
variables used in our firm-level analyses.
   4
    In a slight abuse of notation, we often refer to i as a firm whereas it actually indexes stocks. In
the few cases where a firm has multiple stocks, we assign the same Mcapit value to each one.




                                                   8
2.2    The Risk Factors text in 10-K files

Since 2006 (for fiscal year 2005), the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has
required the vast majority of publicly held firms to include a discussion of Risk Factors
(RF ) in Part 1a of their annual 10-K filings. The SEC advises that these discussions
include any item that could impact future earnings. Investors can sue for compensation
if the firm omits material information or risks (Mast et al., 2020). We use RF texts
filed from 2010 to July 2016. (Machine-readable versions are available from EDGAR.)
This choice of years mitigates the role of idiosyncratic language in a single filing and
ensures that any relationship we find between the RF text and returns in 2020 reflects
persistent risk exposures that long predate the arrival of COVID-19.
   Appendix A describes how we pre-process the raw text files to obtain documents
composed of words and phrases. After pre-processing, there are 18,911 unique terms
that appear a total of 57 million times in our RF corpus. The large number of terms
necessitates some form of dimension reduction, which we accomplish in two distinct
ways: first, curated dictionaries that identify terms of interest and organize them into
categories; second, Taddy’s (2013, 2015) MNIR model, which operates on all terms.


2.3    Empirical approach 1: Curated dictionaries

We adopt the dictionaries of Baker et al. (2019), who expand on ones previously devel-
oped by Baker et al. (2016) and Davis (2017). One attraction of these dictionaries is
their detail. They include 16 dictionaries that cover aspects of economic and financial
conditions and another 20 that pertain to policy areas. Each one contains numerous
terms that effectively define the dictionary’s category. The construction of these dic-
tionaries reflects the input and judgment of expert economists drawing on textbooks,
newspaper articles, 10-K filings, and “their own knowledge of economic matters and
input from other economists in seminars and personal communications.” Baker et al.
(2019) show that these dictionaries are useful for tracking and interpreting movements
in stock market volatility, which is conceptually related to stock market jumps.


                                           9
      The dictionaries contain 430 terms that appear in our RF corpus, 244 after remov-
ing rare terms at the pre-processing stage.5 These 244 terms appear nearly 1.4 million
times, constituting 2.4% of the RF corpus. The RF texts for a given firm contain 28
distinct dictionary terms on average (standard deviation of 10) and 642 instances of
dictionary terms (standard deviation of 620). To quantify a firm’s exposure to a given
risk category, we identify sentences in its RF texts that contain at least one term in the
corresponding dictionary.6 After computing the fraction of such sentences in each of
the firm’s RF texts, we calculate the average fraction. In this way, we obtain 36 firm-
level exposure values, one for each category and its associated dictionary. Descriptive
statistics for these firm-level exposure measures appear in table B.1.


2.4      Empirical approach 2: Multinomial inverse regression

MNIR treats the RF texts for each firm i as a bag-of-words represented by a V -
dimensional vector xi of terms or “features.” xi,v is the count of term v for firm i, and
V = 18, 911 is the number of unique terms in our RF corpus. At the firm level, the
average number of nonzero elements in xi is 2,245, with a standard deviation of 891.
      Many popular machine learning approaches to text analysis in economics and fi-
nance (e.g., latent Dirichlet allocation) represent documents in a latent space of “top-
ics.” These approaches reduce the dimensionality of text but can yield topics that lack
clear relationships to the outcomes of interest. MNIR models the relationship between
the terms in xi and the outcomes of interest directly. The resulting statistical structure
is similar to ones that arise in standard econometric models of discrete choice. Taddy’s
(2013) original MNIR model was inspired by an economics application (Gentzkow and
Shapiro, 2010), and it has been further applied in Gentzkow et al. (2019b). These obser-
vations suggest that MNIR is a promising tool for the text-based analysis of firm-level
  5
     Three Baker et al. (2019) dictionaries – foreign trade exposure, immigration policy, and
government-sponsored enterprises – contain only rare terms. We drop these three categories in our
implementation of the dictionary approach. Retaining them has little impact on the results.
   6
     We handle plurals using the NLTK WordNet Lemmatizer. For example, “recession” and “reces-
sions” are both captured by the “Broad Quantity Indicators” category reported in Appendix A.3.



                                               10
returns and for exploring how machine learning methods can extend and complement
the use of dictionary methods in economics and finance.
   MNIR posits xi ∼ MN(qi , Ni ), where qi is a multinomial V -dimensional probability
                                                                             P
vector and Ni is the total number of terms in firm i’s RF texts (i.e., Ni = v xi,v ).
The probability of feature v for firm i is

                                         exp(av + yiT bv )
                               qi,v   = P             T
                                                             ,                          (2)
                                          v exp(av + yi bv )


where yi = (Abni , ci ) contains firm-i abnormal returns on a given day or collection of
days and firm controls ci ∈ RP . (We suppress time subscripts here.) av is a parameter
that controls for the baseline frequency of term v in the corpus, and bv is a P + 1
vector of coefficients that describe how firm observables map to the probability that
term v appears in the RF texts.
   Equation (2) describes a multinomial logistic regression over V categories, which we
fit to 2,155 observations (per jump day), one per firm. The outcome being modeled is
the probability that a particular term in V appears in a random draw from the firm’s
RF texts. The fitted model delivers 18,911 estimated probabilities for 2,155 firms.
The non-standard aspect of (2) is the high dimensionality of V . So, we estimate (2)
using Bayesian regularization methods with a Gamma-Laplace prior structure on the
regression coefficients. (This estimation method is a more flexible form of the standard
LASSO penalty, one that admits coefficient-specific penalization.) The selection of
the prior trades off goodness-of-fit and model complexity via the maximization of an
information criterion to avoid over-fitting (see Taddy, 2013 and Taddy, 2015 for details).
   We seek to use RF text features to predict returns, while (2) models the inverse
relationship of term probabilities given returns. To move from estimates of (2) to a
forward regression with Abni as the dependent variable, we follow Taddy (2013) and
                                             P
define a sufficient reduction projection zi = v xi,v b1,v with the property Abni ⊥ xi |
zi , Ni , ci . Thus, conditional on the scalar projection zi , the high-dimensional raw data
contain no extra predictive information for returns. This result does not specify the


                                              11
functional form for relating zi to Abni in a forward regression, but it says we can model
Abni as a function of zi , Ni , ci , while disregarding xi .


2.5     Why two empirical approaches?

We adopt two distinct approaches to the analysis of firm-level equity returns for two
reasons. First, we want to compare their strengths and weaknesses in a rich, concrete
setting. Second, we want to explore whether and how empirical researchers can enrich
their text-based analyses by combining elements of both approaches.
   A clear advantage of the dictionary approach is it simplicity and transparency. Its
implementation does not require the estimation of a first-stage statistical model, as
in the inverse regression model (2). It relies instead on domain expertise, as codified
in the dictionaries, to organize and quantify the text data and to use the resulting
quantification to explain outcomes of interest.
   A key advantage of MNIR (in common with all supervised learning models) is the
ability to use all terms in the text corpus to explain the outcomes of interest. In
our context, that means using the RF texts to explain systematic aspects of firm-
level return reactions to pandemic-related news and other common shocks. Our MNIR
model considers all 18,911 terms in our RF corpus, while the dictionary approach
considers only 244 terms organized into 36 categories. As a result of its much larger
feature space, MNIR can potentially capture aspects of the firm-level returns structure
that the dictionary approach misses.
   Two claims often arise in comparisons between dictionary and ML methods. First,
that dictionary methods more readily yield results with clear interpretations. Second,
that ML methods require less need for domain expertise or its costly codification.
Each claim contains a kernel of truth, but the reality is more complex in our setting.
In particular, dictionary methods often but not always yield easy-to-interpret results.
We show how to use ML methods to sharpen the interpretations of dictionary-based
results. Conversely, we also show how to use dictionary methods and domain expertise


                                              12
to interpret results that emerge from an MNIR implementation of the ML approach.



3     Results Based on the Dictionary Approach
To implement the dictionary approach, we fit regression models for daily firm-level
returns via least-squares estimation. Our models have the following form:

                 J
                 X
       Abnit =         βj RExpji + βJ+1 Leveragei + βJ+2 log(Mcapit ) + γs(i) + it ,    (3)
                 j=1



where Abnit is firm-i’s abnormal return on day t, RExpji is its exposure to risk category
j = 1, 2, ..., 36, Leveragei and Mcapit are the financial controls defined earlier, and γs(i)
are NAICS2 fixed effects. Apart from fixed effects, all regressors enter (3) in standard
deviation units. We fit (3) separately for each jump day or collection of same-type
jump days according to the classification in Figure 1. When fitting to a collection of
days, we use average values of Abnit and log(Mcapit ) for the days in question. The
collection of fiscal policy jumps includes three days with a positive market return and
one, 23 March, with a negative return in reaction to a delay in passing a fiscal relief
bill. To account for this sign flip, we multiply firm-level abnormal returns on 23 March
by -1 before averaging over days.
    Table 1 reports estimates of (3), suppressing coefficients that are insignificant at
the 10 percent level. Our simple model explains much of the (very large) abnormal
return variation on jump days: Adjusted R2 values range from 20% the day after
Super Tuesday to 33% on pandemic fallout days and 36% for the March 9 Oil Price
Crash. While not our focus, we observe that the financial controls are important return
predictors. Market cap is a highly significant return predictor on jump days and,
consistent with the evidence in Alfaro et al. (2020) and Ramelli and Wagner (2020),
more leveraged firms perform worse in reaction to bad news about the pandemic.
    Many of our dictionary-based exposure measures are also significant return predic-
tors. As seen in Column (1), firms with high exposures to inflation, credit indicators,

                                             13
                   Jump Classification −→              (1)               (2)                  (3)               (4)                (5)
     Dependent Variable: Abnit                    COVID-19 and      Monetary Policy      Fiscal Policy     Super Tuesday        Oil Price
                                                   Its Fallout         Easing              Stimulus           Election           Crash
     General Economic Categories
      Inflation                                   −0·21   (−2·5)     0·92     (4·7)                         0·24    (3·5)     0·28      (1·9)
      Interest Rates                                                 0·78     (5·4)     0·31      (1·9)     0·13    (1·9)    −0·63    (−3·4)
      Credit Indicators                           −0·29   (−4·1)    −0·68   (−3·4)     −0·21    (−1·8)
      Labor Markets                                                                                                            0·34    (1·8)
      Real Estate Markets                                            0·51     (2·2)      0·45    (2·8)      0·44    (2·8)
      Business Investment and Sentiment                                                  0·31    (5·0)
      Consumer Spending and Sentiment                               −0·36   (−1·9)
      Commodity Markets                                             −0·41   (−2·0)                        −0·37    (−2·7)    −1·73    (−6·6)
      Healthcare Matters                                             0·62     (2·0)
      Litigation Matters                                                                                                       0·34    (2·4)
      Competition Matters                                           −0·37   (−1·8)
      Intellectual Property Matters                0·45    (6·2)                       −0·61    (−6·9)    −0·29    (−2·9)      0·59    (3·0)
     Policy-Related Categories
      Taxes                                       −0·28   (−2·1)                         0·48    (3·4)
      Entitlement and Welfare Programs            −0·49   (−2·9)                                                             −0·84    (−3·0)
      Monetary Policy                                                                  −0·30    (−2·3)    −0·25    (−2·1)    −0·36    (−2·9)
      Financial Regulation                         0·12    (1·8)                        0·29      (2·8)   −0·29    (−5·1)




14
      Competition Policy                                             0·32     (2·0)
      Intellectual Property Policy                                                       0·14    (2·2)
      Energy and Environmental Regulation         −0·19   (−2·2)    −0·31   (−2·1)       0·21    (4·1)                       −1·52    (−3·1)
      Housing and Land Management                                                        0·07    (1·8)
      Other Regulation                                               0·25     (3·2)      0·24    (3·6)
      Healthcare Policy                            0·31     (1·9)                                                              1·06    (5·8)
      Transportation, Infrastructure, Utilities   −0·16   (−2·6)
      Elections and Political Governance                                                                  −0·10    (−2·9)    −0·36    (−2·0)
     Financial Controls
      Log Market Cap                               0·53     (7·3)    0·73     (3·0)      0·68    (4·5)     0·66      (4·8)    1·00      (4·4)
      Leverage                                    −0·42   (−3·0)    −0·85   (−2·8)       0·40    (2·9)    −0·12    (−0·8)    −0·72    (−2·5)
     Observations [Adjusted R2 ]                   2155   [0.329]    2155   [0.232]     2155    [0.285]    2155    [0.199]    2155    [0.361]

                                   Table 1: Regression Results Based on Dictionary Approach
       The dependent variable is the daily firm-level (average) abnormal equity return on February 24, 25, 27 and March 3, 5, 11, 16, 18,
       27 in Column (1); March 2, 17 in Column (2); March 10, 23, 24, 26 in Column (3); March 4 in Column (4); and March 9 in Column
       (5). Each column considers the 36 dictionary-based exposure measures plus log market cap, leverage, and 2-digit NAICS fixed
       effects as controls. The t statistics reported in parentheses are computed by clustering errors at the NAICS2 level. For presentation
       purposes, we omit coefficients on dictionary categories that are insignificant at the 0.1 level.
taxes, entitlement programs, energy and environmental regulations, and transportation,
infrastructure and utilities react especially negatively to bad news about the pandemic
and its economic fallout. Firms with high exposures to intellectual property and health-
care policy perform relatively well in reaction to bad pandemic news. As reported in
Table B.1, 21 firms (1% of our sample) have intellectual property exposures more than
3.5 standard deviations greater than the mean exposure, which implies a one-day pos-
itive abnormal return differential on pandemic fallout days of at least (0.45)(3.5)=
1.6 percentage points for these firms.7 The intellectual property category is especially
relevant for pharmaceutical firms, as its dictionary includes “patent” and “new drug
application.” Thus, the large, positive coefficient on intellectual property fits well with
the view that bad news about the severity of the COVID-19 pandemic is relatively
good for firms that own or develop healthcare-related intellectual property.
       Looking across the columns in Table 1, the structure of firm-level return reactions
differs systematically by jump type. For example, jumps attributed to monetary policy
easing yield large positive return reactions for firms with high exposures to inflation
and interest rates but not to intellectual property or transportation, infrastructure and
utilities. Jump days attributed to fiscal policy news generate the largest return reac-
tion at firms with high exposure to the tax category. Firms exposed to tax-sensitive
categories like real estate and business investment also outperform on fiscal policy jump
days. However, the precise interpretation of some of these patterns is unclear. The tax
category, for example, captures exposures to both high taxes and the potential for large
tax credits (e.g., for R&D or investment). This example illustrates the interpretation
challenges that can arise under the dictionary approach.
       Several exposure measures play a role in driving firm-level return reactions to the
Super Tuesday elections, including real estate, commodity markets, intellectual prop-
erty, and financial regulation. These reactions reflect revised assessments of Job Biden’s
   7
    Examples include Universal Display Corporation with an intellectual property exposure 5.7 stan-
dard deviations greater than the mean exposure, Editas Medicine, Inc. (5.6), Interdigital, Inc. (5.4),
Dicerna Pharmaceuticals (5.1), Gilead Sciences (4.9), Kindred Biosciences (4.7), Biolife (4.5), Qual-
comm (4.4) and Blueprint Medicines (4.0).



                                                 15
(and Bernie Sanders’) prospects of becoming the Democratic Party’s presidential nomi-
nee, how the general election campaign would play out in view of the expected nominee,
and the likelihood that Donald Trump would win re-election. The revision in assess-
ments affect relative returns positively at firms exposed to real estate, for example, and
negatively at firms exposed to commodity markets, e.g., oil and gas companies.
       The Oil Price Crash came with a huge 7.9 percentage point drop in the overall stock
market on 9 March. As reported in Column (5), firms with high exposure to commodity
markets and energy and environmental regulations experienced especially large stock
price drops. Consider a firm at the 99th exposure percentile for commodity markets.
According to Table B.1, this firm’s commodity markets exposure is 4.6 standard devi-
ation units greater than the average firm’s exposure. Thus, conditional on the other
covariates in (3), the estimated model predicts that the 99th percentile firm has one-
day negative abnormal return differential of (−1.73)(4.6) = −8.0 percentage points.
This calculation illustrates a broader point: Some firms have extremely high exposures
to one or a small number of risk categories. As a result, big shocks that pertain to
particular exposure categories can drive very large firm-level return differentials.8
       To summarize, our implementation of the dictionary approach yields an initial
characterization of firm-level reactions to various market-moving news events in the
wake of COVID-19. Some ambiguities arise when seeking to interpret the results,
perhaps because the dictionaries were not specifically designed to characterize stock
market behavior on our particualr jump days. Moreover, as we have stressed, the
dictionary approach taps only a small fraction of the RF corpus.
   8
     Given this, one might worry about our exclusion of dictionary terms that appear rarely in the RF
corpus. While rare overall, these terms might capture important exposures at a few firms. To assess
this concern, we ran jump-day regressions using exposure measures based on the full set of 430 terms
in Baker et al. (2019) and compared them to the ones based on our more limited set of 244 terms.
Figure B.5 plots the adjusted R2 for each pair of regressions across days and shows they are nearly
identical. Thus, nothing is lost in our application by dropping the rare dictionary terms.




                                                 16
4     Exploiting the Full RF Corpus

4.1    How much gain in fit from MNIR?

We estimate the inverse regression (2) separately for each jump day or collection of
days with controls cit = (Leveragei , log(Mcapit ), γs(i) ). Our forward regression is


         Abnit = α1 zit + α2 Ni + α3 Leveragei + α4 Log(M capit ) + γs(i) + εit ,        (4)


which we estimate by ordinary least squares. Ni is the number of terms in firm i’s RF
texts, and zit is the sufficient reduction projection that summarizes the information in
the inverse regression. We first examine the gain in fit achieved by MNIR relative to
the dictionary approach. To do so, we separately estimate (3) and (4) for each of the
17 jump days covered by Table 1.
    There are two reasons why MNIR might have greater explanatory power. First, (2)
allows more flexibility in the relationship between returns and terms. Because (2) is fit
with regularization, terms are selected or not based on the strength of their association
with returns. Moreover, selected terms can have different regression coefficients. In
contrast, the dictionary approach constrains all terms in the same category to have the
same relationship to returns. There is, for instance, no down weighting of terms in a
given dictionary that are less helpful in quantifying return-relevant exposures. Second,
MNIR operates on a vastly larger feature space. Insofar as there is useful information
about returns in the 18,667 terms (= 18, 911 − 244) not classified in the dictionaries,
we expect MNIR to achieve a better fit. To distinguish between these two possible
reasons for a better fit, we also estimate MNIR using just the 244 dictionary terms. To
summarize, we fit three sets of regressions and obtain three sets of adjusted R2 values
corresponding to (i) the dictionary approach, (ii) MNIR based on the 244 dictionary
terms, and (iii) MNIR based on all 18,911 terms.
    Figure 2 displays the results. Figure 2a shows that the two approaches achieve
essentially the same fit when using the same terms, and that this result holds across


                                            17
jump days. That is, the greater flexibility of MNIR in how it relates returns to terms
does not materially improve goodness of fit. Whatever interpretation value the dictio-
nary approach offers by organizing terms into categories does not come at the expense
of model fit – at least not in our application with our dictionaries.



        ŷ = 0.015 + 0.995 x                                    ŷ = 0.201 + 0.817 x
            (0.008) (0.041)                                         (0.020) (0.100)




       (a) Restricted Feature Space in MNIR                       (b) Full Feature Space in MNIR

      Figure 2: R2 achieved via Dictionary and Machine Learning Approaches
     This figure plots the adjusted R2 from regressions (3) and (4). The left panel displays
     results when using only the 244 dictionary terms as inputs into the MNIR model, while
     the right panel displays results when using all terms. Each plot presents a fitted regression
     line that relates the R2 values (solid black line), along with 95% confidence intervals
     corresponding to the shaded region. The dashed line is the 45-degree line.


   Figure 2b compares the dictionary approach to the MNIR implementation that
uses all terms in the RF corpus. Here, we see a uniformly better fit for MNIR. The
fit gain is large: The adjusted R2 value is roughly 20 percentage points higher under
MNIR on all jump days. The implication is that, at least in our setting, the supervised
machine learning approach more fully explains returns entirely because it considers a
much larger set of terms than the dictionary approach.
   Figure 2b carries a subtler message than supervised learning fits better. In particu-
lar, there is a close, approximately one-for-one relationship across jump days between

                                                  18
the R2 values for the two approaches. The confidence interval for the slope coefficient
relating the R2 values contains 1. This result suggests that MNIR and the dictionaries
draw on similar information to explain returns, since their ability to do so is highly
correlated across jump days. Next, we develop this point more fully.


4.2    Comparing predicted firm-level returns

Figure 3 plots fitted values for abnormal returns using the dictionary approach against
the corresponding MNIR predictions (using all terms). To construct this figure, we fit
abnormal return models separately for the 17 jump days to obtain 36,635 predictions
under each approach. Remarkably, the regression line that relates the two sets of
predicted outcomes is indistinguishable from the 45 degree line. In other words, the
predicted firm-level return from the dictionary approach is an unbiased estimate of the
MNIR prediction. This result also holds on each individual jump day.
   One might worry that this one-for-one relationship is an artifact of including indus-
try fixed effects under both approaches. To check this, we drop industry effects and
refit models that focus on the text-based measures. Figure B.7 displays the results.
In the pooled sample, we continue to find a near one-for-one relationship in fitted ab-
normal returns between the two approaches. There is also a close, near one-for-one
relationship on most – but not all – individual jump days. For example, the regression
slope is only 0.822 on 24 March. Thus, the striking result in Figure 3 is not an artifact
of industry effects or the consequence of some other mechanical effect.
   While predictions under the two approaches coincide on average, predicted return
distributions differ in the higher moments. Figure 4 summarizes the predicted ab-
normal return distributions under several specifications. The dispersion of predicted
returns is similar when including sector fixed effects alone or dictionary measures alone
(including financial controls in both cases), as shown by comparing the second and
third box plots in Figure 4. Using both industry effects and dictionary measures yields
somewhat greater dispersion in predicted returns. Using MNIR yields a considerably


                                           19
                         ŷ = −0.002 + 1.012 x
                              (0.015) (0.004)




      Figure 3: Fitted Values from Dictionary and Machine Learning Approaches
      This figure plots fitted values from regressions (3) and (4), pooled across all 17
      dates. It also presents a fitted regression line that relates the two (solid black
      line). Confidence bands are omitted from the graph due to their narrowness at
      standard levels. The dashed line is the 45 degree line.


more dispersed distribution of predicted returns, confirming that it captures additional
return-relevant information in the RF corpus.


4.3     Text-based measures and narrow industry classifications

We now ask whether our text sources and methods capture information about returns
beyond what is captured by narrow industry definitions. An affirmative answer provides
evidence about firm heterogeneity and offers a means to characterize it. The question
is also important in the context of the COVID-19 literature. Both Pagano et al.
(2020) and Papanikolaou and Schmidt (2020) construct industry-level exposures (up
to NAICS4 granularity) to restrictions on labor supply due to the inability of employees
to work from home. They argue that differences in this source of exposure drive much
of the firm-level variation in stock returns during 2020. By controlling for narrowly

                                             20
                     10
                   -.5           4.75



21
     Abnormal Equity Return, Percents
     -5.75
                                                                                                                                     beyond the supply-side shocks that these studies highlight.




                     -11
                                         Fitted Return    Fitted Return   Fitted Return   Fitted Return   Fitted Return   Observed
                                        Financials-Only   Financials +    Financials +     Financials +       MNIR        Abnormal
                                                          Industry FE      Dictionary     Industry FE +   Specification    Return
                                                                                            Dictionary

                                                   Figure 4:     Range of Firm-Level (Fitted) Returns

     This figure considers all 2,155 securities and 17 jump days in our analysis sample. For each specification, we generate
                                                                                                                                                                                                   defined industries, we can assess whether text-based measures pick up information




     fitted abnormal returns at the security-day level and generate the corresponding boxplots. The upper (lower) whisker
     represents the largest (smallest) observation that is less (greater) than or equal to the third (first) quartile plus (minus)
     1.5*IQR.
   There are 216 unique NAICS4 industries in our baseline sample, from which we drop
the 287 firms that lie in industry codes with fewer than five firms overall or with no
available NAICS4 code. This leaves a subsample containing 1,868 firms distributed over
97 unique NAICS4 codes. For each jump day, we model abnormal returns as depending
on firm financial controls and NAICS4 fixed effects, and we record the adjusted R2 . We
then add the dictionary exposures and the sufficient reduction projection, respectively,
and we again record the adjusted R2 . Figure 5 plots the results.




           (a) Dictionary Method                       (b) Machine Learning Method

            Figure 5: Improvement in R2 beyond Narrow Industry Codes
   This figure plots adjusted R2 values from regression models fit to firm-level returns
   on jump days. The horizontal scale shows the adjusted R2 in models with NAICS4
   fixed effects and firm-level financial controls. The vertical scale shows the adjusted
   R2 values that result when adding dictionary-based measures (panel (a)) or the
   sufficient reduction projection estimated in (2) (panel (b)). Models are fit to the
   subsample of firms that lie in NAICS4 industries with five or more firms.


   Figure 5a shows that adding dictionary measures does not shrink the residual vari-
ance in the return regressions, conditional on narrowly defined industry controls. That
does not mean dictionary measures are uninformative about return drivers, but they
don’t improve model fit relative to detailed industry controls. In contrast, Figure 5b


                                            22
shows that including the sufficient reduction projection yields a large R2 gain on every
jump day.9 In Section 5, we develop an approach to uncovering and interpreting the
additional information about return drivers captured by MNIR.


4.4       Clustering jump days based on return structures

Recall that Baker et al. (2020a) use human readings of next-day newspaper accounts
to classify market-level jumps as to reason (pandemic fallout, fiscal policy, etc.). We
now apply an automated approach to classify jump days based on the structure of
predicted firm-level abnormal returns. For this exercise, we measure returns in (2),
(3), and (4) as Abnit × (5.5/AvgERt ), where 5.5 is the average market-level move
in our sample of 17 jump days. This rescaling of returns ensures that our clustering
reflects the structure of abnormal returns and not their overall magnitude or direction.
We then fit our regression models separately by day and build a 17 × 17 matrix, where
the (t1 , t2 ) element is the correlation between the day-t1 fitted values and the day-t2
fitted values. Given this matrix, we apply a standard hierarchical clustering algorithm
to group like days together, and display the results as dendograms in Figure 6.10
       The dendograms reveal two interesting results. First, we obtain similar cluster-
ings of jump days under the dictionary and ML approaches. This result reinforces
our earlier conclusion that these two very different methodologies yield congruent re-
turn predictions. Second, the clustering that emerges from our automated analysis
of firm-level return structures based on Risk Factors texts in 10-K files is similar to
the newspaper-based classification of market-level jumps in Baker et al. (2020a). The
   9
      This result holds even though we estimate the inverse regression model (2) on a sample of 2,155
firms, which involves a potentially different relationship between terms and returns than the smaller
sample of firms considered in Figure 5.
   10
      The clustering algorithm works as follows. Start with a separate cluster for each jump day. In step
1, group the two days with the highest correlation of fitted values, yielding 16 clusters. Again compute
the correlation between each cluster, using the minimum correlation value between all cross-cluster
observations as the similarity metric when the cluster covers more than one day. This is known as
‘complete link clustering’. Repeat this process until all observations lie in a single cluster. The height
of the dendogram corresponds to the similarity level at which clusters are merged. See, for example,
chapter 17 of Manning et al. (2009) for more details.



                                                   23
similarity is particularly evident for the MNIR approach. With few exceptions, the
clustering algorithm groups the “fiscal” and “monetary policy” jumps (according to
newspaper-based approach) into distinct blocks, as it does for the “pandemic fallout”
jumps. Interestingly, the clustering algorithm groups Super Tuesday with other policy
jumps, and it groups the oil price crash with other pandemic fallout days. These results
support the idea that the Super Tuesday elections shifted expectations about future
polices, while the oil price collapse shifted other aspects of the economic outlook. We
conclude that identifiable categories of news events differ in how they interact with
firm-level risk exposures to drive the structure of firm-level return reactions.




            (a) Dictionary Method                         (b) Machine Learning Method

                  Figure 6: Clustering of Days via Different Methods
     This figure displays dendograms that represent clusterings of our 17 event days. In
     the left-hand panel, we cluster days based on the correlation matrix of the fitted
     values from (3) fit with Abnit × (5.5/AvgERt ) as the dependent variable; in the
     right-hand panel, we cluster days based instead on the fitted values from (4) fit with
     the same dependent variable. In both cases, we use a complete-link hierarchical
     clustering algorithm, and color-code days in line with manually-assigned labels.




                                              24
5     Uncovering and Interpreting Risk Factors
We now use our MNIR model to uncover and interpret the risk exposures that drive
return reactions, a different undertaking than the usual prediction-oriented application
of machine learning. The major challenge here is to organize the thousands of estimated
model parameters in an insightful way. A first step in this direction is to exploit the
grouping of jump days in Figure 1 and Section 3. From there, we use MNIR models to
develop new exposure measures that yield insights into how shocks affect the structure
of firm-level returns. Our first application is to pandemic fallout days.


5.1    Risk exposures for pandemic fallout days

When fit to pandemic fallout days, our MNIR model places positive weight on 9,948
terms and negative weight on 8,389 terms (574 terms are not selected into the model).
Table B.2 displays terms with the largest positive and negative inverse regression coef-
ficients on abnormal returns, given by b1,v , the first element of bv in (2). These terms
suggest a more granular characterization of exposures than the baseline dictionaries.
For example, while both “wheat” and “oil” appear in the dictionary for Commod-
ity Markets, “wheat” is the term most associated with positive returns and “oil” is
among those associated with negative returns. A natural interpretation is that pan-
demic news shifted their demands in opposite directions. Wheat is an input into basic
food production, which remained stable as the pandemic unfolded – while oil supports
the physical movement of goods and people, which fell dramatically. Other important
terms include “games,” “optics,” “patents” and “clinical trials” as predictors of posi-
tive returns and “restaurants,” “hotels,” “airline industry” and “jet fuel” as predictors
of negative returns.
    Certain companies also feature prominently: “Intel” has a high association with
positive returns, and “Delta,” “Phillips” and “Boeing” have high associations with
negative returns. Since we drop terms that appear in the RF texts of fewer than 25
firms, these findings say that the return reactions of many firms are strongly affected

                                           25
by their commercial connections to these companies.
       We can inspect return drivers for individual firms as well. Table 2 lists the ten firms
with the greatest residual shrinkage when adding the sufficient reduction projection to
the regression model.11 The table provides a short business description for each firm
and lists its top five terms – calculated as b̂1,v times the firm’s tf-idf score for the
corresponding term, xi,v log( 2133
                               dfv
                                   ), where xi,v is the count of term v in firm i’s RF texts
and dfv is the number of firms that use term v in their RF texts.12 For example, top
terms in predicting a positive return reaction to bad pandemic news for Netflix reflect
its digital video services. The top terms for predicting a positive reaction for Novavax,
which develops vaccines, include “vaccine” and “clinical trials.” Marcus Corporation
offers an example of a firm with exposures that create reinforcing negative return
reactions, as it operates both hotels and cinemas.


5.2       Uncovering risk exposures: A systematic approach

To construct risk exposures, we start with “seeds” drawn from (a) terms with large
MNIR coefficients, |b̂1,v |; and (b) terms with large tf-idf weighted MNIR coefficients,
|b̂1,v |xv log( 2133
                 dfv
                     ), where xv is the count of term v in the RF corpus. We work with 45
seeds that reflect both positive and negative return reactions and that appear to cover
the main exposures surfaced by our MNIR model fit to pandemic-related jump days.
Table 3 reports the seeds and corresponding category names.
       Next, we use the seeds to build sets comprised of related terms. Here, a typical
NLP approach groups words based on semantic relatedness. We rely partly on that
approach and, to this end, deploy the popular word2vec model of word embeddings
(Mikolov et al., 2013). This method inputs every sentence in our RF corpus and returns
  11
      Figure B.8 shows that predicted returns for these firms align more closely with actual returns
as we go from a no-text model to one that includes dictionary-based measures to MNIR. Echoing
results in Section 4, the two text-based approaches yield concordant results, but MNIR captures more
information and yields better predictions.
   12
      The log( 2133
                dfv ) expression down weights generic terms that are less useful in distinguishing among
firms. 2133 is the number of unique firms in the data for which we have 10-K filings, so a term that
appears in every firm’s filings would get a weight of zero.



                                                  26
                   Company                                  Business description                                      Terms              tf-idf x MNIR coeff.
                                             Late-stage biotechnology company focused on the             vaccine                                 475·2
     NOVAVAX INC %                                                                                       influenza                               297·5
                                             discovery, development and commercialization of             clinical trials                         136·9
                                             vaccines to prevent serious infectious diseases.            candidates                               99·4
                                                                                                         collaborators                            96·1
                                                                                                         dvd                                     943·2
                                             World’s leading internet television network with            streaming                               445·6
     NETFLIX INC %
                                             streaming memberships in over 190 countries.                subscribers                             243·5
                                                                                                         titles                                  216·6
                                                                                                         studios                                  81·9
                                                                                                         ip                                      185·7
                                             Leading licensor of wireless connectivity and smart         irish                                   135·3
     CEVA INC %
                                             sensing platforms.                                          royalty revenues                        112·0
                                                                                                         royalty rates                            95·5
                                                                                                         semiconductor                            86·8
                                                                                                         reagents                                124·1
                                             Leading provider of medical device and in vitro di-         incorporating                            84·2
     SURMODICS INC %
                                             agnostic technologies to the healthcare industry.           licensees                                42·7
                                                                                                         new applications                         38·0
                                                                                                         coating                                  30·7
                                                                                                         government appropriations                27·4
                                             Owner and developer of sustainable water and agri-          railroad                                 24·9
     CADIZ INC %
                                             cultural projects in California.                            significant revenues                     22·9
                                                                                                         value of options                         13·6
                                                                                                         such plans                               13·3
                                                                                                         cheese                                   56·5
                                             Multinational pizza restaurant chain with a large           quick                                    28·4
     DOMINO’S PIZZA INC %




27
                                             global network of franchise owners.                         foods                                    25·5
                                                                                                         pound                                    20·9
                                                                                                         interruption from earthquakes            16·8
                                                                                                         biodiesel                            −2897·7
     RENEWABLE ENERGY GROUP INC &            North America’s largest producer of advanced biofu-         biomass                                −904·4
                                             els.                                                        feedstocks                             −335·0
                                                                                                         gallons                                −282·2
                                                                                                         soybean                                −237·1
                                             Provider of midstream energy infrastructure and lo-         crude                                −1639·7
     PLAINS ALL AMER PIPELNE -LP &                                                                       ngl                                  −1499·2
                                             gistics services for crude oil, natural gas liquids, nat-   barrels per day                      −1363·3
                                             ural gas and refined products.                              pipeline                               −815·5
                                                                                                         pipelines                              −681·7
                                             Owner and operator of real estate assets in the lodg-       films                                  −216·8
     MARCUS CORP &                                                                                       hotels                                 −215·2
                                             ing and entertainment industries: movie theatres,           movie                                  −164·6
                                             hotels and resorts, a family entertainment center.          film                                   −103·6
                                                                                                         patrons                                 −72·2
                                             Petroleum refiner and supplier of unbranded trans-          refinery                             −1122·3
     PBF ENERGY INC &                                                                                    crude                                  −755·6
                                             portation fuels, heating oil, petrochemical feed-           refineries                             −627·8
                                             stocks, lubricants and other petroleum products.            feedstocks                             −394·3
                                                                                                         refined products                       −355·5

            Table 2: Top Ten Firms with Greatest Fit Gains on Pandemic Fallout Days from MNIR Text Approach

          This table lists the 10 firms with the greatest fit gain when adding the MNIR-based sufficient reduction production to a model
          with all of our non-text regressors. For each firm, we report five terms with the largest positive or negative MNIR coefficient
          in the firm-specific sufficient reduction projection when multiplied by tf-idf scores to down weight generic terms.
a vector representation of each of the 18,911 terms. We use these vectors to group terms
that are similar with respect to surrounding language in the corpus. This approach
groups nearly identical terms like “pipeline” and “pipelines” and semantically similar
terms like “cheese” and “foods.” However, it neglects the fact that semantically related
words can differ in the sign of their relationship to returns, as with “oil” and “wheat.”
Thus, we must account for both semantic similarity and relationship to returns. And,
as in Table 2, we want to down weight generic terms that are less helpful in capturing
exposures that differ among firms.
   In view of these multiple considerations, we build new term sets by associating each
seed with terms in the RF corpus that meet two criteria:

  1. High specificity and same sign: Among terms v with an MNIR coefficient of the
      same sign as the one for the seed, we select those with |b̂1,v |xv log( 2133
                                                                               dfv
                                                                                   ) > 200.

  2. High contextual similarity, as measured by cosine similarity of the embedding
      vectors: In practice, we require a term’s embedding vector to have a cosine
      similarity greater than 0.4 with that of the seed.

Higher thresholds yield more suitable terms at the cost of excluding potentially relevant
terms. Lower thresholds capture additional terms but at the cost of less suitability. We
adjust the thresholds to strike a reasonable balance between these concerns. Applying
criterion 1 yields 8,513 seed-generated terms. Further applying criterion 2 leaves us
with 1,100 terms in addition to the 45 seeds. When a term meets both criteria for
multiple seeds, we assign it to the seed for which its cosine similarity is highest.
   Appendix C.1 lists all terms grouped with each seed under this approach. By and
large, the term sets reflect coherent exposure categories, even when the seed is highly
specific. For example, tantalum (a rare earth metal) is a key input into the manufacture
of electronic circuits and equipment. The set seeded by “tantalum” contains other key
inputs in the manufacturing supply chain for electronic components and “democratic
republic of congo,” a major source country for rare earth mineral mining.


                                             28
               Seed                       Name                       Retained Terms   Dropped Terms
               advertisers                Advertizing                       9               5
               biodiesel                  Alternative Energy               10              17
               card                       Card Payments                    25               0
               clearing house             Clearing Houses                   3               0
               hotels                     Commercial Property              18               3
               display                    Display Technology               16              13
               unrealized loss position   Financial Management             15               0
               yen                        Foreign Exchange                  5               0
               franchisees                Franchising                      13               0
               gaming                     Gambling                          5               0
               gold                       Gold and Silver                   2               5
               surgeons                   Healthcare Providers              6               1
               reinsurance                Insurance                        23               0
               mortgage                   Mortgages                        44               0
               reit                       REITs                            29               0
               homebuilding               Residential Construction          4               0
               restaurants                Restaurants                       3              13
               retail                     Traditional Retail               26               9
               workforces                 Workforce                         2               0
               aircraft                   Aircraft and Airlines            10              10
               travel                     Travel                           11               6
               satellite                  Communications                   22               0
               newspapers                 Traditional Media                20               3
               pipelines                  Energy Infrastructure            26              11
               oil                        Oil and Gas                      11              0
                                              (a) Negative Exposures

             Seed               Name                                   Retained Terms   Dropped Terms
             preclinical        Drug Trials                                  43               0
             ecommerce          Ecommerce                                    12              11
             optics             Electronic Components and Devices            74              20
             wheat              Foodstuffs                                   27               2
             china              Foreign Countries                            62               0
             medicare           Health Insurance                             35               0
             investment funds   Investment Funds                             15               0
             manufacturing      Manufacturing                                35               5
             steel              Metal Products                               21               0
             coal               Power Generation                             13               0
             tantalum           Raw Metals and Minerals                      11               3
             semiconductor      Semiconductors                               15               5
             games              Video Games                                  21               4
             cloud              Web-Based Services                           23               2
             bank               Banking                                      40               0
             fdic               Deposits                                     20               0
             vessels            Shipping Containers                          12               1
             freight            Transportation                               21               0
             solutions          Software Services                            65               8
             software           Software and Hardware Products               56              9
                                              (b) Positive Exposures

        Table 3: MNIR-Generated Exposure Categories for Pandemic Fallout Dates
This table lists the 45 “seeds” that we use to construct MNIR-generated exposure categories and term sets.
The last two columns report how many automatically generated terms we retain and drop after judgmental
pruning. We combine closely related exposure categories in our downstream analysis, as indicated by those
with the same font color.

                                                         29
   Next, we manually prune the automatically generated term sets, deleting highly
generic terms and those at high risk of referring to other concepts (as fully described in
appendix C.1). Continuing with the tantalum example, we delete “adjoining countries,”
“requirements for companies,” and “sheet.” Table 3 reports the number of deleted and
retained terms in each category. We also combine closely related categories such as
“Software and Hardware Products” and “Software Services,” and we drop the “Manu-
facturing” category because it generates firm-level exposure measures that are highly
correlated with those generated by other, more focused categories. After combining
categories and pruning, we have 934 terms in 38 categories.
    Lastly, we compute firm-level exposures to each category j and its associated term
set, L(j), as zij = v∈L(j) xi,v |b1,v |, which captures the part of the sufficient reduction
                   P

projection that derives from terms in L(j). Table B.3 reports descriptive statistics for
the resulting firm-level exposures for each category j. Some categories contain terms
that appear in the RF texts of relatively few firms (e.g., “Gambling,” 9% of firms),
whereas others appear in the RF texts of most firms (e.g., “Web-Based Services,” 68%).
Cross-firm exposure variation within categories is typically large.


5.3    Applying the new exposure measures

Table 4 reports abnormal return regressions on pandemic fallout days using the MNIR-
generated exposure measures as explanatory variables. We fit (3) to the same data as in
Column (1) of Table 1 except for using 38 MNIR-generated exposure measures rather
than the 36 measures derived from expert-curated dictionaries. As in Table 1, we
express explanatory variables in standard deviation units. A first key result is that the
MNIR-generated exposures yield a large gain in fit: The adjusted R2 increases from
0.33 in Column (1) of Table 1 to 0.41 in Column (1) of Table 4. In other words, our
MNIR-generated categories and measures outperform the expert dictionary approach,
even when using about the same number of explanatory variables.
   A second key result is that our MNIR-based measures capture much of the overall


                                            30
fit gain achieved by the full-blown MNIR implementation. When using the same firms
and pandemic fallout days, the MNIR forward regression yields an adjusted R2 value
of 0.50. To be sure, that is a substantial fit gain relative to Column (1) in Table 4. By
itself, however, the forward regression has little interpretation value. Embedded within
the sufficient reduction projection that drives the strong fit of the forward regression
are more than 18,000 terms that appear in the RF corpus and receive non-zero weight
in the inverse regression. In contrast, Column (1) reports a regression based on 38
exposure measures and 934 terms. Moreover, each category involves a collection of
related terms that, in most cases, offer ready interpretations.
   Table 4 offers a rich account of how bad pandemic news drives the structure of
firm-level abnormal returns. Exposures to “Traditional Retail” and “Card Payments”
involve negative returns, while exposure to “Ecommerce” involves positive returns – in
line with the pandemic-induced shift in consumer spending from traditional retail to
online modes. Other results reflect major shifts in consumer spending across types of
non-durable goods and services. For example, exposures to “Foodstuffs” and “Restau-
rants” generate positive and negative returns, respectively, in line with a shift from
market to home production of meals. “Video Games” is associated with positive re-
turns, while “Gambling” and “Aircraft + Travel” are associated with negative returns,
reflecting a major shift across entertainment and recreation activities.
   Downstream demand shocks are also key drivers of return reactions to pandemic
news. For example, exposures to “Alternative Energy” and “Energy Infrastructure
+ Oil and Gas” are associated with negative returns, while the opposite is true for
exposures to the technology supply chain as captured by “Raw Metals and Minerals,”
“Electronic Components and Devices,” and “Web-Based Services.” The magnitudes
of the estimated coefficients on these exposure measures for intermediate goods and
services are comparable to the ones for categories that capture spending on final con-
sumption goods.




                                           31
                                               (1)                   (2)                  (3)
Dependent Variable: Abnit                   NAICS-2               NAICS-2              NAICS-4
                                          Fixed Effects         Fixed Effects        Fixed Effects
Exposures
 Advertizing                            −0·09     (−2·4)      −0·10    (−2·2)     −0·12     (−3·0)
 Alternative Energy                     −0·10     (−6·8)      −0·09    (−8·7)     −0·05     (−1·9)
 Card Payments                          −0·14     (−3·3)      −0·12    (−3·2)     −0·17     (−4·8)
 Clearing Houses                        −0·10     (−9·7)
 Commercial Property                                                              −0·15    (−2·3)
 Financial Management                   −0·23    (−11·5)      −0·24   (−12·8)     −0·29    (−3·5)
 Foreign Exchange                       −0·07     (−3·9)      −0·06    (−4·0)     −0·05    (−2·7)
 Franchising                            −0·10     (−1·8)      −0·12    (−3·2)     −0·15    (−2·2)
 Gambling                               −0·23     (−2·6)      −0·23    (−2·7)     −0·33    (−4·6)
 Gold and Silver                        −0·28    (−16·8)      −0·28   (−22·1)     −0·32   (−11·4)
 Healthcare Providers                   −0·14     (−6·5)      −0·12    (−7·8)
 Insurance                               0·04       (2·1)      0·05      (2·4)
 Mortgages                              −0·11     (−3·3)      −0·13    (−5·6)
 REITs                                  −0·39     (−4·8)      −0·39    (−4·5)
 Residential Construction               −0·37    (−14·0)      −0·33   (−12·0)     −0·22     (−2·5)
 Restaurants                            −0·22     (−4·6)      −0·25    (−4·4)     −0·21     (−3·2)
 Traditional Retail                     −0·33     (−6·3)      −0·37    (−7·2)     −0·28     (−3·6)
 Workforce                              −0·19     (−3·1)      −0·20    (−2·9)     −0·20     (−3·3)
 Aircraft + Travel                      −0·24     (−2·7)      −0·25    (−2·9)
 Communications + Trad Media            −0·09     (−2·4)      −0·09    (−2·3)     −0·11     (−2·9)
 Energy Infr + Oil and Gas              −0·31     (−5·1)      −0·28    (−4·8)     −0·19     (−3·9)
 Drug Trials                             0·16      (11·4)      0·15     (10·7)    −0·04     (−2·7)
 Ecommerce                               0·15       (3·0)      0·15      (3·4)     0·14       (2·6)
 Electronic Components and Devices       0·09       (4·1)      0·11      (4·2)     0·14       (3·6)
 Foodstuffs                              0·17       (4·3)      0·15      (4·9)     0·15       (4·8)
 Foreign Countries                       0·23       (2·7)      0·16      (1·8)
 Investment Funds                        0·22      (14·8)      0·22     (16·5)     0·21      (13·0)
 Metal Products                                                                   −0·08     (−1·7)
 Raw Metals and Minerals                  0·29        (7·9)    0·28    (10·3)      0·26       (4·7)
 Semiconductors                                                                   −0·07     (−2·0)
 Video Games                              0·12        (4·1)    0·10    (12·3)      0·11       (8·8)
 Web-Based Services                       0·22        (3·8)    0·20     (3·4)      0·21       (3·9)
 Banking + Deposits                       0·18        (5·4)    0·19     (5·1)      0·18       (4·0)
Financial Controls
 Log Market Cap                          0·46       (4·4)      0·44      (4·1)     0·50       (6·2)
 Leverage                               −0·34     (−3·0)      −0·26    (−2·6)     −0·14     (−1·4)
Observations [Adjusted R2 ]              2155    [0.410]       1868   [0.433]      1868   [0.470]

        Table 4: Regression Results Using MNIR-Generated Exposures,
                           Pandemic Fallout Days
 Each column considers 38 MNIR-generated exposure measures for pandemic fallout dates. We
 also include log market cap and leverage. Additionally, columns 1 and 2 (3) consider 2-digit (4-
 digit) NAICS codes to introduce industry fixed effects and to cluster errors. For columns 2 and
 3, we drop 4-digit NAICS codes with less than 5 companies. t stats are reported in parentheses;
 and, for presentation purposes, we omit the coefficients on exposures that are not significant at
 the 0.1 level. The pandemic fallout dates are Feb. 24, 25, 27 and March 03, 05, 11, 16, 18, 27. As
 a benchmark, note that estimating MNIR with all terms achieves an adjusted R2 of 0.502 in the
 analogue forward regression.
                                                 32
   Financial exposure categories also also important. “Mortgages” generates nega-
tive returns, as do other property-related exposures like “REITs” and “Residential
Construction.” Exposure to “Financial Management” is also associated with negative
return reactions. In contrast, exposures to “Banking + Deposits” and “Investment
Funds” yield positive return reactions. A plausible explanation is that bad news about
the pandemic drove greater precautionary savings and more concern about managing
portfolio risks among higher-income households.
   We can also produce a model-based explanation for any particular firm’s return
reactions by combining its exposure measures with the estimation results. Consider
Plains All American Pipeline, which had an average daily abnormal return of -6.4%
on pandemic fallout days as compared to -1.1% for the average firm. The Column (1)
model in Table 4 predicts a daily abnormal return of -5.9% for Plains. The model
attributes the company’s sharply negative performance on pandemic fallout days to its
heavy exposure to “Energy Infrastructure + Oil and Gas,” “REITs,” and “Alternative
Energy” and its light exposure to categories associated with positive returns.
   Column (3) in Table 4 includes NAICS4 industry effects in place of NAICS2 effects.
For comparison, column (2) reports results using NAICS2 effects on the same sample
as in column (3). Some exposure measures become insignificant, but most remain
significant and a few previously insignificant ones become significant. The implication
is that our MNIR-generated exposure measures are not simply a proxy for industry
categories. Instead, they capture and explain important differences in firm-level return
reactions within narrowly defined industries.
   In sum, bad COVID-19 news generates a wide array of positive and negative return
reactions across firms. The richness of the RF corpus enables us to uncover dozens of
separate effects that play a role in driving the structure of return reactions, including
effects that reflect demand shocks induced by social distancing and those that involve
indirect exposures via supply-chain linkages.




                                           33
5.4    An Application to Super Tuesday

To illustrate its flexibility and power, we now apply our approach to explain and inter-
pret firm-level equity returns in reaction to Super Tuesday. This application captures
the impact of the attendant shift in expectations about future government policy due
to changes in the likelihood of a Biden, Sanders or Trump Presidency, expectations
about what policies Biden would pursue to secure the Democratic nomination, and
expectations about the Trump campaign’s policy agenda in response to the now-likely
prospect of facing Biden in the general election contest.
   Table B.4 reports the RF terms most associated with positive and negative return
reactions to Super Tuesday. Terms related to hotels and gambling (“hotel proper-
ties,” “casino,” “las vegas”) and fossil fuels (“natural gas,” “oil,” “permian basin”) are
among those highly associated with negative returns, while terms associated with real
estate more broadly (“tenants,” “reit,” “undeveloped land”) and healthcare (“health
insurance,” “medicare,” “patients”) are highly associated with positive returns. Recall
that “reit” and “oil” are influential predictors of negative returns on pandemic fallout
days. They remain highly influential in explaining reactions to Super Tuesday but in
the opposite direction, illustrating how we capture distinct firm-level return reactions
to different types of shocks. These results also illustrate the power of text to disentan-
gle countervailing effects. Generic property terms predict positive return reactions to
Super Tuesday, while terms relating to the hotels and gambling segment of the prop-
erty market predict negative reactions. Perhaps not coincidentally, President Trump
has major business interests that involve hotels and gambling.
   Table B.5 reports firms for which MNIR yields the largest fit gains relative to a
no-text model. All five firms with the largest negative predicted reactions are in the
oil and gas sector. Terms like “crude,” “refinery,” “offshore,” and “drilling” are most
responsible for driving these predictions. Two firms with large positive reactions facil-
itate government-sponsored healthcare (eHealth and Centene Corp), two are involved
in mining (Coeur Mining Inc and Gold Resource Corp), and one is an industrial prop-



                                           34
erty developer (Griffin Industrial Realty). In each case, the terms associated with large
positive returns relate naturally to the company’s main business activity.
   Next, we select 47 seeds (listed in Table B.6) and, as before, use them to construct
term sets that define exposure categories. We obtain 666 automatically generated terms
and prune 215 of them, as set forth in appendix C.2. Note that a given seed need not
yield the same term set for Super Tuesday as for pandemic fallout days, because the
estimated MNIR models differ. For example, the “ecommerce” seed yields 23 terms on
pandemic fallout dates but just 3 on Super Tuesday (before manual pruning), because
few terms semantically related to e-commerce are associated with negative returns on
Super Tuesday. Nevertheless, several seeds yield similar term sets for Super Tuesday
and pandemic fallout days, e.g., “travel,” “reit,” and “gaming.”
   We also uncover many distinct exposure categories for Super Tuesday. These in-
clude “Drilling Activity” and “Fracking,” which describe specific fossil fuel extraction
activities, in contrast to“Energy Infrastructure” and “Oil and Gas.” Other examples
include “Defense Technology” (military hardware), “Financial Instruments” (deriva-
tives and hedging), “Government Healthcare” (Medicare, Medicaid, etc.) and “Waste
Disposal.” Another notable category is “Financial Regulation,” a concept also present
in the baseline dictionaries and correlated with Super Tuesday return reactions in Ta-
ble 1. By and large, our MNIR-generated exposure categories for Super Tuesday add
detail and nuance to concepts like healthcare, energy, finance, and real estate present
in the baseline dictionaries. In contrast, our MNIR-generated exposure categories for
pandemic fallout days are often quite distinctive and absent from the baseline dictio-
naries. Examples include categories for cloud computing, web services, and material
inputs to the technology supply chain.
   Table 5 presents the abnormal returns regression for Super Tuesday based on the
new exposure categories. We again find a sizable fit gain compared to a model that
relies on the baseline dictionaries: the adjusted R2 rises from 0.199 in Column (4) of
Table 1 to 0.242 in Column (1) of Table 5, roughly one-third of the gain in adjusted R2
from using the full-blown MNIR model (0.349). Many exposure categories remain sta-

                                           35
  tistically significant after controlling for NAICS4 effects, again showing that variation
  in RF texts across firms captures within-industry shifts in expected future earnings.


                                                (1)                (2)               (3)
 Dependent Variable: Abnit                   NAICS-2            NAICS-2           NAICS-4
                                           Fixed Effects      Fixed Effects     Fixed Effects
 Exposures
  Aircraft                                                                     −0·08   (−3·1)
  Card Payments                          −0·04     (−2·4)    −0·04   (−2·1)    −0·09   (−2·7)
  Financial Instruments                  −0·15     (−3·2)    −0·22   (−2·9)    −0·19   (−2·3)
  Foodstuffs                             −0·11     (−4·7)    −0·13   (−4·1)    −0·16   (−4·5)
  Gambling                               −0·20     (−7·4)    −0·18   (−6·2)    −0·16   (−2·8)
  Hotels                                 −0·25     (−8·9)    −0·25   (−8·1)    −0·26   (−4·9)
  Industrial Metals                      −0·09     (−1·8)    −0·07   (−3·2)
  Motor Vehicles                                                               −0·14   (−3·2)
  Power Generation                       −0·19     (−4·2)    −0·17   (−4·2)    −0·16   (−2·1)
  Shipping                               −0·21     (−4·8)
  Traditional Media                      −0·15     (−8·0)    −0·14   (−8·9)
  Transportation                         −0·08     (−3·9)    −0·07   (−3·2)
  Asset Mngmt + Financial Mngmt          −0·19     (−9·5)    −0·16   (−7·6)    −0·18   (−4·1)
  Banking + Financial Regul              −0·18     (−7·5)    −0·18   (−5·4)    −0·11   (−3·4)
  Drilling Act + Fracking                −0·19     (−2·0)
  Construction                            0·22       (2·4)    0·28    (3·8)
  Drugs                                   0·13       (3·0)    0·13    (1·8)     0·26    (5·2)
  Electronic Communication                0·28       (3·7)    0·29    (3·9)
  Foreign                                 0·08       (2·0)    0·12    (2·2)
  Franchising                             0·11       (2·6)
  Government Contracting                                      0·18    (2·0)     0·17    (2·1)
  Insurance                                0·13     (8·7)     0·13    (5·5)
  Metals                                   0·16     (3·7)     0·20    (3·3)     0·23    (6·1)
  Military                                 0·09     (2·6)
  REITs                                    0·43     (8·7)     0·42    (5·8)
  Rental Market                            0·26     (3·1)     0·32    (7·6)     0·30    (9·7)
  Utilities                                0·18     (7·6)     0·19    (8·2)     0·16    (4·1)
  Waste                                    0·16     (6·2)     0·13    (4·5)
  Ecomm + Health Ins + Subsidies           0·20     (4·0)     0·17    (2·5)     0·20    (3·0)
  Gov Healthcare + Healthcare Supp         0·30     (1·8)
 Financial Controls
  Log Market Cap                          0·63       (4·8)    0·59     (4·1)    0·59     (4·5)
  Leverage                               −0·10     (−0·8)    −0·07   (−0·5)    −0·16   (−1·5)
 Observations [Adjusted R2 ]              2155     [0.242]    1868   [0.261]    1868   [0.308]

       Table 5: Regression Results Using MNIR-Generated Exposures,
                         Super Tuesday Aftermath
Each column considers 40 MNIR-generated exposure measures for Super Tuesday. We also include
log market cap and leverage. Additionally, columns 1 and 2 (3) consider 2-digit (4-digit) NAICS
codes to introduce industry fixed effects and to cluster errors. For columns 2 and 3, we drop
4-digit NAICS codes with less than 5 companies. t stats are reported in parentheses; and, for
presentation purposes, we omit the coefficients on exposures that are not significant at the 0.1
level. As a benchmark, note that estimating MNIR with all terms achieves an adjusted R2 of
0.349 in the analogue forward regression.

                                              36
6        Concluding Remarks
We exploit the Risk Factors texts in 10-K filings to investigate how market-moving
shocks interact with prior risk exposures to drive the structure of firm-level equity
returns. We focus on 17 trading days with large market-level moves from late February
to the end of March 2020. These 17 days exhibit enormous dispersion in firm-level
returns in reaction to news about COVID-19, monetary and fiscal policy, the Super
Tuesday Democratic primary elections, and the oil price crash of 9 March.
       Our text-based models explain up to half the variation in firm-level returns on these
days. Bad pandemic news triggers large negative abnormal return reactions for firms
with high exposures to travel, lodging, traditional retail, energy, aircraft production,
residential construction, REITs and restaurants, among others. The same news triggers
positive abnormal return reactions for firms with high exposures to drug trials, e-
commerce, basic foodstuffs, web-based services, video games, financial management,
and metals and minerals that feed into supply chains for semiconductors, electrical
equipment and cloud computing. Many of these reactions reveal powerful effects of
downstream demand shocks on upstream suppliers. Examples include aircraft and
energy, harmed by the fall in travel demand, and positive return reactions for suppliers
to firms that saw demand increases due to social distancing and the shift to working
from home. Other market-moving news – such as monetary and fiscal policy actions
or the Super Tuesday election outcome – generate quite different firm-level return
reactions, which we also characterize using our text-based methods.
       The pandemic-induced return reactions we uncover foretell shifts in the real econ-
omy. Examples include major job losses in the traditional retail sector, employment
gains at online shopping and delivery firms, a persistent collapse in air travel, job cuts
in aircraft production, numerous bankruptcies among oil and gas companies, a collapse
of advertizing revenue in print media, and surging demand for cloud computing.13 Our
results also square with evidence that COVID-19 accelerated ongoing shifts to digital
  13
    (Barrero et al., 2020) discuss the first four developments mentioned here and (Financial Times,
2020c), (Financial Times, 2020b), (Financial Times, 2020a) discuss the others.


                                                37
services and remote interactions across a whole host of activities. Indeed, the share of
new U.S. patent applications that advance technologies to support video conferencing,
telecommuting, remote interactivity, and working from home doubled in the wake of
the pandemic (Bloom et al., 2020). Managing the social and economic fallout of these
shifts will present major policy changes for many years.
   In terms of methodology, we draw on two text-analytic approaches often seen as
alternatives: expert-curated dictionary methods and supervised machine learning. By
combining elements of both, we obtain rich models that (a) fit better than models
based on expert-curated dictionaries, (b) uncover new, empirically relevant exposure
categories missed by the curated dictionaries and, at the same time, (c) deliver inter-
pretable patterns in the estimated structure of firm-level returns. This last feature
pushes the supervised ML approach from prediction to interpretation.
   Our hybrid approach starts with Taddy’s (2013, 2015) MNIR implementation of
supervised ML. We use a fitted MNIR model to identify influential “seed” terms. For
each seed, we build term sets based on similarity of linguistic context in the Risk Fac-
tors texts and relationship to firm-level returns. These term sets effectively define
exposure categories, which we apply to the Risk Factors texts to quantify firm-level
exposures. The resulting firm-level measures then serve as explanatory variables in
return regressions that yield readily interpretable results. While retaining elements of
a conventional dictionary-based approach, our hybrid approach leans lightly on domain
expertise. It completely sidesteps the laborious construction of expert-curated dictio-
naries. It also foregoes any reliance on external libraries, as in some NLP methods. As
illustrated by our separate applications to pandemic fallout days and Super Tuesday,
our hybrid approach is also flexible and adaptable. We hope it will prove useful in
many other applications.




                                          38
References
Acemoglu, D., Akcigit, U., and Kerr, W. (2016). Networks and the Macroeconomy:
  An Empirical Exploration. NBER Macroeconomics Annual, University of Chicago
  Press, 30(1):273–335.

Alfaro, L., Chari, A., Greenland, A. N., and Schott, P. K. (2020). Aggregate and
  Firm-Level Stock Returns During Pandemics, in Real Time. Working Paper 26950,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Andersen, A., Hansen, E. T., Johannesen, N., and Sheridan, A. (2020). Consumer
  Responses to the COVID-19 Crisis: Evidence from Bank Account Transaction Data.
  CEPR Discussion Paper 14809.

Atalay, E. (2017). How Important are Sectoral Shocks? American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics, 9(4):254–280.

Baker, S. R., Bloom, N., and Davis, S. J. (2016). Measuring Economic Policy Uncer-
  tainty. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4):1593–1636.

Baker, S. R., Bloom, N., Davis, S. J., and Kost, K. J. (2019). Policy News and Stock
  Market Volatility. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series,
  (w25720).

Baker, S. R., Bloom, N., Davis, S. J., Kost, K. J., Sammon, M. C., and Viratyosin, T.
  (2020a). The Unprecedented Stock Market Reaction to COVID-19. The Review of
  Asset Pricing Studies, Forthcoming.

Baker, S. R., Farrokhnia, R., Meyer, S., Pagel, M., and Yannelis, C. (2020b). How
  Does Household Spending Respond to an Epidemic? Consumption During the 2020
  COVID-19 Pandemic. The Review of Asset Pricing Studies, Forthcoming.

Baqaee, D. and Farhi, E. (2019). The Macroeconomic Impact of Microeconomic Shocks:
  Beyond Hulten’s Theorem. Econometrica, 87, 4:1155–1203.

                                         39
Barrero, J. M., Bloom, N., and Davis, S. J. (2020). COVID-19 Is Also a Reallocation
  Shock. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Forthcoming.

Bloom, N., Davis, S. J., and Zhestkova, Y. (2020). Covid-19 Shifted Patent Applica-
  tions toward Technlogies that Support Working from Home. Working Paper, Uni-
  versity of Chicago.

Carvalho, V. M., Garcı́a, J. R., Ortiz, Á., Rodrigo, T., Mora, R., and Ruiz, P. (2020).
  Tracking the COVID-19 Crisis with High-Resolution Transaction Data. CEPR Dis-
  cussion Paper 14642.

Carvalho, V. M. and Tahbaz-Salehi, A. (2019). Production Networks: A Primer.
  Annual Review of Economics, 11:635–663.

Chetty, R., Friedman, J. N., Hendren, N., and Stepner, M. (2020). How Did COVID-
  19 and Stabilization Policies Affect Spending and Employment? A New Real-Time
  Economic Tracker Based on Private Sector Data. Working Paper.

Cox, N., Ganong, P., Noel, P., Vavra, J., Wong, A., Farrell, D., and Greig, F. (2020).
  Initial Impacts of the Pandemic on Consumer Behavior: Evidence from Linked In-
  come, Spending, and Saving Data. Becker Friedman Institute Working Paper 2020-
  82.

Davis, S. J. (2017). Regulatory Complexity and Policy Uncertainty: Headwinds of Our
  Own Making. Working Paper 2723980, Becker Friedman Institute Working Paper.

Davis, S. J. and Haltiwanger, J. (1992). Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction,
  and Employment Reallocation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(3):819–
  863.

Financial Times (2020a). Coronavirus and globalisation: the surprising resilience of
  container shipping. Published 19 July 2020; accessed 20 September 2020.




                                          40
Financial Times (2020b). Coronavirus rips a hole in newspapers’ business models.
  Published 25 June 2020; accessed 20 September 2020.

Financial Times (2020c). Rising bankruptcy toll shows US oil patch is not ‘OK now’.
  Published 19 September 2020; accessed 20 September 2020.

Gentzkow, M., Kelly, B., and Taddy, M. (2019a). Text as Data. Journal of Economic
  Literature, 57(3):535–574.

Gentzkow, M. and Shapiro, J. M. (2010). What Drives Media Slant? Evidence from
  U.S. Daily Newspapers. Econometrica, 78(1):35–71.

Gentzkow, M., Shapiro, J. M., and Taddy, M. (2019b). Measuring Group Differences
  in High-Dimensional Choices: Method and Application to Congressional Speech.
  Econometrica, 87(4):1307–1340.

Hanley, K. W. and Hoberg, G. (2019). Dynamic Interpretation of Emerging Risks in
  the Financial Sector. The Review of Financial Studies, 32(12):4543–4603.

Hassan, T. A., Hollander, S., van Lent, L., and Tahoun, A. (2020). Firm-level Exposure
  to Epidemic Diseases: Covid-19, SARS, and H1N1. Working Paper 26971, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

IMF (2020). World Economic Outlook Update. Technical report, International Mone-
  tary Fund.

Justeson, J. S. and Katz, S. M. (1995). Technical Terminology: Some Linguistic Prop-
  erties and an Algorithm for Identification in Text. Natural Language Engineering,
  1:9–27.

Ke, Z. T., Kelly, B. T., and Xiu, D. (2019). Predicting Returns With Text Data.
  Working Paper 26186, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Laeven, L. (2020). Pandemics, Intermediate Goods, and Corporate Valuation. CEPR
  Discussion Paper 15022.

                                         41
Long, J. B. and Plosser, C. I. (1983). Real Business Cycles. Journal of Political
  Economy, 91:39–69.

Lopez Lira, A. (2019). Risk Factors That Matter: Textual Analysis of Risk Disclosures
  for the Cross-Section of Returns. SSRN Electronic Journal.

Loughran, T. and Mcdonald, B. (2011). When Is a Liability Not a Liability? Textual
  Analysis, Dictionaries, and 10-Ks. The Journal of Finance, 66(1):35–65.

Manning, C. D., Raghavan, P., and Shuetze, H. (2009). An Introduction to Information
  Retrieval. Cambridge University Press.

Mast, J. T., Palmer, P. S., and Hickok, R. L. (2020). Operating in a Pandemic:
  Securities Litigation Risk and Navigating Disclosure Concerns.

Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G. S., and Dean, J. (2013). Distributed
  Representations of Words and Phrases and their Compositionality. In Burges, C.
  J. C., Bottou, L., Welling, M., Ghahramani, Z., and Weinberger, K. Q., editors,
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26, pages 3111–3119. Curran
  Associates, Inc.

Pagano, M., Wagner, C., and Zechner, J. (2020). Disaster Resilience and Asset Prices.
  SSRN Electronic Journal.

Papanikolaou, D. and Schmidt, L. D. (2020). Working Remotely and the Supply-side
  Impact of Covid-19. Working Paper 27330, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Ramelli, S. and Wagner, A. F. (2020). Feverish Stock Price Reactions to COVID-19.
  The Review of Corporate Finance Studies.

Stephany, F., Stoehr, N., Darius, P., Neuhauser, L., Teutloff, O., and Braesemann, F.
  (2020). The CoRisk-Index: A data-mining approach to identify industry-specific risk
  assessments related to COVID-19 in real time. Covid Economics, (41):129–146.



                                           42
Surico, P., Kanzig, D., and Hacioglu, S. (2020). Consumption in the Time of COVID-
  19: Evidence from UK Transaction Data. CEPR Discussion Paper 14733.

Taddy, M. (2013). Multinomial Inverse Regression for Text Analysis. Journal of the
  American Statistical Association, 108(503):755–770.

Taddy, M. (2015). Distributed Multinomial Regression. The Annals of Applied Statis-
  tics, 9(3):1394–1414.

Tetlock, P. C. (2007). Giving Content to Investor Sentiment: The Role of Media in
  the Stock Market. The Journal of Finance, LXII(3):30.




                                        43
A      Sample and Feature Space Construction

A.1     Sample of firms

The following are the details on how we construct our analysis sample:

    • We link 3,154 firms (i) with at least one 10-K filing (with a non-empty Part 1a)
      from January 2010 to July 2016, and (ii) with equity return data for all business
      days between Feb 24, 2020 and March 27, 2020.

    • We remove 19 firms with no leverage information.

    • In order to compute abnormal returns, we first need to get estimates of stock-
      level betas. Hence, we keep stocks for which we have at least 125 daily return
      observations in 2019. We lose 28 firms in this step.

    • We also drop small caps: either because they are in the first quartile of equity
      market value or because their share price is smaller than 5 dollars on February
      21, 2020 (i.e. the last trading day before the stock market jump days we consider
      in this paper). Dropped small caps account for 2.5 percent of total equity market
      value in the sample. In this step, we remove 968 firms.

    • We discard 5 companies with no available NAICS2 code in our dataset. Finally,
      we keep only NAICS2 codes with at least 5 companies. We drop one firm in this
      last step.

    • We end up with an analysis sample of 2,155 stocks for 2,133 companies.


A.2     Text preprocessing details

Our feature space construction begins with 10Ks from 2010 to 2016 scraped from
EDGAR for 3,580 unique firms. Some of these firms are not part of our final sample,
as explained above, we use them because they are potentially informative about the
structure of language in the Risk Factors texts.

                                          44
   We first find and replace meaningful phrases in the 10-K corpus with a single term
in the feature space. For example, ‘We owe additional income tax’ becomes ‘We owe
additional income tax’, where ‘income tax’ is treated as an individual term. This
ensures that the meaning conveyed by key phrases is retained in our analysis. These
phrases come from multiple sources:

  1. 433 phrases from the baseline dictionaries in Baker et al. (2019).

  2. 3,803 phrases that correspond to named entities that appear more than 25 times
     in the corpus. We identify these entities with the named entity recognizer (NER)
     from the Stanford NLP group. The NER finds an additional 63 entities that also
     appear in the dictionaries, and so are redundant.

  3. 9,649 additional multi-word expressions (MWE). To identify these, we first tag all
     words in the corpus using a part-of-speech tagger from the Stanford NLP group,
     and then tabulate tag patterns likely to correspond to meaningful sequences
     Justeson and Katz (1995). Our final set of MWE is the resulting trigrams that
     appear more than 150 times in the corpus, and bigrams that appear more than
     500 times. This approach finds an additional 68 phrases also present in the
     dictionaries, and 265 phrases also present in named entities, and so are redundant.

   We then follow standard steps to complete pre-processing:

   • Lowercase all text (case-folding).

   • Tokenize text by breaking it into individual terms. Continuing from the above
     example, the tokenized representation of ‘We owe additional income tax’ would
     be the four-element list [‘we’, ‘owe’, ‘additional’, ‘income tax’].

   • Drop common words from a standard stopword list, e.g. ‘for’, ‘to’, etc.

   • Drop any terms that appear in the Risk Factors text of fewer than 25 firms from
     2010 to 2016.


                                           45
A.3      Baseline Dictionary Categories and Terms

   • Broad Quantity Indicators: {gdp, economic growth, depression, recession, eco-
       nomic crisis, industrial production}

   • Inflation: {cpi, inflation, gold, silver}

   • Interest Rates: {interest rates, yield curve}

   • Credit Indicators:14 {bank loans, mortgage loans, credit spread, consumer credit,
       business credit}

   • Labor Markets: {labor force, workforce, unemployment, employment, unemploy-
       ment insurance, ui claims, jobs report, jobless claims, payroll, underemployment,
       quits, hires, weekly hours, labor strike, wages, labor income, labor earnings}15

   • Real Estate Markets: {housing prices, home prices, homebuilding, homebuilders,
       housing starts, home sales, building permits, mortgages, residential construction,
       commercial construction, commercial real estate, real estate}

   • Business Investment and Sentiment: {business investment, business confidence}

   • Consumer Spending and Sentiment: {consumer spending, retail sales, consumer
       purchases, consumer confidence, consumer sentiment}

   • Commodity Markets: {wheat, corn, sugar, cotton, beef, pork, petroleum, oil,
       coal, natural gas, biofuel, ethanol, steel, copper, zinc, tin, platinum, gold, metal,
       silver, aluminum, lead, commodity exchange, nymex, mercantile exchange, gas
       pipeline}

   • Financial Crises: {financial crisis, financial crises}

   • Exchange Rate: {exchange rate, currency devaluation}
  14
   This category corresponds to the “Other Financial Indicators” term set in Baker et al. (2019).
  15
   Terms in blue-font are not included in the 244-term dictionary currently considered by MNIR.
We will add these in the next version of the draft.


                                               46
• Healthcare Matters: {healthcare, health insurance, medicaid, medicare, afford-
  able care act, medical malpractice, prescription drug, food and drug administra-
  tion, fda, national institutes of health}

• Litigation Matters: {lawsuit, litigation, class action, tort, punitive damages,
  patent infringement, trademark infringement, copyright infringement, medical
  malpractice, supreme court}

• Competition Matters: {antitrust, competition law, federal trade commission, ftc,
  monopoly, hart scott rodino, european commission}

• Labor Disputes: {labor dispute, labor unrest, strike}

• Intellectual Property Matters: {patent, trademark, copyright, patent and trade-
  mark office, international trade commission, federal trade commission, ftc, intel-
  lectual property, hatch waxman, new drug application}

• Taxes: {taxes, tax, taxation, taxed, income tax, payroll tax, unemployment tax,
  sales tax, excise tax, value added tax, vat, carbon tax, corporate tax, business
  tax, accelerated depreciation, research and development tax credit, property tax,
  fiscal cliff, internal revenue service}

• Government Spending, Deficits and Debt: {government spending, government
  appropriations, defense spending, federal budget, government budget, debt ceil-
  ing, fiscal cliff, government shutdown, sovereign debt}

• Entitlement and Welfare Programs: {social security, disability insurance, medi-
  caid, medicare, unemployment insurance, affordable housing}

• Monetary Policy: {monetary policy, money supply, open market operations, dis-
  count window, quantitative easing, central bank, federal reserve, the fed, euro-
  pean central bank}




                                            47
• Financial Regulation: {financial reform, truth in lending, sarbanes oxley, dodd
  frank, tarp, troubled asset relief program, volcker rule, basel, capital requirement,
  stress test, deposit insurance, fdic, office of thrift supervision, ots, comptroller of
  the currency, occ, commodity futures trading commission, cftc, financial stability
  oversight council, securities and exchange commission, sec, bureau of consumer
  financial protection, consumer financial protection bureau, cfpb}

• Competition Policy: {competition law, federal trade commission, ftc, hart scott
  rodino, european commission}

• Intellectual Property Policy: {patent law, trademark law, copyright law, patent
  and trademark office, international trade commission}

• Labor Regulations: {department of labor, national labor relations board, min-
  imum wage, workers compensation, occupational safety and health administra-
  tion, osha, mine safety and health administration, at will employment, affirmative
  action, equal employment opportunity, erisa, pension benefit guaranty corpora-
  tion, pbgc}

• Energy and Environmental Regulation: {energy policy, carbon tax, cap and
  trade, offshore drilling, pollution controls, environmental restrictions, clean air
  act, clean water act, environmental protection agency, epa, federal energy regu-
  latory commission, ferc, endangered species, greenhouse gas regulation, climate
  change regulation, nuclear regulatory commission, pipeline and hazardous mate-
  rials safety administration}

• Lawsuit and Tort Reform, Supreme Court Decisions: {supreme court}

• Housing and Land Management: {federal housing administration, department of
  housing and urban development, hud, bureau of land management, department
  of interior, zoning regulations, zoning laws, endangered species}




                                         48
• Other Regulation: {consumer product safety commission, department of educa-
  tion, small business administration, federal communications commission, fcc, fish
  and wildlife service}

• Generic Regulation: {regulation, regulatory, regulate}

• National Security: {national security, war, military conflict, military action, ter-
  rorism, terror, defense spending, department of defense, department of homeland
  security, armed forces}

• Trade Policy: {tariff, dumping, world trade organization, north american free
  trade agreement, international trade commission}

• Healthcare Policy: {healthcare policy, health insurance, medicaid, medicare, af-
  fordable care act, national institutes of health}

• Food and Drug Policy: {food and drug administration, fda}

• Transportation, Infrastructure and Public Utilities: {department of transporta-
  tion, national highway traffic safety administration, corps of engineers, federal
  aviation administration, faa, nasa, pipeline and hazardous materials safety ad-
  ministration}

• Elections and Political Governance: {presidential election}

• Agricultural Policy: {department of agriculture, usda}




                                        49
                                                                                            ŷ = 1.1 + 0.37 max{0, x} + 0.39 max{0, −x}

                                                                                                                                                                        B
                                                                                                (0.03) (0.04)          (0.05)



                                                                                                                                               B.1
                                                                                Mar 18




                                          6
                                                    Mar 16    Mar 09                                                              Mar 24
                                                                                  Mar 23                               Mar 17
                                                                             Mar 20                                               Mar 13
                                                     Mar 12




                         3.5
                                                                              Mar 27                                  Mar 26
                                                                         Mar 11                                  Mar 10
                                                                                                                Mar 02
                                                                           Feb 27 Mar 05Mar 03
                                                                                                               Mar 04
                                                                                 Feb 24 Feb 25
                                                                                                                                               Material for section 2




          1




50
     Daily Cross-Security SD of Equity Returns, %
                                                     -12               -6.75               -1.5              3.75                          9
                                                                          Daily Average of Equity Returns, %
                                                                 COVID-19 and Economic Fallout          Monetary Policy Easing
                                                                                                                                                                        Additional Tables and Figures




                                                                 Fiscal Policy Stimulus                 Super Tuesday Aftermath
                                                                 Oil Price Crash                        Unclassified
                                                                 All trading days in 2019


                                               Figure B.1: Value-Weighted Mean and Cross-Sectional SD of U.S.
                                               Equity Returns, Daily for 2019 and for Large Daily Jumps in 2020
       We consider the value-weighted distribution of daily returns over 2,155 stocks for trading days in
       2019 and jump days in 2020. The mean (s.d.) of the daily average return for trading days in 2019
       is 0.12 (0.80) percent, and the mean (s.d.) of the daily SD is 1.34 (0.34). The regression has 271
       observations and an R-squared of 0.61, with standard errors in parentheses. A test of the null
       hypothesis that the two rays have equal slopes with opposite signs yields a p-value of 0.66.
             .3
                  Mar 16
                                                      Mar 11
                                                                   Mar 05
                                                                   Mar 23




             .2
                           Mar 12
                                                                                                 Mar 04
                                                                                                               Mar 26 Mar 17




      Fraction
             .1
                                      Mar 09
                                                                  Mar 20 Feb 27
                                                                                                    Mar 02




                                                 Mar 18
                                                           Mar 27 Feb 25 Feb 24
                                                           Mar 03
                                                                                                      Mar 10
                                                                                                                               Mar 24 Mar 13




51
             0
                     -12                  -6.75               -1.5              3.75                                           9
                                             Daily Average of Equity Returns, %
                                    COVID-19 and Economic Fallout                 Monetary Policy Easing
                                    Fiscal Policy Stimulus                        Super Tuesday Aftermath
                                    Oil Price Crash                               Unclassified
                                    All trading days in 2019


                   Figure B.2: Value-Weighted Mean of U.S. Equity Returns,
                       Daily for 2019 and for Large Daily Jumps in 2020
     This Figure considers all 2,155 securities in our analysis sample. The daily cross-sectional average is
     value-weighted (i.e. by equity market value). The mean (s.d.) of the daily average return for trading
     days in 2019 is 0.12 (0.80) percent. The heights on the vertical axis refer to normalized values for the
     histogram of 2019 returns.
                      .2
                                              Mar 04
                                                             Feb 25
                                                                                Mar 27
                                                                                                     Mar 09
                                                                                                                                         Mar 23




                      .15
                                                              Mar 03
                                                                                 Mar 26
                                                                                                                                                  Mar 24




                     .1
                   Fraction
                                                       Feb 27 Mar 05
                                                                   Mar 02
                                                                                         Mar 12
                                                                                                                Mar 20 Mar 17
                                                                                                                                                           Mar 18




                      .05
                                                          Feb 24
                                                                       Mar 11
                                                                                            Mar 10
                                                                                                                                Mar 13
                                                                                                                                                                    Mar 16




52
                      0
                                  1                    2.5               4                5.5                                                              7
                                                  Daily Cross-Security IQR of Equity Returns, %
                                                COVID-19 and Economic Fallout                                 Monetary Policy Easing
                                                Fiscal Policy Stimulus                                        Super Tuesday Aftermath
                                                Oil Price Crash                                               Unclassified
                                                All trading days in 2019


                      Figure B.3: Value-Weighted Cross-Sectional IQR of U.S. Equity Returns,
                                 Daily for 2019 and for Large Daily Jumps in 2020
     This Figure considers all 2,155 securities in our analysis sample. The daily cross-sectional IQR is value-weighted (i.e. by equity
     market value). The mean (s.d.) of the daily IQR for trading days in 2019 is 1.28 (0.36) percent. The heights on the vertical axis
     refer to normalized values for the histogram of 2019 returns.
           .2
                                      Feb 25
                                      Mar 05
                                                                     Mar 10
                                                                                                   Mar 13
                                                                                                                        Mar 09




           .15
                                                     Feb 27
                                                                              Mar 27
                                                                                                      Mar 20
                                                                                                                           Mar 24




           .1
        Fraction
                                                         Mar 02
                                                                                Mar 26
                                                                                                               Mar 23
                                                                                                                                    Mar 16




           .05
                                       Mar 03 Mar 04 Feb 24
                                                                  Mar 11
                                                                                         Mar 12
                                                                                                                  Mar 17
                                                                                                                                             Mar 18




53
           0
                         1               2.25              3.5            4.75                                                          6
                                       Daily Cross-Security SD of Equity Returns, %
                                     COVID-19 and Economic Fallout                                Monetary Policy Easing
                                     Fiscal Policy Stimulus                                       Super Tuesday Aftermath
                                     Oil Price Crash                                              Unclassified
                                     All trading days in 2019


            Figure B.4: Value-Weighted Cross-Sectional SD of U.S. Equity Returns,
                      Daily for 2019 and for Large Daily Jumps in 2020
     This Figure considers all 2,155 securities in our analysis sample. The daily cross-sectional SD is value-weighted
     (i.e. by equity market value). The mean (s.d.) of the daily SD for trading days in 2019 is 1.34 (0.34) percent.
emptyline

                                                             %        Mean            SD
                    Variables                         N                                         p1     p99
                                                             >0      All > 0       All > 0
 Abn. Returns and Financial Controls
  Percent Daily Abn. Return                          36635   45.4    -1.1   3.7    7.1   4.3   -25.9   15.8
  Log Market Cap                                     36635   100.0   21.5   21.5   1.7   1.7    18.6   25.9
  Leverage                                           2155    96.3     0.3   0.3    0.3   0.3     0.0   1.1
 General Economic Categories
  Broad Quantity Indicators                          2155    60.6    0.3    0.6    0.6   0.6   0.0     2.6
  Inflation                                          2155    53.3    0.3    0.6    0.7   0.9   0.0     2.9
  Interest Rates                                     2155    80.3    1.7    2.1    2.3   2.3   0.0     10.0
  Credit Indicators                                  2155    33.6    0.4    1.3    1.3   1.9   0.0     7.0
  Labor Markets                                      2155    92.2    1.2    1.3    1.4   1.4   0.0     6.5
  Real Estate Markets                                2155    50.8    2.3    4.5    4.7   5.8   0.0     20.5
  Business Investment and Sentiment                  2155     7.6    0.0    0.3    0.1   0.2   0.0     0.6
  Consumer Spending and Sentiment                    2155    46.1    0.3    0.8    0.7   0.9   0.0     3.9
  Commodity Markets                                  2155    96.1    3.0    3.1    5.3   5.4   0.0     27.4
  Financial Crises                                   2155    22.2    0.1    0.3    0.2   0.3   0.0     0.9
  Exchange Rate                                      2155    56.6    0.6    1.0    0.9   0.9   0.0     3.7
  Healthcare Matters                                 2155    44.5    1.9    4.3    4.5   6.0   0.0     19.9
  Litigation Matters                                 2155    94.4    2.1    2.2    1.7   1.7   0.0     7.6
  Competition Matters                                2155    32.0    0.1    0.4    0.3   0.5   0.0     1.6
  Labor Disputes                                     2155    38.5    0.2    0.6    0.5   0.6   0.0     2.1
  Intellectual Property Matters                      2155    65.0    2.8    4.3    3.8   4.0   0.0     16.2
 Policy-Related Categories
  Taxes                                              2155    95.5    3.4    3.6    3.4   3.4   0.0     14.4
  Government Spending, Deficits, Debt                2155    32.1    0.1    0.4    0.3   0.5   0.0     1.8
  Entitlement and Welfare Programs                   2155    23.0    0.4    1.8    1.6   3.0   0.0     9.0
  Monetary Policy                                    2155    26.2    0.3    1.3    1.0   1.6   0.0     4.7
  Financial Regulation                               2155    90.5    2.1    2.3    3.1   3.2   0.0     15.2
  Competition Policy                                 2155    24.8    0.1    0.4    0.3   0.4   0.0     1.2
  Intellectual Property Policy                       2155    21.7    0.1    0.4    0.2   0.3   0.0     1.0
  Labor Regulations                                  2155    34.7    0.2    0.6    0.7   1.0   0.0     2.6
  Energy and Environmental Regulation                2155    27.1    0.5    1.8    1.5   2.3   0.0     7.7
  Lawsuit and Tort Reform, Supreme Court Decisions   2155    16.4    0.0    0.2    0.1   0.3   0.0     0.6
  Housing and Land Management                        2155    14.6    0.1    0.4    0.3   0.8   0.0     0.8
  Other Regulation                                   2155    12.1    0.2    1.8    1.4   3.7   0.0     8.2
  Generic Regulation                                 2155    99.7    7.5    7.6    4.1   4.1   0.8     18.8
  National Security                                  2155    74.2    0.5    0.7    0.7   0.7   0.0     3.3
  Trade Policy                                       2155    36.8    0.2    0.6    0.5   0.6   0.0     2.0
  Healthcare Policy                                  2155    30.6    0.6    1.8    2.1   3.5   0.0     10.3
  Food and Drug Policy                               2155    17.4    0.8    4.3    2.3   3.8   0.0     10.8
  Transportation, Infrastructure, Utilities          2155    11.5    0.1    0.6    0.4   1.0   0.0     1.6
  Elections and Political Governance                 2155     1.3    0.0    0.1    0.0   0.1   0.0     0.0
  Agricultural Policy                                2155     4.1    0.0    0.6    0.2   0.8   0.0     0.7

                              Table B.1: Descriptive statistics
All statistics are unweighted and, except for log market cap and leverage, reported in percents. Sample
sizes for returns and market cap refer to the 17 dates used in our regression models for returns.
B.2   Additional material for section 3




  Figure B.5: Adjusted R2 for Baseline and Complete Dictionaries
  The horizontal axis displays the adjusted R2 from 17 separate OLS regressions of
  abnormal returns on firm controls and the baseline exposures, one for each day that
  enters the event groupings. These baseline exposures are computed using the 244
  terms in Baker et al. (2019) that appear in the preprocessed RF corpus. The vertical
  axis displays the adjusted R2 from the same regressions but with the dictionary
  exposures computed using the 430 terms that appear in the original dictionaries.
  The inclusion or not of rare terms is inconsequential for goodness-of-fit.




                                          55
B.3     Additional material for section 4

          ŷ = 0.001 + 1.001 x                                    ŷ = −0.005 + 1.003 x
              (0.050) (0.038)                                           (0.046) (0.011)




           (a) Day with Lowest Dictionary R2                        (b) Day with Highest Dictionary R2

              Figure B.6: Comparison of Fitted Values on 24 February and 9 March
 This figure plots fitted values from (3) and (4) estimated on 24 February (left panel) and 9 March 9
 (right panel). These days have the lowest and highest R2 values, respectively, under the dictionary
 approach. The black solid lines are fitted regressions, and the dashed line is the 45 degree line. The
 scales of the x- and y-axes differ between the two panels.


          ŷ = 0.004 + 0.970 x                                    ŷ = 0.024 + 0.822 x
              (0.011) (0.003)                                         (0.040) (0.019)




                      (a) Pooled Days                                           (b) March 24

   Figure B.7: Comparing Fitted Values between Approaches without Sector Fixed Effects
 This figure plots fitted values from regressions (3) and (4) without NAICS2-level fixed effects. The sufficient
 reduction project in (4) is built from coefficient estimates in the inverse regression model (2) that also does not
 include NAICS2 effects. The left panel plots the fitted values from both approaches across all days, and the
 right panel plots the fitted values for a day on which the fitted returns do not display a one-for-one relationship.
 The black solid lines are fitted regression lines, and the dashed line is the 45 degree line.



                                                         56
                                                                                   acres
                                                                                    of                                                                                                                                 B.4

                                                                                                                                                                                       B.4.1
                              wheat            iceland            intel            land        assays       salesforce     consoles        eye          optics       games
                                               private




                                                                                                                                                                                 Pos
                                                equity                          technology                    santa                                                 purchased
                            ecommerce           funds           alcohol          platform       game          clara           eus         virtual      tractors       power
                                                                                                                             new                        health
                              graphics          titles         intercept       subscriptions questionable     serial       members      ecosystem     insurance      cellular
                              clearing                                                         airline




          Raw Coeffs
                               house        establishments      patrons            atms       industry        delta       homebuyers       atm           slot         tribal




        Pandemic Fallout
                                                                                                                                            jet        american     corporate
                           homebuilding          visa         generations         silver       phillips       boeing         reuse         fuel         express       office
                                                                                                                                                                                 Neg




                                                                                                                                        unrealized
                                                                                  master                                                   loss
                               spirit           cruise       capitalizations       lease         jet        circulation       pos        position       native      negotiable
                              product                           clinical                                     health          drug                         the
                                                                                                                                                                                       Pandemic fallout day material




57
                             candidates         games            trials           clients        fda        insurance     candidates     patent       corporation     steel
                                                                                                 our
                                                                                                                                                                                 Pos




                                fdic          solutions         patents          patients     products        freight       clinical     cellular        game        alcohol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Additional material for section 5




                                                             intellectual                                                    data
                               drugs        collaborators      property        subscriptions container       wheat          center       platform commercialize carriers
                                                                                                 our                                                    general
                                reit           gaming            hotels           crude       manager         hotel       unitholders   restaurants    partner      pipelines




        Weighted Coeffs
        Pandemic Fallout
                                                                                                                                                      mortgage
                                                                                                                                                                                 Neg




                            distributions        trs           restaurant        satellite   reinsurance     tenants          fcc        pipeline       loans        refinery
                                            management                                                                                                              common
                                 oil          agreement          homes              ngl      franchisees     aircraft homebuilding         card        satellites     units


                                          Table B.2: Top and Bottom Terms on Pandemic Fallout Days

     The top half of the table lists the 30 terms with the highest and lowest estimated coefficients in the MNIR model fit to pandemic
     fallout days, after screening out terms that appear in the RF texts of more than two-thirds of firms. The bottom half weights
     the MNIR coefficient by the corresponding term’s tf-idf score, computed as xv log( 2133
                                                                                           dfv ) where xv is the count of term v in the
     RF corpus and dfv is the number of firms that use term v in any of their RF texts. We then display the top and bottom 30
     terms according to this weighted coefficient. Terms in bold also appear in the EMV dictionaries.
                                                                                                             NOVAVAX INC




                       5
                                                                                                             NETFLIX INC

                                                                                                             CEVA INC
                                                                                                             SURMODICS INC




                                 1.25
                                                                                                             CADIZ INC
                                                                                                             DOMINO'S PIZZA INC




                   -2.5
                                                                                                             RENEWABLE ENERGY GROUP INC




                                                                                                             PLAINS ALL AMER PIPELNE -LP




       -6.25
       Abnormal Equity Return, Percents
                                                                                                             MARCUS CORP




58
                                                                                                             PBF ENERGY INC




                       -10
                                      Fitted Return     Fitted Return           Fitted Return            Realized
                                      from No-Text    from Dictionary           from MNIR                Abnormal
                                      Specification     Specification           Specification             Return

                                                                Information   Manufacturing     Others


     Figure B.8: Predicted and Actual Returns for Firms with Greatest MNIR Fit Gains on Pandemic Fallout Days
       This figure considers ten firms with the greatest gain in fit by adding the sufficient reduction projection to a model
       fit to data for the 9 pandemic fallout jump days listed in the notes to Table 1. We consider security-level averages
       over these jump days and obtain predicted values for abnormal returns for each indicated specification. Dot colors
       show the firm’s industry. For firms with multiple equity securities, we retain the one with the highest market cap
       on 21 February 2020.
                                           %     Mean                SD
        Risk Exposure                N                                         p1   p99
                                           >0   All >0         All        >0
Advertizing                         2155   39   283    720    1507     2338    0    6458
Alternative Energy                  2155   25   351    1401   3600     7094    0    4690
Card Payments                       2155   41   844    2077   6997    10861    0    8900
Clearing Houses                     2155   21    93    444    1274     2761    0    1221
Commercial Property                 2155   77   1539   1994   7227     8173    0    25057
Display Technology                  2155   39   406    1046   4362     6958    0    6035
Financial Management                2155   82   761    930    2175     2371    0    12056
Foreign Exchange                    2155   16    33    203     377     911     0     435
Franchising                         2155   29   630    2139   3147     5516    0    12466
Gambling                            2155    9   431    4709   4997    15944    0    6013
Gold and Silver                     2155   10   144    1390   2032     6175    0    1836
Healthcare Providers                2155   16   103    641     847     2029    0    2386
Insurance                           2155   56   682    1223   4485     5953    0    16685
Mortgages                           2155   77   1786   2334   6785     7674    0    37103
REITs                               2155   76   2353   3092   7201     8115    0    41279
Residential Construction            2155   22   231    1028   1489     3010    0    4250
Restaurants                         2155    9   452    5214   5140    16764    0    14326
Traditional Retail                  2155   61   425    700    1295     1603    0    5931
Workforce                           2155    7    21    316     125     379     0     557
Aircraft + Travel                   2155   42   987    2363   7350    11232    0    16330
Communications + Trad Media         2155   61   1484   2450   11191   14301    0    30317
Energy Infr + Oil and Gas           2155   64   2661   4152   15174   18794    0    67763
Drug Trials                         2155   68   2105   3110   8057     9632    0    39575
Ecommerce                           2155   72   438    610    1621     1886    0    6110
Electronic Components and Devices   2155   73   834    1142   3368     3898    0    12615
Foodstuffs                          2155   46   442    963    3551     5198    0    7588
Foreign Countries                   2155   90   1608   1786   3000     3111    0    15099
Health Insurance                    2155   71   1505   2121   7508     8841    0    21070
Investment Funds                    2155   31   440    1436   3266     5778    0    7765
Metal Products                      2155   51   518    1014   4800     6676    0    5493
Power Generation                    2155   40   266    672    1643     2559    0    4655
Raw Metals and Minerals             2155   22   157    711     789     1557    0    2040
Semiconductors                      2155   24   261    1092   1369     2639    0    7368
Video Games                         2155   27   735    2766   9209    17713    0    11450
Web-Based Services                  2155   68   909    1339   3442     4108    0    13521
Banking + Deposits                  2155   83   1889   2286   7184     7845    0    39324
Shipping Cont + Transportation      2155   60   1215   2021   7711     9863    0    18866
Sftw and Hrdw Prod + Sftw Serv      2155   99   3680   3727   6982     7014    0    33594

            Table B.3: Descriptive statistics for MNIR-generated
               firm-level exposures to pandemic fallout news
All statistics are unweighted.
                                         utility                       health                undeveloped                                   service
                             ecommerce operations          navy       benefits  display         land        aggregates    nonresidential territories      radar
                                new                                             health                        health        customer                                         B.4.2
                              members    shield             flex      landfills plans          subsidy      insurance         care         silver          dec




                                                                                                                                                                       Pos
                                                                                                                                                         personal
                              medical                   management                                                                                        health
                               costs       backstop      programs  abbott        tactical     outreach         socio          gold        pharmacy     information
                                                          behalf      market                                                                             private
                                             hotel           of       mutual                                 permian                                     equity




            Raw Coeffs
                               sweep       properties     clients     funds       casino       resorts        basin           vessel         lng          funds




           Super Tuesday
                              millions
                                                                                                                                                                       Neg



                                 of                         las                   room                          hotel                      drilling
                              dollars         nfa          vegas       mmcf       rates      reservations      rooms         lodging         rigs      fractionation
                                                                                                              morgan                                    production
                              wellhead     condensate     lincoln     vessels     sweet        bakken         stanley          rigs         hotel        companies
                                                                                               health
                                                                                                                                                                             Super Tuesday material




                               tenants        reit      medicare        fda       display    insurance        tenant       medicaid        carriers    reinsurance
                                                                                 incentive
                             healthcare     students     properties     ric         fee         coal          patients         sba       franchisees      mining
                                                                                                                                                                       Pos




                                                                                                            department




60
                                drug                       real                   health                        of          operating
                             candidates     portfolio     estate       drugs       care          cms         education     partnership   restaurants     electric
                               natural
                                 gas           oil         crude      hotels      hotel        clients        gaming         drilling    unitholders     pipelines




           Super Tuesday
           Weighted Coeffs
                                 the        common
                                                                                                                                                                       Neg




                             corporation      units       pipeline     client    aircraft      vessels          fdic       midstream     partnership     offshore
                               general                                                                         hotel
                               partner        ferc        casino        ngl        lng         refinery      properties     ethanol          ngls          wells

                                          Table B.4: Top and Bottom Terms by MNIR Coefficient and TF-IDF
                                                     Weighted MNIR Coefficient on Super Tuesday
     The top half of this table lists the 30 terms with the highest and lowest estimated coefficient in the MNIR model on Super
     Tuesday, after screening out terms that appear in the RF texts for more than two-thirds of firms. The bottom half weights the
     MNIR coefficients by the corresponding term’s tf-idf score, computed as xV log( 2133
                                                                                       dfv ) where xv is the count of term v in the RF
     corpus and dfv is the number of firms that use term v in any of their RF texts. We then display the top and bottom 30 terms
     according to this weighted coefficient. Terms in bold also appear in the baseline dictionaries.
                                                                                                                                                    GRIFFIN INDUSTRIAL REALTY




                 13
                                                                                                                                                    EHEALTH INC


                                                                                                                                                    CENTENE CORP




                                7.25
                                                                                                                                                    COEUR MINING INC

                                                                                                                                                    GOLD RESOURCE CORP




     -4.25        1.5
     Abnormal Equity Return, Percents




61
                                                                                                                                                    ENLINK MIDSTREAM LLC


                                                                                                                                                    GENESIS ENERGY -LP
                                                                                                                                                    PBF ENERGY INC
                                                                                                                                                    TIDEWATER INC




                 -10
                                                                                                                                                    OIL STATES INTL INC


                                    Fitted Return                    Fitted Return                     Fitted Return                           Realized
                                    from No-Text                   from Dictionary                     from MNIR                               Abnormal
                                    Specification                    Specification                     Specification                            Return

                                          Transportation and Warehousing   Mining, Quarrying, Oil and Gas Extraction   Finance and Insurance     Manufacturing            Others


                                                                Figure B.9: Ten Firms with Largest Increase in Fit
                                                              from No-Text to MNIR Specification for Super Tuesday
     This figure considers ten firms with the greatest gain in fit by adding the sufficient reduction projection to a model
     fit to data for Super Tuesday. We obtain predicted values for abnormal returns for each indicated specification. Dot
     colors show the firm’s industry. For firms with multiple equity securities, we retain the one with the highest market
     cap on 21 February 2020.
            Company                                        Business Description                                      Terms          tf-idf x MNIR coeff.
                                                                                                             undeveloped land               488·7
                                      Real estate business focused on developing, acquiring, managing        connecticut                    316·5
GRIFFIN INDUSTRIAL REALTY %
                                      and leasing industrial/warehouse properties.                           square feet                    273·8
                                                                                                             flex                           251·3
                                                                                                             hartford                       226·5
                                                                                                             health insurance              3189·4
EHEALTH INC %                         Online marketplace for health insurance and Medicare plans.            ecommerce                     1177·5
                                                                                                             carriers                       946·9
                                                                                                             medicare                       718·0
                                                                                                             carrier                        372·7
                                      Managed healthcare enterprise that serves as intermediary to           medicaid                       656·1
CENTENE CORP %                                                                                               health plans                   444·8
                                      government-sponsored and commercial healthcare programs, fo-           health plan                    405·2
                                      cusing on under-insured and uninsured individuals.                     chip                           380·5
                                                                                                             care                           324·2
                                                                                                             silver                        1007·7
COEUR MINING INC %                    Gold, silver, zinc, and lead producer.                                 gold                           599·5
                                                                                                             mining                         551·4
                                                                                                             mine                           316·7
                                                                                                             ore                            157·7
                                                                                                             silver                         683·6
GOLD RESOURCE CORP %                  Producer of metal concentrates that contain gold, silver, copper,      gold                           576·8
                                      lead and zinc.                                                         mine                           244·9
                                                                                                             mining                         182·9
                                                                                                             mexican                         97·7
                                      Provider of midstream energy services (e.g. fractionating, pro-        midstream                   −1886·9
ENLINK MIDSTREAM LLC &                                                                                       condensate                    −658·8
                                      cessing, transporting, storing, and selling) to the oil and gas in-    partnership                   −455·3
                                      dustries.                                                              mmcf                          −388·9
                                                                                                             gathering                     −380·0
                                      Provider of midstream energy services (e.g. transportation, stor-      crude                         −695·3
GENESIS ENERGY -LP &                                                                                         refinery                      −489·0
                                      age, and processing) to the oil and gas industry and producer of       pipelines                     −387·9
                                      natural soda ash.                                                      oil                           −356·7
                                                                                                             unitholders                   −343·9
                                      Petroleum refiner and supplier of unbranded transportation fu-         crude                         −888·2
PBF ENERGY INC &                                                                                             refinery                      −768·9
                                      els, heating oil, petrochemical feedstocks, lubricants and other       refineries                    −407·3
                                      petroleum products.                                                    receivable agreement          −394·7
                                                                                                             oil                           −257·6
                                      Provides marine support and transportation services to the global      vessels                     −2027·6
TIDEWATER INC &                                                                                              vessel                      −1467·1
                                      offshore energy industry through the operation of a fleet of marine    offshore                      −722·8
                                      service vessels.                                                       deepwater                     −429·6
                                                                                                             crude                         −300·0
                                      Provider of highly engineered oilfield products and services for the   accommodations                −584·8
OIL STATES INTL INC &                                                                                        offshore                      −576·1
                                      drilling, completion, subsea, production and infrastructure sectors    oil                           −352·7
                                      of the oil and natural gas industry.                                   drilling                      −348·3
                                                                                                             sands                         −339·1

                                     Table B.5: Ten Firms with Largest Increase in Fit
                               from No-Text to MNIR Specification for Super Tuesday Aftermath

This table lists the 10 firms with the greatest fit gain when adding the MNIR-based sufficient reduction production to a model with all
of our non-text regressors. For each firm, we report five terms with the largest positive or negative MNIR coefficient in the firm-specific
sufficient reduction projection when multiplied by tf-idf scores to down weight generic terms.
                  Seed                    Name                    Retained Terms   Dropped Terms
                  aircraft                Aircraft                       3               6
                  mastercard              Card Payments                 20               0
                  derivatives             Financial Instruments         34               0
                  wheat                   Foodstuffs                    11              14
                  gaming                  Gambling                       6               0
                  hotels                  Hotels                         6               5
                  steel                   Industrial Metals             17               8
                  vehicles                Motor Vehicles                12               8
                  emissions               Pollution                     40               0
                  electricity             Power Generation              34               1
                  vessels                 Shipping                      15               1
                  tariff                  Tariffs                        5               2
                  broadcast               Traditional Media             19               0
                  fleet                   Transportation                 9               1
                  travel                  Travel                         8               3
                  private equity funds    Asset Management              22               0
                  investment funds        Financial Management          10               0
                  bank                    Banking                       35              16
                  fdic                    Financial Regulation          23               0
                  deepwater               Drilling Activity             21              22
                  hydraulic fracturing    Fracking                      13               3
                  pipelines               Energy Infrastructure         20              15
                  oil                     Oil and Gas                   13              0
                                              (a) Negative Exposures

               Seed                      Name                       Retained Terms   Dropped Terms
               homebuilding              Construction                      5               0
               radar                     Defense Technology               17              38
               drugs                     Drugs                            34              13
               students                  Education                         9               9
               mobile                    Electronic Communication         35              10
               mexican                   Foreign                           9               1
               franchisees               Franchising                       6               0
               government contracts      Government Contracting           10               2
               reinsurance               Insurance                        25               0
               gold                      Metals                            5               4
               navy                      Military                          9               2
               mining                    Mining                           11               0
               reit                      REITs                            21               0
               properties                Real Estate                      22               0
               space                     Rental Market                    14               0
               restaurants               Restaurants                       2               8
               utility operations        Utilities                         6               2
               games                     Video Games                       6               1
               landfills                 Waste                             5               5
               ecommerce                 Ecommerce                         2               1
               subsidy                   Subsidies                         4               2
               health insurance          Health Insurance                  9               5
               medicare                  Government Healthcare            31               2
               hospitals                 Healthcare Suppliers             20               5
                                              (b) Positive Exposures

                        Table B.6: Targeted Exposures for Super Tuesday
This table enumerates our targeted risk factors for Super Tuesday. See notes in table 3.



                                                         63
                                          %     Mean                SD
          Risk Exposure             N                                         p1   p99
                                          >0   All >0         All        >0
Aircraft                           2155   6    147    2358   1738    6609     0    3716
Card Payments                      2155   39   322    837    3176    5077     0    3451
Financial Instruments              2155   81   848    1047   2306    2521     0    9460
Foodstuffs                         2155   23   168    741    1723    3568     0    2206
Gambling                           2155   11   362    3349   4130    12179    0    5030
Hotels                             2155   12   685    5810   6395    17840    0    16468
Industrial Metals                  2155   33   330    1014   2563    4418     0    5184
Motor Vehicles                     2155   42   426    1017   2263    3412     0    7836
Pollution                          2155   45   640    1411   2404    3415     0    12030
Power Generation                   2155   87   1014   1164   4802    5128     0    21215
Shipping                           2155   22   485    2160   4798    9952     0    9518
Tariffs                            2155   40    86    212     570     881     0    1608
Traditional Media                  2155   42   446    1064   4031    6172     0    7639
Transportation                     2155   25   242    957    1883    3658     0    4981
Travel                             2155   27   263    984    1552    2883     0    5674
Asset Mngmt + Financial Mngmt      2155   52   597    1155   3401    4663     0    8793
Banking + Financial Regul          2155   80   1712   2150   6060    6722     0    32918
Drilling Act + Fracking            2155   30   945    3115   6118    10804    0    25243
Energy Infr + Oil and Gas          2155   58   3163   5439   16704   21625    0    80630
Construction                       2155   24   153    651     842    1640     0    3261
Defense Technology                 2155   44   229    526    1453    2167     0    3807
Drugs                              2155   33   988    2967   4059    6604     0    20953
Education                          2155   20   205    1037   3071    6843     0    1180
Electronic Communication           2155   80   647    810    2773    3081     0    15197
Foreign                            2155   31   135    440     895    1573     0    1953
Franchising                        2155   17   527    3020   2314    4818     0    11579
Government Contracting             2155   46   155    336     648     921     0    2885
Insurance                          2155   73   684    939    3840    4471     0    18170
Metals                             2155   25   137    542    1687    3328     0    1662
Military                           2155   44   221    506    1348    2004     0    3657
Mining                             2155   34   450    1341   4327    7389     0    7619
Real Estate                        2155   87   1725   1981   4321    4576     0    22134
REITs                              2155   50   975    1933   3242    4358     0    16733
Rental Market                      2155   48   435    900    1739    2417     0    7045
Restaurants                        2155   8    126    1556   1433    4829     0    4256
Utilities                          2155   24    81    332     612    1206     0    2089
Video Games                        2155   12   115    972    1737    4985     0     938
Waste                              2155   18    98    556    1085    2532     0    1311
Ecomm + Health Ins + Subsidies     2155   73   1124   1533   6602    7670     0    12905
Gov Healthcare + Healthcare Supp   2155   69   1777   2573   7368    8752     0    28726

             Table B.7: Descriptive statistics, Targeted Exposures
                             for Super Tuesday
All statistics are unweighted.
C      Term Sets for Targeted Exposures
Here we list all terms associated with the targeted exposures for pandemic fallout dates
and Super Tuesday. For each exposure, we first provide our chosen name followed by
the set of terms representing the exposures in curly braces. The term marked by the
asterisk is the seed term for building the set. Bold terms are also present in the EMV
dictionaries. Our manual deletions are the terms with strike-through marks. Terms
are ordered within sets according to their cosine similarity with the seed term in the
embedding space.


C.1      Pandemic fallout days

Exposures associated with negative returns:

    1. Advertizing: {advertisers*, advertiser, audience, audiences, guests, advertising,
       end customers, advertising revenue, patrons, digital media, subscriber, marketers,
       advertising expenditures, buyers}

    2. Alternative Energy: {biodiesel*, ethanol, fuels, corn, biomass, gasoline, refined
       products, diesel, biofuels, fuel, feedstocks, feedstock, propane, gallon, refined,
       alternative fuel, poultry, jet fuel, gallons, refiners, asphalt, produced, aggregates,
       crude, alternative energy sources, petrochemical, renewable}

    3. Card Payments: {card*, cards, credit card, visa, mastercard, debit, merchant,
       merchants, credit cards, cardholder, card issuers, card transactions, cardholders,
       atm, american express, electronic payment, interchange, payment services, pos,
       check, gift, interchange fees, pci, atms, point of sale}

    4. Clearing Houses: {clearing house*, clearing, futures}

    5. Commercial Property: {hotels*, hotel properties, hotel, properties, resorts, retail
       properties, property, such properties, shopping centers, communities, commercial



                                             65
    property, rooms, homes, new properties, management agreements, land parcels,
    such property, real properties, other properties, suites, management companies}

 6. Display Technology: {display*, displays, format, digital, signage, displayed, screens,
    navigation, ads, seat, compact, interactive, radar, machine, video, signal, film,
    multimedia, cameras, log, films, pads, meter, filters, crystal, coupons, wall, ad,
    turning}

 7. Financial Management: {unrealized loss position*, unrealized losses, fixed ma-
    turity securities, unrealized loss, fixed maturity, unrealized, investment portfolio,
    otti, fixed income securities, temporary impairments, loss position, market value,
    fair value, decline in value, portfolio}

 8. Foreign Exchange: {yen*, canadian dollar, british pound sterling, rupee, dollar
    value}

 9. Franchising: {franchisees*, franchisee, franchise, franchisors, franchised, franchise
    agreements, landlords, lessees, franchisor, franchise agreement, tenants, franchis-
    ing, anchor tenants}

10. Gambling: {gaming*, casino, slot, horse, native}

11. Gold and Silver: {gold*, silver, concentrates, ore, sweet, lumber, el}

12. Healthcare Providers: {surgeons*, hospitals, dentists, dental, clinics, pathology,
    training programs}

13. Insurance: {reinsurance*, reinsurers, reinsurance agreements, reinsurance ar-
    rangements, ceded, reinsurance contracts, reinsured, reinsurer, commercial in-
    surance, catastrophe, insurers, insurance policies, mortgage insurance, coverages,
    insurer, captive, insurance policy, insureds, cost of reinsurance, casualty, statu-
    tory surplus, insurance company, insurance operations}




                                          66
14. Mortgages: {mortgage*, residential mortgage, mortgages, mortgage loan, com-
    mercial mortgage, certain mortgage, mortgage loans, other mortgage, resi-
    dential mortgage loan, rmbs, loan, cmbs, mbs, abs, federal home loan mortgage
    corporation, ginnie mae, mortgage lending, federal national mortgage asso-
    ciation, commercial mortgage loan, mortgage financing, other loans, subprime,
    securitized, first mortgage, such loans, first lien, agency securities, mortgage orig-
    ination, securitization, mortgage market, originations, loan sales, origination,
    securitizations, asset, borrowers, mortgage banking, servicer, gse, backed, mort-
    gaged, mortgage industry, federal housing administration, fha}

15. REITs: {reit*, ric, reits, reit status, reit qualification, taxable reit subsidiary,
    taxable reit subsidiaries, trss, gross income test, trs, bdc, reit income, internal
    revenue, income test, reit distribution, partnership, income tests, taxable years,
    qualify, asset tests, hedge accounting treatment, gross income tests, gross income,
    reit gross income, investment company, income tax, distribution requirement,
    taxable year, spin}

16. Residential Construction: {homebuilding*, residential construction, land
    development, housing}

17. Restaurants: {restaurants*, restaurant, stores, retail stores, dealerships, guest,
    retail locations, customer traffic, food products, brands, dining, locations, openings,
    concepts, schools, opened}

18. Traditional Retail: {retail*, wholesale, outlet, retail sales, foodservice, retailers,
    specialty stores, convenience stores, automotive, department stores, retail busi-
    ness, retailer, furniture, beauty, home, retail outlets, retail operations, other re-
    tailers, wholesale customers, new vehicle, shopping center, residential customers,
    food service, branded, club, casual, establishments, oriented, cosmetics, build-
    ing products, commercial customers, upscale, retail space, recreational, business
    services}


                                          67
 19. Workforce: {workforces*, labor force}

 20. Aircraft and Airlines: {aircraft*, vehicles, commercial aircraft, boeing, flight,
     airlines, trucks, ships, vehicle, rig, faa, jet, spare parts, flights, fly, drilling rig,
     passenger, replacement parts, machines, passengers}

 21. Travel: {travel*, air travel, business travel, travelers, leisure, tourism, airline,
     discretionary spending, vacation, airline industry, destinations, consumer spending,
     attendance, disposable income, traveling, traffic, recreation}

 22. Communications: {satellite*, satellites, cable, band, broadband, frequencies, ca-
     ble television, signals, gateway, carriage, wireless broadband, wireline, gps, mi-
     crowave, data communications, programming, station, spectrum, broadcasters,
     fcc, transmitter, voip}

 23. Traditional Media: {newspapers*, newspaper, television, circulation, movie, out-
     lets, publications, radio, other media, print, advertising revenues, news, publish-
     ing, tv, broadcast, entertainment, pages, los angeles, stations, outdoor, clubs, hd,
     households}

 24. Energy Infrastructure: {pipelines*, pipeline systems, pipeline, gathering systems,
     pipeline system, processing plants, storage tanks, processing facilities, termi-
     nals, storage facilities, gathering, refineries, interstate, gas pipeline, terminal,
     transportation systems, downstream, intrastate, transmission facilities, gas pro-
     cessing, common carrier, rail, transportation, plants, gas gathering, fractionation,
     shippers, refinery, ferc, dock, gulf coast, routes, wells, transmission system, mid-
     stream, unloading, generation facilities}

 25. Oil and Gas: {oil*, ngls, ngl, oils, liquids, natural gas, petroleum, hydrocar-
     bon, hydrocarbons, marcellus shale, exploration}

Exposures associated with positive returns:



                                             68
1. Drug Trials: {preclinical*, nonclinical, preclinical studies, preclinical testing, pre-
   clinical development, clinical testing, clinical studies, clinical, clinical develop-
   ment programs, clinical trials, trials, toxicology, validation, clinical development,
   clinical data, development programs, confirmatory, trial results, clinical research,
   drug development, research and development, research programs, vivo, research,
   clinical trial, stage clinical trials, investigator, clinical study, drug candidates,
   clinical trial results, vitro, efficacy, product candidates, progress, commercializa-
   tion activities, commercial use, collaborative, drug candidate, submission, anti-
   body, compounds, inconclusive, investigational}

2. Ecommerce: {ecommerce*, e commerce, online, electronic commerce, customer
   care, direct marketing, payment processing, amazon, portals, email, network,
   catalogs, pc, salesforce, support systems, offline, pcs, yahoo, portal, website,
   online services, chat, communications}

3. Electronic Components and Devices: {optics*, optical, sensor, ray, filter, graph-
   ics, high performance, coating, electronic components, electronics, sensors, mag-
   netic, chips, substrates, laser, micro, memory, analog, photovoltaic, fiber, coat-
   ings, thin, composites, logic, flash, chip, polymer, handheld, fibers, serial, sur-
   faces, ir, lighting, industrial applications, boxes, glass, hewlett packard, portable,
   samsung, cables, electrical, transformers, appliances, audio, printers, intel, tech,
   dell, assemblies, biomedical, appliance, data storage, cisco, drives, valve, valves,
   peripheral, consumables, sole supplier, roof, stack, industrial, hvac, powered, ma-
   trix, plc, power systems, wired, modular, phones, ltd, disposable, universal, li-
   braries, chamber, embedded, catalyst, microsoft corporation, reagents, labs, bat-
   teries, corp, plumbing, furnaces, big, bio, color, biology, strip, radiation, sony,
   diagnostics, finishing, graphic}

4. Foodstuffs: {wheat*, grains, sugar, fruit, milk, grain, coffee, dairy, protein,
   proteins, sodium, powder, wine, packaging materials, crops, foods, fresh, agri-
   cultural products, synthetic, intermediates, additives, enzymes, salt, ingredients,

                                          69
   specialty, trees, additive, organic, ingredient}

5. Foreign Countries: {china*, india, taiwan, chinese, south africa, asia, russia, bei-
   jing, shanghai, hong kong, asia pacific region, united arab emirates, countries, the
   philippines, korea, chinas, mexico, western europe, egypt, switzerland, overseas,
   latin america, unitedstates, united kingdom, europe, belgium, asian, germany,
   singapore, france, ukraine, indonesia, norway, finland, asia pacific, japan, certain
   countries, iceland, japanese, sweden, operations in mexico, operations in china,
   north america, peru, korean, australia, dubai, world, european, thailand, euro-
   pean union, industrialized, other countries, russian, england, many countries,
   worldwide, foreign countries, central bank, globally, german, chinese govern-
   ment}

6. Health Insurance: {medicare*, medicaid, cms, payers, prescription drug,
   partd, health plans, physician, payors, reimbursement, health insurance, health
   care, healthcare, third party payers, hospital, health plan, payment system, hhs,
   payer, clinical laboratory, third party payors, reimbursement levels, department
   of health and human services, payor, subsidy, prescription drugs, ppaca, mma,
   care organizations, coding, federal government, patients, private insurers, care
   programs, reimbursement policies}

7. Investment Funds: {investment funds*, private equity funds, hedge funds, private
   equity fund, investment managers, private equity, limited partnerships, separate
   accounts, pooled, advisers, investment management, other investment, clo, in-
   vestment advisers, asset managers}

8. Manufacturing: {manufacturing*, manufacture, product manufacturing, manu-
   facturing process, manufacturing operations, manufacturing processes, manufac-
   turing activities, production processes, manufacturing capabilities, commercial
   manufacturing, manufacturing facilities, production process, third party manu-
   facturing, manufacturing equipment, assembly, wafer fabrication, contract man-


                                         70
    ufacturers, third party manufacturers, packing, contract manufacturing, prod-
    uct development, manufacturing capacity, commercial supply, manufacture of
    products, technical, new manufacturing, manufacturing facility, product compo-
    nents, production facilities, process technology, manufacturing services, testing,
    commercial scale, contract manufacturer, volume production, finished products,
    manufacturers, product design, formulation, materials}

 9. Metal Products: {steel*, aluminum, metal, copper, titanium, metals, stain-
    less, pulp, plastics, resin, scrap, rubber, iron, rolled, raw materials, mill, mills,
    fabricated, raw material, diamond, hot}

10. Power Generation: {coal*, electricity, ash, coke, steam, sand, power plants,
    power plant, electric power, energy sources, electric generating, water, tons}

11. Raw Metals and Minerals: {tantalum*, tin, tungsten, conflict minerals, demo-
    cratic republic of congo, minerals, adjoining countries, zinc, precious metals,
    such minerals, oxide, platinum, requirements for companies, sheet}

12. Semiconductors: {semiconductor*, semiconductors, silicon, semiconductor man-
    ufacturing, ic, semiconductor industry, semiconductor products, network equip-
    ment, consumer electronics, oems, life sciences, technology industry, customers
    products, automotive industry, life science, wafers, original equipment manufac-
    turers, industries, capital equipment, technology companies}

13. Video Games: {games*, game, titles, players, app, consoles, movies, android, win-
    dows, player, mobile devices, streaming, facebook, studios, smartphones, music,
    handsets, smartphone, handset, console, subscribers, download, versions, videos,
    mobile phones}

14. Web-Based Services: {cloud*, saas, cloud computing, web, hosted, server, inter-
    net, premise, ip, desktop, virtual, data center, networking, messaging, browser,




                                          71
    mobility, wireless networks, hosting, subscription, network security, wireless, tele-
    phony, data centers, centric, bandwidth}

15. Banking: {bank*, banks, bank subsidiary, state bank, savings bank, financial
    institution, bank subsidiaries, national bank, bank holding company, institution,
    subsidiary bank, financial institutions, the corporation, ots, institutions, deposi-
    tory institution, national banks, bank holding companies, savings banks, banking,
    prudential, fhlb, banking institutions, savings institutions, community banks, fi-
    nancials, financial companies, depository, federal home loan bank, extensions
    of credit, bank regulators, chartered, wells fargo bank, federal bank, wells fargo,
    bhc act, bhca, corporations, bank of america, holding companies}

16. Deposits: {fdic*, fdics, deposit insurance, occ, insured institutions, frb, dif,
    insured depository institutions, special assessment, restoration plan, comptroller
    of the currency, assessment rate, assessment rates, reserve ratio, insurance as-
    sessments, federal banking regulators, federal banking agencies, loss sharing, loss
    share, federal banking agency}

17. Shipping Containers: {vessels*, vessel, cargo, rigs, tank, fleets, drilling rigs, fleet,
    containers, trailers, other equipment, engines, tractors}

18. Transportation: {freight*, trucking, shipping, delivery services, ocean, carriers,
    shipping costs, other transportation, shipments, railroads, haul, fuel costs, rail-
    road, inbound, transportation industry, ports, fuel surcharges, carrier, container,
    port, transit}

19. Software Services: {solutions*, solution, software solutions, technology solutions,
    platform, technology platform, communications services, service offerings, plat-
    forms, intelligent, analytics, tools, technologies, product offerings, edge, tech-
    nology platforms, capabilities, modules, architectures, business solutions, func-
    tionality, devices, crm, innovative products, connectivity, new solutions, suite of



                                           72
      products, automation, ecosystem, network services, new technologies, new ser-
      vices, innovative, module, features, management products, enterprise, unified,
      functionalities, product line, next generation, scalability, professional services,
      applications, touch, agile, new features, management system, new technology,
      testing services, service delivery, other products, electronic devices, new products,
      wireless carriers, business model, enabled, seamless, clients, enterprise customers,
      technical services, support services, new applications, new business models, in-
      tegrated, lte, range of services, health information technology, diagnostic tests,
      product lines, enhanced products, additional services, technical support services}

 20. Software and Hardware Products: {software*, software products, software ap-
      plications, hardware, software systems, operating system, third party software,
      proprietary software, interfaces, interface, it infrastructure, architecture, other
      technology, computer hardware, operating systems, computer, software vendors,
      third party technology, hardware products, servers, new software, software de-
      velopment, proprietary technology, digital content, designs, it systems, algo-
      rithms, custom, microsoft, data management, customization, analytic, design,
      open source, malware, information systems, technology infrastructure, firewalls,
      open source software, content, such technologies, bugs, communications systems,
      integrations, open source code, computers, compatibility, information manage-
      ment, proprietary, algorithm, source code, laptops, technology systems, inter-
      nal systems, customized, provisioning, computer systems, encryption, optimized,
      designers, business processes, ibm, proprietary technologies, downloaded, unde-
      tected errors}


C.2     Super Tuesday

Exposures associated with negative returns:

  1. Aircraft: {aircraft*, commercial aircraft, railcars, engine, boeing, railcar, spare
      parts, equipment, machines}

                                            73
2. Card Payments: {mastercard*, visa, card, merchants, cards, merchant, debit,
  cardholders, ach, payment card, payment cards, atm, card transactions, card-
  holder, interchange, credit card, pci, processors, payment processing, interchange
  fees}

3. Financial Instruments: {derivatives*, derivative instruments, swaps, derivative,
  derivative transactions, swap, derivative contracts, financial instruments, hedges,
  futures contracts, derivative financial instruments, futures, foreign exchange con-
  tracts, commodity, hedging, hedging instruments, credit default, forward con-
  tracts, hedging activities, hedge accounting, hedge, otc, market risk, hedging
  arrangements, clearing, aoci, notional, nymex, hedged, trading activities, fair
  value measurements, cash collateral, cftc, counterparties}

4. Foodstuffs: {wheat*, sugar, oils, corn, grain, proteins, fish, powder, wine,
  fabrics, feedstocks, blends, sweet, fibers, synthetic, intermediates, precious metals,
  additives, trees, tin, chips, additive, apparel, organic, produces}

5. Gambling: {gaming*, casino, slot, las vegas, horse, native}

6. Hotels: {hotels*, hotel properties, hotel, resorts, communities, rooms, stores,
  franchisors, management agreements, suites, franchise}

7. Industrial Metals: {steel*, aluminum, nickel, titanium, paper, plastics, scrap,
  alloys, petrochemicals, concrete, iron, rolled, mill, composites, fertilizer, petrochemical,
  pipe, coatings, raw material costs, diamond, silicon, hot, platinum, global demand,
  sand}

8. Motor Vehicles: {vehicles*, vehicle, cars, trucks, engines, new vehicles, car,
  containers, motor vehicles, batteries, mounted, battery, new vehicle, appliances,
  motors, furnaces, heavy, residual values, automotive, motor vehicle}

9. Pollution: {emissions*, ghg emissions, emission, greenhouse gas, ghgs, ghg, emis-
  sions of ghgs, air emissions, carbon dioxide, nox, carbon emissions, air pollutants,

                                        74
    methane, ghg emission, emitted, emissions of greenhouse, emission standards,
    hazardous air pollutants, carbon, dioxide, nitrogen, fuel economy, emit, flaring,
    sulfur, clean air act, cap and trade, mact, caa, epa, stationary sources, epas,
    pollutant, nsps, psd, energy consumption, discharges, discharge of pollutants,
    tons per year, pollution}

10. Power Generation: {electricity*, electric power, power, energy, electricity genera-
    tion, fuels, electrical power, propane, feedstock, spot market, energy sources, solar
    energy, renewable energy, refined products, hydro, coke, power generation, gen-
    eration, ethanol, utility, hydroelectric, alternative energy sources, commodities,
    output, generation facilities, renewables, forms of energy, gasoline, lng, renew-
    able, solar panels, wholesale, heat, grid, alternative fuel}

11. Shipping: {vessels*, vessel, barges, cargo, rigs, tank, drilling rigs, rig, tanker,
    tanks, dock, barge, other equipment, ports, crews, loading}

12. Tariffs: {tariff *, tariffs, ferc, fercs, indexing, shipper, mechanism}

13. Traditional Media: {broadcast*, television, broadcasting, radio, broadcasters,
    programming, newspaper, stations, movie, fcc, fccs, station, newspapers, other
    media, studios, signals, audio, magazines, digital}

14. Transportation: {fleet*, fleets, truck, horsepower, container, customer base, crew,
    van, miles, trains}

15. Travel: {travel*, air travel, travelers, leisure, tourism, vacations, vacation, desti-
    nations, disposable income, fears, economic activity}

16. Asset Management: {private equity funds*, hedge funds, private equity, private
    equity fund, investment managers, mutual funds, limited partnerships, propri-
    etary trading, pension funds, asset managers, certain investment, operating com-
    panies, clo, fixed income, institutional investors, buyout, institutional clients,



                                          75
    alternative investment, investment banks, ventures, mutual fund, asset manage-
    ment}

17. Financial Management: {investment funds*, investment vehicles, separate ac-
    counts, asset classes, pooled, advisers, investment strategies, investment man-
    agement, other investment, investment advisers}

18. Banking: {bank*, banks, bank subsidiary, state bank, financial institution, bank
    subsidiaries, banking subsidiaries, national bank, bank holding company, institution,
    subsidiary bank, commercial bank, financial institutions, the corporation, trust
    company, institutions, depository institution, national banks, bank holding com-
    panies, banking, prudential, fhlb, banking institutions, subsidiary, banking oper-
    ations, financial services businesses, capital adequacy, financial group, community
    banks, financials, thrift, financial companies, supervisory, depository, lending,
    extensions of credit, bank regulators, chartered, loans, regulator, federal bank,
    wells fargo, bhc act, bhca, corporations, nonbank, brokered deposits, holding
    companies, s subsidiaries, entity, summit}

19. Financial Regulation: {fdic*, fdics, deposit insurance, occ, frb, dif, insured
    depository institution, fdia, insured depository institutions, insured deposits,
    restoration plan, federal reserve, assessment rate, assessment rates, reserve ra-
    tio, insurance assessments, federal banking regulators, federal banking agencies,
    assessment base, loss sharing, cfpb, loss share, fsa}

20. Drilling Activity: {deepwater*, gulf of mexico, shallow, offshore, marcellus shale,
    permian basin, horizontal, bakken, drilling, wash, sands, basin, shale, onshore,
    depths, drilling rig, seismic, exploration, exploratory, drilling activity, gas wells,
    gulf coast, production operations, frontier, basins, feet, outer, unconventional,
    wells, drilling operations, coastal, north, directional, deepwater horizon, ocean,
    mississippi river, deep, marine, flowing, drilled, northern, gulf, formations}

21. Fracking: {hydraulic fracturing*, fracturing, hydraulic fracturing activities, hy-

                                          76
     draulic fracturing process, sdwa, water act, fracturing process, federal safe drink-
     ing, fluids, stimulation, hydraulic, lands, blm, production activities, hydraulic
     fracturing practices, groundwater}

 22. Energy Infrastructure: {pipelines*, pipeline systems, pipeline, gathering systems,
     pipeline system, processing plants, storage tanks, processing facilities, terminals,
     gathering, refineries, interstate, transportation facilities, gas pipeline, terminal,
     transportation systems, downstream, intrastate, gas processing, common carrier,
     rail, transportation, plants, gas gathering, waterways, fractionation, shippers,
     refinery, production facilities, leaks, transmission system, transportation services,
     midstream, unloading, ruptures}

 23. Oil and Gas: {oil*, ngls, ngl, liquids, natural gas, petroleum, henry hub,
     liquefied, hydrocarbon, mcf, hydrocarbons, extraction, shales}

Exposures associated with positive returns:

  1. Construction: {homebuilding*, commercial construction, residential con-
     struction, land development, housing}

  2. Defense Technology: {radar*, sensor, tactical, sensors, weapons, lightweight,
     electro, sensing, adaptive, handheld, monitoring systems, command, instrumen-
     tation, computerized, console, filtration, detection, signaling, visual, ray, in-
     telligence, filter, pads, suppression, id, powered, airborne, peripheral, imaging,
     turbine, interface, conditioning, hd, micro, ground, optic, vision, backbone, wall,
     radiological, cables, satellite, tracking, dimensions, air, advanced, workflow, polymer,
     architecture, flight, intrusion, infusion, measurement, controller, radiation}

  3. Drugs: {drugs*, drug, drug products, pharmaceutical products, drug candi-
     dates, new drugs, therapies, prescription drugs, vaccines, approved products,
     such products, pharmaceuticals, medical devices, treatments, potential products,



                                           77
  biosimilars, drug candidate, diagnostic products, biologics, medical device prod-
  ucts, compounds, devices, pharmaceutical, future products, new drug, inhibitors,
  medical products, therapy, antibodies, marketed, inhaled, regimens, topical, in-
  travenous, device, branded products, indications, certain products, fda, con-
  trolled substances, other indications, molecules, inhibitor, ingredients, label, other
  product candidate, prescription}

4. Education: {students*, student, educational programs, subscribers, patients,
  homebuyers, college, consumers, student loans, courses, individuals, adults, ap-
  plicants, colleges, members, credentials, users, women}

5. Electronic Communication: {mobile*, mobile phone, apps, wireless, android,
  messaging, data communications, video, mobile applications, personal comput-
  ers, enabled, platforms, data services, handset, wireless communications, internet
  services, facebook, phones, smart, voice, wireless networks, wireless carriers, com-
  munications services, download, broadband, handsets, apple, portal, tablets, net-
  work, communications, ios, centric, networks, entertainment, voip, lte, telecom,
  pos, wireless services, easy, internet access, operating systems, monetization,
  interoperable}

6. Foreign: {mexican*, swedish, peso, mexico, railway, puerto rico, peru, franc,
  canadian dollar, operations in mexico}

7. Franchising: {franchisees*, franchisee, franchised, landlords, tenants, franchis-
  ing}

8. Government Contracting: {government contracts*, subcontracts, government
  contracting, government contractor, fixed price contracts, government customers,
  other contracts, government contractors, procurement, procurements, contracting,
  government agencies}

9. Insurance: {reinsurance*, reinsurers, reinsurance coverage, ceded, reinsurance


                                        78
    contracts, reinsured, property insurance, reinsurer, insurance subsidiary, commer-
    cial insurance, catastrophe, insurers, insurance policies, insurance subsidiaries,
    coverages, insurer, casualty insurance, insurance coverage, such insurance, in-
    sureds, cost of reinsurance, casualty, statutory surplus, insurance company, in-
    surance operations}

10. Metals: {gold*, silver, copper, metals, metal, concentrates, recycled, pound,
    lumber}

11. Military: {navy*, army, department of defense, dod, installations, defense,
    military, prime contractor, prime contractors, awarded, aerospace}

12. Mining: {mining*, mine, mining operations, mineral, mines, reclamation, coal,
    ore, underground, mined, land use}

13. REITs: {reit*, ric, reits, reit status, reit qualification, taxable reit subsidiary,
    taxable reit subsidiaries, bdc, irc, investment trust, income test, reit distribution,
    income tests, taxable years, qualify, asset tests, rics, hedge accounting treatment,
    gross income, distribution requirement, taxable year}

14. Real Estate: {properties*, property, such properties, certain properties, such
    property, real property, real properties, other properties, land, land parcels, office
    properties, commercial property, real estate, additional properties, undeveloped
    land, homes, lease, leases, apartment, property acquisitions, acres, lots}

15. Rental Market: {space*, office space, retail space, vacant space, rentable, square
    feet, condominiums, let, buildings, leased, office buildings, vacancy rates, footage,
    vacant}

16. Restaurants: {restaurants*, restaurant, shopping centers, dealerships, customer
    traffic, foods, food products, clubs, club, convenience stores}

17. Utilities: {utility operations*, utilities, electric utility, electric, es, distribution
    operations, service territories, electric transmission}

                                           79
18. Video Games: {games*, game, titles, players, app, player, new product offerings}

19. Waste: {landfills*, landfill, solid waste, generating facilities, beds, hazardous
    waste, wastewater, ash, water, electric generating}

20. Ecommerce: {ecommerce*, customer care, website}

21. Subsidies: {subsidy*, subsidies, veterans, grants, rebates, eligibility}

22. Health Insurance: {health insurance*, health plans, health care, health bene-
    fits, health plan, health insurers, healthcare, private insurance, employers, other
    insurance, workers compensation, employer, medical care, long term care}

23. Government Healthcare: {medicare*, medicaid, cms, reimbursement rates,
    payment rates, payers, inpatient, outpatient, part d, beneficiaries, prescription
    drug, partd, reimbursement, third party payers, aca, government programs, hhs,
    payer, care plans, third party payors, reimbursement levels, payor, ppaca, afford-
    able care act, formularies, care organizations, independent payment advisory
    board, coding, reductions in reimbursement, federal government, private insurers,
    care programs, reimbursement policies}

24. Healthcare Suppliers: {hospitals*, hospital, clinics, physicians, physician, clin-
    icians, medical services, clinic, pharmacies, surgeons, nursing, providers, care
    providers, universities, relationships with physicians, settings, care, admissions,
    nurses, health services, pharmacy, medical device manufacturers, medical, trans-
    plant, acute care}




                                          80
