                        NRER WORKINC PAPER SERIES




        CAN THE EUROPEAN MONETARY SYSTEM BE COPIED OUTSIDE EUROPE?
     LESSONS FROM TEN YEARS OF MONETARY POLICY COORDINATION IN EUROPE




                            Francesco Giavazzi

                            Alberto Ciovannini




                          Working Paper No. 2786




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                December 1988




Prepared for the IMF-NBER Conference on "International Policy Coordination
and Exchange Rate Fluctuations," Kiawah Island, October 27-29, 1988. We
thank Reiko Nakamura for able research assistance. Support from the Smith
Richardson Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. This research is part of
NBER's research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #2786
                                             December 1988


     CAN THE EUROPEAN MONETARY SYSTEM BE COPIED OUTSIDE EUROPE?
  LESSONS FROM TEN YEARS OF MONETARY POLICY COORDINATION IN EUROPE


                                       ABSTRACT


     This paper   add res SeS   t he   qUCS Lion   of wilt'   I her   the European

     Monetary   System   can    be copied outside Europe. Our answer is
     negative. The EMS is just one element of a more comprehensive

     design   of institutional integration within Europe: the presence
     of the European Economic Community, and                  the dependence    of EEC

     institutions   upon exchange rate stability lend credibility to EMS

     exchange   rate targets in a way that would not be present. say,

     among the United States, Europe and Japan. The EMS has also

     reproduced previous experiences of fixed exchange rates by not

      imposing the exchange rate constraint symmetrically upon all

     member countries: the system has de facto worked as a DM-zone,

      thus confirming that the institution of fixed rates pg cannot

      induce international nonetary cooperation. Finally, the

      diferences in the use of the inflation tax among European

      countries and the divergent behaviour of government debt after

      1979 indicate that the pursuit of monetary convergence among

      countries with different fiscal structures might entail

      substantial fiscal reforms.




Professor Francesco Giavazzi                       Professor Alberto Giovannini
Dipartimento di Scienze Economiche                 622 Uris Hall
lJniversita di Bologna                             Graduate School of Business
Strada Maggiore 45                                 Columbia University
Bologna - ITALY                                    New York, NY 10027
                                           2


1. Introduction
       The European Monetary System () greeted with considerable
skepticims in 1978,      is now enjoying remarkable popularity. The causes

of this shift in public opinion are plausibly to be found in the

experience   with the the international onetary system in the two
periods:   from 1971 to 1978, and from 1979 to the present. The period

following the     collapse of the Bretton Woods system was characterized, in
Europe, by several attempts to limit exchange rate fluctuations,
represented by the experiments with the "snake'.           These   experiments
proved   to be   a failure for the large "romance"      countries:   France and
Italy.     The two countries made respectively two and one attempt to Join

the snake, which were definitely abandoned in 1976 and 1973. The

Belgian franc the Dutch guilder and the Deutsche mark, by contrast,

entered the snake in 1972 and never left it           until the start of the ENS.
       The failed attempts of France and Italy, and the suspicion that the

new   technical   features   that   characterized   the ENS would look more like

ginsiickry   than substantial reforms, justify the skepticims of observers

in 1978. On the other hand, during the most recent decade, the events

in the world financial markets have renewed and exhasperated the

dissatisfaction     with flexible exchange rates. The unprecedented swings
of   the nominal and real dollar exchange rate,         associated   with a dramatic

worsening    of the US current account      balance   and the new position of the
US as the    largest   debtor in the world economy, have led       many   observers
to   believe that there is something inherently unstable about flexible

exchange rates, and that it would be desirable to reform the

international     monetary system. All      the main proposals for world
                                            3


monetary reform advocate, in a form or another, the limitation of
exchange    rate flexibility.

       In stark contrast with the gyrations of the dollar, European

currencies      and intra-European   competitiveness indices have kept
relatively stable      over the past   ten   years1; at the same time inflation

rates,    and   inflation-rate differentials across Europe,        have   been

dramatically reduced. Hence        the shift in the public opinion, and the

renewed    interest in the .         This   paper   discusses some aspects of    the

EMS   experience with the objective of helping to answer the           question of

whether    the E can be copied outside Europe.
      The paper is organized around two main questions. The first is,
why is the aversion to exchange rate fluctuations stronger in Europe
than elsewehere? European countries are highly integrated and have
built institutions--the coninon market for agriculcural products in
particular-—that are dependent upon exchange rate stability. European
exchange rate stability is justified by a much broader, and more
important trend towards economic unification, which in part transcends

purely economic motivations. Section 2 discusses the economic arid
historical justifications for limiting exchange—rate flexibility in
Europe,    while section 3 reviews the working of the ENS exchange-rate

arrangements.
      The second     question   is: how does the EMS hold together' hat are




  An important exception is the United Kingdom,            that   remained   outside
  the EMS.
                                           4


the macroeconomic benefits       from   belonging to the system?2 It         is often

statedthat joining the      has helped high inflation countries like
France and Italy to disinflate. Theoretical models suggest that such an
arrangement is desirable,       for the inflation—prone countries, when the

nominal    exchange rate target is more credible than money stock targets,
or interest rate targets. There is not, however, an accepted
explanation of why nominal exchange rate targets are more credible. The
explanation we propose is based on the claim that the                  exchange—rate
targets are a part of a broader agreement that includes the coixon
market, and the      other coninunity   institutions. Abandoning the EIS
targets is equivalent to abandoning this larger system. An additional
complication is that the the country exporting its reputation as an
"inflation fighter" tends to suffer, in the ENS, higher inflation than
it would otherwise.        Sections   4 and 5   discuss the disinflation which

occurred    after the start of the ENS, and the stabilization of West

Germany's     real   effective exchange rate.

         The achievement of monetary     convergence,   which can be credited         in
part to the ENS, has been reached at            the expense   of divergent   fiscal

performances.        In section 6 we discuss the effects of the ENS on the
fiscal performances on the countries that joined it, while in section                  7

we offer a     few concluding remarks.

2
    Ideally this question should be answered by integrating the analysis
    of the informational benefits of a conunon currency (or fixed exchange
    rates) with the analysis of the macroeconomic effects of alternative
    exchange rate regimes. Unfortunately, the current models of money are
    still ill-suited for such an ambitious task. Hence we concentrate
    here on the macroeconomic aspects.
                                        5




2.Why did Europeans set up the is?
      The   coordination of macroeconomic policies has a long tradition in
Europe: it dates back at least to the 1950s when six European countries
signed the Treaty of Rome. The izinediate effect of the Treaty was the
establishment of a customs union and of a corimon market for cereals——
later extended to all agricultural products. But its intentions were
much more ambitious. The Treaty lays down a set of principles for the
conduct of macroeconomic policy among its members: mutual consultations
in the area of short run macroeconomic policy; the cormnittment to
 regard exchange rate policy as a matter of coninon interest"; and the
possibility of mutual assistance to overcome balance of payments crises.
The Monetary Coonittee of the European Coiauunities also dates back from
1958: its role was to promote the coordination of monetary policies, and
it was formed by two representatives for each country, one from the
Treasury, the other from the central bank.
      Behind these early steps for policy coordination in Europe lies the
special    European aversion for exchange rate fluctuations. This aversion
is motivated by three factors. The          first   is rooted in Europe's recent
history.     In the 1920s and    '30s many European countries had sought to
defend    themselves against    external shocks through competitive exchange
rate depreciations. Many in       Europe today hold those policies responsible

for   the disruption of international trade and economic activity, and the
                                    6



ensuing   collapse of European democracies   .   The   experience of the 1920s
and '30s is important to understand the postwar quest for exchange rate
stability which led to the Bretton Woods system.
     Openness is the second explanation for the European distaste for
exchange rate fluctuations. The EEC as a whole is not a particularly
open region——no more for example than the United States or Japan: the
share of imports in GDP was—-in 1987-—12.3 percent in the EEC, 10. 1
percent in the United States and 11.4 percent in Japan. Therefore there
is no particular reason why Europeans should worry about the
fluctuations of the ECU relative to the dollar or the yen—-no more at
least than Americans and Japanese worry about fluctuations of their own
currencies. But was is special in the EEC is that the region is not a
coimnon currency area. Individual countries have different currencies
and are also much more open than the region as a whole. Even before the
creation of the customs union the share of imports in GDP was as high as
40 percent in Belgium and the netherlands, 16 percent in Germany. The
trade creation and trade diversion effects of the union rapidly raised
these figures: now they are around 60—70 percent in the small northern
countries, and 25—30 percent in Germany, France, Italy and the UK.
Openness however is mostly an intra—European affair: thus, to the extent
that exchange rate fluctuations pose problems for an economy, it is the
fluctuation of intra-EEC exchange rates that Europeans view as
worrisome.


  The memory of these events is kept alive by the Nurske's illuminating
  account of the effects of the exchange rate policies of the 1920s.
  See   Nurske (1944].
                                        7



        The third explanation for the European aversion to exchange rate
fluctuations lies    in the very institutions set up with the Treaty of

Rome, and in the coa.non   agricultural     market in particular. As we shall

now explain, the survival    of the coninon agricultural market depends upon
the    st.abiity of intra-European exchange rates. Consider French and
German grains for example: they are almost perfect substitutes. Thus,
the "Law of One Price" for cereals should hold exactly. However input
prices in agriculture—-labour costs in particular--do not follow the
"Law of One Price": exchange rate realigneints could thus produce large
shifts in the profi t.abil i ty of the fanning sector across Europe, and
induce swings in   agricultural    trade in the region. The problem is
aggravated by the fact that across European agricultural markets the
"Law of One Price" rules by law. This is so because the European
Corrvnission regulates the cereals' market setting an EEC-wide price for
each product. The price is set in ECUs and translated in local
currencies at the ongoing exchange rate.
        Europeans have agonized   on the difficulty of running     a comon
market    in a region that does not use     a   coninon currency, at least since

the early 1960s, The rules of Bretton Woods           permitted excursions   of up

to    three percent between any two European currencies.4 Such excursions
were big enough to interfere with the functioning of the cereals market.
The problem precipitated in 1969, with the August devaluation of the


 The rules set one percent margins around the dollar parity of each
 currency, thus in principle permitting bilateral excursions of up to              4
     percent. European countries however had agreed to maintain their
     dollar parities within smaller margins: 0.75 percent.
                                           8


French franc, and the (tober revaluation of the Deutsche mark. The
response to the realignments was the temporary suspension of the free
cereals market. France prevented a jnp of cereals' prices on the home
market by converting the comeon ECU price at an artificial exchange
rate--that did not reflect the devaluation. Germany avoided being
flooded with    French cereals by imposing           a tariff on   imports     and granting
an   export subsidy to its     own farm"rs. After         the fall of Bretton Woods,

responding to realignments with the            introduction of tariffs and

subsidies   became coninon practice. By 1974 a German farmer exporting
butter to Italy received a subsidy equal to 28.3 percent of the price;
if the butter was shipped the other way, a corresponding tax was levied
on the Italian exporter.
       Beyond infringing      the basic   principle     on which    the   EEC was set up,

the tariffs     and   subsidies introduced      to   cope with realignments have         also
been   costly   for the EEC   budget. For       two reasons.       The first is that it

proved easier to remove the tariffs by        letting agricultural prices rise
in   the aevaluing country, than      to remove the subsidies by cutting prices
in   the revaluing country. Therefore the revenue from the tariffs did
not match the expenditure on the subsidies. The persistence of export
subsidies in strong—currency countries aggravated                         's   chronic

overproduction    of food. By the mid-1970's two thirds of the financial
resources available to the EEC were absorbed by the cost of running the
agricultural     market-—leaving    very little room for       action      in other areas.
       Exchange rate     stability then became a vital issue for the               EEC, and

it thus natural that the Coniuission would become a strong supporter of
schemes designed to limit intra-European exchange rate fluctuations.
                                   9

The problem has riot disappeared in the .    The   "agri-monetary"
consequences of a realignment are an important item in the negotiations,
as documented by the realignment Coiuiuniques that always carefully spell
out the provisions for agricultural markets--the timing of price
adjustments, etc.
     For many years the conon agrictLLtural policy has been the only
-important activity of the EEC and the main reason for its existence. In
the early 1970's the agricultural market absorbed 90 percent of the
total EEC budget; in 1985 the figure was still as high as 73 percent.
It is unlikely that the EEC would still be there had it failed to keep
the cownon agricultural market alive.• Over the years the operation of
the agricultural market provided the testing ground for cooperation in
other areas. The EEC is now moving in new directions. The planned
liberalization of 1992 is its first major initiative outside of
agriculture: if succesfull it will reduce the importance of agriculture
among the activities of the EEC and enhance the role of this institution
in the coordination of economic policies across Europe. To some extent
the evolution of the EEC has been possible because this institutions
survived the difficulties of operating the cereals market. Exchange
rate stability has thus been an important condition for institutional
developuents in Europe.
      Trying to understand the E without considering the grounds for
the            European aversion to exchange rate fluctuations would be
misleading. For the countries that belong to the        leaving the system
is a step that many would associate with the abandonment of other areas
of European cooperation as well. In some crucial occasions, the links
                                  10


between the     and other institutions of European cooperation has been
instiunental to force policy shifts that in turn have made the survival
of the exchange—rate system possible.



3. The RIS is an (Imperfect) Greater Deutsche-Mark Area
     Ten years of operations of the R provide an important case stty.
to those who are interested in designing new forms of international
monetary policy coordination. In any fixed-exchange-rates regime, the
task of running monetary policy is not explicitly assigned to any one
country. Supporters of the hypothesis that international monetary
policy coordination is feasible, claim that in cocjnodity standard
systems like the gold standard or the Bretton Woods regime, the
establishment of nominal parities in terms of an external nuneraire
forced all countries to pursue the nominal target in a syninetric
fashion. This mechanism, it is claimed, imposes a sort of implicit
coordination of monetary policies. In a fiat currency system like the
ENS, systematic cooperation by monetary authorities could help to define
coiiinon monetary targets, to be pursued jointly by all countries.
     Are the use of an external ntmieraire——like gold in the earlier
fixed-exchange—rates regimes--or the institution of consultation bodies-
-like the EEC Monetary Cotmiitte and the Comitte of Central Bank
Governors——effective enough measures to induce international monetary
policy cooperation? The evidence from the ENS suggests a negative
answer to that question. The ENS, like the gold standard and the
Bretton Woods system, is characterized by a "center" country——West
                                   11


Germany--whose central bank pursues its own monetary targets
independently of the policies pursued by the other members.5 The other
countries, which have——to a significant extent——converged to West
Germany's monetary policies, have maintained limited independence by the
systematic use of capital controls, and the adoption of periodic
exchange—rate devaluations.
     The strongest evidence in support of the hypothesis that the E1S
actually worked as some imperfect Greater Deutsche—Mark Area comes from
the study of interest rates: West German interest rates are unaffected
by most intra-EIIS shocks, like the expectations of parity realignments,
while interest rates denominated in the other currencies are those that
suffer the full impact of intra—EIIS portfolio disturbances. Countries
like Italy and France have prevented the wide fluctuations in their own
interest tes observed in the (unregulated) Euro-markets to affect
their domestic economies by imposing capital controls. This evidence,
as Giovannini [1988] shows, is similar to that of the gold standard and
the Bretton Woods period, when countries other than Great Britain and
the United States, respectively, sought to defend their policies from
the influence of the "center" country by imposing various forms of
regulatory hurdles on the international transmission of monetary


 See Giovannini (1988] for an historical comparison of the gold
 standard, Bretton Woods and the E, a formal statement of the
  'asynmietry" hypothesis, and an analysis of the empirical evidence.
                                         12


            6
policies.




4.    Macroeconomic    Effects: Inflation
       One of     the most dramatic changes in the economies of the         member

countries       since 1979 has been the decrease in the rate of inflation.
Table I compares inflation rates of various European countries at the
start of the E2 with the present. The table suggests both a
significant convergence of European inflation rates towards the West
German levels, and a general decrease of inflation, which is not limited
to the countries belonging to the . Since the conclusion of the
preceding section is that West Germany's monetary policy ha-s been at
                                                                      the
center   of the , and          since West German authorities built a wide

reputation       as inflation fighters" in the second postwar period, the
natural question raised by this experience is whether the structure and
working of the RIS, and in particular the central role played by the
German monetary authorities, have played any role in the disinflation

experience       of countries as different as Denmark, France and   Italy. In
this section we review the argument accordirg to which pegging         the

exchange rate can       help   a country in the disinflation effort, and present




 6
     In the form of changes in regulations affecting the gold market, and
     controls on international capital flows.
                                     13


the evidence for a nunber of fl countries, and a country outside the
: the United Kingdcm. The theoretical model points to the problem of
the crethbility of the exchange rate target, and the costs of the
exchange rate union for the center country——West Germany. In our
empirical analysis we attempt to measure both the credibility of intra-
European exchange rate targets, and the size, timing, and effects of
shifts in expectations after 1979.



4.1 Breaking the Inflation Inertia: The Role of Expectations
     One fundamental feature of the inflationary process in modern
industrial economies appears to be its persistence, a phenomenon that
has been linked to the mechanics of wage and price setting. Firms and
unions—- for a number of reasons that we do not need to explore here7——
find it more convenient to set prices and wages much less frequently
than the rate of arrival of economic news. Therefore wages and prices
are crucially affected by workers' and firms' expectations. Workers and
firms are concerned, for example, to preserve the purchasing power of
their income, and incorporate in their output prices their forecasts of
the future evolution of the general price level. Indirectly, wage and
price setters concerned about the evolution of the general price level
need to forecast stance of monetary policy.
     The special nature of wage and price setting therefore creates a


  See, for example, Blanchard (1988) and Roteinberg [1988) for excellent
  Surveys.
                                        14


problem of coordination between the central bank and the public. The
central. bank   might want   to use monetary policy to steer the economy
towards ahigher output path, but the public, anticipating future
expansionarY policies, can sterilize them fully, by incorporating in
their current pricing decisions the expectation of future monetary
expansion and higher inflation. This process, by.itself, generates
inflation and tends to force the monetary authority to accomodate          the

higher    rate of growth of prices, in order to avoid a severe recession.

Hence in equilibrium there is higher inflation, and less output growth,

than initially desired by both the public and monetary         authorities.
This   is the inflationary bias of monefary policy       in the presence of

price and wage inertia, first described and analyzed by Barro and Gordon

(19831.

       The coordination problem of of monetary policy and sluggish prices

and wages is also at the core of the issue of disinflation. Bringing

inflation down requires a change in inflationary expectations on the

part of price setters. How can the monetary authorities "convince"

price setters that    an   announced   contraction   will be lasting and

credible?     The reputation that a central bank needs to bring down
inflation can be obtained in two        ways. The first, and more painful

method for society as a whole, is by showing that,          even in the worst of
a   depression, the   announced   monetary targets are    not reneged. The
initial monetary contraction after the announcement of a disinflation
plan generates a recession, since it is imposed in a economy where

inflation and money growth expectations are high. The recession would
tend to be longer and harsher, the slower is the response of the private
                                         15


sector expectation to the monetary             rac, because the very fact
that the monetary authority sticks to the announced contractionary path
comes to private agents as a surprise.
       Alternatively, the monetary authority could      avoid going through

this prolonged      "initiation" period by seeking a way to influence
expectations      with some institutional reform. The institutional reform
of interest for us is a change in the exchange rate regime. How can the
transition from flexible to fixed exchange rates bring about an
improvement in the output-inflation tradeoff, and facilitate the
disinflation effort? Under fixed exchange rates, a central bank tends
to loose control on the domestic supply of money, since the changes in
international reserves needed to support the exchange rate parity
produce changes in the domestic supply of money which, in principle, the
monetary authority cannot influence.
       Now,    suppose a country decides to passively peg its exchange rate
to another country, whose monetary authority enjoys the reputation of
being an inflation-buster. By "passive peg" we mean that the former
country' s monetary authority, after announcing the exchange—rate parity,
simply accornodates the latter country's monetary policies, without any
attempt    to directly influence their choice of targets.       What happens to
the   inflation expectations    of   the private sector? Wage   and price
setters need to evaluate      the   credibility of this institutional   reform,
that is they need to determine the likelihood that the announced
exchange      rate targets will be pursued    consistently. If, and only    if,

the exchange—rate target is a credible one, expectations will adjust              and
the   process of disinflation will be facilitated.
                                     16



       In practice, the E' has not completely eliminated inflation

differentials. Countries with higher inflation rates have resorted to

periodic
           exchange—rate realignments to recover the losses in
competitiveness caused by persisting inflation differentials and fixed
exchange rates. The disruptions caused by speculators' expectations of
these exchange— rate realignments have been limited——as we stressed
above——through the systematic use of capital controls. Even when the
exchange i-ate are periodically realigned, though, pegging to a low
inflation country can improve the output-inflat: tradeoff. This
happens because the terms-of-trade fluctuations that occur during the
intervals when exchange rates are not changed provide a strong-enough
deterrent to central banks not th deviate from the center—country
monetary policies as much as they would under a pure floating rate
regime. With periodic realignments, however, the center country's
output-inflation tradeoff is affected as well. During the intervals
when exchange rates are kept fixed, the center country's terms of trade
worsen, because the partner's inflation rate is higher than its own.          As

a consequence, the center-country's output—inflation tradeoff also
worsens: the inflation-buster exports reputation and imports inflation.
       In summary, the argument that pegging to West Germany has   helped

high   inflation countries in the disinflation efforts of   the 1980s rests

crucially   on the assumption that exchange-rate targets are more credible
than   monetary targets. In the next section we try to measure the effects

of   the EMS on   inflation expectations and the short-run output-inflation

 tradeoff among member countries, and confront the issue of credibility

of exchange-rate targets.
                                         17




4.2   Measuring the Shifts in Expectations

       Our discussion in the previous section suggests that one important

macroeconomic benefit of the EMS for countries other than West Germany

could have been associated with a shift in inflationary expectations

originating from the public's awareness that in a fixed-exchange-rate

regime like the EMS monetary policy is run, by and large, by the

Bundesbank.    In   order to asses the empirical relevance of these effects,

we    need to measure these shifts of expectations. Consider the dynamics
of wages and prices. As we argued above, private agents (firms and
unions) set prices and wages by forming expectations on future
macroeconomic variables, like the overall rate of inflation. These
expectations are necessarily a function of agents' available
information, reflected in current and .st realization of all relevant
macroeconomic variables. If a        monetary reform like the EMS is put in
place,    private agents who believe that     the   reform will actually change

monetary    policies in   the way   described above, have to reevaluate the
methods    they use to extrapolate from past macroeconomic variables their

expectations about future inflation and economic activity. Hence the

shift in expectations, and its effect on the inflationary process, will

be reflected in a shift of statistical equations relating wages and

prices to available information. In this section we study the process

of disinflation in Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, and, for

comparison, the United Kingdom, by comparing how the relation between

price and wage inflation and output has shifted after the start of the
.          We


their magnitude.
                                          18


                are concerned both with the timing of the shifts, arid with


          We    estimate a (quarterly) system of three equations specifying the
dynamics of CPI inflation, wage inflation, and output growth, which we
measure using industrial production indices. Each equation includes on
the right hand side a time trend, seasonal dunmy variables, 4 lags of
wage      inflation,   CPI inflation and industrial production growth, and
dumy variables representing country-specific events that the model
cannot explain.8 We also include 4 lags of Ml growth rates, as well as
changes in the relative price of imported intermediate and final goods.
This last set of variables are assumed to be determined outside of the
system: while innovations in wage and price inflation are plausibly
correlated with money growth and changes in relative prices of
intermediate and final goods, these variables are assumed to affect
inflation and output growth only with a one—quarter lag
          The first question we address is whether there is evidence of a
significant shift in these statistical equations after 1979. A test of
stability of the mrameter estimates was performed for each equation and



8
    The duisiies are the following. For all countries, from 1971:3 to the
    end of the sample, fall of the fixed—rates regime. For Italy, 69:2-
    70:1 Autunno Caldo, 73:3—74:1 price freeze. For France, 63:4-64:4,
    69:1—70:4, 74:1—74:4, 77:1—77:4, 82:3—83:4, wage and price controls;
    68:2-68:3 "May 1968'. For the UK, 67:4 sterling devaluation, 73:4-
    74:4 wage controls.

    Theestimates are obtained assuming that superneutrality holds, i.e.
    thesum of the coefficients of nominal variables is equal to I in the
    equations explaining wage and price inflation, and is zero in the
    equation explaining output growth. These constraints were not
    rejected in the largest majority of cases.
                                          19


each                   a cutting point the first quarter of 1979.
       cositry, using as                                             The

results of the test indicate the presence of a structural shift only in
the case of France: in no other country the shifts of wage-price
dynamics after 1979 are statistically significant. While this evidence
is against the hypothesis that the E4S has been associated with a shift
in expectations, the negative result is very likely to be caused by the
low power of the parameter stability tests we employ.
       The next question we address regards the timing and the direction

of the shifts in the inflation processes. Using parameter estimates

obtained over the 60-79 sample, and the actual realizations            of the

forcing   variables (money growth and relative prices of intermediate and
final   goods) we compute dynamic simulations of wage        and price inflation
and output growth. Table 2       reports the timing and the direction of

estimated   shifts in inflation and output dynamics obtained from the
simulations. For every country we show the date when           the simulated

paths of inflation and output growth start diverging in a persistent way
from the actual   paths,   and   the   sign of the divergence. The words
"higher    and "lower" reported in parenthesis under each date indicate
that the actual realizations of the variables were respectively higher
and   lower than their simulated values.

       The table shows a number of impressive regularities. First, for

all countries except West Germany,        and possibly   Denmark,   actual   and




10
     In Giavazzi and Giovannini (forthcomi.ngl we report a more detailed
     analysis of the model, and all the statistical results. Detailed
     statistics for Ireland, which do not appear there, are available from
     us on request.
                                    20


simulated inflation and output paths start diverging later than the
beginning of the . Second, simulations for output growth tend to be
less clearcut than simulations for inflation. And third, the direction
of the divergences are opposite for Germany and the other countries in
the table. In Germany actual inflation after 1979 is higher than its
simulated value, and output growth is lower. The opposite results of
Germany and the other countries are consistent with the model of




,
imported reputation. The delayed shifts in the output-inflation
tradeoffs for most countries, which occur well after the start of the
     and    the very similar pattern followed by UK inflation and output,
raise the question of the nature of the shift in expectation, and the
role played by the reform of the exchange-rate regime.
     Further evidence on the effects of the exchange—rate reform on
expectations is reported in figures 1 to 3, which depict the Euro-
interest—rate differentials between 3—month kroner, franc and lire
deposits and Deutsche-mark deposits. Interest-rate differentials
contain both expectations of exchange rates and risk premia. The

presumption is that, if exchange rate targets were perfectly credible,
both components of the interest rate differentials would tend to zero:
expected changes in exchange rates would disappear, and the
substitutability between eurodeposits denominated in francs, marks,
liras and kroner--which is presunably inversely related to risk premia--
would increase. The figures, by contrast, show that interest-rate
differentials are not stabilized after 1979. In particular, the years
 1982 and 1983 are associated with a crisis of confidence in the E1S, as
shown by the large increases in interest-rate differentials.
                                        21


        In s*muary, the evidence from the simulation of the output-

inflation model suggest a delayed response in expectations, while

interest rate differentials indicate that expectations and risk premia

did not decrease after the start of the EMS. Is this evidence

consistent with the theory? The failure of interest-rate differentials

to   disappear   is   clearly not enough to dismiss the imported-credibility
model. Although higher interest rates on lira, franc, and kioner
deposits most likely indicate that private agents attached a positive
probability to devaluations of these currencies relati.e to the Deutsche
mark,                  were subject to the effects of the
        European countries

unprecedented dollar appreciation in the early eighties and the second
oil shock: the exchange rate mechanism might have limited the expected
devaluations relative to a pure floating regime. Hence, while the
forward exchange rates data seem to be inconclusive on the issue of the
credibility of the exchange-rate targets, there is no prima-facie
inconsistency between the simulation results and the behavior of forward
premia.
        Finally, we turn to the analysis of the magnitudes of the shifts in
the output-inflation tradeoffs. Table 3 reports       changes in  inflation
and cumulative output growth that occurred in      European   countries since
1979, and comperes them with simulations of the same magnitudes obtained
from the model described      above. Contrast, for example, the experiences

of   Germany, Ireland and Italy. According to our s imulat ions, every
percentage point of inflation reduction since 1979 would have afforded
Geriiny 10.7 percent growth: by contrast, the output growth for every
point of inflation reduction was only 4.10. In the case of Ireland and
                                              22


Italy, our simulations predict that every point of inflation reduction

could have afforded those           countries      4.10 and 0.67 percent growth,

respectively. But in reality, real growth for every point of inflation

reduction was higher in both cases: 6.94 percent in Ireland and 2. 18

percent in Italy. Similarly, our simulations predicted a fall in output

by 1.34 percent for          every percent point reduction of inflation in

Denirk, whereas in           fact output has       increased by 10.6 percent for every
percent point reduction of inflation. These comparisons vividly

illustrate        the estimated effects of shifts in expectations, and their
uneven distribution among Germany and the               European partners.

       It is however        puzzling that price and      wage expectations   seem to

have adjusted        with   a lag. One possible interpretation        of this puzzle is
that the effects of the 1S on expectations were not as direct as

predicted by the Barro-Gordon           model. The      experience in France, Italy

and Ireland, and our estimates of the timing of the shifts in

expectations, suggesl that the shifts in expectations were prompted by

shifts      in   domestic policies.

       In Italy we estimate a shift in expectations in the first quarter

of 1985, in the aftermath of a government decree which had set a ceiling

on wage indexation.          That   decree   had been   challenged by the unions, and

was   eveentually ratified by a national referendum, in June 1984.
       In   Ireland there was       a major turnaround in economic policies in the
Suner of         1982, marked by    an announcement     of tighter guidelines for

monetary policy, a decision of not to devalue the central parity of the

punt   in   the February and June 1982 R realignments, and to freeze pay
                                     23


increases in the public sector.'

       In   ranc, the turnaround in macroeconomic policies occurs in March
1983, after the expansionary experiment of the first Mitterand
government had produced a large current account deficit (3.5 percent of
GDP) and a speculative attack on the franc. The government accompanied
the EMS exchange realignment with a freeze in budgetary expenses, an
increase in income taxes, and a dramatic tightenin of credit.12
      What was the linkage bett.ieen these policies and the EMS constraint?
In the case of Ireland and France the linkage is apparent. In
particular, French authorities justified the unpopular policies as a
necessary step to insure E membership, and linked the membership in
the EMS to the participation in the c.13 In the case of Italy, we
were unable to find any important reference to the       in the government
pronouncements after the decree on wage indexation, but cannot exclude
that the external constraint might have motivated that unpopular policy.
In conclusion,        membership might have helped countries other than
West Germany in their disinflation efforts only to the extent that they
provided a justification for unpopular policies vis-a'-vis the domestic
public, which could have helped to strengthen the credibility of the
exchange-rate targets. The unpopular policies were justified, by French
government officials, arguing that EMS membership is an integral part of
EEC membership.


     Dornbusch [1988].
12
     Sachs and   Wyplosz   [1986).
13
     Sachs and Wyplosz [1986].
                                              24



5. The "European Alliance"
       The   view of the F       as a      system designed   to   enhance the credibility
of inflation—prone       countries leaves us with a puzzle. What incentives

does   Germany have to belong         to   such a system? The imported credibility
model suggests that the center country may be the loser in an agreement
in which it provides the nominal anchor that helps its parnthrs to
dis inflate. If the dec is ion to peg to a stable currency produced an
instanteneous adjustment         of   expectations, the center country would be
unaffected by the decisions of others to peg to its currency. But if
learning takes time and disinflation                is a dynamic process, during     the
transition the terms of trade of the center country worsen, and so does
its output-inflation       tradeoff.        These   effects are obviously smaller te

larger is the center country relative to its partners: the United States

were not concerned when Grenada or Belize decided to peg to the dollar.

But even if    we consider Germany and          the Netherlands     a de-facto iaonetary
union   and we stmi their economic size, the joint GDP of the two countries

(one thousand billion ECUs in 1985) is still only two—thirds of the

joint GDP    of   the   other   members of the RIS. The E!S         area   also accounts

for some 30 percent of total German and Dutch trade.
       The empirical results described in section 4.2 seem to confirm that
Germany's    output-inflation         tradeoff worsened since       th start of the 1S.

The evidence would thus justify the initial reluctance of the Deutsche

Bundesbank     to   join the system. It temajns to explain, however, why

German policymakers tried, since the late 1960s, to avoid an

uncoordinated response of European countries to the fall of Bretton
                                        25



Woods.    As it   became   clear that the Bretton Woods system was approaching
its final days, German policymakers became increasingly worried that
other European currencies might riot be able to follow the appreciation
of the Ctl vis-a-ViS the dollar: they were preoccupied that the
realignement of intra-European parities would disrupt the European
customs union as well as the coninon agricultural market-—two
institutions that they considered important for the German economy.14
      In this section we look for evidence of Germany's incentives to
stay in the E analyzing the behavior of Germany's             terms-of-trade   from

the Bretton Woods era to       the 1980s. The terms-of-trade index we use        is
the   real effective exchange rate of the Deutsche mark built using
relative wholesale prices and the fllF-MER?1 weights, that are designed           to

measurea country's competitiveness relative to its trading parthers.
We are interested in finding out whether the   has stabilized
Germany's terms of trade relative to previous periods.
       The definition of "stability", however, is not unambiguous. One

possibiity     is to look at the variability of unanticipated changes in the

real effective exchange rate. This       measure however eliminates most of
the    low frequency component of the series. Indeed, it         could be argued
that those low—frequency components are worthy of special attention.
Williamson      (1983] suggests that while exchange rate volatility (measured

by the standard      deviation   of unanticipated exchange rate changes) might

have   a negative impact on      trade and   welfare,   exchange rate misalignment




14
      For an account of the German position in those years see Emiriger
      [1977]   and Kloten[1978].
                                        26


(that is prolonged deviations      of the exchange rate from some       fundamental

level)   are   likely to bring about the largest costs.15       Table 4 reports

the simplest possible measure of the variability of the real effective

excange rate: its standard deviation. The data are monthly, from 1960

to 1985. The volatility of the effective real rate increases

dramatically after the end of Bretton Woods, but stabilizes in the EMS.

The second     eolinnn in the Table suggests why this might have happened.
We construct the real effective exchange rate of' the Deutsche mark vis-
a'—vis its         parthers and compute the correlation between the index of
"global" competitiveness and that of Germany's competitiveness           inside

the EMS.     In the 1960s and '70s the correlation between      the two indices
is very high, indicating that the French franc, the lira and the other
EI currencies did not follow the Deutsche mark—-particularly at the
time of its large     appreciation vis-a'—vis the dollar, after the collapse

of   Bretton Woods. The    phenomenon reverses after 1979: the correlation

between the global and     the   intra—ENS indices becomes   negative   indicating

that   the ENS has limited the effects of the fluctuations of the
dollar/tN rate on Germany's competitiveness. Similar computations for
the other EMS countries show that the phenomenon documented in Table 4
is specific to Germany. Belgium for example offers the mirror image of
the German experience: the correlation between the global and the intra-


15
     Recent research by Krugman and Baldwin (1987], Baldwin and Krugxnan
     [1986], Dixit [1987], and especially Krunan (1988], provides the
     firstattempt at formalizing the linkage between the uncertainty          and
     slow mean—reversion in exchange rate movements and the speed of
     adjustment of intersectoral factor movements and investment.
                                       27


    indices increases after 1979. Given that Belgium is one of
Germany's major trading parthers, this has stabilized Germany's real
exchange rate. The cost for Belgium has been an increase in the
volatility of real effective exchange rate.
     The evidence on Germany's terms—of-trade seems to support the
"European Alliance" view of the R: the system has protected Germany
from the effects of dollar fluctuations. In the early 1970s, at the
time of the first dollar collapse, Germany appreciated both vis-a'-vis
the dollar and vis-a' -vis its European partners: the result was a large
swing in the country terms-of-trade. After the dollar fall of 1985 the

E9S currencies   followed e DM much closer and attenuated the impact on
Germany's   terms-of-trade. The comparison between the two periods
clearly shows the extent to which the             has stabilized Germany's
overall competitiveness. From November 1969 to March 1973 the Deutsche
mark appreciated 25 percent vis-a'-vis the dollar; this was accompanied
by an 18.6 percent worsening of      Germany's    overall competitiveness.     From

January 1985   to December   1987 the DM appreciation was similar-—27
percent--but this   time   it was   accompanied   by a loss of competitivenes
only half as large-—9 percent.



6. Fiscal implications of monetary convergence.
     Our    discussion of the European disinflation has so far neglec:ed
the fiscal implications of monetary convergence. The important
interactions between inflation and the financing of budget defic              oç n
up an additional set    of issues on the economic      effects of   the   E. anc
                                             28


the   prospects of financial markets liberalization planned            for    1992.

What has been the      effect of the convergence of inflation rates on the
government debt in the high inflation countries? There are two channels
through which a disinflation affects the budget. The first               is   direct: a

monetary contraction reduces the portion of the budget deficit that can

be financed by printing money. The second channel stems from the rise

in real interest rates and            the fall in output associated with the
disinflation. When the gap between the             real rate and the growth rate

widens,   debt starts        to   grow. The larger a country's initial stock of
public    debt-—as a percent of GDP——the more serious will be the impoct on

the budget    of any increase in the real rate and of any reduction in the

rate   of growth.
       All   these   problems are      particularly important in   Europe    because

high   debt levels and dependence on money financing          were   the norm in many
countries before      start of the E1S. Table 5 shows the fiscal
                       the

situation of Ireland, Italy, Denmark and Belgium before the start of the
E. We concentrate on these countries, neglecting France, Germany and
the    Netherlands, because the latter were characterized neither by high

debt levels, nor by significant money financing--and not surprising it

is the first four countries that eventualy developed a fiscal problem.

In 1978 none of these countries, with the possible exception of Belgium.

could be characterized as facing a dramatic fiscal problem. Ireland and

Italy had a high debt ratio and a primary deficit that exceeded the

revenue from money financing, but real rates were well below the growth

rate of income, and the ratio of debt to GDP was stable. Denmark had a

small    primary surplus          and a large revenue from money financing: the sum
                                   29


of the two was more than enough to service the debt, even at        high   real
rates. Belgitmi is the only comtry where debt was growing.

    To analyse the effects of inflation convergence on debt and
deficits, we need to isolate the components of government deficits, and
of debt dynamics. We study the government budget constraint':


                                          +               +                 (1)
               Be.— Bt_i   (1+it_i)Bt_i       (Ct_Ct'i)       Dt


The increase in the stock of government debt, B, equals the capitalized
value of last period's debt, less the increase in credit to the
government by the central bank (Ct_Cti), plus        the non—interest (or
primary) budget deficit. Bt and C denote stocks           of credit at the end

of period t, i is the interest rate on government borrowing, from the
end of period t—1 to the end of period t. Dividing both sides of the
equation by nominal income at time t, Y, and applying the usual
approximations, we obtain:


   b - bi (rti_nt_j)bt_i + d - (c_ci) - (lTt+nti)cti                        (2)


where   lowercase letters denote the corresponding variables in uppercase
letters expressed as percent of Q'P. Equation (2) says that the
increase in government debt is higher, the higher the real interest
burden on the existing stock of debt--measured by the real interest rate
in excess of the rate of growth of the economy—-and the higher the
primary deficit. An alternative means of financing deficits is

represented by the last two terms on the right hand side of equation
                                      30

(2): the increase of credit to the government by the central bank (in
percent   of   (?JP), seigniorage and the inflation tax. Seigniorage is
represented by n_1c_1, i.e. the non-inflationary growth of the total
stock of credit from the central bank. The inflation tax (in percent of
(24P) is ITtCtI.
      In the steady state, barring nonneutralities of the tax system,
the only fiscal consequence of a slo1own in the rate of inflation is
the change in seignorage revenue and in the inflation tax. If the
economy is along the efficient portion of the revenue curve, both
seignorage and the inflation tax fall. Thus a country that prior to the
disinflation relied on seignorage and on the inflation tax as a source
of revenue must sooner or later correct its primary deficit. If the

country could simply jump from the high to the low-inflation steady
state   and the fiscal correction occured simultaneously with the jump in
inflation, the debt level would be unaffected by the change in monetary
regime. But if the country postpones the fiscal correction, debt grows:
the longer the postponement, the larger becomes the change in the
primary deficit required to stabilize the debt, because in the meantime
the stock of debt has grown.
     The response of European fiscal authorities to the revenue loss
induced by the distnflation was uneven. Denmark and Ireland swifitly
turned the primary deficit into a large surplus; Italy waited. The
question thus arises of what is the cost of waiting. How fast does the
required change     in the primary deficit grow if you delay the fiscal

correction? Figure 4 helps artswêring      this   question. On the vertical

and on the horizontal axis we have the primary deficit and       the   debt
                                          31


level respectively. The two downward sloping schedules describe steady

states in which the ratio of public debt to GDP            is   constant. They are

drawn for two different levels of (s+n)c, the steady state revenue from

money financing in equation (2). Money financing is higher along the

upper schedule than it is along the lower one. The slope of the two

schedules is -(r-n): if the interest rate is above the growth rate of

income a higher debt level requires a smaller primary deficit. As Cr-n)

becomes smaller, the schedules. flatten out, since the cost of sustaining

higher debt levels also becomes smaller.

     Consider now a country starting off from a point such as A, and

assane that inlation      jumps   to   zero, so that   it looses   all the revenue
from the inflation tax. If the fiscal authorities correct the budget
iunediately, the country simply moves from A to B at an unchanged             stock

of debt. But if     the   fiscal correction is delayed, the economy starts
drifting from   A   towards a point such as     A'.    How fast does the   required

fiscal correction grow? The difference between the budget correction
required in   A and in A' is      (r-n) times the increase in the stock of
debt: i.e the   required    fiscal correction grows at (r-n).
     Suppose a country starts off with         a   seventyfive percent ratio of
public debt to GDP, and      primary deficit equal to 2 percent of GDP.
                             a

Assume that   prior to the disinflation money financing brought 3.5
percent of GDP each       year in the coffers of the Treasury, and that Cr-n)
is equal to 0.02. If the fiscal correction is done ixunediately, it must

fully offset the loss in money financing: if this falls to zero the

primary deficit must move from a 2 percent deficit to a surplus of 1.5
                                      32

         16
percent.     If the fiscal correction does not take place, ten years
later the debt level will have grown frow 50 to 90 percent of GDP, but
the    fiscal correction required to stabilize it will have grown    only from

1.5    to 1.8 percent of GDP.

       This simple example suggests that, if policymakers' public support

is negatively affected by a fiscal contraction, there is a strong

incentive to wait. A delay in fiscal adjustment increases the chances

of reelection of the current government. Come tomorrow, the fiscal

contraction- -and the accompanying loss of consensus--will be only

slightly higher. Waiting can be very attractive.

       The output response to the monetary contraction and to the

turnaround in fiscal policy adds further effects on the dynamics of the

stabilization. As discussed in section 3, the decision to peg to a

stable currency does not produce an instantaneous shift in expectations:

thus, the impact effect of the central bank's decision to embark on a

new   monetary   path, consistent with the peg, is an increase in real

interest rates. The rise in interest rates will depress output, o that

during the transition (r-n) will be higher: this is the secondary burden

of the disinflation. In addition, lower output will reduce tax revenues

and add a cyclical component to the primary deficit. If on top of this

the primary deficit is abruptly cut, it is unclear whether the simple

jump    from A to B described in figure 1 is at all possible.
        In Table 6 we show the results of simple simulations designed to



16                         .                                         .
      In reality, even if inflation falls to zero, not all money financing
      will be lost. At n0 money financing is equal to nc.
                                   33

capture the dynamics of debt in the presence of a response of output,
real rates and the budget to the monetary contraction. Lines 1>, 2) and
3) illustrate the example discussed above. 2) and 3) correspond,
respectively, to the instanteneous fiscal correction and to the case
when the correction comes ten years later. The simulation reported on
line 4) allows for a temporary increase in (r—n), which jumps from 2 to
3 percent at the outset of the disinflation and than gradually falls
back to 2 percent17 The fiscal correction occurs, as in case 3) after
ten years. Line 5) extends the example by including the effect of the
recession on the budget. The recession is assumed to worsen the budget
by an amount equal to 3.5 percent of GDP in the first year, which
gradually returns to zero in six years.
    The results of these simulations suggest that the effects of the
monetary convergence on the government debt of some B' members has been
sizeable, and could malce the fiscal situation of countries like Italy
and Ireland more and more difficult to manage. Such convergence is
however necessary to achieve a sustainable elimination of inflation rate
differentials.




17
     The precise figure are shown on the bottom of the Table.
                                             34


7.   Concluding Remarks
        In this paper we have reviewed the experience of the E to
identify the lessons that this experiment in monetary coordination could
provide to those who are considering a reform of the international
monetary system.
     Clearly,    an institution like the                 would not work outside of

Europe,   for   a number   of   reasons.    First,      the incentives that    countries
have to belong    to   the E1S--the high degree of integration of European

economies, and the more comprehensive design of institutional

integration of which the EMS is just              an   element, and   which   lends

credibility     to the EMS exchange—rate          t.argets-—are not present, say,

among   the US, Europe and Japan. Second, the operation of monetary
policies has not been linked to            the exchange-rate    constraint     by all

countries:      West Germany appears to have pursued its own monetary
targets without attempting to accomodate international influences, while
the other countries have either accomodated Germany's policies, or
changed exchange rates, or imposed capital controls. The striking
similarity between the EMS and previous experiences of fixed exchange
rates suggests that the institution of fixed rates cannot per se, induce
international monetary policy cooperation. Finally, the differences in
the the use of the inflation tax among European countries and the
divergent behavior of government debt after 1979 indicate that the
pursuit of monetary convergence among countries with different fiscal
structures might entail substantial fiscal reforms.
                                          35



                                     Table     1


                             The European disinflation
                       (GDP deflator: annual growth, percent)

                                   1978            1987

                Belgium             4.3             2.1
                Denmark             9.9             4.6
                France              9.5             3.3
                Germany             4.3             2.1
                Ireland            10.5             2.9
                Italy              13.9             5.5
                Netherlands         5.4             -1.0
                United Kingdom     11.3              4.0


Source:   European Economy.
                                          36




                                        Table 2

              The timing and   direction of the shift in expectations:


                Denmark     France     Germany     Ireland    Italy       U.Kingdom



Price
Inflation        80:1          83:2      79:2       82:3     85:1     *         81:3
(direction)      (lower)    (lower)     (higher)   (lower)   (lower )       (lower)


Wage
Inflation        80:2        83:2        79:2      80:2       85:1           81:1
(direction)      (lower)    (lower)     (higher)   (lower)   (lower )       (lower)


Output Growth    80:3       none         79:2      none      none               none
(direction)      (higher)               (lower)


Note: The words "higher' and "lower" indicate that the actual realization of
the variables are respectively higher and lower than their simulated values.
The word   "none" indicates that no   systematic divergence between    actual   and
simulated values can be detected. In the case of Italy the divergence between
actual and simulated variables occurs close to the end of the simulation period
                                    37




                                 Table 3

                 The shift in the output-inflation tradeoff


              Denmark   France   Germany    Ireland    Italy   U.Kingdom




Endof the
Simulations     84:4     85:4       86:4      88:1      86:4     87:1

Change in
Inflation      —1.83    —4.86      —3.37     —9.72     —8.38    —6.23

Predicted
Change in
Inflation      —2.57    6.78      —5.51      —8.57    —12.87      6.63
Cumulative
Change   in
Output         19.43     5.06      13.82     39.84     18.30     12.10

Predicted
Cumulative
Change in
Output         —3.45    26.18      58.95     59.60      8.25     9.98
                                        38



                                    Table    4

                            Germany's   Terms-of-Trade

                   Standard Error of the                   Correlation between
                 Real Effective Exchange Rate        the Global and the Intra-EEC
                      (global index)                     Indeces of Competitiveness


1960:1—1971:8            .041                                      .824

1960:1—1979:1            .127                                      .911

1960:1—1985:12           .124                                      .620

1979:2—1985:12           .114                                    —.033


Sources: IMF, IFS. Real exchange rates are constructed using wholesale prices.
Effective exchange-rate weigts are the fllF-MERII weights for 1977, normalized to
accot for Germany's competitiveness vis-a'-vis its eight major trading
parthers——in the case of the global index--and its four major EIIS parriers--in
the case of the intra-E?IS index. Weights are as follows. Global index:
Belgitmi, 0.0588; France, 0.2016; Italy, 0.151; Japan, 0.152; Netherlands, 0.074;
Switzerland, 0.043; United Kingdom, 0.058; United States, 0.262. Intra-E29S
index: Belgium, 0.121; France, 0.416; Italy, 0.311; Netherlands, 0.152.
                                              39




                                           Table 5

                      Fiscal   conditions     at the start of the E9S
                                   (percent   of GDP: 1978)
            debt level          money              money financing        r       ft-n)
                               financing      plus primary surplus

Belgium        0.65              0.0                   —2.0             3.0      0.0
Ireland        0.82               1.8                  —3.5             -0.6    —7.8

Italy          0.51              2.2                    —2.2            —2.4    —5.1

Denmark        0.18              3.4                    +5.2                     4.0


Definitions:
Debt level is the stock of public debt on the market,            i.e. total debt net of
debt held by the central bank. Money financing corresponds to the public sector
borrowing requirement financed by the central bank. Primary surplus    the      is
budget deficit net of interest. r is the ex—post short-term real rate of
interest, and n is the growth rate of GD? at constant prices.

Sources: the fiscal variables for Ireland and Italy are from the local central
bank Bulletins. For Belgium and Denmark debt levels are from Chouraki     al.    et
[1986]; money financing and the debt held by the central bank are computed from
line 12a  of IFS. Interest rates and growth rates for all countries are from
European Economy.
                                                  40


                                                Table 6

                                 Disinflation, debt and the budget

                                      debt        monetary        budget surplus required
                                                   financing      for debt stabilization

1) initial conditions                   0.75              0.035             —0.020


2) instantaneous fiscal
   correction                           0.75              0.0                0.015

3) fiscal correction
   after 10 years                       0.91              0.0                0.018

4) fiscal correction
   after 10 years
   with     (r-n) effect                 1.07             0.0                0.021


5) fiscal correction
   after 10 years
   with (r-n) and
   cyclical effects                      1.20             0.0                0.024




In all simulations the steady state value of (r-n) is 0.02.   In cases 2) and 3)
the stabilization has no effect on real variables. In case 4) output falls and
real rates rise during the disinflation, but there are no cyclical effects on
the budget. The path of (r—n) is:
year 1: 0.07
year 2: 0.07
year 3: 0.05
year 4: 0.04
year 5: 0.03
year 6: 0.02.
In case 5) ft-n) rises and the recession raises the budget             deficit.
                                                                      The paths
of (r-n) and of the cyclical component of the budget are:
            (r-n)     cyclical
year   1:   0.07           0.035
year   2:   0.07           0.035
year   3:   0.05           0.020
year   4:   0.04           0.010
year   5:   0.03           0.005
year   6:   0.02           0.0
                                               41


                                           References

Baldwin,      R. and Krugman,P. "Persistent Trade Effects of Large Exchange Rate
      Shocks." MIT. Mimeo, 1986.
Barro, R. J., arid D. Gordon, "A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in
     a Natural Rate Model," Journal of Political Economy 91, 1983,
      pp. 589—610.
Blanchard, O.J., "Why Money Affects Output" manuscript, MIT 1988.
Dixi t, A. "Entry and Exit Decisions of Firms under Fluctuating Real Exchange
      Rates". Princeton University. Mimeo, 1987.
Dornbusch, R,, "Ireland's Failed Stabilization," manuscript, MIT
    September 1988.
F1rlninger,   Otmar "The D4rk in the Conflict Between Internal and
      External Equilibrium, 1948-75," ys in International Finance,
      No.     122, International     Finance Section, Princeton University, 1977.

Giavazzi, F. and A. Giovannini, Limiting Exchange Rate Flexibility:
     The European Monetary System. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, forthcoming.

Giovarinirii, A., "How     Do Fixed-Exchange-Rates Regimes Work: The
      Evidence    from the Gold Standard, Bretton Woods and      the EMS,"
      rnimeo,   Columbia Business School, Outober 1988,
Kloten, N. "Germany's Monetary and Financial Policy and the European
     Economic Coninunity", in W.L. Kohl and G. Basevi (eds.) West Germany:
     A European and Global Power. Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books, 1978.
Krugman,  P. "Deindustrialization, Reindustrialization, and the           Real   Exchange
      Rate." MIT. rlimeo, 1988.
Krugman,      P, and Baldwin, R. "The     Persistence of the U.S. Trade   Deficit."
      Brookings       Papers   on Economic Activity II (1987):1-55.
Nurake, R. International Currency Experience. Geneva:          League of   Nations, 1944.

Rotemberg, J .    J.,
                  "The New Keynesian Microfoundations"
      Macroeconomics Annual, 1988.

Sachs, J., and Wyplosz, C. "The Economic Consequences of President
     Mitterand." Economic Policy 2 (1986):261—313.

Williamson,      J.
               The Exchange Rate System. Washington, D.C.: Institute for
     International Economics, 1983.
                        Figure 1: Danish Kroner
             3—Month Interest—Rate Differential Relative to DM
      6




      5


I..
0     4


4)
0.
C
      3
4)
C.)
L
04)
      2




      1




      0
          77.01   78.01   79.01   80.01   81.01   82.01   83.01   84.01   85.01   86.01   87.01

                                          Year and Month
                       Figure 2: French Franc
           3—Month Interest—Rate Differential Relative to DM
      40

      35

      30

I-
a 25
4)
>-
L
4)
a- 20
C
4)    15
C.)
L
04)
      10


       5

       0

      —5
       74.02 75.02 76.02 77.02 78.02 79.02 80.02 81.02 82.02 83.02 84.02 85.02 86.02 87.02

                                     Year and Month
                         Figure 3: Italian Lira
             3—Month Interest—Rate Differential Relative to DM
     10

     9

     8

     7
L
0
a)
>-    6
I-
a)
0     5
C
a)    4
U
L
a)
a-    3

      2

      1



      0

     —1
          73.06 74.06 75.06 76.06 77.06 78.06 79.06 80.0681.06 82.06 83.06 84.06 85.06 86.06 87.06

                                         Year and Month
                 /
a)
'a-

a,
      'a-



      II

      0
      0
      C,)




            U)
