NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RETAIL RAW: WISDOM OF THE ROBINHOOD CROWD AND THE COVID CRISIS
Ivo Welch
Working Paper 27866
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27866

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2020, Revised October 2020

The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Ivo Welch. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Retail Raw: Wisdom of the Robinhood Crowd and the Covid Crisis
Ivo Welch
NBER Working Paper No. 27866
September 2020, Revised October 2020
JEL No. D9,G11,G4
ABSTRACT
Small retail investors at the Robinhood (RH) retail brokerage firm from 2018 to 2020 shared with
Finnish and larger US investors from the 1990s a preference for extreme recent winners and
losers. Interestingly, this preference held even for the overall stock market during the March-2020
Covid crisis, indicating an absence of panic and margin calls. Thus, RH investors acted as a
(small) market-stabilizing force. They were also unusually interested in some “experience” stocks
(e.g., Cannabis stocks). Nevertheless, the narrative of pure irrational exuberance is misleading.
Collectively, RH investors principally held stocks with large persistent past share-volumes and
dollar-volumes, making them invest overwhelmingly in large rather than in obscure stocks. A
portfolio constructed on the basis of just these two (slowly moving) variables can mimick the
investments of RH traders, plausibly even beyond the sample. (2000 would have been an
exceptionally bad year.) The collective RH crowd portfolio did not underperform with respect to
standard academic benchmark models.

Ivo Welch
Anderson School at UCLA (C519)
110 Westwood Place (951481)
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1482
and NBER
ivo.welch@anderson.ucla.edu

The online retail brokerage company Robinhood (RH) was founded in 2013 based on a
plan to make it easier and cheaper for small investors to participate in the stock and option
markets. RH has never charged brokerage fees, making it possible to buy and sell single
shares of stocks. Instead, RH earns its revenues through margin fees and cash balance
interest, payment-for-order flow, and sales of its investor data to more sophisticated highfrequency traders. RH’s also appealed with many other small technological innovations,
such as mobile-first user interface.
As of mid-2020, RH had attracted a clientele of over 13 million investors—widely
believed to be small, young, computer-savvy but also mostly first-time novice investors.
“According to Robinhood...first time investors accounted for 1.5 million of its 3 million
funded accounts opened in the first four months of 2020” (WSJ, Sep 12, 2020). The website
brokerage-review.com estimated that the average account size at RH was only $2,000. By
August of 2020, RH had raised another $200 million of fresh capital, boosting its valuation
to $11.2 billion. It is widely considered a disruptive force in US investing.
RH also offered an API from mid-2018 to mid-2020 that made it possible to obtain the
(anonymous) number of RH investors holding a particular stock at that particular moment.
In turn, the website robintrack.net wrote some scripts to continuously pull down the RH
information (at a speed of about 20 stocks per second, cycling through all stocks about
once an hour) and then reposted the data online with RH’s blessing.
My paper investigates this Robintrack history. It first documents that the small RH
investors of the 2018-20s shared some of the behavioral traits of retail investors first
observed in other contexts. In particular, Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001) and Barber and
Odean (2008) had shown that other retail investors in the 1990s bought stocks that had
recently gone up or gone down a lot. This could be due to stocks catching the attention of
investors1 or investors deliberately seeking of sensation. Barber and Odean (2013) surveys
the behavioral literature on individual investors.
In addition to establishing that this was also the case here for individual stocks that
underperformed or outperformed the market dramatically the day before, my paper can
show that such behavior extended to the sharp market-wide Covid decline in March 2020.
1

See also Ben-Rephael, Da, and Israelsen (2017), DellaVigna and Pollet (2009), Fang and Peress (2009),
Fang and Peress (2009), Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh (2009), Peng and Xiong (2006), Da, Engelberg, and Gao
(2011), DellaVigna and Pollet (2009).

2

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

RH investors did not panic or experience margin calls. Instead, there is evidence that as
the stock market declined, investors actively added cash to fund purchases of more stocks.
Their first “purchasing” spike (i.e., increase in the sum-total number of holding investors
in all stocks) occurred as early as the next day, presumably reflecting account purchasing
power. The second spike occurred 3-4 days after a large market movement, roughly the
time that it takes to complete a cash bank transfer. Thus, the evidence suggests that RH
investors collectively acted as a (small) market-stabilizing force.
There is plenty of opportunity to poke fun at the holdings of RH investors. For example,
they purchased and overweighted stocks that seemed to appeal to their interests—Ford
(but not GM), Facebook in 1998 (but not in 2000), airline stocks in 2000 (but not in 1998).
AMD, Snapchat. Cannabis stocks were particularly popular. At the end of January 2019,
Aurora Cannabis (ACB) was briefly the most widely held stock, with 244,532 investors
(AAPL being second with “only” 237,521 investors)!
Nevertheless, there is also a different perspective. Although RH-type investors may very
well have played a role in the demand for many otherwise obscure cannabis stocks, an
“actual Robinhood” crowd portfolio (ARH) was not as crazy as these “anecdotal holdings”
would suggest.2
Most of the collective holdings of RH investors revolved around larger and highly
liquid firms. Two readily available stock attributes—share trading volume and dollar
trading volume over the last year—can explain about 50-60% of the ARH crowd portfolio’s
investment weights.3 The abnormal 5-F returns (from this two-attribute “quasi-RH” portfolio
[QRH]) can explain about 2/3 of the abnormal 5-F investment returns of the ARH portfolio.
This is similar to if not higher than the mutual associations of 5-F abnormal returns among
the equal-weighted, value-weighted, and S&P market portfolios. The QRH portfolio is not
a perfect but a reasonable proxy of the ARH portfolio.
Yet it is perhaps most surprising that the ARH portfolio, based on the collective wisdom
of the crowd, did not underperform. This was the case for the 0-factor model (i.e., returns
above the risk-free rate), the 1-factor model (i.e., abnormal returns adjusted for marketbeta), and the 5-factor model (Fama and French (2015)). The alphas were positive—-and,
2

My paper even understates the sanity of the RH portfolio. RH investors also held better-diversified ETFs,
but these were not part of the study here.
3
I can speculate that the remaining 40% relate to the visibility of products and stocks for my target investor
group. Unfortunately, there are no readily available long time-series that would make it easy to measure this.

3

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

despite the very short sample period, even statistically significant for the 5-factor model
with a respectable abnormal rate of return of 1.3% per month. The QRH portfolio did not
underperform over a much longer horizon, starting in 1980, either.
The evidence in my paper does not contradict any evidence from earlier research, which
tended to focus more on portfolio changes (buys and sells). In contrast, my analysis of the
synthetic and aggregated ARH and QRH portfolios focuses more on level holdings. These
are more akin to the buy-and-hold benchmark in Barber and Odean (2000) than their
active traders. It is also not likely that the ARH portfolio was held by any one retail investor,
either. Instead, ARH should be viewed as crowd wisdom, akin to consensus forecasts in
Zarnowitz and Lambros (1987).

I

Background

Wikipedia describes Robinhood Markets, Inc., as an “American financial services company
headquartered in Menlo Park, California. The company offers a mobile app and website
that offer people the ability to invest in stocks, ETFs, and options through Robinhood
Financial and crypto trading through Robinhood Crypto. Robinhood operates a website
and mobile apps for iPhone, Apple Watch, and Android. The company has no storefront
branches and operates entirely online without fees. Robinhood is a FINRA regulated brokerdealer, registered with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, and is a member
of the Securities Investor Protection Corporation. The company’s main source of revenue
comes from interest earned on customers’ cash balances, selling order information to highfrequency traders (a practice for which SEC opened a probe into the company in September
2020) and margin lending. The company has 13 million users.”
Presumably, with their payment for order flow, RH spread the eliminated fixed-cost fee
component into higher per-share variable costs—making it cheaper to buy and sell small
positions and more expensive to buy and sell larger positions. However, given the lack of
data on execution costs by all retail brokers in the market—and a criminal law related to
price manipulation against testing execution quality with sample roundtrip trades—the
relative execution quality of RH is difficult to ascertain.

4

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

RH’s rapid growth led other brokers to abandon brokerage fees by October 2019. It
was also reputed to have played a role in inducing the merger between Charles Schwab
and Ameritrade.
RH had its fair share of controversies, relating to service outages, cryptocurrency,
banking, payment for order flow, a security breach, and even the suicide of one of its
investors.4
Robintrack.net (RT) was created in 2018. For about three years, RT regularly and
irregularly ran a script to download all RH data made publicly available on RH’s API.
RH terminated its public API in August 2020 and RT froze its operations. By this time,
the data base had accumulated into 3.5GB worth of data.

After removing repeated

intra-hour observations and unchanging holdings, it contained about 12 million tickerhour observations.

For each stock, I extracted the last UTC observation for each day.

(Conveniently, the NYSE closes at 4:30pm, which is 11:30pm UTC.)
This resulted in 5,777,002 RH ticker-day observations from 802 unique days and 8,597
useful tickers.5 Of the 8,560 RH tickers, 8,387 tickers were matchable to CRSP. Of these,
3,834 had sharecode 10 or sharecode 11. Thus, my paper pertains only to this specific
investment universe, ex-ante identifiable.
Some tickers do not appear at all or appear late in the RT data. Early versions of
the script probably omitted dual-class tickers ending with ’.A’ and ’.B’, most prominently
Berkshire Hathway. RT remedied this with an upgrade on 2020/01/16.6 Nevertheless,
some stocks are not in the RT dataset at all for reasons unknown, most prominently CELG
(Celgene) and TWX (Time-Warner).
From 2018/05/02 (the incept day on RT) to 2020/06/30 (the end day of my CRSP
data set), there were 545 valid CRSP trading days. RH suffered some systemwide outages
on 2020/03/02 and 2020/03/09. The RT script should have been but was not run on
2018/08/09, on 2019/01/24-29 (4 days), and 2020/01/07-15 (7 days). The last followed
4

Fong, Gallagher, and Lee (2014) found that discount brokerage firms had less informative trades than
full-service brokerage firms. My paper tests whether their base finding (low informativeness) also holds for
Robinhood investors.
5
The data contained some non-sensical tickers, such as _OUT, _PRN, MTL-, PKD∼ (and its sibling PKD),
which I hand-removed.
6
Thus, BRK.B suddenly appeared with 38,023 users (BRK.A with 134 users). (Figure 3 shows that BRK.A
was right on the fitted line on 2020/06/30.) Other noteworthy dual-class examples, also appearing on
2020/01/16, included Royal-Shell Dutch and Lions Gate Entertainment.

5

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

the dual-class script update. This left 533 valid trading days, which are the basis for my
analysis.
Over time, the number of RH investors increased, and with the law-of-large-numbers,
presumably the reliability of the number of RH investors holding individual stocks. On
2018/06/29, the RH data covered only 2,947 stocks that could be matched to 3,635 CRSP
stocks. On 2019/12/31, the respective numbers were 3,522 and 3,613.
The only other academic paper that I am aware of that has studied RT data is Moss,
Naughton, and Wang (2020). It shows that RH investors did not care much about ESG,
contrary to some experimental studies.7
Before offering an analysis, it is important to offer appropriate caveats. RH investors
are a small and perhaps unusual part of the overall retail investor clientele. Their behavior
may or may not be representative of the behavior of retail investors in general.
Without access to the investment holdings and transactions of individual RH investors,
one can investigate only aggregate and relative stock-specific holding patterns. Realistically,
research can investigate only (1) changes in the number of RH holders for a stock over
time; (2) changes in and the performance of synthetic investment portfolios that include
information based on the relative number of RH holders.
I define my Actual RH (“ARH”) crowd portfolio as
ni,t
wARH
≡ P
,
i,t
i ni,t

(1)

where i is a stock index and t a day index. The ARH portfolio invests more when the
number of investors holding a stock is higher.8 ARH assumes that each investor holding
represents an equal amount of dollars. For example, if RH posts twice as many owners of
7

A non-public J.P.Morgan research report by Cheng, Murphy, and Kolanovic (2020) was privately emailed
to me in September 2020. It also studied purchases and sales of RH data, focusing primarily on changes in RH
holdings, i.e., following earlier Barber-Odean studies. It is clearly independent, roughly contemporaneous,
and different in its research questions. It does share some findings with my own paper, especially with respect
to RH purchases of strong winners and losers.
8
An analogous assumption would be used for changes in holdings. Thus, it is required in Section II. If
investors diffuse their portfolios from concentrated positions, more RH investors will be holding each stock
without a necessary overall increase in investment dollars. Nevertheless, though possible, it seems implausible
that the amount invested by RH in a particular stock would not increase when the number of investors in this
stock increases.

6

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

stock A compared to stock B, the weight of A in the ARH portfolio is twice that of B. The
number of investors in each stock is unlikely to be a good approximation for shares in a
value-weighted portfolio of RH or retail investors in general. It probably overweights small
investors.
The performance of this ARH portfolio is not likely to be representative of the performance of the average RH investor, either. In particular, few if any RH investors are likely to
hold the widely-spread ARH portfolio. Instead, individual RH investors are more likely to
suffer (or enjoy) diversifiable risk.
For papers investigating changes in holdings (and my Section II), multiple stock holdings
could increase suddenly when investors transfer brokerage accounts from elsewhere to
RH. However, transferring assets from another brokerage firm to RH does not seem to be
common. My repeated email interactions suggested that my customer-service representative did not even understand my question of how to do this. Instead, she repeatedly
suggested funding the account by linking to a bank cash account. It is also not possible
to transfer fixed amounts of funds (e.g., via paypal or check) to fund an account.9 Moreover, Section IV focuses on questions about ARH investment levels rather than questions
about (simultaneous) ARH changes. Thus, it does not even matter whether investors had
purchased stocks earlier and just transferred them or whether they had purchased them
anew.
Importantly, this ARH portfolio is not the only one that could be considered. One of
its drawbacks is that when a stock increases in value, this stock’s titlt does not increase in
the ARH portfolio. An alternative crowd portfolio would be one in which each investor
P
(holding) represents an equal number of shares. In this case, w i,t ≡ (ni,t ·Pi,t )/( i ni,t ·Pi,t ),
where Pi is the prevailing stock price. A drawback of this alternative portfolio would be that
any variable that is correlated with price (such as marketcap or dollar trading volume or
simply price itself) becomes nearly mechanically correlated with this portfolio’s investment
weights. That is, the portfolio investment weights would no longer be primarily measures
of information obtained from RH.
9

To fund their accounts, 13 million RH investors were willing to hand their user credentials including
passwords for their bank accounts to an intermediary named “PLAID,” that links Robinhood to these banks.
If PLAID were to be hacked, the consequences for these investors could be disastrous. All banks advise their
customers not to share their account credentials and will contest any liability if bank account funds disappear
through such a channel.

7

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

Another source of noise is that RH gives each investor one free randomly-chosen share
upon signup or referral. 2% of these new investors are “winners,” in that they receive
one share that is drawn from one of six stocks explicitly named on RH’s bonus page with
stock prices above $10. The shares given to the other 98% are impossible to ascertain. A
survey of past recipients confirms that the selections did not adhere to a literal reading of
the description in the bonus offer—that is, these shares were not drawn from the three
highest-capitalized stocks with prices below $10. While this should not matter to RH
investors, it can influence the reported holdings. I suspect that Robinhood merely reassigns
some random share just sold by another investor to the new investor, thereby saving all
external costs. If this is correct, then the sale of a larger position could easily splinter into
more holders rather than fewer. It is also likely that many investors simply hold on to their
share, despite the near-zero marginal trading-out cost. Thus, this holding could persist
over time and effect even portfolio levels. This is noise in my study, tilting it against finding
any effect.
In sum, the ARH portfolio considered in my paper is one feasible crowd-wisdom portfolio.
Its investment weights summarizes the RH crowd participation in one particular fashion. It
was investable in-time.

II

Idiosyncratic Responses To Large Stocks Returns

This section first examines changes in RH holdings as background evidence. It investigates
whether the buy/sell behavior patterns of retail investors documented in Grinblatt and
Keloharju (2001) and in Barber and Odean (2008) also apply in my sample. The Grinblatt
and Keloharju (2001) data was for Finish investors from 1994 to 1997. The Barber and
Odean (2008) data was stitched together from various clienteles for U.S. investors from
1991 to 1999.
The result is not a foregone conclusion. Causality is local. It is not impossible for my
investors to behave differently. Neither the time period nor the types of investors overlap.
My sample consists of smaller investors 25 years later, perhaps even wiser after the 2000
Tech collapse. It also includes the 2020 Covid experience—the most severe contraction of
the economy since the Great Depression, all in the midst of a sharp stock market decline

8

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

followed by a sharp bull stock market. Thus, it requires empirical evidence to find out
whether RH investor behavior was similar or different.

A

Active Holding Changes
[Insert Table 1 here: Extreme One-Day Increases in RH Holdings]

Before proceeding to the statistical evidence, Tables 1 and 2 help gain an intuitive
understanding of the data. They describe the most extreme cases of changes in the ARH
investment weight, i.e., in a portfolio formed in accordance with the number of RH investors
holding each stock.
Table 1 lists stocks with unusual one-day increases in investor interest. The common
feature seems to be highly unusual one-day stock price increases or decreases.10
[Insert Table 2 here: Extreme One-Day Decreases in RH Holdings]

Table 2 lists stocks with unusual one-day decreases. There are again some rather stark
stock price changes, tilting more towards losses. Sounding somewhat trite, IGC investors
seem to have decided to realize their profits after a stark price increase a few days earlier.
However, I could not detect a strong pattern in these extreme declining-sentiment changes.

B

Individual Contrarianism and Sensation-Seeking
[Insert Figure 1 here: RH Holding Changes by Net-of-Market Daily Return]

Figure 1 investigates whether RH investors were “sensation-seeking” in the Barber and
Odean (2008) sense. I first categorized all trading days by their rates of return net of the
market (both from CRSP). The plots then tabulate contemporaneous RH change statistics.
No attempt is made to distinguish between causal and correlative-only associations.
However, it would seem unlikely that small RH investors alone would be influential enough
10

Some events involve stock splits. Note that a stock split does not mechanically change the number of
investors in a stock.

9

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

to cause major price changes. Similarly, no attempt is made to distinguish between anticipatory and consequent purchases. It seems even less plausible that small retail investors
would collectively have had advance knowledge.11
The top plot tabulates the fraction of stocks that experienced increases in their RH
holdings vs. decreases in their RH holdings on each trading-day. It shows that when
stocks either increased or decreased by about 30% on one day, the number of RH holdings
increased in about 4 out of 5 times. This contrasts with stock-days that had non-descript
performances, in which the number of increases and decreases was about even. The plot
also shows (in lighter colors) lines based on pre-2020 and post-2020 data. The observed
pattern was stable over time.12
The bottom figure tabulates ARH portfolio weight changes. This takes into account both
that an increase from 50 to 51 holders is not the same as an increase from 1 to 100 holders,
and that other stocks on the same days may also have experienced changes. The response
is still a U-shape, but the plot shows that the increase in RH investors was stronger on the
positive than on the negative side. This suggests that increases of interest on the down-side
were often in smaller stocks, where just a few net purchasers would have increased the
total number of RH investors.
In sum, the evidence suggests that the “sensation-seeking” evidence in Grinblatt and
Keloharju (2001)) and in Barber and Odean (2008) also appears in RH investors. It is
proportionally weaker for large stock price decreases than it is for large stock price increases.

11

These questions are investigated in a different data set in Barber, Odean, and Zhu (2008).
Kaniel, Saar, and Titman (2007) use an order-based proxy for individual investor trading. The pattern
then changes somewhat. Investors are still contrarian over monthly horizons, but they did not purchase
(extreme) winners. Surprisingly, retail investors’ returns were quite good over the subsequent month.
12

10

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

III

Systematic Contrarianism in the Time-Series

Retail investor could behave differently in stark and/or prolonged market-wide downturns.
They could start to panic or they could face margin calls. Neither Grinblatt and Keloharju
(2001) nor Barber and Odean (2008) examined this question. There simply was no large
decline in the Grinblatt sample; and the biggest decline in the Barber sample was only 15%
(July 1998). In contrast, my sample contains an interesting episode. After multiple days
of decline in March 2020, the stock market had dropped by about 1/3, with reasonable
expectations of a calamitous economic depression caused by Covid looming ahead. As of
September 2020, although the economic depression has materialized, the stock market has
recovered and reached new all-time highs.
[Insert Figure 2 here: Sum-Total RH Holdings and Stock Market Performance, 2018-2020]

Interpreting the aggregate time-series behavior is complicated by the fact that the
Robinhood brokerage firm was not stable but experienced good growth throughout the
entire sample period. Figure 2 shows a full-sample tally of the number of holdings. The
sum-total of investor holdings grew steadily from 2018 to 2019—and then dramatically
accelerated in 2020.
[Insert Figure 3 here: Sum-Total RH Holdings and Stock Market Performance in 2020]

The plot in Figure 3 is a closeup view. It shows that the most dramatic acceleration in
holdings by RH investors appeared roughly contemporaneously with the stark decline in
the stock market.13
[Insert Figure 4 here: 2018-2020 RH Systematic Contrarianism By Horizon]

Figure 4 presents the same information but for different horizons in an x-y graph,
plotting the performance of the S&P 500 and the percent change in RH sum-total holdings.
It shows that over horizons from 1 day to 1 month, both large decreases and increases in
the S&P 500 associated with large increases in the sum-total number of holdings by RH
investors.
13

A spike in January hints at tax-related, bonus-related, or New-Year-resolution related purchases.

11

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

[Insert Table 3 here: Daily Innovations in the Sum-Total Number of RH Holdings]

Table 3 investigates the association between daily changes in the S&P 500 and daily
innovations in the aggregate number of RH holdings. The two left regressions use the entire
sample, the two right regressions begin in February 2020 (thereby omitting the January
2020 RT script update).
The estimated coefficients suggest a first spike in innovations in RH holdings exactly
one day after the stock market increased or decreased. This suggests that RH investors
learn about strong market movements towards the end of the day and purchased further
holdings the following day with their remaining (margin) purchasing balances. The 0.13
up-coefficient suggests that a 10% market increase resulted in a 1.3% increase in the
number of RH holdings; the 0.04 down-coefficient suggests that a 10% market decrease
resulted in an 0.4% increase.14 A second spike occurred about 3-4 days later—roughly the
time that it takes for a bank transfer to complete. This second spike is more symmetric,
with strong bull and bear markets having an equal influence on innovations in RH holdings.
The two-day coefficient of about 0.1 suggests another 1% increase—this one almost surely
funded by dollars previously held in cash or savings accounts and now flowing into the
riskier equity markets. Not shown in the regressions, there is also some evidence that lower
volatility and returns in bitcoin increased RH participation. However, this effect is smaller.
In sum, just like strong price increases or decreases of individual stocks can explain
additional individual RH purchases of a stock, strongly positive or strongly negative overall
market movements can predict/explain unexpected increases in RH positions. This evidence
suggests that RH investors did not retreat from the stock market during its starkest decline.
It appears that RH investors served a small but active market-stabilizing role during the
Covid crash. In this case (as in the other U.S. stock-market crashes in our lifetimes),
holding on and/or increasing the position would then have paid off well in the subsequent
stock-market boom.

14

The stock return is negated in this variable to make the interpretation easier.

12

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

IV

The ARH Portfolio Perspective
[Insert Table 4 here: Highest ARH vs VW Log-Investment-Rank Difference]

Reading popular descriptions, the behavior of RH investors is subject to common ridicule.
Indeed, RH investors ended up with some rather unusual portfolio positions. In the most
extreme example where the value-weighted market cap rank was much lower than that
of RH investors at a year end, Table 4 shows that RH investors were particular fans of
India-Cannabis (IGC), which ranked 27th on their holdings in 2019 with 0.59% of their
portfolio. Yahoo!Finance describes this 50-employee company as follows
India Globalization Capital, Inc. purchases and resells physical infrastructure
commodities. The company operates through two segments, Infrastructure Business, and Life Sciences. It buys and sells infrastructure commodities, such as steel,
wooden doors, marble, and tiles; rents heavy construction equipment, including
motor grader, transit mixers and rollers; and undertakes highway construction
contracts. The company also develops cannabinoid-based products and therapies,
such as Hyalolex for the treatment of patients from anxiety, agitation, dementia,
depression, and sleep disorder diseases; and Serosapse for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. In addition, it offers offer extraction, distillation, tolling, and white
labeling services under the Holi Hemp brand; and hemp crude extracts, hemp
isolates, and hemp distillates. The company operates in the United States, India,
and Hong Kong. India Globalization Capital, Inc. was founded in 2005 and is
based in Potomac, Maryland.
It is difficult to think of a rational portfolio in which IGC would deserve an investment
holding similar to that of J.P.Morgan.
Not shown, other Cannabis stocks similary attracted unusual interest by RH investors.
(The RH mobile interface even has a special button dedicated to pulling up the most popular
Cannabis stocks.) As already noted in the introduction, at the end of January 2019, Aurora
Cannabis (ACB) was briefly the most popular stock on RH.

13

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

Moreover, Table 4 shows that RH investors also had a relative preference for certain
oil&gas-related exploration companies and bio-pharmaceutical-related companies. All
these investments tended to be highly risky, too.15
In sum, it is easy to tell a tale that RH retail investors fit the stereotype of the unsophisticated gambler, earning low returns and being taken advantage of by more sophisticated
professional traders.
However, the remainder of this section will show that this narrative seems incomplete.
Although RH investors were presumably relatively common investors in some rather odd
stocks (as in IGC) and suffered from all sorts of behavioral and perhaps harmful patterns
when buying and selling, this does not mean that the most important holdings in the ARH
portfolio were in these odd or bought-and-hold stocks, too. This section provides evidence
that the ARH crowd portfolio was a lot more ordinary.
Put differently, the odd holdings described in Table 4, though real, were not the rule
but the exception. From the perspective of the ARH portfolio, they could be described as
“interesting experience and curiosity holdings.”16

A

Large Holdings

Figure 5 provides a graphical perspective of ARH portfolio holdings for two snapshots, one
at the end of 2018, the other towards the end of the sample in mid-2020.
[Insert Figure 5 here: Snapshot ARH Weights by Log-Rank of Market Cap]

Although IGC was perhaps the strangest popular holding in Table 4, it was not particularly noteworthy in the overall portfolio. After all, even at its height, IGC still represented
only 0.5% of the portfolio. This leaves 99.5% for other holdings. Many other stalwarts
represented more than twice of IGC’s weight. The outliers other than IGC from Table 4
would be even less notable.
15

Remarkably, the historical standard deviation of stock returns is not a great predictor of ARH holdings,
because it is largely subsumed by trading volume in Table 7.
16
As already mentioned in footnote 2, my analysis understates the “sanity” of ARH, because it excludes
many better-diversified ETF portfolios with share codes other than 10 or 11, also commonly held by RH
investors.

14

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

This does not mean that the ARH portfolio mimicked the marketcap-value weighted
portfolio. For example, the top plot (2018) shows that GE and F were as popular as AAPL
and both exceeded the holdings in MSFT. Other popular stocks were AMD, Fitbit, GoPro,
Netflix, Snapchat—firms with products familiar to computer-savvy Millenials.17 The blue
line is a near perfect fit of the value-weighted market-cap weight, by design, for comparison.
The bottom plot shows that the (blue) market-cap weighted curve had steepened by
2020, with AAPL valued at $2 trillion representing about 4% of the overall stock market. In
contrast, the black RH curve for ARH weight by marketcap remained roughly unchanged.
Yes, the ARH portfolio continued to invest strongly in AAPL (with about 2% weight), but
less aggressively so than the value-weighted market. Instead, RH investors overweighted
Disney, GE, Ford, and airlines stocks. A fair characterization is that although retail investors
had loved “new-economy” stocks in 2018, their portfolio had been tilting more towards
fallen “old-economy” stocks by mid-2020.

[Insert Table 5 here: ARH Investment Weights Far Above VW Investment Weights]

Table 5 lists the largest holdings by RH-portfolio investment weight. With data for both
snapshots for a given stock, it also provides a perspective on their evolutions. A stock can
see increases both in its ranking relative to other stocks and in its marketcap-relative weight
in the RH portfolio if
1. it is more actively purchased by (new) investors relative to other stocks;
2. its price (and thus its weight in the value-weighted market portfolio) decreases
relative to other stocks.
The table shows some instances of both. For example, although American Airlines (AAL)
dropped from a high of about $50/share in late 2018 to about $10/share in mid2020,
reducing its weight in the value-weighted CRSP index from about 0.06% to 0.02%, Yet RH
investors adored it. The 7,300 original holders in 2018 had turned into 654,611 holders
by 2020. American Airline’s weight in the ARH portfolio increased from 0.12% to 2.39%.
Facebook (FB) had good stock market performance, raising its weight in the value-weighted
17

It seems unlikely that Robinhood attracts the same lower socioeconomic clienteles that were studied in
Kumar (2009). However, they do seem to share some of their gambling predilections.

15

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

market from 1.34 to 1.78. But it fell out of relative favor with RH investors, with holdings
increasing only 40% rather than the 360% that the sum-total number of RH holdings
increased. PLUG (a hydrogen fuel researcher) benefitted both from strong rate of return
performance and increased interest.
In sum, even though some of the buying and selling and even investments in odd
small-cap experience stocks were eye-popping, these positions represented only a small
part of the RH crowd portfolio. They were a storm in a teacup. The big picture happened
in larger stocks, typically more familiar to and focused on retail consumers and especially
Millenials.

B

The Performance of The ARH Crowd Portfolio
[Insert Table 6 here: Return Performance of the ARH Crowd Portfolio, 2018 – mid-2020]

Table 6 shows the next-day performance of daily rates of return for the ARH portfolio.
Again, this portfolio is not representative of those of individual investors. It is more
appropriately viewed as a “crowd wisdom” or consensus portfolio.
To analyze the performance of the ARH portfolio, I rely on the familiar methods of Fama
and French (2015). The left side of Table 6 shows that the average daily performance of
the ARH portfolio was a positive 10 basis points per day on the 0-Factor model, i.e., net
of the prevailing risk-free rate (from Ibbotson via Ken French’s website). This abnormal
performance declines to about 5 basis points on the 1-Factor model. This is performance
above the stock market rate of return when the (ex-post realized) market exposure of 1.1
is taken into account. The abnormal performance increases back to 9 basis points on the
5-Factor model. This is because the ARH portfolio had positive exposure on the SMB factor
and negative exposure on the CMA factor.
The right side of Table 6 shows that when portfolios are formed at the end of each
month and held until the end of the following month, the performance remains about the
same. The factor exposures become less precise, perhaps explaining the change in the
5-factor model CMA exposure. The abnormal rate of return on the 5-F model is a very
respectable 1.30% per month and statistically significant.

16

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

The results are not sensitive to delay. After all, these are portfolios based on investment
weights, not portfolios based on changes in investment weights. The RH holdings and thus
the ARH portfolio are mostly very stable.
These performance regressions assume equal investments in different periods. They
ignore the effects of time-varying entry and exit into the stock market. They thus understate
that investors had deployed more capital just after the March 2020 decline, which would
have benefitted further from correctly timing the market.
In sum, the ARH portfolio performed surprisingly well. Collectively, the RH crowd may
have anticipated subsequent interest of other slower retail and other investors.18 It also
suggests that the narrative that RH investors were cannon fodder for more sophisticated
day traders seems misplaced.

V

Mimicking The ARH Crowd Portfolio

What stock attributes explain the investment interests of the RH clientele? The answer can
allow us to explore when a strategy mimicking the behavior of RH investors would have
performed well and when it would have performed poorly, even beyond the short available
RH 2018-2020 sample period.
To answer this question, a few issues must be kept in mind. First, it is more important
for a prediction of investment weights to explain the top 50 holdings than the bottom 3,000
holdings—and these 50 top holdings are by-and-large not odd experience micro-stocks like
IGC. Mispredicting the weights of cannabis stock is forgivable. Second, the ARH portfolio
has a lot of hysteresis. The figures have shown that many weights are stable over more than
a year. Thus, short-term variables (like recent rates of return) are unlikely to help explain
much of the investment weights. Third, it is not useful to attempt to explain changes in
ARG weights, because we have neither any earlier ARH portfolio holdings nor occasional
ARH holdings on which we could recalibrate predicted ARH portfolios weights. Fourth,
regressions predicting ARH weights should not so much be judged by their ability to predict
18

Good performance by stocks purchased by retail investors over a short horizon was also the case in
Barber, Odean, and Zhu (2008), Kelley and Tetlock (2013), and Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001). However,
the focus there was on changes in holdings. The focus here is on levels of holdings. As already noted, this is
more akin to the buy-and-hold benchmark in Barber and Odean (2000).

17

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

these weights, but by their abilities to produce portfolio returns similar to those displayed
by the ARH portfolio. Thus it is not of great concern that the weight-predicting regressions
below include many days for the same stock with similar weights and characteristics, or that
its T-statistics would be misleading, or that the regressions are misspecified on a number of
other dimensions (such as heteroskedasticity or codeterminants).19

A

The Attributes Determining ARH Investment Weights
[Insert Table 7 here: Explaining ARH Investment Weights (in %)]

With 1.7 million ticker-day observations, it is feasible to start with little theory and try to
disentangle similar variables empirically. Table 7 begins with a large panel regressions with
many variables in the pre-2020 sample, allowing the post-2020 sample to be a hold-out
sample. This “kitchen sink” regression contains a set of variables inspired by earlier (largely
behavioral) research, as well as some more ad-hoc variables:
IPO Variables: IPO<1year, IPO<3years, Days Since IPO logged, days since IPO;
Name: A dummy when the ticker starts with the letter ”A”;
Share Volume, Dollar Volume, Marketcap: Basic value, a “transformed weight” (see explanation below), a rank of weight, log of weight, squared weight; 5-day, 22-day,
252-day, and 504 day average weights, calculated as mean own value divided by
mean of total-across-stocks value; historical mean dollar trading volume divided by
current price (thus adjusting for stock splits);
Further Marketcap: Dummies for being among the top-500 or top-100 stocks by marketcap; a nonlinear option-like transform (500 - rank for big firms, 0 beyond);
Share-Price: Plain, squared, and log; stock split measures; Price is below $1, $10, $50, or
$100.
Min-Max Distance: the percent Distance to All-time Max, to 252-Day Max, to All-time
Min, to 252-Day Min; all plain and squared;
19

The measures in Lee and Ready (1991), Kelley and Tetlock (2013), Boehmer et al. (2019) track retail
investor order flow. This is likely to be related to changes in investment weights, not to levels. It is simply a
different and mostly unrelated measure.

18

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

Various: the largest-mcap stock in the same month, the number of stocks in month, the
crsp day index, and even the permno as a placebo.
The “transformed weight” input variables will play an important role and require
explanation. They map a raw variable into a variable that mimicks a portfolio weight,
such that the cross-sectional sum adds to 1.0 on each day. The calculation is equivalent
to that used for value-weighted portfolios. For example, if stocks A-D have attributes 2, 4,
6, and 8, the investment weights would be 10%, 20%, 30% and 40%. The advantage of
such weight-normalized variables is that their units are easily relatable to the dependent
variable, the ARH portfolio investment weight.
The regression fit can also be improved with a later-stage equivalent portfolio-weight
procedure. The OLS model fits some negative weights and the fitted portfolio weights
would no longer add to 1. Thus, I truncate fitted values to 0 and then rescale the weights
to add to 1. The reported R2 (and portfolio returns below) are based on these rescaled
investing weights. (These R2 s are not our measure of forecasting success, especially not
in-sample.)
There are other more sophisticated econometric techniques that could be used to allow
the statistical model to enforce these restrictions itself. However, this would make it more
difficult to replicate the analysis and be subject to a “specification search” critique. The
simplicity of the linear procedure (with weight adjustments) here is appealing.
The first row in Panel A shows that the pre-2020 kitchen-sink regression can explain
about 66.60% of the variation in ARH portfolio weights. However, it is not likely that such
an overfitted highly-collinear model would remain stable over other sample periods. A
kitchen-sink model is useful primarily to identify important variables (two stick out) and to
learn the limit of how well a model with the employed variables could fit.
A simpler model is more likely to be more stable and thus more useful out-of-sample. I
therefore employed a “forward-selection” regression procedure on the kitchen-sink variables.
The second row shows that a minimalist two-variable model can explain 58.81% of the
variation in ARH weights:
1. The mean share trading volume over the last year for each stock, divided by the mean
total share trading volume (transformed into a portfolio weight);
19

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

2. the same for dollar trading instead of share trading volume.
The coefficient estimate on the former is about twice that of the coefficient estimate on the
latter. I shall refer to the (renormalized) weights from this model as the “Quasi RobinHood”
(“QRH”) portfolio.
The model’s two input variables are mechanically correlated with one another. The
dollar-volume is also nearly mechanically correlated with the not-included marketcap.
Moreover, empirically, these two variables also correlate well with many other omitted
variables such as return volatility and distance to min/max price.
Two alternative specifications are similar and nearly as good. A first does not use a full
year’s worth of trading, but a shorter period (merely a month). A second does not use the
mean number of shares trading, but the mean dollar-volume of shares trading divided by
the last price. (This is a sensible adjustment for stock splits.)
When explaining ARH weights with attributes, it is true that there are still many other
variables that could add statistically significant power. The table shows the performance of
a few of them (based on intuition-augmented forward selection). On the margin relative to
the QRH variables, the ARH portfolio still underweights the biggest 100 stocks, the biggest
500 stocks, and younger firms. However, these are correlations merely on the margin, with
most of their (unconditional) positive relation having already been captured by the two
trading variables. Most importantly, their marginal increase in fitting the observed ARH
weights is modest.20
Panel B shows that all models perform worse in the post-2020 holdout sample—perhaps
not surprising given the continued large inflow of RH investors and the turbulent market
conditions. The kitchen-sink model’s explanatory power declines to 61.87%. The QRH
model explains only 49.45%. The larger 12% difference relates to primarily to shorter-term
(say, weekly) trading volume, which was not important in the 2018-9 sample but did
become more important in 2020. As to the two coefficients themselves, the past-year share
trading volume gains in importance relative to the past-year dollar trading volume.
Panel C shows that a model that fits to the entire sample is similar to the 2018-9 sample,
if only because it shares most of its observations with the former.
20

Not shown, the rate-of-return performance of these models is also just a few basis points better.

20

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

[Insert Table 8 here: Implication of QRH Model Differences For QRH Investment Weights]

Even when models (and their coefficients) look different, it is difficult to assess whether
their predictions are similar. Panel A of Table 8 shows that differences in the ultimate
weight predictions between using the pre-2020 coefficients or the post-2020 coefficients
are small. The fitted weight correlations from the two models are always 98% or higher,
regardless of sample (and specifically also out-of-sample to the holdout sample).
Panel B shows that this similarity does not necessarily extend to the difference between
the kitchen-sink and the two-variable models. For example, on June 30, 20202, the fitted
investment weights from two models had only 87% correlation in this pure cross-section.
Again, the correlation was better in the 2018-9 sample than it was more recently.
Again appropriate cautions to the meaning of crowd portfolios and their returns apply.
It seems implausible that bigger retail investors would have behaved just like the “micro”
RH investors. With a different age profile, larger retail investors with more to loose may
have preferred more conservative holdings—although even the RH crowd portfolio was by
no means as aggressive as often claimed.
In sum, the ARH portfolio tilted heavily towards stocks with a lot of trading activity
over the past year. Other variables, even when statistically significant, don’t add a lot of
explanatory power in fitted values to the QRH model portfolio.
I can speculate that the remaining 40% unexplained variation in investment weights
relates to stock attributes for which there are no readily available (long-term) comprehensive
proxies. These would be variables such as excitement about or visibility of products by retail
customers, measures of the share of consumer expenditures spent on these companies, their
brand values and advertising, the excitement and promise of new technologies, and/or
perhaps even their recent performance. Such variables could potentially help explain why
RH investors liked Delta and American Airlines more than United Airlines; why they liked
Ford better than General Motors; why they liked Disney more in 2020 than in 2018; or why
they liked Facebook more in 2018 than in 2020. This investigation is left to future research.

21

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

B

The Return Performance of The QRH vs. the ARH Portfolio

I can now evaluate the performance of a portfolio that is inspired by—but not the same
as—the ARH portfolio. This QRH portfolio tilts towards high volume and high dollarvolume stocks, in accordance with the QRH model from Table 7. As already noted, its fitted
investment weights are truncated to be above zero, and its holdings are rescaled to sum
to 1 first (before the QRH portfolio rate of return can be calculated). Importantly, it was
formed based only on trading volume. It was not formed in a way to take into account any
correlation in rates of return.
[Insert Table 9 here: ARH and QRH Portfolio Return Correlations, 2018 – mid-2020]

Table 9 shows that it does not matter whether returns are calculated from coefficients
based on the pre-2020 or the post-2020 sample. In particular, I calculated one full series
with “IS” coefficients, where each investment weight is based on the model in the same
period, and one full series with “OOS” coefficients, where each investment weight is based
on the model not estimated in the same sample period. (That is, I use the pre-2020 model
coefficients on the post-2020 stock attributes and vice-versa.) The two return series had
99.99% correlation with one another.
Panel B shows that there is some further slippage in association when the universe is
expanded to include all CRSP stocks and not just the stocks in the RH sample. (Adding
about 300 albeit often smaller stocks, this yields a slightly different rate of return series.)
The correlation between the two QRH series is an imperfect but unconcerning 99.78%.
Panel C shows that much of the 97.82% correlation between the actual and the quasi RH
portfolio rates of returns was due to shared exposure to the market-factor. After subtracting
out the market rate of return, the correlation drops to a respectable but much lower 85%.
Pushing this return-factor analysis one step further, the correlation between residuals from
the ARH and the QRH models on the 5-F benchmark model is about 79%.
To put this 79% figure in perspective, the 5-F residuals between the CRSP S&P-500 rate
of return and the value-weighted rate of return is only 27% in the same time-period. The
correlation of the residuals for the equal- and value-weighted market-portfolio is only 72%.
There is more association between the ARH and the QRH portfolio than there is between
common but different overall stock-market portfolio return measures.
22

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

In sum, the QRH portfolio return series is a good but not a perfect substitute for the
ARH portfolio return series.

[Insert Table 10 here: Return Performance of the QRH Portfolio, 2018 – mid-2020]

Table 10 shows the performance of the QRH portfolio in the 2018-2020 sample. In
Panel A, on a daily basis, the QRH portfolio performed well, earning an alpha of about 5.1
basis points per day net of the risk-free rate, and 4.2 basis points relative to the FF 5-factor
model. Relative to the CAPM market-model, QRH earned an “on-model” 0.4% appropriate
rate of return.
However, the QRH portfolio delivered about 4 basis points less than the actual ARH
portfolio from Table 6, statistically significant. The RH crowd simply knew better how to
invest than this naive two-attribute QRH model.
Panel B shows that the same inference obtains when trading is restricted to be once-permonth and returns are compounded over the following month. The QRH portfolio had a
positive adjusted rate of return of 1.035% per month above the risk-free rate, and a positive
alpha of of 0.505% on the 5-factor model. On the market-model, it lost an insignificant
9.7 basis points per month. Again, the actual ARH portfolio comfortably outperformed the
naive QRH portfolio.
With a reasonable mode, we can now ask how a portfolio (of a crowd of retail investors)
with QRH-like preferences would have performed over a longer horizon.
[Insert Table 11 here: Return Performance of the QRH Portfolio, 1980 – 2020]

Table 11 shows that from 1980 to 2020, the QRH portfolio would by-and-large have
achieved a similar performance as it did from 2018 to 2020. It would have had positive
excess and 5-factor abnormal return performance, with modestly negative (and statistically
insignificant) abnormal 1-F market abnormal return performance.

23

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

[Insert Table 6 here: Return Performance of the QRH Portfolio After 1980]

Figure 6 shows the year-by-year performance of the QRH portfolio, with daily returns
summed over yearly intervals. 1999 and 2009 were spectacularly good years for QRH
investors, with performance about 30% better than that of the market. The worst year was
2000, the year of the collapse of the “1999-9 Tech bubble period,” with underperformance
of about 20% below an already dismal overall market performance. This conforms to
informal anecdotes from the era. In contrast, 1999 and 2009 were exceptionally good years
(perhaps leading to more exuberance of retail investors in the following year).
Of course, with respect to QRH as a proxy, appropriate caution to the interpretation
of this portfolio’s track record apply, too. Small retail investors could have had evolving
preferences over the longer samples, and/or they could have had better stock-picking
abilities and wisdom than this naive QRH model would suggest—which is reinforced by
the higher alpha of ARH over QRH in the overlapping sample.

VI

Conclusion

By and large, RH investors liked to hold stocks with high trading activity over the last year.
There were exceptions. They fell in love with some obscure experience stocks, such as
cannabis stocks, and some risky technology/gamble stocks. And they displayed some of the
same behavioral-finance biases documented in previous literature, especially with respect
to purchasing stocks experiencing extreme stock price increases or decreases.
Nevertheless, on the whole, the ARH crowd portfolio was not greatly tilted toward
these stocks. RH investors’ more obscure buys, sales, and holdings are better described as
“curiosity ingredients.” Overall, the ARH portfolio seemed more tilted away from the very
largest stocks and towards actively-trading stocks with whose products retail customers
would have been familiar with. By mid-2020, RH investors had even actively pivoted
towards familiar fallen old-economy stalwarts like airline companies.
The ARH “crowd wisdom investment portfolio” performed reasonably well, earning
positive alpha with respect to the risk-free rate, the market-model, and (statistically significantly) the Fama-French 5-factor model. And the ARH portfolio earned these positive
24

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

abnormal returns while RH investors acted as a contrarian market-stabilizing force and
without panicking during the 33% Covid drop in March 2020. They increased investment
funding, as measured by the 3-4 day (bank-transfer-lag induced) increase in their number
of holdings. This steadfastness was presumably rewarded in the market recovery, although
this timing would not be reflected in the ARH portfolio performance measures reported in
my paper.
Further analysis shows that a simple two-variable attribute model can explain a large
part of RH investor ARH preferences (and consequent ARH portfolio return). This QRH
model weighs the share trading volume about twice as much as the dollar trading volume
(properly normalized). Until there is a better model or actual data, this simple two-variable
model can act as a proxy for the investment performance of small RH-like retail investors
in some contexts.
My paper shows that the resulting QRH return factor could plausibly capture much of
the RH investors’ preferences. The evidence suggests that QRH’s returns associated with
ARH’s returns about as well as different stock market indexes associate with one another,
all quoted above and beyond the 5-F model.
When my paper then tracked the performance of the ARH-inspired QRH portfolio
beginning in 1980, QRH had positive 0-F and 5-F alphas, too. Overall, QRH investors
would not have suffered poor performance over a longer timeframe—although they would
have underperformed especially badly in the year of tech collapse (2000).

25

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

References
Barber, Brad M. and Terrance Odean (2000). “Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The
common stock investment performance of individual investors”. In: The journal of
Finance 55.2, pp. 773–806.
— (2008). “All that glitters: The effect of attention and news on the buying behavior of
individual and institutional investors”. In: The Review of Financial Studies 21.2, pp. 785–
818.
— (2013). “The Behavior of Individual Investors”. In: Handbook of the Economics of Finance.
Elsevier. Chap. 22, pp. 1535–1565. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-

44-459406-8.00022-6.
Barber, Brad M., Terrance Odean, and Ning Zhu (2008). “Do retail trades move markets?”
In: The Review of Financial Studies 22.1, pp. 151–186.
Ben-Rephael, Azi, Zhi Da, and Ryan D. Israelsen (2017). “It depends on where you search:
Institutional investor attention and underreaction to news”. In: The Review of Financial
Studies 30.9, pp. 3009–3047.
Boehmer, Ekkehart, Charles M. Jones, Xiaoyan Zhang, and Xinran Zhang (2019). “Tracking
retail investor activity”. In: Available at SSRN 2822105.
Cheng, Peter, Thomas J. Murphy, and Marko Kolanovic (Aug. 2020). Follow the Robinhood
Money. Tech. rep. J.P.Morgan.
Da, Zhi, Joseph Engelberg, and Pengjie Gao (2011). “In search of attention”. In: The Journal
of Finance 66.5, pp. 1461–1499.
DellaVigna, Stefano and Joshua M. Pollet (2009). “Investor inattention and Friday earnings
announcements”. In: The Journal of Finance 64.2, pp. 709–749.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French (2015). “A five-factor asset pricing model”. In:
Journal of Financial Economics 116.1, pp. 1–22.
Fang, Lily and Joel Peress (2009). “Media coverage and the cross-section of stock returns”.
In: The Journal of Finance 64.5, pp. 2023–2052.
Fong, Kingsley Y.L., David R. Gallagher, and Adrian D. Lee (2014). “Individual investors
and broker types”. In: Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, pp. 431–451.
Grinblatt, Mark and Matti Keloharju (2001). “What makes investors trade?” In: The Journal
of Finance 56.2, pp. 589–616.

26

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

Hirshleifer, David, Sonya Seongyeon Lim, and Siew Hong Teoh (2009). “Driven to distraction: Extraneous events and underreaction to earnings news”. In: The Journal of Finance
64.5, pp. 2289–2325.
Kaniel, Ron, Gideon Saar, and Sheridan Titman (2007). “Individual investor trading and
stock returns”. In: Journal of Finance 62.3, pp. 1139–1168.
Kelley, Eric K. and Paul C. Tetlock (2013). “How wise are crowds? Insights from retail orders
and stock returns”. In: The Journal of Finance 68.3, pp. 1229–1265.
Kumar, Alok (2009). “Who gambles in the stock market?” In: The Journal of Finance 64.4,
pp. 1889–1933.
Lee, Charles M.C. and Mark J. Ready (1991). “Inferring trade direction from intraday data”.
In: The Journal of Finance 46.2, pp. 733–746.
Moss, Austin, James P. Naughton, and Clare Wang (May 2020). The Irrelevance of ESG
Disclosure to Retail Investors: Evidence from Robinhood. Tech. rep. University of Iowa,
University of Virgina, and University of Colorado.
Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth D. West (1987). “A Simple, Positive Semi-definite, Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix”. In: Econometrica
55.3, pp. 703–708. DOI: doi:10.2307/1913610.
Peng, Lin and Wei Xiong (2006). “Investor attention, overconfidence and category learning”.
In: Journal of Financial Economics 80.3, pp. 563–602.
Zarnowitz, Victor and Louis A. Lambros (1987). “Consensus and Uncertainty in Economic
Prediction”. In: Journal of Political Economy 95.3, pp. 591–621. DOI: http://www.

jstor.org/stable/1831979.

27

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

Exhibits

28

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

tbl:rhchanges.ex.pos in rhperf-exhibits.tex, September 29, 2020

Table 1: Extreme One-Day Increases in RH Holdings

Rel Day; Holdings in K

Date

Ticker

2018/07/26

FB

ARH

stock return in percent

–2 –1 ±0 +1 +2

∆#

w

∆w

r−1

r0

r+1

108 114 156 166 170

42,083

3.22

0.85

0.4

–18.7

–0.1

Good 2nd-Q earnings, but below expectations, 10% price drop

2020/01/16

INPX

0

0 26 26 25

26,376

0.27

0.27

–55.5

8.1

–7.2

1/8: Reverse Stock Split, IOT Sensor Product wins award, Canada Patent.

2018/10/02

OGEN

17 27 41 39 37

14,336

0.74

0.25

38.8

123.2

–51.1

Various minor news

2018/07/17

NFLX

101 107 118 118 117

11,000

2.49

0.23

1.3

–5.6

–1.4

Poor earnings report, Walmart considers competitive service.

2019/11/01

FIT

252 252 271 275 275

18,924

3.06

0.21

5.8

14.6

–1.8

Google agrees to buy Fitbit

2020/03/06

INO

107 111 137 155 150

25,521

1.16

0.20

25.5

45.5

–22.6

Accelerated Covid DNA vaccine

2020/06/03

GNUS

49 66 112 145 141

46,014

0.46

0.19

52.6

95.9

–13.2

Raised funding for digital children network

2018/07/27

FB

114 156 166 170 173

9,832

3.40

0.19

–18.7

–0.1

–1.6

See above. Also acquires Redkix.

2020/06/09

NKLA

33 77 125 130 137

48,019

0.49

0.18

102.5

9.6

–17.9

Various progress reports. See also below.

2020/05/18

SRNE

16 51 92 92 90

41,302

0.41

0.18

157.6

–7.0

–15.6

Antibody has various positive Covid vaccine news.

Explanations: These are sample cases with relatively large one-day AHC investment weight increases.
Interpretation: There are typically large daily rates of return on the day before or the day of the
increase.

29

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

tbl:rhchanges.ex.neg in rhperf-exhibits.tex, September 29, 2020

Table 2: Extreme One-Day Decreases in RH Holdings

Rel Day; Holdings in K

Date
2019/02/27

ARH

stock return in percent

Ticker

–2 –1 ±0 +1 +2

∆#

w

∆w

r−1

r0

r+1

IGC

78 78 42 42 42

–36,084

0.63

–0.71

–2.1

1.9

13.7

Cannabis stock wins appeal to relist on NYSE. Stock rises dramatically. Q3-19 earnings release.

2018/11/02

INPX

39 40

1

1

1

–38,583

0.03

–0.67

–3.5

–31.5

1.8

See also above. Reverse stock split.

2020/06/04

NKLA

95 100 21 33 77

–78,685

0.09

–0.32

6.9

–0.3

4.0

Various progress reports. see also previous table.

2020/02/05

TSLA

154 163 148 151 152

–15,339

1.43

–0.15

12.2

–18.3

1.6

Good earnings report. Model-Y news. German factory. Weibo negative report.

2020/03/13

AIKI

18 18

1

1

1

–17,240

0.01

–0.14

–8.6

–33.8

–12.0

Name change to emphasize Alzheimer and Multiple Sklerosis drug dvlpmt

2019/02/04

OHRP

8

8

0

0

0

–8,742

0.00

–0.14

–4.6

–23.7

–2.5

Reverse stock split

2018/10/01

TSLA

95 101 94 94 94

–6,876

1.69

–0.13

–13.9

17.0

–3.1

Musk steps down as chairman and settles with SEC. Next day good earnings news.

2018/10/04

IGC

89 83 76 72 80

–7,259

1.35

–0.13

–32.0

–26.8

–36.3

10/2: ATM offering completed

2020/01/16

FIT

257 257 256 257 259

–898

2.59

–0.11

0.6

–0.5

1.0

Scripps Research claims Fitbit can detect flu

2018/08/02

TSLA

85 85 80 77 76

–4,857

1.61

–0.11

1.0

15.7

–0.9

OK Earnings news. Announces China plan

Explanations: These are sample cases with relatively large one-day AHC investment weight decreases.
Interpretation: There are sometimes large daily rates of return on the day before or the day of the
increase.

30

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

fig:xret in rhperf-exhibits.tex, September 29, 2020

Figure 1: RH Holding Changes by Net-of-Market Daily Return

Holders Up/Dn

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
−0.6

−0.4

−0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.4

0.6

Grouped by Log Excess Return

Weight Change *100

1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
−0.6

−0.4

−0.2

0.0

0.2

Grouped by Log Excess Return

Explanations: Stock-days are first grouped by net-of-market stock returns into about 20
(non-equal-spaced) categories. Within each category, the y-axis presents mean statistics for
the full sample (dark) and two subsamples (light, pre-2020 and post-2020). The top plot
shows (a dummy for) increases vs decreases. The bottom plot shows the net change in the
ARH investment weight. This weights a larger number of investor changes more (common
in bigger stocks with more RH holders) and also takes other ARH changes on the same day
into account.
Interpretation: RHers preferentially purchase large movers. This confirms earlier work.
Contrarian increases are concentrated in small stocks with small increases relative to total
number of RH holdings.
Source: 3-mkdbyret.R: 4 Sep 2020 (files d*-by-xret.pdf).

31

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

fig:sys2018 in rhperf-exhibits.tex, September 29, 2020

Figure 2: Sum-Total RH Holdings and Stock Market Performance, 2018-2020

40

F1

M1

A1

M1

J1

J1

A1

S1

O1

N1

D1

J1

F1

M1

A1

M1

J1

J1

A1

S1

O1

N1

D1

2019

J1

F1

| M1| ||A1 |

Aug 13: API closes

Jun 1: Low Covid Interest

|

Apr 15: Checks Mailed

0

Mar 23: Lowest S&P
Mar 25−7: CARES Act

Holdings
Total RH

10

Feb 19: Highest S&P

20

Mar 04: S&P Stabilized

Mar8 to Ma
r22:
Covid GTrend
s 8 to

92

30

0−Commission
Elsewhere

Number (in b)

Google
Trends
Covid

M1

J1

|

J1

A1

M1

J1

J1

A1

|

S1

O1

S1

O1

2020
Day

2.5

2.0

Change RH Holdings
J1

A1

S1

O1

N1

D1

J1

F1

M1

A1

M1

J1

J1

2019

A1

S1

O1

N1

D1

J1

F1

M1

A1

2020
Day

Explanations: The top plot shows the total number of RH investors. The green line shows
the interest in Covid on Google Trends. The bottom plot shows the S&P500 index and
the percent change of the sum-total in RH holdings. The red line indicates zero growth.
Figure 3 is a closeup for 2020.

Aug 13: API closes

J1

Jun 1: Low Covid Interest

M1

Apr 15: Checks Mailed

A1

Mar 23: Lowest S&P
Mar 25−7: CARES Act

1.5
M1

Mar 04: S&P Stabilized

F1

S&P 500

3.0

Feb 19: Highest S&P

Number (S&P in K, RH scaled)

3.5

Interpretation: RH investing accelerated around the beginning of the Covid crisis in the
US.
Source: 4-mktsplots.R: 4 Sep 2020 (files rhs-[topkbot-2018.pdf).

32

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

fig:sys2020 in rhperf-exhibits.tex, September 29, 2020

Figure 3: Sum-Total RH Holdings and Stock Market Performance in 2020

40

J1

F1

M1

| |

|

A1

Mar

M1

|

J1

May

Aug 13: API closes

|

Jun 1: Low Covid Interest

|

Apr 15: Checks Mailed

0

Mar 25−7: CARES Act

10

Mar 04: S&P Stabilized

20

Mar 23: Lowest S&P

Mar8 to Ma
r22:
Covid GTrend
s 8 to

92

30

Feb 19: Highest S&P

Number (in b)

Google
Trends
Covid

J1

A1

|

Jul

Day

3.0

S&P 500

2.5

2.0

Change RH Holdings
F1

M1

A1

M1

Day

Apr 15: Checks Mailed

Mar 25−7: CARES Act

May
Mar 23: Lowest S&P

Mar 04: S&P Stabilized

Feb 19: Highest S&P

Mar

J1

Explanations: This figure is a closeup of Figure 2.

J1

A1

Jul
Aug 13: API closes

1.5
J1

Jun 1: Low Covid Interest

Number (S&P in K, RH scaled)

3.5

Interpretation: The Covid-related drop in the stock market coincided with an acceleration
of sum-total RH positions.
Source: 4-mktsplots.R: 4 Sep 2020 (files rhs-[topkbot-2020.pdf).

33

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

fig:sysbylenoftime in rhperf-exhibits.tex, September 29, 2020

Figure 4: 2018-2020 RH Systematic Contrarianism By Horizon
1 Day

5 Days
1/16
3/20

3/23

3/25
6/8

3/20

2

4/20
4/13 3/19

3/18

Chg Holdings, in%

Chg Holdings, in%

3/16

3/26

3/30

3/24
3/13

3/17
3/274/15
3/3
4/30
3/31
3/10
4/27
6/9 1901/30
4/21 4/3 6/44/16
5/4
4/14
3/11
4/8
3/5
5/1
4/6
4/1
5/183/4
2/24
1812/26

3/9

1
3/12

1908/5
1812/4
2/25
1908/14
1810/24

0
6/11

−10

−5

4/21
4/2
3/13

6
3/11
3/9

3/12

2/26
2/25

2/28
2/27

10

−15

−5

40

4/6
4/23
4/24
4/214/22
4/20
4/28 4/27
4/8
4/17
4/30
4/13
4/29
4/16
5/1
4/9
4/15
4/14
5/4

3/12

3/9

5

6/8
3/10
6/5

3/6
3/5
3/3 3/4
2/28
2/27 3/2

4/9 4/14

4/15

4/16

4/204/17
4/21
4/22

30

3/24

4/24

4/27
4/28
5/45/1
4/30
5/5
5/6 4/29
5/7
5/8

3/23
3/20
3/19

5/11

3/18

20

3/17
3/16
3/13
3/12

10

3/11 3/10
3/9
3/6
1901/31

1901/9
1901/3

1812/17
1812/18
1812/20
1812/21
1812/24

0

4/7
4/8

4/23

4/7

3/11

15

3/25
4/3

3/18

4/6
3/30

3/27

4/2

3/20

3/13

10

3/26

Chg Holdings, in%

Chg Holdings, in%

3/23

3/19

10

5

4/13

3/31
4/3
4/2
4/1

3/30

3/31
4/1

3/17

0

Return of S&P 500, in%

3/26

3/27
3/25

3/16

1901/2
1901/10

21 Days

3/24

15

4/13
4/9
4/8

1908/5
1812/19
1812/11
1810/11
1812/20
1810/24
1812/21
1812/24

10 Days

20

4/20
4/17
4/16
4/22
4/15
4/23
4/24
6/9
4/3
6/10
4/14
1/23
1/21
1/22
1/17
4/27
1/164/28
5/1
4/306/8

4

Return of S&P 500, in%

25

3/30

4/1

3/16

0
5

3/19

3/17

8

1901/4

0

3/27

3/24

3/18

2

3/2

2/27
1810/10 1810/23
8/11 1805/4
5/11

3/23

3/31

10
3

3/26

3/25

12

4

1812/24

0
−20

−10

0

10

20

Return of S&P 500, in%

−30

−20

−10

0

10

20

Return of S&P 500, in%

Explanations: This figure shows the percent change in the sum-total of RH holdings vs.
the stock-market return, similar to Table 2, but in X-Y rather than time-series format and
over longer (overlapping) intervals, too. Large changes are named.
Interpretation: Large S&P500 price drops did not deter RH investors.
Source: 4-mktsplots.R: 4 Sep 2020 (files rhts-xy-*.pdf).

34

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

tbl:grangersimms in rhperf-exhibits.tex, September 29, 2020

Table 3: Daily Innovations in the Sum-Total Number of RH Holdings

(Intercept)
Lagged Values
lag(Y, 1)
lag(Y, 2)
lag(Y, 3)
lag(Y, 4)
lag(Y, 5)
lag(Y, 6)

Full Sample (D=563)
Coef
T
Coef
T

>2020/02 (D=134)
Coef
T
Coef

0.08

3.20

0.03

2.74

0.06 2.04

0.48

5.54

0.23 3.36
0.26 10.08
0.18 4.25

0.40 6.09
0.17 2.57
0.14 2.34

Positive Market Movement: (R M >0) · R M
lagp(R M , 0)
lagp(R M , 1)
0.14 8.66
0.09 4.35
lagp(R M , 2)
0.01 0.47
lagp(R M , 3)
0.00 0.29
lagp(R M , 4)
lagp(R M , 5)
lagp(R M , 6)

0.12 3.85
–0.02 -0.59
–0.01 -0.35

Negative Market Movement, Absolute Value: (R M <0)·|R M |
lagn(R M , 0)
lagn(R M , 1)
0.09 13.43
0.05 4.80
0.07 4.78
lagn(R M , 2)
0.03 2.28
0.01 0.67
lagn(R M , 3)
0.01 0.35
0.01 0.23
lagn(R M , 4)
lagn(R M , 5)
lagn(R M , 6)
R̄2 :
N:

48.2%
563

48.9%
563

56.9%
135

T

0.03 0.92
0.34
0.16
–0.06
0.17
0.10
–0.16
0.04
0.13
–0.03
–0.02
0.09
0.01
–0.01
–0.02
0.04
–0.01
–0.02
0.05
0.04
0.00

5.77
4.05
-0.86
3.22
1.52
-4.03

1.81
5.50
-1.22
-1.05
3.80
0.96
-0.26

-0.85
3.23
-0.33
-1.01
3.76
2.11
-0.24

66.2%
135

Explanations: The dependent variable Y in this time-series
P regression is the percent change
in the sum-total number of RH holdings, Yt ≡ %∆ t i RHi t . The market rate of return
is the percent change in the S&P 500. The “positive market movement” variables assign
zero on days when the market declined. The “negative market movement” variables are
analogous, except that they use the absolute value of R M , as indicated in the header. The
T-statistics are adjusted for heteroskedasticity and two lags as in Newey and West (1987).
Interpretation: 1-day lagged and 3-4 day-lagged large market movements are robust
positive predictors of increases in the sum-total number of RH holdings. The 1-day spike is
stronger on positive than on negative rates of return days, but it occurs in both. The 3-4
day spike is roughly symmetric.
35

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

tbl:weirdprefs in rhperf-exhibits.tex, September 29, 2020

Table 4: Highest ARH vs VW Log-Investment-Rank Difference

TIC

Business
Description

Rank
RH
VW

2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019

BIOC
HUSA
IGC
OGEN
RIOT
ZN

Cancer-Detection
Oil-Gas
India-Cannabis
BioPharm Immunization
Blockchain Fin’l
Oil-Gas

102
88
27
39
96
95

3356
3425
3271
3280
3161
3296

0.15
0.19
0.59
0.47
0.17
0.17

2020
2020
2020
2020

CEI
INPX
OCGN
TTNP

Oil-Gas
Big Data
Eye Disease
Drug Implants

94
88
101
90

3425
3227
3403
3274

0.20
0.22
0.19
0.22

Year

ARH Pfio
Weight

Explanations: RH is Robinhood, VW is value-weighted (always according to CRSP’s
shrout × |prc|). The stocks listed in this table (log-)ranked more highly in the investment holdings of RH investors than in the VW market portfolio either on 2019/12/31 or
on 2020/06/30, such that they constituted at least 0.15% of the ARH investment weight.
(All stocks listed in this table constituted less than 0.005% holdings in the VW portfolio.)
Source: 1-namelargeholds.R: 4 Sep 2020.

36

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

fig:mcapw in rhperf-exhibits.tex, September 29, 2020

Figure 5: Snapshot ARH Weights by Log-Rank of Market Cap

#3

#2

AAPL

#5

#4

#6 #7 #8

#55

#21

#149

#404

GE
F

3
RH Weight, in %

#2981

AMD

M

ar

FIT

ke

t−

Ca
pW
AMZN
eig

We
igh

2

#1097

FB

MSFT

RH

#500

2018/12
#1

ted

ht
ed

SNAP

NFLX

TWTR

NVDA

BAC

SQ

TSLA
DIS

1

MU

T
INTC
GOOG
JNJ JPM

0
0

ZNGA

SBUX
ATVI SIRI
S

NKE

V
GOOGL
WMT
PFE VZ
XOM
WFC
PG
UNH
CVX

PYPL

2

GPRO

GRPN

PLUG
XXII
NBEV
OGEN

TLRY

4

6

8

Log Rank of Lag Market Cap

#1

#2

#3

#5

#4

#6 #7 #8

#55

#21

#149

#404

F

M

RH Weight, in %

3

ke

t−

Ca

p

W
ei
gh
te

DAL

MSFT

RH
Wei
ght

ed

GPRO

BAC
TSLA

AMZN
FB

T
NVDA
V
JPM BRKB
GOOGL
WMT
JNJ
INTC
GOOG
MA HD VZ
PG
UNH

0
0

#2981

AAL

DIS

d

2

1

#1097

GE

ar

AAPL

#500

2020/06

BA
SBUX

KO
XOM
NFLX

SNAP
UBER
AMD

TWTR
MRNA
LUV

UAL

4

FIT

INO
SAVE
ZNGA
MGM MRO JBLU

NKLA

2

PLUG

SPCE

GNUS
HTZ

6

8

Log Rank of Lag Market Cap

Explanations: Each point is one stock’s percentage investment weight in ARH against the log
market-cap rank (from CRSP). For example, in 2019/12, AAPL was the biggest stock by marketcap,
but it accounted for “only” 2.3% of the ARH portfolio. For stocks with unusually large weights and
for the biggest stocks, the figures show ticker symbols instead of points. The black (loess) line fits
the (RH) points. The blue line shows the line that a market-cap VW portfolio would have assigned
(which would have been about 4% for AAPL).
Interpretation: Retail investors overweight many consumer-related tech stocks, as well as fallen
angels (like Ford, GE, UAL) that probably remain because investors were reluctant to sell them. Retail
investors systematically underinvest in the biggest 500 stocks, with notable consumer exceptions.
Source: 2-mkbyszplots.R: 4 Sep 2020 (files bysz-20*.pdf).

37

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

tbl:unusualholdings in rhperf-exhibits.tex, September 29, 2020

Table 5: ARH Investment Weights Far Above VW Investment Weights

Pre-Covid

Post-Covid

Tic

Description

Dec 2018
Rank
Weight
ARH VW
ARH VW

AAL
AMD
BA
DAL

American Airlines
AMD
Boeing
Delta Airlines

114 272
6 218
53 26
82 139

0.12
2.70
0.29
0.17

0.06
0.08
0.78
0.15

3
21
11
5

620
92
57
288

2.39
0.84
1.23
2.16

0.02
0.20
0.34
0.06

7
161
17
10

654
229
337
592

88.7
0.4
18.5
56.1

–0.64
1.92
–0.42
–0.47

DIS
F
FB
FIT

Disney
Ford
Facebook
Fitbit

17 27
3 152
4
7
7 1388

1.22
3.35
2.85
2.51

0.69
0.13
1.34
0.00

4
23
1 233
19
4
13 1281

2.28
3.38
0.86
1.21

0.66
0.08
1.78
0.01

72
200
170
149

624
925
235
331

7.6
3.6
0.4
1.2

0.04
–0.18
0.67
0.30

GE
GPRO
INO
JBLU

General Electric
GoPro
Vaccines
JetBlue Airlines

2
72
8 1867
384 1931
100 587

3.55
2.42
0.03
0.14

0.28
0.00
0.00
0.02

2
95
7 1785
17 725
31 920

3.05
1.79
0.88
0.72

0.20
0.00
0.01
0.01

212
144
1
8

834
491
241
197

2.9
2.4
133.4
23.0

–0.05
0.19
5.41
–0.36

LUV
MGM
MRO
MU

Southwest Airlines
MGM Casino-Entmt
Marathon Oil
Micron Storage

51
180
129
18

167
301
322
131

0.29
0.07
0.10
1.11

0.11
0.05
0.05
0.15

27
30
29
97

266
488
668
99

0.75
0.74
0.74
0.19

0.07
0.03
0.02
0.19

17
4
6
66

205
202
202
53

10.8
44.3
31.6
–0.2

–0.33
–0.31
–0.55
0.42

NBEV
NFLX
NVDA
PLUG

Cannabis Drinks
Netflix
Nvidia
Hydrogen Fuel

24 1927
11 37
13 56
19 2115

0.84
1.89
1.63
0.99

0.00
0.50
0.35
0.00

87 2637
36 25
42 17
9 971

0.23
0.54
0.44
1.31

0.00
0.65
0.76
0.01

50
113
97
59

61
148
121
358

0.2
0.3
0.2
5.1

–0.76
0.65
2.13
4.85

SAVE
SNAP
SQ
TSLA

Spirit Airlines
Snapchat
Square Pymnts
Tesla

501 689
10 559
15 230
16 82

0.02
1.93
1.41
1.37

0.02
0.02
0.07
0.24

22 1282
14 189
61 145
15 24

0.82
1.21
0.33
1.16

0.01
0.09
0.12
0.65

1
115
84
81

225
330
89
317

174.0
1.9
0.1
2.9

–0.69
2.66
0.68
1.73

TWTR
UAL
XXII
ZNGA

Twitter
United Airlines
Cannabis-Nctn
Gaming (FB)

12
335
23
21

1.74
0.04
0.85
0.94

0.09
0.10
0.00
0.01

20
12
103
23

0.84
1.23
0.19
0.77

0.08
0.03
0.00
0.03

104
2
51
55

231
336
51
210

1.2
157.2
0.0
2.8

–0.03
–0.60
–0.67
1.14

5,973 27,390

3.6

0.24

194
188
2050
757

Jun2020
Rank
Weight
ARH VW
ARH VW

236
437
2793
464

All ARH:

Holdings (in K)
Dec
Jun
2018 2020
Chg

Price
Chg
(RoR)

Explanations: These are the companies with the largest (absolute) excess ARH weights over the
value-weighted marketcap (VWM) weights either on 2018/12/31 or 2020/06/30. The holdings
changes and rates of return in the last four columns are from 2018/12/31 to 2020/06/30.
Interpretation: Some companies increased their ARH minus VW weights through active RH purchases, some due to less purchasing of other stocks, and some due to price drops affecting the VW
weight.
Source: 1-namelargeholds.R: 4 Sep 2020.

38

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

tbl:act-performance in rhperf-exhibits.tex, September 29, 2020

Table 6: Return Performance of the ARH Crowd Portfolio, 2018 – mid-2020
Daily Positions

Monthly Positions

0-F

1-F

5-F

0.098
1.13

0.052
1.50

0.088
3.14

alpha
(T)

1.13

1.00

xmkt

smb
hml

0.54
0.20

smb
hml

1.02
–0.38

rmw
cma

–0.02
–0.71

rmw
cma

0.16
0.15

alpha
(T)
xmkt

R̄2
df

531

0.83
530

R̄2
df

0.90
526

0-F

1-F

5-F

2.000
1.31

0.915
1.62

1.298
2.54

1.31

1.03

25

0.86
24

0.90
20

Explanations: These are alphas from factor regressions based on the implied performance
of the ARH portfolio (formed on the basis of RH participation, as in equation 1). For
example, if 200 RH traders held stock A and 100 RH traders held stock B, the ARH portfolio
invests twice as much in A as in B (regardless of share price differences). After forming the
ARH portfolio, I calculate the portfolio rates of return and evaluate its performance with
respect to different benchmarks. The 0-F benchmark is the mean (net of the prevailing riskfree rate (about 0 in the 2018-2020 sample). The 1-F benchmark is the CAPM market-model.
The 5-F benchmark is the Fama-French 5-factor model.
Interpretation: In a sample this short, only the daily evaluation seems reasonable. The
ARH crowd portfolio performed quite well. It tilted towards small stocks that invested
aggressively.

39

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

tbl:predictweights in rhperf-exhibits.tex, September 29, 2020

Table 7: Explaining ARH Investment Weights (in %)
Panel A: 2018-2019 Sample (N=1,308,437)

const

Weight
Shr Vol Dol Vol

Rank MCap
top500 top100

Log-Days
since IPO

. . . . . . . . . Kitchen Sink >50 Variables . . . . . . . . .
(QRH)

–0.014
–0.005
–0.006
–17.0

98.6
105.9
107.7
108.3

45.7
52.9
58.6
58.0

R̄2 , in %
66.60

–0.099
–0.091

1.013

58.81
61.26
61.86
62.12

Rank MCap
top500
top100

Log-Days
since IPO

R̄2 , in %

–0.0858
–0.0765
–0.0691

Panel B: 2020 Sample (N=417,933)
Weight
Shr Vol Dol Vol

const

. . . . . . . . . . . Kitchen Sink >50 Variables . . . . . . . . . . .
(QRH)

–0.011
–0.006
–0.006
–8.7

113.4
119.2
120.5
120.9

25.52
30.52
33.82
33.54

61.87

–0.0563
–0.0523

0.515

49.45
50.87
51.10
51.19

Rank MCap
top500 top100

Log-Days
since IPO

R̄2 , in %

–0.0585
–0.0534
–0.0498

Panel C: Full Sample (N=1,726,370)

const
all years
(QRH)

Weight
Shr Vol Dol Vol

. . . . . . . . . . . Kitchen Sink >50 Variables . . . . . . . . . . .
–0.013
–0.005
–0.006
–15.0

101.9
108.9
110.6
111.2

40.9
47.6
52.8
52.3

–0.0798
–0.0714
–0.0649

–0.090
–0.083

0.894

63.99
56.72
58.93
59.45
59.67

Explanations: This table shows the performance of regressions explaining the ARH investment
weights in grand pooled regressions. R̄2 are based on residuals where fitted values were winsorized
at 0 and renormalized to add to 1.
Interpretation: A model with only two variables—trading volume and dollar trading volume over
the last year—can explain over 50% of the ARH investment weights. (Not shown, this is also the
case if the prediction is purely cross-sectional on one specific day only.)
Source: 5a-qrh-predictweights.R: 4 Sep 2020.

40

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

tbl:effmdldiffs in rhperf-exhibits.tex, September 29, 2020

Table 8: Implication of QRH Model Differences For QRH Investment Weights
Panel A: Correlation of Fitted Investment Weights based on 2018-9 vs 2020 Coefficient
Estimates

wqrh

2018-9

2020

Dataset
All

2020/06/30

98.63%

98.24%

98.55%

98.00%

Panel B: Correlation of Fitted Investment Weights based on 2018-20 Coefficient Estimates,
Kitchen Sink vs QRH Model

wqrh

2018-9

2020

Dataset
All

2020/06/30

96.02%

90.73%

95.07%

86.94%

Explanations: These are correlations between fitted investment weights implied by different regression models (and/or their coefficient estimates). All model-implied investment
weights were truncated at 0 and renormalized to sum to 1.
Interpretation: Coefficient-estimate differences between the 2018-9 and the 2020 model
for the QRH model seem unimportant. Coefficient model-estimate differences between the
kitchen-sink model and the simpler two-model QRH are more concerning.
Source: 5d-cors: 12 Sep 2020.

41

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

tbl:Simulated Portfolio in rhperf-exhibits.tex, September 29, 2020

Table 9: ARH and QRH Portfolio Return Correlations, 2018 – mid-2020
Panel A: Rate of Return Correlations (Over Time-Series in ARH Universe)
QRH Portfolio Return
IS
OOS
QRH (IS)
QRH (OOS)
ARH

*

99.99
*

ARH Portfolio Return
All Yrs
pre-2020 post-2020
97.91
97.82
*

96.68%

98.51%

Panel B: Sample Slippage: ARH vs CRSP Set of Stocks, QRH Portfolio
Adjustment
QRH (RH Universe) vs QRH (CRSP Universe)

Raw
Net of Market

Correlation
99.78%
98.58%

Panel C: Net-of-Model Correlations
Adjustment

Correlation

ARH vs. QRH (OOS, ARH Universe)
ARH vs. QRH (OOS, CRSP-Universe)

Net of Market
Net of Market

86.96%
83.49%

ARH vs. QRH (OOS)
ARH vs. QRH (IS)

Net of 5-F
Net of 5-F

79.01%
79.65%

Explanations: Unlike earlier tables (such as Table 8), this table investigates correlations
not in investment-weight space but in rate-of-return space. The QRH portfolio weights are
from the two-variable model in Table 7 (based on one year of share volume and dollar
volume). The IS performance uses the estimated weight coefficients from the full sample,
the OOS performance uses the coefficients from the post-2020 model with the pre-2020
volume data (and vice-versa). Panel B shows that there is some slippage when we include
stocks on CRSP but not in the Robintrack data. Panel C shows that the correlation between
ARH and QRH returns remains respectable even after subtracting ohter important factors.
Interpretation: The QRH investment strategy has return performance very similar to that
of the ARH strategy. However, Panel C shows that a good part of this is due to common
stock-market movements.
Source: 5cd-*.R: Sep 2020

42

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

tbl:qrh-performance in rhperf-exhibits.tex, September 29, 2020

Table 10: Return Performance of the QRH Portfolio, 2018 – mid-2020
Panel A: Daily Performance
QRH Pfio Ret
0-F
1-F
5-F
alpha
(T)

0.051
0.60

0.004
0.17

0.042
2.16

1.14

1.05

xmkt

Delta (to ARH, Table 6)
0-F
1-F
5-F
0.040
2.09

0.041
2.15

0.038
2.26

–0.02

–0.05

smb
hml

0.37
0.27

0.18
–0.06

rmw
cma

–0.05
–0.28

0.03
–0.43

rsq
df

0.91
530

531

0.95
526

531

0.00
530

0.25
526

Panel B: Monthly Performance

0-F
alpha
(T)

1.035
0.67

QRH Pfio Ret
1-F
5-F
–0.097
–0.25

0.505
1.37

1.37

1.14

xmkt

Delta (to ARH, Table 6)
0-F
1-F
5-F
0.824
2.37

0.868
2.44

0.642
2.30

–0.05

–0.11

smb
hml

0.71
–0.10

0.32
–0.28

rmw
cma

0.29
0.34

–0.13
–0.19

rsq
df

25

0.93
24

0.95
20

25

–0.01
24

0.45
20

Explanations: For methods, see Table 6. The QRH portfolio here was formed based on lagged
one-year share volume and dollar share volume, in accordance with Table 7 in the “OOS” way
(model coefficients from other part). The table here presents alphas and exposures from factor
regressions based on the implied performance of the portfolio return time-series. The daily series
allow daily portfolio readjustment; the monthly series do not.
Interpretation: The QRH portfolio performed reasonably well. Like the ARH portfolio, the QRH
portfolio tilted towards small stocks with weak profitability. Although the QRH return time-series
matched the ARH return time-series reasonably well in its factor exposures (except in its exposure
to CMA, where it was less aggressive), it could not quite match the ARH portfolio’s performance
(alpha).
Source: 5b-compare-factors.R: 12 September 2020

43

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

tbl:inspiredperf in rhperf-exhibits.tex, September 29, 2020

Table 11: Return Performance of the QRH Portfolio, 1980 – 2020

0-F
alpha
(T)

0.037
2.53

xmkt

Daily
1-F

5-F

0-F

–0.005
–0.98

0.014
3.53

0.76
2.56

1.26

1.16

Monthly
1-F
5-F
–0.19
–1.59

0.20
1.77

1.45

1.20

Annual
0-F
1-F
9.2
2.68

5-F

–1.9
–1.59

1.6
1.00

1.32

1.16

smb
hml

0.13
0.13

0.14
0.05

0.32
–0.05

rmw
cma

–0.58
–0.51

–0.55
–0.35

–0.43
–0.04

R̄2
df

10,209

0.89
10,208

0.93
10,204

484

0.82
483

0.91
479

39

0.87
38

0.91
34

Explanations: For methods, see Table 6. This table is like Table 10, but the QRH strategy
is extended to 40 years of data (from 1980 to 2020). (Not Shown: a delay of one day or
month is largely inconsequential.)
Interpretation: The QRH portfolio would have underperformed on the 1-factor CAPM but
outperformed on the Fama-French 5-factor model.

44

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

fig:1980to in rhperf-exhibits.tex, September 29, 2020

Figure 6: Return Performance of the QRH Portfolio After 1980

60

xqrhr
xmkt

40

20

0

−20

−40
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

Explanations: These are returns from daily trading, then aggregated to yearly bases.
Interpretation: The performance of a QRH portfolio was different but not worse than that
of the market. It was spectacularly good in 1999 and 2009, but even worse than the stock
market in the already bad 2000.
Source: 6-ret-qrh-1980.R: 4 Sep 2020 (file qretail.pdf).

45

This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696066

