                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     UNEMPLOYED WITH JOBS AND WITHOUT JOBS

                                         Robert E. Hall
                                        Marianna Kudlyak

                                       Working Paper 27886
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27886


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




Hall's research was supported by the Hoover Institution. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco or the Federal Reserve System.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27886.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Robert E. Hall and Marianna Kudlyak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Unemployed With Jobs and Without Jobs
Robert E. Hall and Marianna Kudlyak
NBER Working Paper No. 27886
October 2020
JEL No. E32,J63,J64

                                        ABSTRACT

Potential workers are classified as unemployed if they desire to work but are not working. The
unemployed population contains two groups–those with jobs and those without jobs. Those with
jobs are on furlough or temporary layoff. They wait out periods of non-work with the
understanding that their jobs still exist and they will be recalled. We show that the resulting
recall-unemployment dissipates quickly following a shock. Those whose jobs no longer exist
constitute what we call jobless-unemployment. Shocks that elevate jobless-unemployment have
much more persistent effects. The unemployed without jobs often circle through short-term jobs,
spells of unemployment. and spells out of the labor force, before finding stable employment.
Historical major adverse shocks, such as the financial crisis in 2008, created mostly jobless-
unemployment and consequently caused extended periods of elevated unemployment. The
pandemic starting in March 2020 created a large volume of recall-unemployment, most of which
dissipated by August. It also created a bulge in jobless-unemployment, which is lingering.


Robert E. Hall
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
rehall@stanford.edu

Marianna Kudlyak
101 Market St
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
San Francisco, CA 94105
marianna.kudlyak@sf.frb.org
   In the labor-force statistics of the United States, an individual is unemployed if not
working, but is available for work, and is either actively looking for work or waiting to return
to an existing job. Until the pandemic hit the labor market in March 2020, the great majority
of the unemployed fell into the first category—those actively looking for work—only a fraction
of one percent of the labor force was waiting for recall. Unemployment was effectively
synonymous with joblessness. The pandemic prevented many millions of individuals from
working, but they retained their jobs. The jobless population rose moderately, while the
unemployed population, waiting for recall, exploded.
   We study the distinction between jobless-unemployment and recall -unemployment. We
explore whether in the regime created by the pandemic, total unemployment retains its social
significance in a similar way as suggested by the traditional term of joblessness. Higher
recall-unemployment unemployment implies a burden on the economy from the decline in
the utilization of available labor and a corresponding decline in the earnings of the labor
force. However, there is some offsetting social benefit from the preservation of job-specific
human capital among workers who do return to their earlier jobs. A major difference is that
recall-unemployment returns to normal much faster than does jobless-unemployment.
   A decline in recall-unemployment typically takes place as soon as economic conditions
improve and firms recall workers. No search or matching takes place—firm-worker match
capital is preserved. A decline in recall-unemployment does not mean that the workers are
all back at work because they were recalled. Employers may cancel recall plans, because the
plans turned out to be over-optimistic. These workers become jobless-unemployed, find new
jobs, or leave the labor force. Workers remaining on recall may take interim jobs, in which
case they show up in the data as employed, not as recall-unemployed.
   In contrast, a decline in jobless-unemployment takes time. Creation of new, stable, firm-
worker relationships is a long and costly process. Terminated workers often circle through
a number of short-term jobs before finding a stable job. For reasons we explore in another
paper, jobless-unemployment declined quite slowly but reliably during the type of economic
recovery that typified the US economy from 1948 through 2019. As we show in this paper,
recall-unemployment has declined at a much faster rate so far, in the months since total
unemployment began to decline in May 2020.
   An increase in jobless-unemployment comes in part from a direct inflow of individuals
who suffered permanent job loss, or who were out of the labor force and then start searching
actively for work. It can also come from individuals on recall-unemployment losing their
recall option.
   The 2020 pandemic led to employment losses in the U.S. of catastrophic proportions, but
only moderate job losses—so far, much smaller than in the recession that began in late 2007.


                                               2
Key factors that will determine the shape and speed of the future recovery are whether the
pandemic

   • eventually destroys the firm-worker relationships that are currently in limbo,

   • slows down the job finding opportunities for the unemployed without jobs,

   • triggers a new wave of job loss, but this time involving losses of permanent jobs.

If these developments occur with sufficient combined magnitude, jobless-unemployment will
rise well beyond its current level of 5.7 percent of the labor force to levels typical of serious
recessions, such as the 10 percent of the labor force that occurred at the worst of the recessions
of 1981 and 2007.
    We compare unemployment in the 2020 pandemic to unemployment in the most recent re-
cessions, focusing on the distinction between recall-unemployment and jobless-unemployment.
Recall-unemployment accounted for almost the entire increase in the unemployment rate to
its historic high of 14.7 percent in April 2020. Since then, the recall-unemployment rate has
declined by 5.7 percentage points. In later months, through August 2020, the total unem-
ployment rate has continued to decline at an unprecedented rate, but jobless-unemployment
has been rising, so recall-unemployment has fallen by more than the fall in total unemploy-
ment.
  So far in the current recovery, workers among the recall-unemployed have not been moving
into jobless-unemployment at an unusually high rate. But jobless-unemployment has been
rising. One reason is that there has been an increase in churn, specifically the flow of
individuals out of the labor force and the flow re-entering the labor force. Some of these
individuals find stable jobs quickly but others tend to circle through unemployment, out
of the labor force, and short-term jobs. Job-finding rates for the jobless-unemployed have
fallen, though they are still reasonably high by historical standards.
   The term layoff has a major role in discussions of the issues considered in this pa-
per. In labor-market parlance, a layoff means a cessation of work not resulting from a
choice of a worker to leave a job—not a quit—and not a discharge resulting from a worker’s
misconduct. Layoffs may be temporary, meaning with an expectation of recall. Our cat-
egory of recall-unemployment corresponds to non-working individuals who are classified as
on temporary layoff. Layoffs may also be terminations, that is, the loss of a job without
expectation of recall. We avoid the use of the layoff term because we want to emphasize
the important distinction between recall-unemployment and jobless-unemployment, both of
which originate from layoffs. Some authors refer to jobless-unemployment as “permanent
layoff unemployment”. This terminology arises from a category of the unemployed in the

                                                3
Current Population Survey whose unemployment resulted from the loss of a permanent job,
as distinguished from another category, the ending of an explicitly temporary job. It is the
lost job that was permanent, not the layoff.


1    Related Research
Feldstein (1976) launched an extensive literature on the role of recalls in labor dynamics.
He found that an imperfect experience rating system in which firms did not pay the full
cost of benefits accounted for a large portion of temporary layoffs and the resulting bulge in
unemployment in a recession. More recent commentary on this issue includes Topel (1983),
Card and Levine (1994), Brown and Ferrall (2003), and Ratner (2014).
   Fujita and Moscarini (2017) demonstrated the importance of recall-unemployment in
pre-pandemic data. They found that post-unemployment outcomes for recalled workers
were substantially better than for those not recalled, a finding consistent with ours, using
pandemic data. Their paper contains many references to other recent pre-pandemic work on
recalls.
   Gregory, Menzio and Wiczer (2020) is a mainly theoretical paper that is highly com-
plementary to this paper. It emphasizes heterogeneity in the job-search process, including
especially the difference between searchers with a prospect for recall and those without that
prospect. The current version of the paper calibrates the model to the differing experiences
of those groups and from other dimensions of heterogeneity in pre-pandemic data. The paper
characterizes the central issue as the difference between a favorable V-shaped recovery, where
the high re-employment rate of recalled workers dominates the recovery, and an unfavorable
L-shaped recovery, where job losers undergo a time-consuming process finding new, stable
jobs. With the pandemic-period data we assemble in this paper, the model can be calibrated
more directly to the pandemic, and, based on results to date, would probably portray a more
favorable recovery than Gregory et al. (2020) develop in the current version.
   Gallant, Kroft, Lange and Notowidigdo (2020) build a detailed model of labor-market
transitions that distinguishes individuals by layoff status. The model’s calibration is con-
firmed by studying pandemic-period data through July. The model’s estimated transition
rates show that recall rates considerably exceed job-finding rates for job-seekers who lack po-
tential recalls. The paper uses data on vacancies to measure the demand for labor and makes
the case that demand was far stronger that would normally accompany unemployment rates
at the high level experienced during the pandemic so far. Based on assumptions about labor
demand, the paper uses the model of labor-market transitions to forecast unemployment



                                              4
several years ahead. A main thrust of the paper is the finding that the demand assumptions
fed into the model forecast much less unemployment than do professional forecasters.


2     How the Current Population Survey Measures Un-
      employment
In the US, the Current Population Survey (CPS), designed and published by the Bureau
of Labor Statistics (BLS), is the basis for the official estimates of the unemployment rate
and related measures of labor-market status. We use the CPS to examine the distinction
between recall and jobless-unemployment, and related issues. In describing the logic of the
CPS, we will treat the process as if it gathered information directly from an individual about
that individual’s labor-market status, but, while that is often the case, the CPS also gathers
information about a household from one person, the respondent, on behalf of other members
of the household.
    The CPS has a variety of questions that determine if individuals are recall-unemployed,
jobless-unemployed, or not unemployed. We refer to these questions by the name that the
BLS has assigned, in capital letters. First, an individual is asked whether they did any
work for pay during the reference week (WORK). Then they are asked whether they are on
layoff from a job (LAY). If they are on layoff, the questions follow of whether the employer
has given a date to return to work (LAYDT) or any indication that they will be recalled
to work within the next 6 months (LAY6M). Finally, they are asked whether they could
return to work if recalled (LAYAVL). All individuals on layoff are also asked whether they
did anything to find work during the last 4 weeks (LK) and what the things they have done
to find work during the last 4 weeks (LKM).
    To be classified as recall-unemployed in the CPS, an individual answers negatively to
question WORK (no work in the survey week), positively to question LAY (currently on
layoff), positively to question LAYAVL (available to return to work), and positively to either
question LAYDT (employer has given a return date) or to question LAY6M (recall indicated
within 6 months).
    To be classified as jobless-unemployed, an individual answers negatively to question ques-
tion WORK (no work in the survey week), not positively to question LAY (not currently on
layoff), positively to question LK (looked for work), and answers question LKM to indicate
active job search (answers 1 through 9).
    There is a category of “employed, absent without pay” in the CPS, whose members are
not counted as unemployed. The BLS has indicated that they should be counted, but has



                                              5
not acted on that conclusion, to preserve continuity. Only in the pandemic has this category
had a meaningful number of members.
   Based on the information discussed here and other questions in the CPS, unemployed
individuals are classified by six reasons for entering unemployment: (1) lost a permanent
job, (2) completed a temporary job, (3) was laid off with expectation of recall (temporary
layoff), (4) re-entered the labor force, (5) entered the labor force for the first time, and (6)
quit a previous job. Reason 3 corresponds to recall-unemployment and the other reasons
comprise jobless-unemployment.


3     Recall- and Jobless-Unemployment Historically and
      during the Pandemic
3.1    Evidence from the CPS
Figure 1, panel (a) shows the recall and jobless-unemployment rates, from January 1965
through February 2020, the last month before the pandemic influenced the labor market
materially. At all times, recall-unemployment was small in relation to jobless-unemployment.
When the labor market was strong and unemployment low, the recall portion was under one
percent of the labor force, while jobless-unemployment only dropped below four percent in
the very strongest years. In recessions, jobless-unemployment rose to close to 9 percent of
the labor force. In the recessions starting in 1974 and 1981, recall-unemployment touched
2 percent, but hardly rose at all in the later recessions of 1990 and 2001. Even the severe
recession starting in 2007 saw an increase in the recall-unemployment rate of less than one
percentage point.
    The recall-unemployment rate in the recessions prior to 1990 was somewhat higher than
in the most recent three recessions. A structural change in the UI system at the end of
the 1980s is one of the reasons. Prior to the late 1980s, employer insurance premiums in
the UI system were not linked to the number of workers they displaced. Temporary layoffs
served as a way for firms to manage their workforces during economic downturns, effectively
subsidized by the UI system.
    Figure 1, panel (b), displays the totally different behavior of the two kinds of unem-
ployment during the pandemic, starting in March 2020. At the peak in April, the recall-
unemployment rate had skyrocketed to 11.5 percent. The jobless-unemployment rate rose
only slightly, to 3.2 percent from its February value of 3.0 percent.
    Recall unemployment accounted for more than the entire increase in unemployment at
the beginning of the 2020 pandemic. This can be seen in Figure 2, which shows the month-


                                               6
                       Unemployment rate from temporary layoff, SA
      12
                       Unemployment rate for reasons other than temporary layoff, SA

      10


       8


       6


       4


       2


       0
           1965         1970              1975           1980            1985           1990              1995              2000          2005           2010             2015              2020




                                                    (a) January 1965 to February 2020



                       Unemployment rate from temporary layoff, SA
      12               Unemployment rate for reasons other than temporary layoff, SA


      10


       8


       6


       4


       2


       0
              Jan‐19
                        Feb‐19
                                 Mar‐19




                                                             Jun‐19
                                                                      Jul‐19
                                                                               Aug‐19
                                                                                        Sep‐19
                                                                                                 Oct‐19
                                                                                                          Nov‐19


                                                                                                                             Jan‐20
                                                                                                                                      Feb‐20
                                                                                                                                               Mar‐20




                                                                                                                                                                          Jun‐20
                                                                                                                                                                                   Jul‐20
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug‐20
                                           Apr‐19
                                                    May‐19




                                                                                                                   Dec‐19




                                                                                                                                                        Apr‐20
                                                                                                                                                                 May‐20




                                                                               (b) 2019-2020


Figure 1: Recall-Unemployment Rate and Jobless-Unemployment Rate
Note: Unemployment as a percent of the labor force, monthly seasonally adjusted.

                                                                                                 7
             15

             13
                                                                  Losers of permanent jobs
             11
                                                                  On layoff, expecting recall
              9                                                   New entrants to labor force
                                                                  Re‐entrants to labor force
              7
                                                                  Quitters
              5          10.1
                                                                  Completed temporary job

              3

              1
                   0.7
                                ‐2.0           ‐0.7
             ‐1                        ‐2.9           ‐2.0

             ‐3




Figure 2: Contribution of Layoffs with Expected Recall and Other Reasons to the Monthly
Change in Unemployment during the Pandemic, Percent of Labor Force
                                  Note: Not seasonally adjusted


to-month change in unemployment during the 2020 pandemic (solid red line) and the con-
tributions of each of the six reasons to the change (color bars, non-seasonally adjusted).
Between March and April 2020, the aggregate unemployment rate increased by 9.9 percent-
age points. The recall unemployment rate increased by 10.1 percentage points. The jobless
unemployment rate actually declined.

3.2    Additional evidence from employers
It is useful to supplement the CPS data on the nature of pandemic unemployment with data
from employers to see whether they paint a similar picture. First, employers might possess
more accurate information about the nature of layoffs than the workers in the survey. Second,
the BLS slightly changed the interviewing process during the pandemic, which might have
led to a larger fraction of layoffs to be counted as temporary as compared to the previous
periods BLS (2020). A number of investigators have studied data from employers relating
to the recent behavior of unemployment. The data from firms confirms the conclusions from

                                                8
the CPS that the majority of layoffs at the beginning of the pandemic were classified as
temporary.
   Using the Survey of Business Uncertainty, Barrero, Bloom and Davis (2020) document
that the pandemic caused gross staffing reductions of 15 percent of March 1 employment
between that date and mid-May and that 77 percent of these gross staffing reductions were
attributed to temporary layoffs and furloughs. Though the BLS does not use the term
furlough, it is generally understood to be paid or unpaid leave from a job with an under-
standing that the worker will be recalled. Using data from the payroll processing company
ADP, Cajner, Crane, Decker, Hamins-Puertolas and Kurz (2020) find that temporary layoffs
constituted about two-thirds of the decline in paid employment in the ADP firms. Kudlyak
and Wolcott (2020) find similar results using data on mass layoffs from the Federal Worker
Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act notices.


4     Is Recall-Unemployment Turning into Jobless-
      Unemployment?
Since April 2020, total unemployment and recall-unemployment have been declining. But to-
tal unemployment declined by less than recall-unemployment fell. That is, jobless-unemploy-
ment has increased. One obvious potential reason for this phenomenon is that employers are
becoming less optimistic and are canceling advice they give to their idle workers about the
prospects for recall. A related possibility is that individuals previously expecting recall have
abandoned that hope and are actively looking for new jobs.
    The CPS does not verify whether workers who were classified as on temporary layoff, and
thus recall-unemployed, subsequently do actually return to their jobs. Thus a direct attack
is not possible with data from the CPS on the question of leakage from recall-unemployment
to jobless-unemployment based on the incidence of actual recalls. Instead, we examine
transitions of individuals who stated in one month that they were expecting recall, and then
shifted to stating in the next month that they were jobless and seeking work. If leakage is
worsening, the transition rate would be rising from one month to the next.
    We match the CPS microdata month-to-month by respondent and construct the fre-
quency of transitions from temporary layoff as the stated reason for unemployment to loss of
permanent job as the reason, at the individual level. We include the 6 rotation-groups pairs
that cover one-month transitions. Figure 3 shows the monthly frequency of such a leakage
transition. In normal times, the frequency is under 5 percent; but during the 2007-09 reces-
sion it went up to 15 percent. As of June 2020, the most recent month covered by the CPS
microdata, there has been no visible increase in the transition rate. While this is encourag-


                                               9
ing news, there are reasons to be cautious. The frequency of leakage from recall- to jobless-
unemployment increases during economic downturns with high jobless-unemployment. Con-
sequently, leakage will increase if the pandemic recession resumes and unemployment rises.


5     Distribution of Jobless-Unemployment by Prior
      Labor-Market Status
Our results demonstrate the importance of jobless-unemployment in understanding the dy-
namics of the labor market in the pandemic recession and nascent recovery. Though unem-
ployment reached alarming levels in April 2020, most of the increase came in the form of
recall-unemployment, which dissipates much more quickly than the jobless-unemployment
that proved highly persistent in past recessions. This section explores the path into jobless-
unemployment from other labor-market statuses.
    The pattern of transitions among labor-market statuses has changed substantially as the
pandemic has evolved. Again, we study month-to-month matched records in the CPS. We
classify the jobless-unemployed into five categories based on the individuals status in the
previous month. The categories based on the previous month’s status are: (1) employed, (2)
recall-unemployed, (3) jobless-unemployed, (4) out of the labor force, and (5) missing from
the CPS data. We include the fifth category because the BLS reports that an unusually large
fraction of individuals were missing from the April and subsequent surveys (BLS, 2020). We
express the distribution across the five categories as percent shares of the labor force. Figure
4 displays the results. The figure shows where the current jobless-unemployed come from.
Panel (a) shows the time series from January 1994 to February 2020, and Panel (b) shows
the most recent period.
   We find the following:
    • In April 2020, at the height of the pandemic, an unusually large fraction of jobless-
      unemployment came from previously employed individuals. These people had lost jobs
      in unusual numbers from the pandemic.

    • In May and June the fraction coming from employment declined and the fraction
      coming back into the labor force went up substantially.

    • In May and June the fraction coming from recall-unemployment went up. The fraction
      of those who were missing (failed to respond) in the previous month went up as well,
      which was also the case in the 2007 recession.
    Some implications of these developments for the evolution of the labor market during the
pandemic are:

                                              10
                  0.20




                  0.15




                  0.10




                  0.05




                  0.00
                      1994                          1999                           2004                            2009                                2014                          2019



                                                      (a) January 2000 to February 2020



                  0.20



                  0.15



                  0.10



                  0.05



                  0.00
                                                             May‐19
                                                                      Jun‐19




                                                                                                                   Nov‐19




                                                                                                                                                                         May‐20
                                                                                                                                                                                  Jun‐20
                         Jan‐19
                                  Feb‐19
                                           Mar‐19
                                                    Apr‐19



                                                                               Jul‐19
                                                                                        Aug‐19
                                                                                                 Sep‐19
                                                                                                          Oct‐19


                                                                                                                            Dec‐19
                                                                                                                                     Jan‐20
                                                                                                                                              Feb‐20
                                                                                                                                                       Mar‐20
                                                                                                                                                                Apr‐20



                                                                                                                                                                                           Jul‐20




                                                                                  (b) 2019-2020


    Figure 3: Probability of Recall-Unemployment Turning into Jobless-Unemployment
Note: Monthly series calculated from the month-to-month matched CPS microdata, not seasonally adjusted

                                                                                                 11
              0.10                 From missing
                                   From OLF
              0.09
                                   From jobless unemployment
                                   From recall unemployment
              0.08
                                   From employment
              0.07

              0.06

              0.05

              0.04

              0.03

              0.02

              0.01

              0.00
                  1994                           1999                            2004                               2009                                2014                               2019



                                                  (a) January 1994 to February 2020



              0.050
                         From missing                                                                  From OLF
                         From jobless unemployment                                                     From recall unemployment
                         From employment
              0.040


              0.030


              0.020


              0.010


              0.000
                      Jan‐19
                               Feb‐19
                                        Mar‐19
                                                 Apr‐19
                                                          May‐19
                                                                   Jun‐19
                                                                            Jul‐19
                                                                                     Aug‐19
                                                                                              Sep‐19
                                                                                                       Oct‐19
                                                                                                                Nov‐19
                                                                                                                         Dec‐19
                                                                                                                                  Jan‐20
                                                                                                                                           Feb‐20
                                                                                                                                                    Mar‐20
                                                                                                                                                             Apr‐20
                                                                                                                                                                      May‐20
                                                                                                                                                                               Jun‐20
                                                                                                                                                                                        Jul‐20
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Aug‐20




                                                                                 (b) 2019-2020


Figure 4: Composition of the Jobless-Unemployment Rate, by Labor-Force Status in the
Previous Month
                                                          Note: Not seasonally adjusted

                                                                                                 12
    • The observation that the fraction of unemployment for reasons other than temporary
      layoffs coming from employment is not going up is a positive development—permanent
      job loss is not elevated.

    • While the fraction coming from temporary layoffs is elevated, this is not yet a significant
      concern. As we have shown above, temporary layoffs are not turning into permanent
      job loss at an elevated rate. Their fraction is high because there are many of them.

    • Finally, the observation that a large fraction is coming from OLF is troublesome be-
      cause these individuals tend to circle through multiple spells of unemployment, out of
      the labor force status and short-term jobs before finding a stable job (Hall and Kudlyak
      (2019)). Consequently, they may contribute to the persistence of the aggregate unem-
      ployment rate.

    Zooming in on the 2007-09 period in Figure 4, we observe that the level and persistence
of the aggregate unemployment rate during that time was largely due to the individuals
who were unemployed in the previous months. At present, the contribution of this category
is low, that is, the fraction of long-term unemployed is low. However, one should watch
out for unemployment turning into long-term unemployment. And the elevated fraction of
those coming from out of the labor force is typically at a high risk of becoming long-term
unemployed (Hall and Kudlyak (2019)).


6     Labor-Market Tightness
One of the important contributions of the models of the labor market associated with Di-
amond, Mortensen, and Pissarides (DMP) is the formalization of the concept of tightness.
The market is tight when job-seekers locate new jobs easily and quickly, and employers lo-
cate new workers with difficulty and slowly. The job-finding rate is one of the key metrics of
tightness. It is the probability that a jobseeker will accept a new job over a month of looking.
The job-finding rate can be measured directly from the CPS microdata. The average time
to fill a job vacancy is the other key metric labor-market tightness. The average vacancy
duration is high in a tight market and low in a slack market. It can be calculated from the
Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS), which reports data on hiring from a
survey of businesses.
   Job-finding rates from the CPS and vacancy durations from JOLTS are remarkably highly
correlated. The high correlation is good evidence of the validity of the DMP modeling
approach. See Hall and Schulhofer-Wohl (2018) for discussion of these concepts and measures


                                               13
of rates for a variety of originating activities, ranging from, on the one hand, active search
without a job to, on the other, out of the labor market and unavailable to work.

6.1     The job-finding rate
The job-finding rate is the probability that a person observed in a given labor-market status
at one time, is holding a job when observed again some time later. In tight labor markets
with overall unemployment rates below 4 percent, the typical job-finding rate is roughly
double its value in the worst slumps. Put another way, it took twice as long to find a job
than it had when the labor market was strong.
   One important question about the pandemic labor market is how tight or slack the market
is for the jobless-unemployed. Prior to the pandemic, the overall unemployment rate was a
reasonable guide to job-finding rates throughout the labor market. By that standard, the
labor market in August 2020, with overall unemployment at 8.4 percent, was very slack. In
historical times when unemployment was that high, which were fortunately rare, jobs were
hard to find.
   Figure 5 shows job-finding rates for people in the two categories of unemployment featured
in this paper. Panel (a) shows pre-pandemic rates from January 1995 though January 2020.
The upper line is the frequency that a person in recall-unemployment in one month is
employed in the following month. In most cases we believe that such a person was probably
recalled rather than finding a new job, but, as we noted earlier, some people take a new
job even though they were on recall for an existing job. The lower line shows the frequency
with which a person in jobless-unemployment in one month is employed in the following
month. The job-finding rate out of recall-unemployment is about double the rate for those
in jobless-unemployment. Both rates track the business cycle and reached high levels by the
beginning of 2020.
   Panel (b) of the figure shows what has happened so far in the pandemic. The job-finding
rate for recall-unemployed individuals has fallen slightly in the months measured so far,
relative to the average of the same months averaged over 2017, 2018, and 2019. The decline
is larger compared to 2019 alone. The rate for jobless-unemployed people fell noticeably in
April but bounced back in May, though it is still below its levels in 2019.
    So far in the pandemic, both measures of labor-market tightness show a definite slackening
of the market, but nothing like what would be inferred from the high overall unemployment
rate.




                                             14
                  0.8                     From jobless unemployment
                                          From recall unemployment
                  0.7

                  0.6

                  0.5

                  0.4

                  0.3

                  0.2

                  0.1

                  0.0
                     1994                          1999                           2004                              2009                               2014                          2019



                                                       (a) January 2000 to February 2020



                  0.8                                                                                       From jobless unemployment
                                                                                                            From recall unemployment
                  0.7

                  0.6

                  0.5

                  0.4

                  0.3

                  0.2

                  0.1

                  0.0
                        Jan‐19
                                 Feb‐19
                                          Mar‐19
                                                   Apr‐19
                                                            May‐19
                                                                     Jun‐19
                                                                              Jul‐19
                                                                                        Aug‐19
                                                                                                 Sep‐19
                                                                                                          Oct‐19
                                                                                                                   Nov‐19
                                                                                                                            Dec‐19
                                                                                                                                     Jan‐20
                                                                                                                                              Feb‐20
                                                                                                                                                       Mar‐20
                                                                                                                                                                Apr‐20
                                                                                                                                                                         May‐20
                                                                                                                                                                                  Jun‐20
                                                                                                                                                                                           Jul‐20




                                                                                       (b) 2019-2020


              Figure 5: Job Finding Rates for Recall- and Jobless-Unemployed
Note: Monthly series calculated from the month-to-month matched CPS microdata, not seasonally adjusted.

                                                                                                   15
6.2    Duration of vacancies
The average duration of vacancies, in months, can be measured from JOLTS as the ratio of
the number of vacancies to the monthly flow of newly hired workers. In a tight market, it
takes more vacancy-months to hire one new employee. One month is a typical time to fill a
vacancy. Panel (a) of Figure 6 shows the results of the calculation since the inception of the
survey at the end of 2000. This variable tracks the business cycle in much the same way as
the job-finding rate, except that it suggests some softening of the market in 2018 and 2019
that is not plainly visible in Figure 5, panel (a).
   Panel (b) of the figure shows what has happened to vacancy duration during the pandemic
through July 2020. It maintained a high value over 1.2 months in April, collapsed to below
0.8 months in May, then recovered in June and July to a value similar to the experience in
months before the pandemic began.

6.3    The Beveridge curve
The Beveridge curve is a graph depicting the movements of unemployment on the horizontal
axis and vacancies on the vertical axis. When the labor market is tight, vacancies are
numerous and unemployment is low; the labor market is at a point up and to the left in the
Beveridge curve. When the market is slack, vacancies are scarce and unemployment is high,
down and to the right on the curve.
   Some authors, including Gallant et al. (2020), have used the Beveridge curve as a tool to
investigate recent events in the labor market. Overall unemployment rose much more than
would be consistent with the pre-pandemic Beveridge curve, given the behavior of vacancies.
Jobless-unemployment, when placed on the horizontal axis instead of overall unemployment,
results in a reasonably stable new version of the Beveridge curve.
   Because the Beveridge curve uses the same data on jobseeking and recruitment as we do
in this paper, it would be redundant to present the data here in the Beveridge-curve format—
it would not add to the already strong case that jobless-unemployment plays a similar role in
the pandemic labor market to the role that overall unemployment did in earlier recessions.
We also note that the Beveridge curve is inherently unstable, because, as, predicted by the
DMP model, the vacancy rate is a jump variable, whereas unemployment is a state variable
that lags behind jumps in vacancies.




                                             16
1.4


1.2


 1


0.8


0.6


0.4


0.2


 0
  2000                                    2005                                          2010                                         2015



                                      (a) January 2000 to February 2020



1.4

1.2

 1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

 0
      Jan‐19

               Feb‐19

                        Mar‐19




                                                   Jun‐19

                                                            Jul‐19

                                                                      Aug‐19

                                                                               Sep‐19

                                                                                        Oct‐19

                                                                                                 Nov‐19



                                                                                                                   Jan‐20

                                                                                                                            Feb‐20

                                                                                                                                     Mar‐20




                                                                                                                                                                Jun‐20

                                                                                                                                                                         Jul‐20
                                 Apr‐19

                                          May‐19




                                                                                                          Dec‐19




                                                                                                                                              Apr‐20

                                                                                                                                                       May‐20




                                                                     (b) 2019-2020


 Figure 6: Duration of Vacancies from JOLTS, in Months
                                 Note: Ratio of seasonally adjusted data

                                                                                 17
7     Concluding Remarks
Recent experience has shown that a pandemic can trigger a severe recession, with a higher
percentage of workers inactive than in the worst past recessions and a corresponding huge
drop in output. Experience has also shown that the recovery in terms of a declining unem-
ployment rate has occurred much faster, to date, than in past recessions.
   The evidence is reasonably clear that there are two basic kinds of unemployment behind
these developments. The shutdown of major sectors of employment has led many employers
to idle their workers, but to indicate to them that they should plan to be recalled to their
jobs. Recall-unemployment, previously a sideshow in labor dynamics, became the bigger
component of total unemployment almost overnight. Very soon, recall-unemployment began
to decline, replaced in small part by a rise in jobless-unemployment. Total unemployment
receded much faster than in earlier recessions.
    Tightness in the labor market, revealed by the job-finding rate for active, jobless indi-
viduals, declined, but not to normal recession levels. And tightness, revealed by the time
required to fill a vacancy by recruiting efforts on the part of employers, dipped initially but
returned to pre-pandemic levels a month later. Judged by tightness measures, the market
for job-seekers is reasonably favorable.
   The labor market could switch rapidly to normal recession conditions, with much lower
job-finding rates and lower vacancy duration.




                                              18
References
Barrero, Jose Maria, Nick Bloom, and Steven J. Davis, “COVID-19 Is Also a Reallocation
   Shock,” 2020. Becker Friedman Institute, Working Paper No. 2020-59.

 BLS, “Frequently asked questions:       The impact of the coronavirus (COVID-19)
    pandemic on The Employment Situation for April 2020,” 2020.           Available at
    https://www.bls.gov/cps/employment-situation-covid19-faq-april-2020.pdf.

Brown, Laura and Christopher Ferrall, “Unemployment Insurance and the Business Cycle,”
   International Economic Review, 2003, 44 (3), 863–894.

Cajner, Tomaz, Leland D Crane, Ryan A Decker, Adrian Hamins-Puertolas, and Christo-
    pher Kurz, “Tracking Labor Market Developments during the COVID-19 Pandemic: A
    Preliminary Assessment,” 2020. Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discus-
    sion Series.

Card, David and Phillip B. Levine, “Unemployment Insurance Taxes and the Cyclical and
   Seasonal Properties of Unemployment,” Journal of Public Economics, 1994, 53 (1),
    1–29.

Feldstein, Martin, “Temporary Layoffs in the Theory of Unemployment,” Journal of Political
    Economy, 1976, 84 (5), 937–958.

Fujita, Shigeru and Giuseppe Moscarini, “Recall and Unemployment,” American Economic
    Review, 2017, 107 (12), 3875–3916.

Gallant, Jessica, Kory Kroft, Fabian Lange, and Matthew Notowidigdo, “Temporary Un-
    employment and Labor Market Dynamics During the COVID-19 Recession,” Brookings
    Papers on Economic Activity, Forthcoming, 2020.

Gregory, Victoria, Guido Menzio, and David Wiczer, “Pandemic Recession: L or V-
   Shaped?,” 2020. New York University, Working Paper.

Hall, Robert E. and Marianna Kudlyak, “Job-Finding and Job-Losing: A Comprehensive
    Model of Heterogeneous Individual Labor-Market Dynamics,” 2019. Hoover Institution.

      and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl, “Measuring Job-Finding Rates and Matching Efficiency
    with Heterogeneous Jobseekers,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Jan-
    uary 2018, 10 (1), 1–32.



                                           19
Kudlyak, Marianna and Erin Wolcott, “Pandemic Layoffs,” 2020. Middlebury College,
   Working Paper.

Ratner, David, “Unemployment Insurance Experience Rating and Labor Market Dynamics,”
   2014. Federal Reserve Board, Working Paper No. 2013-86.

Topel, Robert H., “On Layoffs and Unemployment Insurance,” American Economic Review,
   1983, 73 (4), 541–559.




                                        20
