                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             PRIVATE EQUITY AND COVID-19

                                      Paul A. Gompers
                                      Steven N. Kaplan
                                   Vladimir Mukharlyamov

                                      Working Paper 27889
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27889


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




We thank Patrick Sweeney for his research assistance. We thank the Harvard Business School
and the University of Chicago Booth School of Business for providing us access to their alumni.
We particularly thank and are very grateful to our survey respondents. Gompers and Kaplan have
consulted to general partners and limited partners investing in private equity. Gompers received
research support from the HBS Division of Research. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Paul A. Gompers, Steven N. Kaplan, and Vladimir Mukharlyamov. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Private Equity and COVID-19
Paul A. Gompers, Steven N. Kaplan, and Vladimir Mukharlyamov
NBER Working Paper No. 27889
October 2020
JEL No. G24,G31,G32

                                         ABSTRACT

We survey more than 200 private equity (PE) managers from firms with $1.9 trillion of assets
under management (AUM) about their portfolio performance, decisionmaking and activities
during the Covid-19 pandemic. Given that PE managers have significant incentives to maximize
value, their actions during the current pandemic should indicate what they perceive as being
important for both the preservation and creation of value. PE managers believe that 40% of their
portfolio companies are moderately negatively affected and 10% are very negatively affected by
the pandemic. The private equity managers—both investment and operating partners— are
actively engaged in the operations, governance, and financing in all of their current portfolio
companies. These activities are more intensively pursued in those companies that have been more
severely affected by the Covid-19 pandemic. As a result of the pandemic, they expect the
performance of their existing funds to decline. They are more pessimistic about that decline than
the VCs surveyed in Gompers et al. (2020b). Despite the pandemic, private equity managers are
seeking new investments. Relative to the 2012 survey results reported in Gompers, Kaplan, and
Mukharlyamov (2016): the PE investors place a greater weight on revenue growth for value
creation; they give a larger equity stake to management teams; and, they also appear to target
somewhat lower returns.

Paul A. Gompers                                 Vladimir Mukharlyamov
Harvard Business School                         McDonough School of Business
Baker Library 263                               Georgetown University
Soldiers Field                                  3700 O St NW
Boston, MA 02163                                Washington, DC 20057
and NBER                                        vladimir.mukharlyamov@georgetown.edu
pgompers@hbs.edu

Steven N. Kaplan
Booth School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
steven.kaplan@chicagobooth.edu
1   Introduction

       Private equity (PE) investors are typically viewed as quintessential ideal shareholders.
They usually own a majority of the equity in the companies within their portfolio, take active roles
in governance and operations, and seek to maximize the value of their investments given that
private equity managers are typically compensated with a large share of the profits of the funds
(Gompers and Lerner (1999)). Jenson (1989) argues that private equity represented a superior
organizational form over dispersed public ownership. Research, including Kaplan (1989a,b),
Acharya et al (2013), Davis et al (2014), has consistently shown that PE firms increase the
productivity of their portfolio companies. PE returns also have consistently outperformed the
public markets both gross and net of fees (Brown and Kaplan (2019)). Our prior survey, Gompers,
Kaplan, and Mukharlyamov (2016) (GKM 2016), explored how private equity firms pursue
investment decision-making as well as operational, governance, and financial engineering.

       Covid-19 has dramatically and unexpectedly shocked the global economy. In the short-run,
financial performance, including revenue and cash flows, have been significantly affected.
Additionally, uncertainty about the future of the pandemic potentially hinders the ability to make
new investment decisions. In response to this shock, we have undertaken a second survey of the
private equity industry to understand investors’ responses to this crisis. The new survey provides
insights about how highly motivated owners of companies are managing the economic
implications of the crisis. In particular, given that Covid-19 is an exogenous shock to economic
performance, we ask private equity manages to divide their portfolio into three categories of firms:
those affected positively or unaffected by the pandemic (green light), those moderately affected
by the pandemic (yellow light), and those severely affected by the pandemic (red light). By
comparing across green, yellow, and red light companies, we consider how important different
actions are for maintaining value across differential economic shocks to performance, particularly
underperforming firms. Second, by comparing the survey results to GKM 2016 (conducted from
2011 to 2013), we study how the industry has adapted over time and from more “normal” times.




                                                 2
       We survey more than 200 private equity (PE) managers from firms with $1.9 trillion of
assets under management (AUM). We first establish that the Covid-19 pandemic has had a
meaningful impact on private equity firms by asking them to assess the health of their existing
portfolio companies. On average, 50.9% of private equity firm portfolio companies are unaffected
by the pandemic, 39.9% are somewhat affected, and 9.6% are severely affected. This
heterogeneity allows us to explore differential activity across those categories. In particular, we
look at how the actions that private equity firms are undertaking in various categories of distress
indicate their importance for helping underperforming companies. Consistent with the impact on
portfolio companies, we also find that the outlook for the performance of their existing private
equity portfolios (both internal rate of return and the multiple on invested capital) has been
significantly negatively affected. This will make outperformance of public markets, particularly
the S&P 500, difficult going forward.

       This survey on the effects of Covid-19 follows a similar organizational structure to that
employed in GKM 2016. Kaplan and Strömberg (2009) classify three types of value increasing
actions—financial engineering, governance engineering, and operational engineering. These
value-increasing actions are not necessarily mutually exclusive. GKM 2016 identify and tabulate
the key decisions made by 79 private equity (PE) investors (with a total of over $750 billion of
private equity assets under management as of the end of 2012). That sample, like the current
sample, included private equity firms across a spectrum of investment strategies, size, industry
specialization, and geographic focus. The GKM 2016 survey asked PE managers questions about
financial engineering—how they value companies and think about portfolio company capital
structures; governance engineering—how they think about management incentives, governance
and monitoring; and operational engineering—how they think about value creation, both before
closing the transaction and after the transaction.

       GKM 2016 find that all three forms of engineering are important. For financial engineering,
PE firms set the capital structure based upon both market timing, i.e., they look to use debt when
interest rates are low, as well as to provide incentives for management to maximize cash flows.
These results are consistent with academic theory and teaching. In choosing the capital structures


                                                     3
for their portfolio companies, PE investors appear to rely equally on factors that are consistent
with capital structure trade-off theories of Myers (1977) and those that are consistent with market
timing of Baker and Wurgler (2002).

       In governance engineering, PE investors expect to provide strong equity incentives to their
management teams and believe those incentives are very important. They regularly replace top
management, both before and after they invest. And they structure smaller boards of directors with
a mix of insiders, PE investors and outsiders. These results are consistent with research on value
enhancing governance structures that have been identified in other settings.

       Finally, GKM 2016 find that PE managers place a heavy emphasis on operational
engineering, i.e., adding value to their portfolio companies, both before and after they invest. The
sources of added value, in order of importance, were increasing revenue, improving incentives
and governance, facilitating a high-value exit or sale, making additional acquisitions, replacing
management, and reducing costs.

       In this paper, we consider three main types of PE managers’ actions.First, we look at how
they are managing their portfolios and trying to mitigate the damage. In doing so, we look at
operational and governance engineering, both of which are meant to improve operations and
maximize cash flows of the business. And we look at financial engineering that is designed to
improve firms’ liquidity and ensure that portfolio companies have the financial resources that they
need to survive until the pandemic is over. Financial engineering in light of a reduction in current
operating cash flows may be necessary to ensure portfolio companies do not default on their debt
obligations.

       For severely affected portfolio companies, we find, unsurprisingly, that the most common
activities for PE managers are reducing head count and reducing costs. These activities are much
less important for firms that are relatively unaffected. Similarly, replacing management is far more
likely in severely affected companies than in unaffected companies. On the other hand, providing
general operational and strategic guidance as well as recruiting new board members is similar
across all three categories of companies.


                                                 4
       The most consistent financial engineering strategy that PE managers employ to improve
liquidity is drawing down the company revolving lines of credit (revolvers). The more severely
affected the portfolio company, the more likely the PE manager is to draw down the revolver.
Larger and older PE organizations exhibit a significantly higher propensity to draw down
revolvers. A second source of potential liquidity is equity investments. The vast majority of PE
managers who indicate a desire to raise equity in existing portfolio companies indicate that the
source of the equity would likely be the existing fund that had invested in the company, not a later
fund or a third-party fund. Smaller PE firms, which likely have smaller portfolio companies, also
are more likely to help their companies access the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). Some PE
managers indicate a desire to refinance the debt and to extend maturities.

       Second, we explore the impact of the pandemic on investment decision-making. In the
current crisis, private equity managers still spend a significant portion of their time sourcing and
evaluating new investments. Among the criteria that PE managers use to evaluate new investment
opportunities, business model ranked as the most important followed closely by the management
team. This is similar to the results in GKM 2016. When asked where they expect value creation
to come from, the PE investors overwhelmingly pointed to growth in revenue as the key driver
with reduction in costs a distant second. The focus on increased revenue versus cost reduction is
greater than that reported in GKM 2016. In addition, the PE investors indicate they are giving a
larger equity stake to management teams than in the previous survey. Finally, they also appear to
target somewhat lower returns. For new investments, the PE managers target IRRs averaging
22.6%, but that target is lower than the 27.0% reported in GKM 2016.

       Among industries, information technology (IT) and health care are the two most attractive
industry. This is not surprising given the public market performance of these sectors. These
preferences also are consistent with Gompers, Gornall, Kaplan, and Strebulaev (2020b) who find
that venture capital portfolio companies (which are heavily weighted in the IT and health care
industries) have been relatively unaffected by the pandemic. North America and Western Europe
remain the most attractive geographies (despite how severe the pandemic was in those
geographies) while LBOs and growth equity remain the most attractive types of investments.


                                                 5
       Third, our survey asks about the internal operations of the PE firms. We seek to understand
whether time allocation of investment and operating partners has changed given the external shock
of Covid-19. We find that both investment and operating partners are spending the bulk of their
time helping existing portfolio companies. At the same time, investment partners are still spending
17.7 hours per week finding and evaluating new deals. In total, investment partners are working
nearly 60 hours per week while operating partners are working in excess of 50 hours per week.
Investment partners also are meeting with limited partners 3.6 hours per week. Roughly 21% of
limited partners have expressed a desire for reduced capital calls.

       Finally, despite the pandemic, PE managers are optimistic about both their own
performance and that of the PE industry overall. 76.8% of managers believe that the fund they
currently manage will outperform the public markets either somewhat or substantially. 35.3% of
PE investors believe that the overall PE industry will perform slightly better than the public
markets while 53.1% predict that the entire PE industry will perform somewhat or much better
than the public markets.

       The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we describe our research design and report
summary statistics. In Section 3, we report our results. In Section 4, we conclude.




2   Research and Survey Design

2.1. Design

       We created the survey to determine how the Covid-19 pandemic has affected PE investors.

We also designed the survey with the intent of comparing answers to our prior survey from 2011

to 2013, primarily in 2012, in GKM 2016. We initially tested the survey on a small number of PE

investors in the May 2020. We revised the survey to reflect some ambiguities in our questions and

to add some additional questions. The final survey includes 54 questions and is available on Paul

Gompers’s website.


                                                 6
2.2. Delivery and Response

          We distributed the survey to PE investors during July and early August 2020. We

distributed it to the alumni of Chicago Booth and HBS employed in PE and to investors where one

of the co-authors knew or was introduced to a senior investment professional. We received our

last survey response in early August 2020. The vast majority of survey responses, therefore, were

received in July 2020.

          We invited a total of 1,180 investment professionals to participate in the survey by filling

out an online questionnaire. Of these, 272 filled out some part of the survey; the median respondent

answered 96% of questions shown to them.2 The response rate of roughly 23% is much higher

than the response rate for other surveys. Graham and Harvey (2001) obtain a response rate of 8.9%

for CFOs while Da Rin and Phalippou (2014) obtain a response rate of 13.8% for PE limited

partners.3

          The 272 individual responses correspond to 214 PE firms. For PE firms with two or more

respondents, we obtain a firm-level response by averaging out the responses of the individual

investors.

          We also study the within-firm variation in responses obtained from multiple people and

establish notable agreement between them.4 This is consistent with the survey's efficacy in




2
  From the participant’s perspective, the survey is path-dependent. For example, respondents with no portfolio companies severely
affected by the Covid-19 pandemic were not asked about the value-add activities they pursue in such companies. For that reason,
the number of survey questions varies by person.
3
  Since participants were allowed to skip questions, for a subset of questions, especially toward the end of the survey, the effective
response rate is commensurate with that of Da Rin and Phalippou (2014).
4
  First, we calculated the average pairwise Euclidean distance between vectors of Z-scores representing survey responses from
different people at the same PE firm. Second, to establish the benchmark, we randomly perturbed survey responses to create 1,000
datasets with observations within the same PE firm matched by chance alone. Based on the distribution of 1,000 pseudo distances
computed from the step 2 datasets, the actual distance measured in step 1 is 2.8 standard deviations below the lower bound of that
distribution.


                                                                  7
eliciting meaningful information. In addition, among participants who handled the survey in one

sitting, the median respondent dedicated 15-16 minutes to the questionnaire. Taking into account

how senior the sample participants are in their PE firms' hierarchy (Panel C of Table 1), they have

clearly taken the survey seriously.



2.3. Private Equity Firm Characteristics

            Table 1 provides some summary statistics for the firms of the PE investors who responded

to the survey. We obtained cumulative AUM in PE5, dry powder available, number of past PE

deals, number of employees, and geographic distribution of offices from Preqin. Information on

firms not covered by Preqin is taken from firm websites and media articles.

            The table shows that there is a large variation in the size of the firms as measured by assets

under management (AUM). The mean AUM is just under $10.7 billion. A quarter of the firms

have AUM under $400.0 million while a quarter have AUM above $8.0 billion. Table 2 looks at

average equity check size that our PE respondents are investing. On average (median) our firms

invest $140.2 ($50.0) million. Larger and older PE firms write larger checks ($194.8 and $231.2

million) than do smaller and younger PE firms ($85.6 and $58.8 million).

            Overall, PE managers at 214 different firms with total AUM of roughly $1.9 trillion filled

out the survey. Because the participants were allowed to skip questions, the amount of AUM

represented by the survey data differs by question. But even the question with the fewest responses

among questions available to all—the last question in the survey—still covers 126 PE firms with

AUM of $1.3 trillion. Clearly, we have solid coverage of the largest PE firms. Each year, Private

Equity International (PEI) Media ranks the top PE firms globally by AUM. Our sample includes



5
    This measures cumulative AUM for the PE firm, not the size of the most recent fund.


                                                                 8
twelve of the top twenty-five in PEI’s 2019 list; among these, nine followed through till the last

question. Given this, we believe that our results are reflective of a meaningful fraction of the PE

industry.


3   Results

3.1. Covid-19 Effects on Private Equity Industry

    We first examine the PE investors’ overall assessments of implications of the Covid-19

pandemic. We explore these assessments at both the individual portfolio company level as well as

the aggregate fund return level. We asked PE managers to assess the relative fraction of their

portfolio that is unaffected or positively affected by the pandemic (green light), somewhat affected

(yellow light), and severely affected (red light) by the Covid-19 pandemic. Because most of the

companies were likely similarly situated before the exogenous effects of the pandemic, comparing

across these three categories allows us to highlight actions PE managers take at various stages of

distress. Table 3 shows that PE investors believe that 50.9% of their portfolios is unaffected by

the pandemic, 39.9% of the portfolio is somewhat affected, and 9.6% is severely affected.

    We next ask how the PE managers expect the current Covid-19 pandemic to impact fund

performance. Like GKM 2016, we ask whether their funds target an Internal Rate of Return (IRR)

and/or a Multiple on Invested Capital (MOIC). Slightly more PE managers target an MOIC

(81.8%) than IRR (60.4%) in Table 4. Given that these add up to more than 100%, it is clear that

many managers target both MOIC and IRR.

    Because roughly 50% of the PE portfolios have been adversely affected by the pandemic, we

asked the PE investors how they thought the pandemic would affect the IRRs and MOICs on their

existing funds. Table 5 shows that 85.4% of PE investors expect their fund’s IRR to be adversely

affected and 58.8% of respondents expected their existing fund’s MOICs to be adversely affected.


                                                 9
The average (median) change in expected IRR is -4.4% (-4.9%) while the average (median)

expected change in MOIC is -0.24 (-0.20).

    These represent a substantial effect relative to the typical target IRR and MOIC. When we

compare these results to those of a similar and contemporaneous survey of venture capital industry

(Gompers, Gornall, Kaplan, and Strebulaev (2020b)), we find that the PE industry is substantially

more affected by the Covid-19 pandemic. In the venture capital (VC) survey, although a similar

percentage of the portfolio was negatively affected (10%), the VCs expected declines in IRR

(MOIC) of only 1.6% (0.07).

The declines in PE IRRs and MOICs also appear substantial compared to the return on the S&P

500 through the end of July 2020. At that time, the S&P 500 had a positive year-to-date total return

in 2020 of 2.5%, driven, in particular, by the success of the large technology companies. That

performance is likely to make comparisons of PE returns to the S&P 500 very challenging for

existing vintages. The comparisons will be less challenging with the less technology heavy Russell

2000 which had a year-to-date total return of -10.4% at the end of July 2020.



3.2. Existing Portfolio Implications

    GKM 2016 examines a variety of actions that PE firms perform to add value to their portfolio

companies. In that survey, PE investors place a heavy emphasis on adding value through

operational and governance engineering. PE investors indicated that they place a heavy emphasis

on adding value to their portfolio companies, both before and after they invest. The sources of that

added value, in order of importance, were increasing revenue, improving incentives and

governance, facilitating a high-value exit or sale, making additional acquisitions, replacing

management, and reducing costs. Consistent with adding operational value, the PE managers make



                                                 10
meaningful investments in employees and advisors who provide advice and help in implementing

operating improvements. Additionally, PE managers put a strong emphasis on implementing high

powered equity incentives to their management teams and thought those incentives are very

important. They also focused on creating smaller board of directors with a mix of insiders, PE

investors, and outsiders.

    In the earlier survey, PE investors also placed importance on financial engineering, i.e.,

putting in place the type of capital structure that could potentially enhance value. PE investors

appeared to rely equally on factors that are consistent with capital structure trade-off theories and

those consistent with market timing. The results were different from those for the CFOs in Graham

and Harvey (2001). The market timing result was consistent with the results in Axelson,

Jenkinson, Strömberg, and Weisbach (2013).



3.2.1. Operational and Governance Engineering

       Our next set of questions involves examining how PE investors are managing their existing

portfolio companies through operational and governance engineering. The first question asks who

works with portfolio companies. Table 6 reports that 84.4% of existing portfolio companies have

involvement of deal team members, 57.6% have operating partners involved in their management,

and 23.0% have outside consultants actively engaged.

       Table 7 presents the results concerning how often the PE manager has interacted during

the pandemic with the typical portfolio company. The intensity of interaction has been very high.

81.7% interact with the typical portfolio company at least weekly. 50.7% interact multiple times

per week while 6.8% were interacting daily. This is substantially higher than the rate of portfolio

company interaction in Gompers, Gornall, Kaplan, and Strebulaev (2020b) for VCs. VCs meet



                                                 11
with 26% of the portfolio once a week, 26% multiple times per week, and 2% daily. In the current

crisis, PE managers appear to be more hands on than VCs.

       Based on the classification from Table 3, we asked PE managers the types of activities they

engaged in within their existing portfolio companies. Panels A and B of Table 8 present the percent

of portfolio companies in the green, yellow, and red categories in which they are performing

specific operational or governance engineering activities.

       The prevalence of different actions, in general, is monotonically higher going from green

to yellow to red portfolio companies. For example, reducing head count is an activity in only

28.5% of unaffected portfolio companies, while it rises to 65.7% in moderately affected

companies, and to 87.1% in severely affected companies. Similarly, reducing other costs occurs

in 47.8% of the green companies, 78.2% of yellow companies, and 91.0% of red companies.

       In all three categories (green/yellow/red) of portfolio companies, PE managers are active

in   providing     general   operational    (64.3%/77.5%/82.4%)       and    strategic   guidance

(79.7%/88.6%/89.8%). This is consistent with GKM 2016 in which PE managers take active roles

in providing support.

       The PE managers in our survey are also actively involved in governance engineering and

their involvement increases as firms become more severely affected.          For example, in all

categories of companies (5.8%/12.2%/19.2%), PE managers actively seek to replace the CEO or

CFO. The percentage of PE managers involved in other senior management replacement is

similarly high (7.6%/13.4%/25.4%). Hiring other managers and recruiting board members is also

an important activity, but is not related to being more severely affected by Covid-19. Overall, the

more operationally affected a portfolio company is, the more likely the PE managers are to be

deeply involved.



                                                12
3.2.2. Financial Engineering

       GKM 2016 also examine financial engineering by PE managers. Kaplan (1989b) showed

that taxes are one source of value in leveraged buyouts. Jensen (1989) argued that leverage

imposed financial and operating discipline on company executives and avoided agency costs of

free cash flow. As discussed earlier, Covid-19 has been an unexpected shock to many firms’

revenue and cash flows. As such, maintaining liquidity and avoiding default is potentially a critical

concern for PE investors. To gauge how important liquidity concerns are, we asked PE managers

what fraction of their portfolio companies currently had covenant violations. On average, 22.7%

of portfolio companies had a covenant violation. There is no significant difference in the rate of

covenant violation in small vs. large or old vs. young PE firms.

       We asked PE managers about the target capital structure policies for their existing portfolio

companies. Table 9 tabulates their answers for bank and long-term debt maturity, debt-to-capital

ratio, and debt-to-EBITDA. Average (median) target maturity of bank and other long-term debt

are 4.2 (4.0) years and 5.0 (5.0) years. Large PE firms have longer target maturities (4.6 years

bank debt / 5.2 years other long-term debt) than small PE firms (3.9 years bank debt / 4.8 years

other long-term debt). Target debt-to-capital is 44.6% on average (50.0% median) and is

significantly higher for larger (47.4%) PE firms when compared to smaller (41.8%) ones. Debt-

to-EBITDA ratios average 3.8 (median 3.6) in our sample and are significantly higher for large

(4.6) and old (4.2) when compared to small (3.0) and young (3.4) PE firms.

       We also asked PE managers in what fraction of their portfolio companies they sought to

refinance their debt. Panel A of Table 10 shows that our PE managers target debt refinancing in

30.5% of their portfolio companies. When we asked the managers to rate the reason for seeking



                                                 13
to refinance (Panel B of Table 10), extending the maturity of the debt rated the highest at 6.1 (on

a scale from 1 to 10) followed by the low current rates at 5.2 and (potential) covenant violations

being next at 5.1. Larger PE firms rated extending the maturity of the debt (6.6) significantly

higher than smaller firms (5.5).

       Table 11 compares the target debt policies of our firms during Covid-19 with our earlier

survey. Except for debt to EBITDA, all the financial policies of our PE mangers have changed.

Debt maturity for both bank and other long-term debt has fallen significantly, falling from 5.25

years to 4.23 years for bank debt and from 6.89 years to 5.01 years for other long-term debt. Target

debt-to-capital ratios have also fallen significantly. They were 55.74% in the earlier survey and

are 44.6% now. These changes are consistent with an increased riskiness of the portfolio

companies and a desire to finance their companies more conservatively.

       Panel C of Table 8 tabulates the prevalence of financial engineering activities undertaken

by PE managers depending upon the severity of Covid-19 on their portfolio companies. Across a

number of areas, PE managers are active in raising cash for their companies. The intensity of these

activities is greater the more severely Covid-19 has affected the portfolio company. Across the

different   categories   of   portfolio   companies     (green/yellow/red),    a   large    fraction

(40.0%/55.4%/71.0%) are actively drawing down their revolving credit facilities. Similarly,

helping their portfolio companies access the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) is a common

activity for the PE managers (17.1%/25.1%/32.3%).

       Drawing down revolvers and accessing the PPP program are both non-dilutive (from an

equity perspective) ways to raise cash for portfolio companies. We also asked whether PE

managers if they were pursuing equity infusions for their portfolio companies. Except for the most

severely affected companies, raising new equity has been a relatively infrequent activity for PE



                                                 14
managers. In 34.5% of the severely affected (red) companies, however, PE managers actively

sought to raise equity.

       We also asked whether the PE firm sought to raise the equity from third parties, the same

fund that had invested in the portfolio company, or a later fund. By far the most common potential

source of equity is the same fund that had invested in the company. In 35.7% of the severely

affected companies, PE managers were pursuing equity investments from the same fund. Third

parties represent the second most frequent target source of equity financing – in 12.7% of severely

affected portfolio companies. Later funds by the same manager are almost never mentioned as a

source of equity financing for portfolio companies. Even in severely affected companies, only

2.5% of the time did PE managers consider an equity investment from a later fund. This is

consistent with the conflict of interest perceived by limited partners in cross-fund investing.

       We find significant differences when we compare different types of PE firms. For example,

across all portfolio company categories (green/yellow/red), small PE firms are far more likely to

help their companies participate in the PPP program. This is perhaps not surprising because much

of the PPP program was targeted at smaller businesses and smaller PE firms hold smaller

companies in their portfolio. Older and larger PE firms are more likely to be helping their portfolio

companies draw down their revolvers across each category of portfolio companies

(green/yellow/red). For equity investments, there is no consistent pattern of activity across fund

size or age.

       Overall, we find that PE firms are active in seeking additional cash for their portfolio

companies. Non-dilutive financing (either bank revolvers or the PPP program), unsurprisingly, is

preferable to outside equity. Outside equity appears to be an option in only the most severely

affected companies.



                                                 15
3.3. Exit Implications

       Exiting investments is a critical element of the PE process. We asked a set of questions

concerning whether and how exits might be affected by the Covid-19 pandemic. Given the turmoil

in operations identified above, one might expect that exits are not top of mind for PE firms. In

Panel A of Table 12, we ask PE managers whether their investment horizon has decreased, stayed

the same, or increased in the current environment. Fewer than 1% answered that their investment

horizon has decreased; 72.2% of respondents indicated that their investment horizon has increased.

At the same time, in Panel A of Table 13, we find that PE managers have not given up on exiting.

More than 55% of PE managers still seek to exit existing portfolio companies.

       Finally, we asked about the attractiveness of different types of exits in current financial

markets. Strategic sales are rated most highly by PE managers in Panel B of Table 13, averaging

7.2 on a scale from 1 to 10. Sales to financial buyers is the next most highly rated exit path,

receiving 6.3 on average. Pursuing an IPO is rated significantly higher by larger (4.6) and older

(4.3) PE organizations than by smaller (2.3) and young (2.7) firms did, likely reflecting the fact

that smaller portfolio companies do not have the option to go public.

       Overall, then, despite the current impact of Covid-19, PE managers are still seeking to gain

liquidity in their portfolios.



3.4. Investment Decision-Making Implications

    To this point, our analysis has largely focused on how PE managers engage with their existing

portfolio companies. In this section, we examine how the Covid-19 pandemic has affected

decision-making on future investments.



                                                16
    GKM 2016 identify deal sourcing and deal selection as important elements of the PE

investment process. We find in Table 14 that virtually all PE firms (94.6%) in our sample are still

seeking new investments. At the same time, 14.6% of our respondents indicated that they

anticipate that they will walk away from signed deals. While these may seem at odds with each

other, clearly the terms agreed to prior to the onset of the pandemic may be unattractive after.

    We asked the PE investors what IRR or MOIC they targeted for new investments in the firm’s

main fund. In Table 15 we find that for PE firms that target IRR, the average (median) target IRR

is 22.6% (24.8%). We do not find any difference between small and large or old and young PE

firms. For those who target MOIC, the average (median) MOIC target is 2.7 (2.6). PE firms with

offices exclusively in the US have an MOIC target (2.8) that is significantly higher than that of

other firms (2.5).

    In Table 16, we compare the average IRR and MOIC targets in the current survey to those of

our earlier survey. Both IRR and MOIC targets have declined, with the decline in IRR target

significant. In GKM 2016, the average PE firm had an IRR target of 27.0% compared to our

current survey target of 22.6%.

    This reduction in target IRR may reflect the tremendous growth in the PE industry over the

past eight years. Global AUM in PE (buyout and growth equity) in 2019 was $3.8 trillion billion

versus $1.3 trillion in 2012 according to Preqin. This growth has potentially led to increased

purchase multiples for PE investors as well as firms commensurately lowering their

target/projected IRRs and MOICs. The decline in target IRR may also reflect, at least partially,

the decline in long-term interest rates over this period. These explanations are not mutually

exclusive.




                                                17
    The investment horizon of new investments (in Panel B of Table 12) has remained similar to

that in GKM 2016 with an average (median) of 5.2 years (5.0 years).

    We next asked PE managers what factors they considered most important when deciding

whether to invest. In Table 17, we see that business model is the most important investment factor

with an average rating of 8.5 followed by management team (8.0), ability to be cash flow positive

(7.7), and ability to add value (7.7). These patterns are similar to those in GKM 2016 where the

PE investors also rated the business model as the most important factor followed by the

management team. The result that business model is more important than management team for

PE investors differs from the result in Gompers et al. (2020a) that the management team is more

important for VC investors.

    Table 18 examines the source of return generation for new deals that PE firms expect in the

current Covid-19 environment. We asked PE managers to rate each potential source of value on a

scale from 1 to 10. The PE investors overwhelmingly point to growth in revenue as the key driver

with an average of 8.2. Reduction in costs is a distant second at 5.4. The focus on increased

revenue versus cost reduction is greater than that reported in GKM 2016. This result also indicates

that despite the current economic downturn, PE firms remained focused more on increasing

revenue than on cutting costs.

    This finding is not at all consistent with the frequent criticism that PE firms largely seek to

cut employment and costs in their portfolio companies. Instead, this result and the similar result

in GKM 2016 indicate that growing the business is the most important strategy to increase value

independent of the phase of the economic cycle.

    We next asked a series of questions about the types of investments that are most attractive. In

Panel A of Table 19 we ask what types of investment strategies are attractive; in Panel B we ask



                                                18
what industries are attractive; and in Panel C we ask which regions are most attractive, all on a

scale from 1 to 10. LBOs, growth equity, and follow-on investments are rated similarly at 6.1;

with larger PE firms having a higher proclivity toward LBOs (6.5) compared to smaller firms (5.7)

but no statistically significant difference across firm size and age otherwise. Not surprisingly,

larger and older firms rated Private Investments in Public Equities (PIPEs) more highly (4.3 and

4.3) than did smaller and younger firms (3.0 and 3.1).

    Consistent with the results of Gompers et al. (2020b) for VC deals, PE firms rate IT and

Healthcare as the most attractive investment industries at 6.2 and 6.9. Energy, materials, and

utilities all rate low, from 2.0 to 2.5. These are also the two sectors in the public market that have

done well in the current Covid-19 environment. The S&P 500 Healthcare Index is up 2.35% for

the year and the S&P 500 Information Technology Index is up 23.14% for the year.

    Interestingly, when we asked which regions are most attractive for PE investments, despite

being among the more affected by the Covid-19 pandemic for the longest duration, North America

is the most highly rated region at 6.6. Western Europe is next at 3.7. All the other regions are

below 2.3. This ranking of regions may reflect the concentration of PE in North America as well

as our survey being more highly skewed to managers in North America.

    Finally, we asked what fraction of considered investments would end up in an actual

investment. We find that 10.9% of considered opportunities are anticipated to end up as an actual

investment (Panel B of Table 14). This is substantially higher than the 3.9% that GKM 2016

report. We find it difficult to reconcile these two numbers. Perhaps, the hurdle to be a considered

deal is higher and therefore, fewer, higher quality deals are in the pipeline. Second, perhaps the

pipeline has become dramatically narrower during Covid-19 and the “denominator” of considered

deals has shrunk.



                                                 19
    When making investments, PE investors choose among various securities. We asked in what

fraction of deals the PE managers use various securities and tabulate the results in Table 20. PE

managers say they will use common stock in roughly 60% of their deals. This compares to almost

75% of deals in GKM 2016. In the current environment, PE investors appear to have moved PE

investments more towards senior securities. PE managers stated that they used preferred stock in

almost 43% of their investments, convertible preferred in 23%, and convertible debt in 13%. Small

PE firms were more likely to use senior securities than were large PE firms.

    Another critical element of investment decision-making is how much equity to provide to the

management team to incentivize them. We asked PE managers how much of the equity is owned

by various parties. Table 21 shows that 72.9% of a company’s equity is, on average, owned by the

PE sponsor. Table 22 compares the results from our earlier survey to our current sample. PE

sponsors’ ownership has declined from 79.6% on average to 74.9%. CEO ownership has increased

to 10.9% from 8.0% while ownership of the top 10 managers and other employees has increased

to 11.3% from 8.9%. This suggests that management teams have become a more valuable and

scarcer resource over time.

    As was true in GKM 2016, large firms and old PE firms typically take more ownership (80.2%

and 75.4%) than small and young firms (65.6% and 70.7%). This is likely the case because older

and larger PE firms fund larger deals, leaving the management teams with an equity interest of

similar (or larger) dollar value.

    Overall, PE firms continue to seek out new investments. The firm’s business model and then

the firm’s management team rank as the first and second most important investment criteria. PE

investors are seeking to invest in more senior securities and are giving a larger equity stake to

management.



                                               20
3.5. Internal PE Firm Implications

    The next set of questions examines how PE firms’ internal operations have been affected by

the Covid-19 pandemic. We first asked PE managers to detail how investing and operating partners

are spending their time during the crisis. Panel A of Table 23 shows the hours per week investing

partners spend on various activities. The majority of their time is being spent assisting portfolio

companies, 25.2 hours per week.

    Consistent with our results above on investment-decision making and that PE firms are

exploring new investment opportunities, investing partners are spending time identifying new,

potential deals, 17.7 hours per week on average. They also are spending 6.1 hours per week on

networking for a total of 23.8 hours per week that is related to new deals. Managing the firm

accounts for 6.4 hours per week and meeting with limited partners totals 3.6 hours per week.

    Across firm types, PE investors at smaller and younger firms spend more time on managing

their firms (7.6 and 8.2 hours per week) relative to investing partners at larger and older firms (5.1

and 4.3 hours). This makes sense if there are more partners in older and larger firms and if they

are more likely to have dedicated staff who manage the firm’s internal operations. In total,

investment partners report they are working an average of 59.3 hours per week, suggesting that

the PE investors are highly engaged through the pandemic.

    We next asked firms that have operating partners, how the operating partners are spending

their time on various activities. Panel B of Table 23 finds that the vast majority of their time is

spent assisting portfolio companies, 33.5 hours per week, substantially more than investing

partners. The next most time-consuming category is finding and evaluating potential deals at 6.5

hours per week, significantly less than the time spent by investing partners. All the other categories



                                                  21
take relatively modest portions of operating partners’ time. On average operating partners are

reported to work 50.4 hours per week, again suggesting they are highly engaged.

     Given the experience during the financial crisis in which liquidity concerns caused LPs to want

reduced or no capital calls, we asked PE managers whether or not they have received similar

requests from LPs during the Covid-19 crisis. Table 24 shows that 21% of PE managers indicated

that their LPs have communicated a desire for reduced capital calls. Young PE firms have limited

partners who are more likely to indicate a desire for reduced capital calls (25.6%) relative to older

firms (15.3%). Although the difference is not statistically significant, this may reflect a difference

in the LP base of young funds who typically rely on smaller institutions and high net worth

individuals for their funding.

     Finally, we asked PE managers if they are currently fundraising. Table 25 shows that 38.1%

of PE firms have been fundraising in the Covid-19 environment. Given the lifecycle of funds, this

figure appears to be overall in line with the proclivity of firms to fundraise during normal times

suggesting that the pandemic has had at most a modest effect on the fundraising efforts of firms.

     Having said that, larger firms are more than twice as likely to be fundraising as smaller firms

(53.2% versus 22.9%). This could be a manifestation of larger firms having a wider spectrum of

contemporaneous funds under management. Alternatively, but not in a mutually exclusive sense,

larger firms and their LPs might have been more pandemic-resilient as far as fundraising is

concerned. The former explanation appears more plausible because the fraction of PE firms that

anticipate their next fund to be larger than their current fund is the same (58%) for large and small

managers.6 The overall fundraising findings are consistent with Gompers, Gornall, Kaplan, and




6
  35% of firms anticipate the next fund to be about the same size as the current fund; 7% expect a reduction in the fund size. 65%
of US-headquartered firms expect an increase, while this value (40%) is significantly lower for overseas managers.


                                                               22
Strebulaev (2020b) who find that venture capitalists have likewise continued to fundraise in the

Covid-19 environment.



3.6. Return Expectations

    Our final questions looked at PE managers’ perceptions of their own and the entire PE

industry’s performance over the next ten years. In Panel A of Table 26, we find they are quite

optimistic about their own performance. 34.9% believe they will perform much better than public

markets while another 41.9% believe they will perform somewhat better. Only 1.7% think they

will perform slightly worse than the public markets.

    When we asked the same managers their expectations for the entire industry, they were

similarly, albeit slightly less, optimistic. Panel B of Table 26 shows that 41.8% of PE managers

believe the industry will perform somewhat better than public markets over the next ten years

while 11.3% believe it will perform much better. Large PE firms are more pessimistic about the

industry than small PE firms. 16.1% of large managers believe that the PE industry will perform

either worse than or on par with the public markets with the corresponding number being 6.9%

for small firms.


4   Conclusion

    We have reported the results of a survey of more than 200 private equity (PE) managers from
firms with $1.9 trillion of AUM about their portfolio performance, decision-making, and activities
during the Covid-19 pandemic.

    Given that PE managers have significant incentives to maximize value, their actions during
the current pandemic should indicate what they perceive as being important for both the
preservation and creation of value. PE managers believe that 40% of their portfolio companies are
moderately negatively affected and 10% are very negatively affected by the pandemic. The private

                                                23
equity managers—both investing and operating partners—are actively engaged in the operations,
governance, and financing in all of their current portfolio companies. These activities are more
intensively pursued in those companies that have been more severely affected by the Covid-19
pandemic. They include helping to reduce headcount and non-headcount costs, providing strategic
and operational guidance, and helping to insure liquidity by drawing down revolvers, using the
PPP and raising equity. Less frequently, they change out senior management.

   As a result of the pandemic, the PE investors expect the performance of their existing funds to
decline. They are more pessimistic about that decline than the VCs surveyed in Gompers et al.
(2020b). Given the positive performance of the public market, particularly the tech-driven S&P
500 over this period, this is likely to make comparisons with the public markets difficult for the
private equity funds.

   Despite the pandemic, private equity managers are seeking new investments. Relative to the
2012 survey results reported in Gompers, Kaplan, and Mukharlyamov (2016): the PE investors
place a greater weight on revenue growth for value creation; they are giving a larger equity stake
to management teams; and, they also appear to target somewhat lower returns. These changes are
consistent with the large increase in commitments to PE since 2012 increasing the competition
(and cost) of management teams as well as leading to a modest decline in the returns targeted by
PE investors.




                                                24
References

Acharya, V., Gottschalg, O., Hahn, M., Kehoe, C., 2013. Corporate governance and value
creation: evidence from private equity. Review of Financial Studies 26, 368–402.

Ang, A., Chen, B., Goetzmann, W., Phalippou, L., 2013. Estimating private equity returns from
limited partner cash flows. Unpublished working paper. Columbia University.

Axelson, U., Jenkinson, T., Strömberg, P., Weisbach, M., 2013. Borrow cheap, buy high? The
determinants of leverage and pricing in buyouts. Journal of Finance 68, 2223–2267.

Axelson, U., Sorensen, M., Strömberg, P., 2013. The alpha and beta of buyout deals. Unpublished
working paper. LSE.

Baker, G., 1992. Beatrice: a study in the creation and destruction of value. Journal of Finance 47,
1081–1119.

Baker, G., Wruck, K., 1989. Organizational changes and value creation in leveraged buyouts: the
case of the O.M. Scott & Sons Company. Journal of Financial Economics 25, 163–190.

Baker, M., Wurgler, J., 2002. Market timing and capital structure. Journal of Finance 57, 1–32.

Bertrand, M., Schoar, A., 2003. Managing with style: the effect of managers on firm policies.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1169-1208.

Brav, A., Graham, J., Harvey, C., Michaely, M., 2005. Payout policy in the 21st century. Journal
of Financial Economics 77, 483–527.

Brealey, R., Myers, S., Allen, F., 2013. Principles of Corporate Finance. McGraw Hill, New York.

Brown, Gregory W. and Kaplan, Steven N., Have Private Equity Returns Really Declined? Journal
of Private Equity, 2019, Volume 22 (4), 11-18.

Chung J., Sensoy B., Stern L., Weisbach M., 2012. Pay for performance from future fund flows:
the case of private equity. Review of Financial Studies 25, 3259–3304.

                                                 25
Cohn J., Mills, L., Towery, E., 2014. The evolution of capital structure and operating performance
after leveraged buyouts: evidence from U.S. corporate tax returns. Journal of Financial Economics
111, 469–494.

Cohn J., Towery, E., 2013. The determinants and consequences of private equity buyouts of
private firms: evidence from U.S. corporate tax returns. Unpublished working paper. University
of Texas.

Coles, J., Daniel, N., Naveen, L., 2008. Boards: does one size fit all? Journal of Financial
Economics 87, 329–356.

Da Rin, M., Phalippou, L., 2014. There is something special about large investors: evidence from
a survey of private equity limited partners. Unpublished working paper. University of Oxford.

Davis, S., Haltiwanger, J., Handley, K., Jarmin, R., Lerner, J., Miranda, J., 2014. Private Equity,
Jobs, and Productivity. American Economic Review 104, 3956–3990.

Fama, E., Jensen, M., 1983. Separation of ownership and control. Journal of Law and Economics
26, 301–325.

Gompers, P., Gornall, W., Kaplan, S., Strebulaev, I., 2020a. How Do Venture Capitalists Make
Decisions? Journal of Financial Economics, 2020, Volume 135, 169-190.

Gompers, P., Gornall, W., Kaplan, S., Strebulaev, I., 2020b. Venture Capital and Covid-19.
Unpublished working paper, Harvard Business School.

Gompers, P., Ishii, J., Metrick, A., 2003. Corporate governance and equity prices. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 118, 107–156.

Gompers, P., Kaplan, S., Mukharlyamov, V., 2016. What do private equity investors say they do?
Journal of Financial Economics 121, 449-476.




                                                26
Gompers, P., Lerner, J., 1999. An analysis of compensation in the US venture capital partnership.
Journal of Financial Economics 51, 3–44.

Graham, J., Harvey, C., 2001. The theory and practice of corporate finance: evidence from the
field. Journal of Financial Economics 60, 187–243.

Guo, S., Hotchkiss, E., Song, W., 2011. Do buyouts (still) create value? Journal of Finance 66,
479–511.

Harris, R., Jenkinson, T., Kaplan, S., 2014. Private equity performance: what do we know? Journal
of Finance 69, 1851–1882.

Hermalin, B., Weisbach, M., 1998. Endogenously chosen boards of directors and their monitoring
of the CEO. American Economic Review 88, 96–118.

Higson, C., Stucke, R., 2012. The performance of private equity. Unpublished working paper.
London Business School.

Jensen, M., 1986. Agency cost of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers. American
Economic Review 76, 323–329.

Jensen, M., 1989. Eclipse of the public corporation. Harvard Business Review 67, 61–74.

Jensen, M., Meckling, W., 1976. Theory of the firm: managerial behavior, agency costs, and
ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305–360.

Jensen, M., Murphy, K., 1990. Performance pay and top-management incentives. Journal of
Political Economy 98, 225–264.

Kaplan, S., 1989a. The effects of management buyouts on operating and value. Journal of
Financial Economics 24, 217–254.

Kaplan, S., 1997. The evolution of US corporate governance: we are all Henry Kravis now. Journal
of Private Equity 1, 7–14.

                                               27
Kaplan, S., Sensoy, B., Strömberg, P., 2009. Should investors bet on the jockey or the horse?
Evidence from the evolution of firms from early business plans to public companies. Journal of
Finance 64, 75–115.

Kaplan, S., Strömberg, P., 2009. Leveraged buyouts and private equity. Journal of Economic
Perspectives 23, 121–146.

Metrick, A., Yasuda, A., 2010. The economics of private equity funds. Review of Financial
Studies 23, 2303–2341.

Myers, S., 1977. Determinants of corporate borrowing. Journal of Financial Economics 5, 145–
175.

Myers, S., 1984. The capital structure puzzle. Journal of Finance 39, 575–592.

Page, B., 2011. CEO ownership and firm value: evidence from a structural estimation.
Unpublished working Paper, University of Rochester.

Robinson, D., Sensoy, B., 2013. Do private equity fund managers earn their fees? Compensation,
ownership, and cash flow performance. Review of Financial Studies 26, 2760–2797.

Strömberg, P., 2008. The new demography of private equity. In: Globalization of Alternative
Investment Working Papers Volume 1, The Global Economic Impact of Private Equity Report
2008, World Economic Forum, pp. 3-26.




                                               28
                                          Table 1: Respondents
This table describes the sample private equity (PE) investor respondents. The data in Panels A and B are
from Preqin; individual positions in Panel C are from the current survey. To ensure the anonymity of the
survey participants, we report rounded values of the median and the percentiles in Panel A.

Panel A: Summary statistics of sample firms

                                                              25th                   75th
 PE firm characteristic                N         Mean                    Median                   St. dev.
                                                            percentile             percentile
 Age (years)                          212        21.7          12.0        20.0       30.0         14.0
 AUM (US$m)                           176      10,678.0       400.0      1,800.0    8,000.0      23,061.5
 Dry powder available (US$m)          155      3,451.9        100.0       500.0     2,000.0      7,009.8
 Number of past PE deals              199       122.0           5.0        35.0      100.0        234.7
 Number of employees                  166        92.9          10.0        25.0       55.0        233.4
 Number of countries with offices     214        3.1            1.0         1.0        2.0         4.5
 Office in the US (binary)            214       80.4%
 HQ in the US (binary)                214       72.0%

Panel B: Geographic distribution of sample firms        Panel C: Positions of individual respondents

                               Firms                                                     People
 Region of HQs                                           Position
                          Number   Fraction                                         Number Fraction
 North America             158       73.8%               Managing Partner            106       39.0%
 Western Europe             22       10.3%               Managing Director            51       18.8%
 Asia                        9        4.2%               General Partner / Director   31       11.4%
 Africa                      6        2.8%               Principal / VP               67       24.6%
 Eastern Europe              6        2.8%               Other                        17        6.3%
 South America               5        2.3%               Total                       272      100.0%
 Middle East                 4        1.9%
 Oceania                     4        1.9%
 Total                     214      100.0%


                                     Table 2: Average equity check
This table reports the average equity expected in the Covid-19 environment by the sample private equity
(PE) investors. Question is: “In the current Covid-19 environment, what do you anticipate your average
equity check in your primary fund will be in 2020?” The sample is divided into subgroups based on the
median of assets under management and the age of PE firm. Statistical significance of the difference
between subgroup means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                                 AUM                       Age
                                    Mean      Median         Low   High            Young          Old
 Average equity check (US$m)        140.2      50.0          85.6 194.8*            58.8        231.2***
 Observations                        144       144            72    72               76            68


                                                   29
                       Table 3: The Covid-19 pandemic’s impact on the portfolio
This table describes the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on the portfolios of the sample private equity
(PE) investors. Question is: “In the current Covid-19 environment, what fraction of your portfolio
companies are currently…?” Green light applies to portfolio companies affected positively or unaffected
by the pandemic; yellow light—moderately affected; red light—severely affected. The sample is divided
into subgroups based on the median of assets under management and the age of PE firm. Statistical
significance of the difference between subgroup means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are denoted by ***,
**, and *, respectively.

                                                                   AUM                       Age
                                  Mean      Median          Low          High          Young     Old
 Without symptoms (green)         50.9       50.0           53.3         48.4           50.2     51.5
 Sick, but ok (yellow)            39.9       37.5           37.8         41.9           41.4     38.2
 In intensive care (red)           9.6       9.2             9.5          9.7            8.9     10.3
 Observations                     213        213            107          106            112      101


                                  Table 4: Target performance metrics
This table reports the propensity of the sample private equity (PE) investors to target IRR or MOIC.
Question is: “Do you target IRR or multiple on invested capital (MOIC)? Select all that apply.” The sample
is divided into subgroups based on the median of assets under management and the age of PE firm.
Statistical significance of the difference between subgroup means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are
denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                         AUM                          Age
          Target of choice          Mean          Low       High                Young     Old
          IRR                       60.4          51.4     69.6**                64.6     55.4
          MOIC                      81.8          82.2      81.4                 78.5     85.7
          Other                      8.4           6.8       9.9                  8.9     7.8
          Observations              145            73        72                   79       66




                                                   30
                            Table 5: Pandemic’s impact on fund performance
This table describes the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on the expected performance of the existing funds
managed by the sample private equity (PE) investors. Panels A and B focus, respectively, on the IRR and
the MOIC. The number of observations in each panel reflects the number of sample PE firms that target
that metric. The sample is divided into subgroups based on the median of assets under management and the
age of PE firm. Statistical significance of the difference between subgroup means at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                                              AUM             Age
                                                         Mean Median        Low High       Young Old
 Panel A: IRR
 Yes, pandemic will affect IRR (percent of PE firms)      85.4              81.8 88.9        80.9   90.5
 Observations                                              88                44 44            47     41

 Expected change in gross IRR (percentage points)         -4.4    -4.9        -4.5 -4.3      -4.5   -4.3
 Observations                                              87      87          44 43          47     40

 Panel B: MOIC
 Yes, pandemic will affect MOIC (percent of PE firms)     58.8              60.0 57.6        54.8   63.1
 Observations                                             119                60 59            62     57
 Expected change in gross MOIC                           -0.24    -0.20     -0.23 -0.25     -0.16 -0.33*
 Observations                                             117      117       59 58           60     57



                    Table 6: Participants actively involved with portfolio companies
This table reports the fraction of portfolio companies with active participation in the current Covid-19
environment by each specified group for the sample private equity (PE) investors. The sample is divided
into subgroups based on the median of assets under management and the age of PE firm. Statistical
significance of the difference between subgroup means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are denoted by ***,
**, and *, respectively.

                                                                  AUM                       Age
 Participants                     Mean      Median         Low       High             Young     Old
 Deal team                        84.4      100.0          78.8     90.1***            81.3     88.2
 Operating partners               57.6       63.3          54.9      60.3              55.6     60.0
 Outside consultants              23.0       20.0          21.0      25.1              24.5     21.2
 Other                             3.8       0.0            3.1       4.5               3.8      3.8
 Observations                     163        163            82        81                91       72




                                                    31
                      Table 7: Frequency of interactions with portfolio companies
This table reports how frequently the sample private equity (PE) investors have interacted with the
management of a typical company in their portfolio since the beginning of the Covid-19 pandemic. The
sample is divided into subgroups based on the median of assets under management and the age of PE firm.
Statistical significance of the difference between subgroup means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are
denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                              AUM                    Age
      Frequency of interactions       Mean             Low          High     Young       Old
      Never                            0.1             0.0           0.3       0.0        0.3
      Less than once a month           0.8             0.0           1.7       1.2        0.4
      Once a month                     5.4             5.4           5.5       9.9      0.0***
      2-3 times a month               11.8             13.5         10.0       8.6       15.6
      Once a week                     24.2             24.3         24.1      24.7       23.7
      Multiple times a week           50.7             50.0         51.5      45.7       57.0
      Every day                        6.8             6.8           6.8       9.9       3.0*
      Observations                    147               74           73        81         66




                                                  32
                            Table 8: Sources of value in existing portfolio companies during the Covid-19 pandemic
This table reports the percent of portfolio companies—tabulated by the extent of the Covid-19 pandemic’s impact—in which the sample private
equity (PE) investors pursue specified activities: operational engineering (Panel A), governance engineering (Panel B), and financial engineering
(Panel C). Green light applies to portfolio companies affected positively or unaffected by the pandemic; yellow light—moderately affected; red
light—severely affected. Standard errors appear in brackets.

 Activity                                Green    Yellow      Red             Activity                            Green       Yellow       Red
 Panel A: Operational engineering                                             Panel C: Financial engineering
 Reducing head count                    28.46      65.74     87.07            Using the PPP                       17.11       25.10       32.33
                                        [2.30]     [2.95]    [2.61]                                               [2.46]      [3.01]      [4.25]
 Reducing other costs                   47.81      78.23     91.02            Getting liquidity                   34.46       48.17       66.98
                                        [2.81]     [2.55]    [2.37]                                               [2.74]      [3.37]      [4.21]
 Provide operational guidance           64.33      77.52     82.38            Drawing down revolvers              40.02       55.41       71.04
                                        [2.89]     [2.81]    [3.36]                                               [3.00]      [3.26]      [4.02]
 Provide strategic guidance             79.74      88.55     89.77            Raising equity                       7.69       12.20       34.45
                                        [2.52]     [1.99]    [2.59]                                               [1.49]      [2.02]      [4.17]
 Connect companies with potential       51.58      52.46     61.87            Equity infusion from 3rd party       4.26        5.84       12.73
 customers/suppliers/strategic partners [3.00]     [3.28]    [4.22]                                               [1.23]      [1.40]      [2.82]
 Observations                            168        155        96             Equity infusion from same fund       6.17       12.86       35.68
                                                                                                                  [1.16]      [1.89]      [4.08]
 Panel B: Governance engineering                                              Equity infusion from later fund      2.18        1.78        2.51
 Change CEO or CFO                        5.80     12.16     19.20                                                [0.82]      [0.76]      [1.09]
                                         [1.08]    [1.87]    [2.98]           Seeking an exit                     11.49        7.21       15.13
 Change other senior management           7.60     13.38     25.36                                                [1.49]      [1.55]      [3.10]
                                         [1.15]    [1.91]    [3.29]           Observations                         168         155          96
 Help companies hire managers            28.57     33.00     30.73
                                         [2.64]    [3.23]    [4.11]
 Help companies hire board
                                         23.14     25.09     21.40
 members
                                         [2.64]    [3.02]    [3.66]
 Observations                             168       155        96


                                                                        33
                                  Table 9: Target capital structure policies
This table describes the capital structure policies currently targeted by the sample private equity (PE)
investors for their existing portfolio companies. The sample is divided into subgroups based on the median
of assets under management and the age of PE firm. Statistical significance of the difference between
subgroup means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                                          AUM                   Age
                                                 Mean       Median    Low   High           Young    Old
 Maturity of bank / senior debt (years)           4.2        4.0      3.9 4.6***            4.0     4.5*
 Observations                                    145         145       73    72             79       66

 Maturity of other long-term debt (years)        5.0         5.0       4.8      5.2          4.8      5.2
 Observations                                    133         133       67       66           71       62

 Total debt-to-capital ratio, D/(D+E) (%)        44.6        50.0     41.8    47.4**        43.8      45.5
 Observations                                    142         142       71       71           77        65

 Debt-to-EBTDA                                   3.8         3.6       3.0    4.6***         3.4     4.2***
 Observations                                    143         143       72       71           78        65


                                        Table 10: Debt refinancing
This table describes debt refinancing decisions. Panel A reports the fraction of portfolio companies in which
the sample private equity (PE) investors have refinanced or seek to refinance the debt over the next 6
months. Panel B shows how important—on a scale of 1 (least) to 10 (most)—the specified factors are for
the refinancing decisions, as indicated by a subset of the sample PE investors with plans to refinance. The
sample is divided into subgroups based on the median of assets under management and the age of PE firm.
Statistical significance of the difference between subgroup means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are
denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                                          AUM                  Age
                                                 Mean       Median     Low High             Young Old
 Panel A: Debt (expected to be) refinanced
 Percent of portfolio companies                   30.5        25.0     33.0     27.9          27.9     33.8
 Observations                                     141         141       71       70            79       62

 Panel B: Rationale for debt refinancing
 Low current rates                                5.2         5.0       5.3     5.1           4.9      5.5
 Desire to extend maturity of debt                6.1         7.0       5.5    6.6**          5.8      6.4
 Violation or potential violation of covenants    5.1         5.0       4.9     5.3           5.3      4.8
 Precautionary                                    4.1         4.0       4.2     4.1           4.0      4.3
 Other                                            1.7         1.0       1.5     1.9           1.8      1.6
 Observations                                     132         132       66      66            72       60




                                                       34
                         Table 11: Debt policies in normal times vs. Covid-19
This table compares the target debt policies of the sample private equity (PE) investors surveyed in July–
August 2020 during the Covid-19 pandemic with the results of a similar survey conducted in 2011–2013,
i.e., normal times (Gompers, Kaplan, and Mukharlyamov 2016). Statistical significance of the difference
between means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                 Typical target                              2011–2013       Covid-19
                 Maturity of bank / senior debt (years)         5.25         4.23***
                 Standard errors                               [0.15]         [0.12]
                 Observations                                    64            145

                 Maturity of other long-term debt (years)        6.89         5.01***
                 Standard errors                                [0.17]         [0.15]
                 Observations                                     64            133

                 Total debt to capital ratio, D/(D+E), %        55.74        44.60***
                 Standard errors                                [1.76]        [1.19]
                 Observations                                     62           142

                 Total debt to EBITDA Ratio                       3.9            3.8
                 Standard errors                                [0.14]         [0.13]
                 Observations                                     60            143




                                                    35
                                       Table 12: Investment horizon
This table describes the investment horizon of sample private equity (PE) investors in the current Covid-19
environment. Panel A shows the pandemic-induced change in the investment horizon; Panel B reports the
current levels. The sample is divided into subgroups based on the median of assets under management and
the age of PE firm. Statistical significance of the difference between subgroup means at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                                    AUM                        Age
                                  Mean         Median          Low     High                Young   Old
 Panel A: Investment horizon’s change in the current Covid-19 environment
 Decreased                         0.1                          0.0     0.2                 0.0        0.2
 Stayed the same                  27.7                         27.4    28.0                 27.5       27.9
 Increased                        72.2                         72.6    71.9                 72.5       71.9
 Observations                      146                          73      73                   80         66

 Panel B: Investment horizon in the current Covid-19 environment
 Investment horizon                 5.2          5.0           5.3            5.1            5.1        5.4
 Observations                       158          158           79             79             85         73


                                                Table 13: Exit
This table describes the intention to exit investments and the attractiveness of different exit routes. Panel A
reports the fraction of the sample private equity (PE) investors actively seeking to exit current portfolio
companies in today’s Covid-19 environment. Panel B shows how attractive—on a scale of 1 (least) to 10
(most)—the specified exit routes are, as indicated by a subset of the sample PE investors seeking exits. The
sample is divided into subgroups based on the median of assets under management and the age of PE firm.
Statistical significance of the difference between subgroup means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are
denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                                          AUM                   Age
                                             Mean       Median         Low High             Young   Old
 Panel A: Actively seeking to exit existing portfolio companies
 Yes, seeking exit (percent of PE firms)     55.3                      55.4     55.2          61.1     48.2
 Observations                                147                        74       73            81       66

 Panel B: Exit routes and their attractiveness
 IPO                                         3.4           2.0          2.3    4.6***         2.7      4.3**
 Strategic sale                              7.2           7.5          7.2      7.1          6.9       7.4
 Financial sale                              6.3           7.0          6.1      6.5          6.2       6.3
 Other                                       1.1           1.0          1.2      1.0          1.0       1.2
 Observations                                83            83           42       41           43        40




                                                      36
                                          Table 14: Deal funnel
This table describes the propensity of the sample private equity (PE) investors to seek out potential new
investments (Panel A), to invest in considered opportunities (Panel B), and to walk away from a signed deal
before closing (Panel C) in the current Covid-19 environment. The sample is divided into subgroups based
on the median of assets under management and the age of PE firm. Statistical significance of the difference
between subgroup means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                                  AUM                       Age
                                     Mean Median             Low     High              Young    Old
 Panel A: Are you currently seeking out potential new investments?
 Yes (percent of PE firms)           94.6                     94.0   95.2                89.3    100.0***
 Observations                         167                      84     83                  84        83

 Panel B: In the current Covid-19 environment, what fraction of all considered opportunities do you
 anticipate you will end up investing in?
 Percent of all considered
                                       10.9    8.3           10.7      11.2           10.9       11.0
 opportunities
 Observations                           150    150            75        75             80         70

 Panel C: In the current Covid-19 environment, have you or do you anticipate walking away from a
 signed deal before closing?
 Yes (percent of PE firms)           14.6                   15.1      14.1            13.7     15.5
 Observations                        166                     83        83              84       82


                                    Table 15: Performance targets
This table reports the gross IRR and MOIC targets, in the current Covid-19 environment, in the primary
fund of the sample private equity (PE) investors that target either metric. The sample is divided into
subgroups based on the median of assets under management and the age of PE firm. Statistical significance
of the difference between subgroup means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are denoted by ***, **, and *,
respectively.

                                                                        AUM                   Age
                                      Mean         Median           Low   High           Young    Old
 Target gross IRR (percent)           22.6          24.8            23.1   22.1           22.6    22.6
 Observations                          88            88              44     44             47      41

 Target gross MOIC (x)                 2.7           2.6            2.8      2.6           2.6       2.7
 Observations                          114           114            57       57            58        56




                                                    37
                     Table 16: Performance targets in normal times vs. Covid-19
This table compares performance targets of the sample private equity (PE) investors surveyed in July–
August 2020 during the Covid-19 pandemic with the results of a similar survey conducted in 2011–2013,
i.e., normal times (Gompers, Kaplan, and Mukharlyamov 2016). Statistical significance of the difference
between means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                         2011–2013       Covid-19
                   Target gross IRR in primary fund        27.03         22.60***
                   Standard errors                         [1.45]         [0.63]
                   Observations                              62             88

                   Target gross MOIC in primary fund        2.85           2.69
                   Standard errors                         [0.15]         [0.06]
                   Observations                              62            114




                                                  38
                                       Table 17: Investment factors
This table reports the importance in the current Covid-19 environment of the specified investment factors—
on a scale of 1 (least) to 10 (most)—as indicated by the sample private equity (PE) investors. The sample
is divided into subgroups based on the median of assets under management and the age of PE firm.
Statistical significance of the difference between subgroup means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are
denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                                               AUM                Age
 Investment factor                                  Mean      Median        Low High          Young Old
 Ability to add value                                7.7       8.0          7.9   7.5          7.7    7.7
 Business model / Competitive position               8.5       9.0          8.5   8.6          8.6    8.4
 Fit with Fund                                       6.9       7.3          6.8   7.0          7.1    6.7
 Industry /Market                                    7.2       8.0          6.9 7.6*           7.1    7.4
 Management team                                     8.0       8.0          8.0   8.1          8.0    8.1
 Valuation                                           7.2       8.0          7.3   7.1          7.2    7.2
 Ability to be cash flow positive                    7.7       8.0          7.8   7.5          7.8    7.5
 Other                                               1.3       1.0          1.3   1.4          1.2    1.4
 Observations                                       151        151           76   75           76     75




                                         Table 18: Sources of value
This table shows how critical, in the current Covid-19 environment, the specified drivers are (or anticipated
to be) in generating returns—on a scale of 1 (least) to 10 (most)—according to the sample private equity
(PE) investors. The sample is divided into subgroups based on the median of assets under management and
the age of PE firm. Statistical significance of the difference between subgroup means at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                                              AUM                Age
 Source of value                              Mean          Median        Low   High         Young Old
 Growth in revenue of the underlying business 8.1            8.0          7.9    8.3          8.0    8.1
 Reducing costs                                5.4           5.0          5.5    5.4          5.5    5.3
 Industry-level multiple arbitrage             4.6           4.5          4.4    4.8          4.6    4.7
 Leverage                                      3.9           4.0          3.9    4.0          4.0    3.8
 Refinancing                                   3.2           3.0          3.2    3.1          3.2    3.2
 Other                                         1.7           1.0          1.5    1.9          1.9    1.6
 Observations                                 145            145           73    72           77     68




                                                     39
                         Table 19: Types of investments and their attractiveness
This table shows how attractive, in the current Covid-19 environment, the specified types of investments
are—on a scale of 1 (least) to 10 (most)—according to the sample private equity (PE) investors. Panels A,
B, and C present the results for investment strategies, industries, and regions, respectively. The sample is
divided into subgroups based on the median of assets under management and the age of PE firm. Statistical
significance of the difference between subgroup means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are denoted by ***,
**, and *, respectively.

                                                                     AUM                    Age
                                     Mean        Median           Low  High             Young   Old
 Panel A: Investment strategies
 Leveraged buyouts                    6.1          6.0             5.7     6.5*           5.8        6.3
 Growth Equity                        6.1          6.8             6.4      5.8           6.0        6.1
 PIPEs                                3.7          3.0             3.0    4.3***          3.1      4.3***
 Distressed Debt                      4.5          5.0             4.9      4.2           4.4        4.7
 Follow-on investments                6.1          7.0             6.3      5.9           6.2        6.1
 Other                                1.3          1.0             1.4      1.3           1.5       1.1*
 Observations                         150          150             75       75            79         71

 Panel B: Industries
 Energy                               2.0          1.0             2.2      1.7           2.1       1.9
 IT                                   6.2          7.0             6.1      6.3           5.7       6.7*
 Materials                            2.5          1.0             2.3      2.6           2.3       2.7
 Telecommunication Services           4.2          4.0             4.2      4.2           4.0       4.4
 Industrials                          3.8          4.0             3.7      3.9           3.6       4.0
 Utilities                            2.3          1.0             2.2      2.5           2.0       2.7*
 Consumer                             3.9          4.0             3.8      3.9           3.9       3.8
 Health Care                          6.9          7.0             6.8      7.0           6.9       6.9
 Financial                            4.0          4.0             4.0      4.0           4.2       3.8
 Other                                1.9          1.0             2.0      1.8           2.0       1.8
 Observations                         147          147             74       73            79         68

 Panel C: Regions
 North America                        6.6          7.0             6.6      6.6           6.4       6.7
 Southeastern Asia                    2.3          1.0             2.5      2.1           2.3       2.3
 Latin America                        1.9          1.0             1.6      2.2           1.7       2.1
 Africa                               1.6          1.0             1.6      1.5           1.8       1.3*
 Western Europe                       3.7          4.0             3.4      4.0           3.8       3.7
 Australasia                          2.3          1.0             2.1      2.5           2.1       2.5
 Eastern Europe                       2.2          1.0             2.4      2.1           2.5       1.9
 Eastern Asia                         1.9          1.0             1.9      1.9           2.0       1.9
 Middle East                          1.4          1.0             1.6      1.3           1.6       1.2*
 Other                                1.0          1.0             1.0      1.1           1.0       1.1
 Observations                         139          139             70       69            74         65


                                                    40
                                       Table 20: Types of securities
This table reports the percentage of new deals on which the sample private equity (PE) investors anticipate
using each of the specified securities or instruments in the current Covid-19 environment. The sample is
divided into subgroups based on the median of assets under management and the age of PE firm. Statistical
significance of the difference between subgroup means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are denoted by ***,
**, and *, respectively.

                                                                        AUM                   Age
 Security                               Mean        Median          Low High             Young      Old
 Straight common stock                  59.3         74.6           57.1   61.5           58.2      60.7
 Preferred stock                        42.7         40.0           46.6   38.7           44.1      41.0
 Convertible preferred                  23.0         10.0           24.5   21.6           21.4      24.9
 Convertible debt                       12.6         0.0            16.0   9.2*           14.7      10.1
 Other                                   3.4         0.0            5.3     1.5           2.8       4.1
 Observations                           138          138             69     69             74        64




                                   Table 21: Typical equity ownership
This table reports the typical equity stakes in new portfolio companies as expected by the sample private
equity (PE) investors in the current Covid-19 environment. The sample is divided into subgroups based on
the median of assets under management and the age of PE firm. Statistical significance of the difference
between subgroup means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                                           AUM                   Age
                                             Mean        Median        Low   High           Young Old
 PE investors                                72.9         80.0         65.6 80.2***          70.7 75.4
 CEO                                         10.9         5.0          14.8 7.0***           12.1    9.5
 Top 10 Management (excluding CEO)            8.9         7.0          11.0 6.8***           9.5     8.2
 Top 10 Management (including CEO)           19.8         15.0         25.7 13.8***          21.7 17.7
 Other employees                              2.4         0.0          2.8    2.1            2.7     2.2
 Other                                        4.7         0.0          5.9    3.4            5.0     4.3
 Observations                                138          138           69    69              73     65




                                                    41
                     Table 22: Typical equity ownership in normal times vs. Covid-19
This table compares the typical equity stakes in new portfolio companies as reported by the sample private
equity (PE) investors surveyed in July–August 2020 during the Covid-19 pandemic with the results of a
similar survey conducted in 2011–2013, i.e., normal times (Gompers, Kaplan, and Mukharlyamov 2016).
Statistical significance of the difference between means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are denoted by ***,
**, and *, respectively.

                                                             2011–2013       Covid-19
                 PE investors                                  79.58         72.93**
                                                               [2.00]         [1.59]
                 CEO                                            7.99          10.93*
                                                               [1.29]         [1.05]
                 Top 10 Management (excluding CEO)              7.16          8.91**
                                                               [0.43]         [0.57]
                 Top 10 Management (including CEO)             15.15         19.83**
                                                               [1.46]         [1.39]
                 Other employees                                1.75           2.43
                                                               [0.50]         [0.32]
                 Other                                          3.55           4.65
                                                               [1.16]         [0.77]
                 Observations                                    64            137




                                                   42
                                           Table 23: Time use
This table describes how investing partners (Panel A) and operating partners (Panel B) spend their time (in
hours) during the Covid-19 pandemic as indicated by the sample private equity (PE) firms which reported
having both types of partners. The sample is divided into subgroups based on the median of assets under
management and the age of PE firm. Statistical significance of the difference between subgroup means at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                                              AUM                     Age
                                            Mean        Median            Low   High              Young Old
 Panel A: Investing partners
 Assisting current portfolio companies       25.2          21.7           21.8     28.6**          25.1        25.2
 Finding and evaluating potential deals      17.7          15.0           18.4      17.0           16.3        19.3
 Networking                                   6.1          5.0            7.1       5.1*            6.3         5.9
 Meeting with limited partners                3.6          2.5            3.6       3.5             4.3        2.7*
 Management of your firm                      6.4          5.0            7.6       5.1             8.2        4.3**
 Other                                        0.4          0.0            0.4       0.5             0.4         0.5
 Total (hours)                               59.3          57.0           58.9      59.8           60.5        58.0
 Observations                                 93            93             47        46             50          43

 Panel B: Operating partners
 Assisting current portfolio companies       33.5          30.0           27.2    39.8***          29.5        38.0*
 Finding and evaluating potential deals       6.5          5.0            7.0       6.0             6.5         6.6
 Networking                                   3.7          2.2            4.4       3.1             4.4         3.0
 Meeting with limited partners                1.5          0.0            1.8       1.2             2.0        0.9*
 Management of your firm                      4.3          0.0            6.3      2.2**            6.0        2.3**
 Other                                        0.9          0.0            0.7       1.0             0.7         1.1
 Total (hours)                               50.4          50.0           47.3     53.4            49.1        51.8
 Observations                                 92            92             46       46              49          43


                               Table 24: LPs’ desire for reduced capital calls
This table reports the percentage of the sample private equity (PE) investors that indicated that their limited
partners (LPs) have communicated a desire for reduced capital calls in the current Covid-19 environment.
The sample is divided into subgroups based on the median of assets under management and the age of PE
firm. Statistical significance of the difference between subgroup means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are
denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                                      AUM                       Age
                                                      Mean          Low  High               Young   Old
      Yes, LPs communicated a desire for
                                                      21.0          21.1         21.0       25.6          15.3
      reduced capital calls (percent of PE firms)
      Observations                                     141           71          70          78           63




                                                      43
                                         Table 25: Fundraising
This table reports the percentage of the sample private equity (PE) investors that are fundraising in the
current Covid-19 environment. The sample is divided into subgroups based on the median of assets under
management and the age of PE firm. Statistical significance of the difference between subgroup means at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                          AUM                        Age
                                         Mean         Low   High                Young    Old
            Yes, currently fundraising
                                          38.1        22.9    53.2***           31.9     44.2
            (percent of PE firms)
            Observations                  144            72      72              72       72


                            Table 26: Private equity performance expectations
This table describes the sample private equity (PE) investors’ perceptions of their own performance
(Panel A) and that of the entire PE industry (Panel B) over the next ten years relative to the overall stock
market. The sample is divided into subgroups based on the median of assets under management and the age
of PE firm. Statistical significance of the difference between subgroup means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels
are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                           AUM                    Age
                                       Mean            Low     High        Young      Old
        Panel A: Respondent’s investments relative to the overall stock market
        Much worse                       0.0            0.0     0.0          0.0      0.0
        Slightly worse                   1.7            0.0    3.5*          1.3      2.3
        About the same                   7.4            8.2     6.7          10.6     3.5*
        Slightly better                 14.1           16.4    11.7          12.5     16.0
        Somewhat better                 41.9           37.7    46.2          40.6     43.4
        Much better                     34.9           37.7    32.0          35.0     34.7
        Observations                    145             73      72            80       65

        Panel B: Private equity industry relative to the overall stock market
        Much worse                         0.0            0.0      0.0          0.0         0.0
        Slightly worse                     5.4            4.2      6.7          5.1         5.8
        About the same                     6.1            2.8     9.5*          4.4         8.2
        Slightly better                   35.3           41.0     29.7          34.2       36.8
        Somewhat better                   41.8           44.4     39.1          49.4      32.6**
        Much better                       11.3            7.6     15.0          7.0        16.7*
        Observations                       144            72       72            79         65




                                                    44
