                          NBER WORXING PAPER SERIES




                     SUBSTITUTION OVER TIME IN WORK AND
                                 CONSUMPTION




                               Robert   E.   Hall




                           working Paper No. 2789




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                December 1988




Presented at the TEA Conference, "Value and Capital Fifty Years Later,'
Bologna, Italy, September 3-5, 1988. This research was supported by the
National Science Foundation and is part of the Economic Fluctuations Prograrii
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.  I am grateful to James Conklin

for able assistance. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2789
                                                  December 1988


                  SUBSTITUTION OVER TIME IN WORK        MD   CONSUMPTION


                                     ABSTRACT


Sir John Hick's Value and Capital provided the theoretical foundation for

an important element of modern macroeconomics.            Intertemporal    substitution -

deferral    or acceleration of economic activity in response to the real

interest rate and other incentives       -   is   the mechanism generally relied upon

in equilibrium theories of macroeconomics to explain the irregular evolu-

tion of the economy over time.     Even theorists who question the pure

                                                                      in
market-clearingparadigm are concerned with intertemporal substitution

measuring deadweight burden of fluctuations.            This paper surveys recent

empirical    evidence on intertemporal       substitution with regard to the type

of fluctuations model introduced in Value and Capital.




                                                  Robert E. Hall
                                                  Hoover Institution
                                                  Stanford University
                                                  Stanford, California 94305
         Fifty years after the publication of Value p4 Capital, the view of
the role of the interest rate in macroeconomicfluctuations expounded there
has never been more influential. According to that view, a higher interest
rate brings a deferral of spending and an acceleration of production; a
temporarily high real wage causes a burst of work effort. A huge body of
research in the past decade has sought to clarify the details of equilibration
through the interest rate and to measure the strength of intertemporal
substitution effects. My purpose here is to comment selectively on the new
developments in intertemporal substitution research as it bears on
macroeconomic fluctuations. All of the research fits nicely into the
intertemporal framework of Value and Capital.




1. INTERTEMPORAL SUBSTITUTIONIN VALUE                   Jjfl CAPITAL
        The feature of Value and Capital that makes it good reading on
intertemporal issues 50 years later is its full exploitation of the principle
that intertemporal general equilibrium is an application of standard
general equilibrium with the goods identified by date. The later chapters
of the book apply the principle systematically, first with respect to
intertemporal production and then with respect to consumption.
         In Chapter XV, "The Planning of Production," intertemporal
equilibrium conditions for the firm appear. The key condition is, "The
marginal rate of substitution [in production] between outputs of any two
dates must equal the ratio of their discounted prices." (p. 197)1. When a
future discounted price rises, intertemporal substitution can take a number
of forms: "This substitution may take place at the expense of output
earlier than the critical date (reduction of output from now on, in order to
accumulate stocks which can be sold at the critical date), or at the expense
of later output (acceleration of production, using up of the stock of goods
in process, in order to have as much as possible ready at the critical date),
or perhaps of both. I-low far these methods are available depends upon the
technical character of tbe product and the technical character of the initial
equipment: the durability of the product, the durability of the unfinished
goods which go to make it, the quantity of such unfinished goods available
in the initial equipment, and so on" (p. 208). The tenor of the discussion
is that intertemporal substitution often makes short-run product supply
fairly elastic, but not invariably. The largest substitution effects occur
when the price change is temporary, but fully anticipated, for in that case
the accumulation effect operates as well as the drawing against future
production. When the price change is unexpected, only the latter effect
operates.
       Chapter XVII, "Interest and the Production Plan," rightly insists
on the discipline of discounted prices (now often called "Arrow-Debreu
prices"). Within that framework, changes in interest rates have effects
that can be restated as changes in sets of prices. An increase in a single
one-period interest rate lowers all subsequent discounted prices by the


        1References are to   the Second Edition, 1946.

                                      2
same proportion relative to earlier discounted prices (p 214). Equal
changes in all future interest rates "affect the 'tilt' or crescendo of the
production plan" (p. 224, emphasis in original).
                                                                 "
        Chapter XVIII on the household, "Spending and Lending, takes
the view that "...the dynamic problem of the private individual ought to
be conceived as the choice of a most preferred collection of streams of
commodities, out of the various collections of streams which the individual
could expect to be able to purchase out of a given expected stream of
receipts." (p. 227) Franco Modigliani (with Brumberg [1954] and Ando
[1963]) and Milton Friedman [1957] pursued this view in the life-cycle and
permanent income models of the consumer.         The view continues to
dominate thinking about consumer behavior. This view yields a critically
important insight whose importance for fluctuations theory has only
recently been appreciated: "If the price of X rises, and the rise is not
expected to be permanent, the income effect will usually be very slight or
indeed quite negligible. The substitution effect, however, may well be
much more considerable than in the preceding case [of a permanent price
         For substitution may now proceed, not only in favour of other
increase].
commodities, but also in favour of future purchases of X itself. The main
effect of such   a temporary                     in the postponement of
                               rise may well consist

expenditure." (p. 232) From this point, it is an easy step to the
conclusion that an increase in the current short-term interest rate, with
future short-term interest rates held constant, will cause households to
decrease current spending and to make plans to spend more in the future
instead.
           Chapter XX, "The Temporary Equilibrium of the Whole System,

                                       3
I:   Its Imperfect Stability," notes that an economy with significant
intertemporal substitution is highly stable with respect to temporary
disturbances: "So long as all changes in current prices are regarded as
being temporary changes, any changes in current prices will induce very
large substitution effects in a large number of markets. A rise in price will
make people postpone expenditure, entrepreneurs postpone input and
accelerate output; a fall in price will work the opposite way. This
substitution over time will be strongly stabilizing; small rises in price will
produce large excesses of supply over demand; indeed the forces making for
stability are likely to be so potent that it will take a very violent
disturbance of data to have any considerable effect on the price system at
all" (pp. 250-251).



2. INTERTEMPORAL SUBSTITUTION IN SUBSEQUENT MACRO-
ECONOMIC THOUGHT


        Hicks' themes in Value         4     Capital saw some important
developments in the macroeconomics of the 1950s and 1960s. As I noted
above, the intertemporal analysis of the household flourished in
Modigliani's and Friedman's work, though the emphasis on substitution
over time was slight.      Interest in intertemporal substitution arose
primarily in connection with investment theory— acquisition of equipment,
structures, housing, and consumer durables could be readily deferred or
accelerated, depending on the interest rate. A major turning point in this
area was Dale Jorgenson's     [1963]   derivation of an investment function

                                       4
following the paradigm of Value jiçj Capital explicitly. Jorgenson derived
a formula expressing the optimal amount of postponement of acquisition
of durable goods given the crescendo of discounted prices.
        The next maj or development in macroeconomic applications of
intertemporal substitution was Robert E. Lucas and Leonard Rapping's
[1969] paper on labor supply. Lucas and Rapping applied Hicks' insight
that short-run supply may be highly elastic because the offsetting income
effect is small. Their application was   to a supply issue that received little
attention in Value and Capital—labor supply—but which has received
more than its due in business cycle theory in the past two decades. Lucas
and Rapping sought to give an equilibrium interpretation to a fact that
has occupied the attention of almost every macroeconomist since
Keynes—employment has business-cycle fluctuations of about the same
amplitude as those of output. In their account of a boom, workers see
temporarily high real wages and short-term real interest rates, which
makes them substitute toward work and away from leisure. As Value
Capital explained,   the income effects from these temporary changes is
small, so short-run labor supply is quite elastic as a function of these two
variables. Lucas and Rapping's claim that the intertemporal substitution
view could explain the ups and downs of the U.S. economy, including the

great depression, was vigorously disputed by Albert Rees [1970] and
others, but the idea has remained centrally important in business cycle
theory.
        Lucas's [1972] classic paper on monetary non-neutrality gave full
theoretical expression to intertemporal substitution in labor supply in
general equilibrium. He examines a model economy subject to a

                                     5
temporary real shock and a permanent monetary shock. Analytical
convenience requires him to assume that people live only two periods. As
a result, the minimalincome effect stressed by Hicks does not apply to
Lucas's model. Instead, Lucas makes an explicit assumption that the
substitution effect dominates the income effect. The model has a business
cycle because some years appear to be better than others for work and
production.
        Recent work by Kydland and Prescott [1982] and Prescott [1986]
has seen the full application of the intertemporal substitution paradigm
from Value and       Capital.    Households    choose    the scheduling of
consumption by equating the marginal rate of substitution between
current and future consumption to the discounted price ratio, suitably
adjusted for stochastic variations. Households also choose the scheduling
of work with reference to the expected ratio of the current real wage to the
discounted future real wage. Businesses choose the timing of investment
to maximize business value, in the sense appropriate to the stochastic
setting. One of the most novel features of this line of thought is its
assumption that the major driving force in macroeconomic fluctuations is
stochastic shifts in the production function. When conditions are
favorable, the real wage is high and workers have an incentive to work
harder than usual—a boom occurs.            Recessions   are periods when
productivity and real wages are low. Almost all the features of this type
of model are controversial—see Summers [1986] for a critique—but the line
of thought has become well established.
        Barro [1981] has developed a related model in which the driving
force is government- purchases of goods and services, rather than

                                     6
productivity. The government sets off a boom by purchasing more
output. The real interest rate rises temporarily, which stimulates added
work effort. In addition, the higher rate should cause businesses to defer
investment and consumers to defer consumption. The first prediction is
fulfilled in data for most countries, but not the second. Consumption and
government purchases have a zero or slightly positive correlation, not a
negative correlation. To fit the data, the model would have to invoke a
high intertemporal elasticity of substitution in labor supply and a low
elasticity in consumption. To some extent, the evidence supports this
combination of elasticities.




3.   EVIDENCE ON INTERTEMPORAL SUBSTITUTION IN SUPPLY



         The hypothesis of high intertemporal substitution in labor finds
little apparent support in the very large body of research on labor supply
at the level of the individual. This research has consistently failed to find
substitution elasticities in labor supply much above 0.1 or 0.2 for the
dominant demographic groups in the labor force (Pencavel [1986]).
However, the source of wage variation exploited in panel data is almost
entirely life cycle in nature, not the year-to-year temporary fluctuations
that would reveal the short-run elasticity of substitution. Existing studies
of panel data do not test the hypothesis that modest temporary added
incentives   to work will call forth significant additional work effort.

                                     7
Consider a worker earning $10 per hour and working a standard 40-hour,
5-day workweek. Would he add 8 hours of work on Saturdays in response
to an opportunity to earn $12 per hour for a few months? Studies of panel
data are unable to isolate instances of this type. It is common to find
episodes when work effort rises 20 percent above average. It is not
possible to isolate the wage changes that might have induced the increase
in work effort, in the face of large amounts of random noise in measured
wages for individuals. In principle, an exogenous variable that signaled a
true increase in the wage could solve this problem, but the available instru-
mental variables do not seem to be correlated with these temporary
fluctuations in employment opportunities.
         Aggregate labor supply schedules are generally found to be quite
inelastic as well. Again, the findings do not settle the issue of the short-
run elasticity of labor supply. When that elasticity is high, correctly
measured real wages will be close to constant. If there is any noise in the
actual measure of the real wage, the correlation of work effort and the real
wage will be close to zero. In addition to standard measurement
problems, wage measurement may be complicated by the tendency for
actual wages to fluctuate less than the underlying shadow value of time
(see Hall [1980]).
         My own view is that the facts about the labor market actually
point in the direction of a combination of reasonably high intertemporal
substitution from one year to another (though not from one decade to
another) and fairly strong fluctuations in the shadow value of work. The
evidence is necessarily indirect. First, substantial annual fluctuations in
hours of work are the rule, nOt the exception. Volatility is significant

                                      8
among older workers with long-term jobs in stable sectors, as well as in
markets well known for employment variations, such as construction.
Institutions in the labor market accommodate, rather than resist,
variations in annual weeks of work. Perhaps the most convincing evidence
is Ramey's [1988] finding that firms schedule output as if they faced flat
or declining marginal cost. If the short-run labor supply schedule were
inelastic, firms would accumulate inventories during periods of low
demand and decumulate in high demand, so as to smooth employment
and limit the disamenity from variable weeks of work. If anything,
according to Ramey, firms do the opposite. Seasonal movements of
employment are substantial, which points in the same direction as
Ramey's findings.



3.1 Characterization of preferencesabout work over time


       Value and Capital raised the possibility that short-run supply may
be more elastic than long-run supply, because of the absence of income
effects.  Recent work on labor supply has pushed the idea a little further
by recognizing a difference between short- and medium-run intertemporal
substitution. A convenient family of intertemporal preferences for this
purpose follows suggestions of Sargent [1979, p. 371] and Kydland and
Prescott [1982]. Let be the accumulated stock of current and past work
effort, with persistencefactor w:


                         Z1
                              =   (1—w)> w5Lv5                       (3.1)
                                       s=O
                                     9
Because variations in hours of work per week are small, the measure of
work effort, L1, is weeks of work in period t. The parameter w controls
the memory of past work and leisure. If w is 0, there is no memory; only
current work effort matters. If w is large (close to its upper limit of 1,
then Zt        on a long distributed lag of past work effort. The worker
          depends
orders work schedules with a (dis)utility function that is separable over
time in the z1s:


                               T     ( —z      )1/1T1
                                                                       (3.2)
                                          1/t7—1



Define effective leisure as 7—z1 and actual leisure as i—Li. The
parameter o is both the intertemporal elasticity of substitution in effective
leisure and the long-run elasticity of substitution in actual leisure. In the
short run, the elasticity of substitution in actual leisure is greater than a
by an amount that is controlled by the memory parameter, w. The
parameter -y can be interpreted as the number of weeks physically
available for work.
          A worker with   a   high   a      little from a work schedule
                                         will suffer

involving many weeks of work per year in one decade and few weeks per
year in another decade, in comparison to putting in the same number of
lifetime weeks with no variation from decade to decade. In a situation
with free choice of weeks, such a worker will concentrate weeks
disproportionately during the years of highest wages.

                                          10
         On the other hand, a worker with low intertemporal substitution,
a, but high memory persistence, w (that is, close to one), will tolerate
short-term fluctuations in weeks of work but resist decade-to-decade
movements. This feature makes the preferences attractive witbin a theory
in which the deadweight burden from employment fluctuations is small or
absent. Kydland and Prescott [1982] rely on a slightly more general class
of preferences in their model that attempts to rationalize employment
fluctuations as fully efficient responses to vibrations in technology. In
their specification, current work can have a role in the utility function
beyond the role implicit in the variable z1.
        To illustrate the difference between the short-run and the
medium-run responses of labor supply to wage changes, consider the
following question: Let 2N be the number of periods considered to define
the medium run, say 24 months. Suppose a worker increases his weeks of
work by one percent in periods i—N,..., 1,..., i+N. By what percent does
his supply price of a week of work in period I increase? The elasticity of
labor supply over the 2N+1 period run is the ratio of the two numbers.
        It is convenient to use the A-constant or Frisch labor supply
schedule to answer this question. Let A be the Lagrangian multiplier
associated with the worker's intertemporal budget constraint. The first-
order condition associated with labor supply is

                    OU(L1 , ...,   £ ,..., £ T)
                                                  =   Aw1             (3.3)
                              8L21

Here     is the real wage in period I stated in period 0 prices. The Frisch
inverse labor supply function is simply the marginal disamenity of work

                                         11
stated in wage units:

                        1   OU(L ...,    L, ...,LT)                     (34)

When U is additively separable in labor, this can be solved to give current
labor supply as a function of the current wage. Absent separability, it
states the supply price of work in one period as a function of the level of
work in that and other periods.         Keeping   A   constant has two inter-
pretations. First, equation 3.4 gives the supply price of labor at different
points in time along the same labor supply trajectory. Under this
interpretation, statements about the response of the supply price to
different levels of work are comparisons of the supply price at different
points in time; the change in the level of work is fully anticipated.
Second, the supply price conditional on A has a comparative statics
interpretation when the change has little or no effect on A. Under this
interpretation, equation 3.4 is very similar to (but not quite the same as)
the compensated labor supply schedule.
        The Frisch labor supply function associated with the preferences
considered here is

                                     T                    1
                        =      —
                            (1 w)Ectt(7 — z8)                           (3.5)


Let z be the common increment to L1                Lj+N. For simplicity,
                                                L1,...,
assume that the horizon, T,     is infinite and that L1 and    have the
common value £ in all periods. Then some manipulations show that the
slope of the inverse labor supply schedule is

                                     12
                                                                    2N+1
                     dx
                          —
                          —
                              )o         —   L 1/cr1(i         —
                                                                   1   +   w
                                                                                      3 6



The elasticity, e(JV), of the labor supply schedule is


                          e(iV)   =
                                             —
                                             L
                                                 Lr
                                                  L'
                                                       —
                                                                       ]
                                                                   N+114
                                                                                     (3.7)


If there is no memory of past            work (w = 0) or if the displacement of work
is lengthy (N is large), then the elasticity is just the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution in leisure, o, multiplied by the ratio of non-work
time to work time:


                                              =
                                                       —       L
                                                                                     (3.8)


The elasticity f(oo) controls labor supply over the life cycle. A worker
with an f(oo) of 1 with a wage at age 40 double his wage at age 20 would
work twice as many hours           at age 40.     Because life-cycle variations   in weeks
of work are not nearly this large, there is a presumption against high
values of e(oo); rather, the evidence appears to favor values of 0.1 to 0.2.
If (y   —
            L)/L is 5/47 =    0.11    and the medium-run elasticity of labor supply
is 0.15, then  is 0.15/0.11 = 1.4. I assume that the medium run is short
                o-

enough that income effects do not offset substitution effects.
        By contrast, the elasticity of labor supply in the context of a one-
period displacement (N = 0) is

                                         =
                                                  —    L   1   +
                                  e(0)            L        1—w                       (3.9)

                                                 13
If memory decays at a rate of 20 percent per period, as might he
appropriate in a quarterly model, the very short-run elasticity is 1.8/0.2
=   9 times as large as the medium-run elasticity. The specification is
successful iu delivering a high short-run elasticity of labor supply without

relying on significant decade-to-decadeelasticity of labor supply.


3.2. The burden   of a fluctuating work schedule


      Except in the polar case of perfect intertemporal substitution,
workers resist variable work schedules. That is, they would choose jobs
with constant weeks over jobs with variable weeks but the same total
hours and total compensation.2 With the intertemporal utility function, it
is possible to compute the work equivalent of variability in a work
schedule. The work equivalent is the added amount of work that a worker
would be willing    to do in exchange for a completely constant work
schedule.
       Most variability of work schedules is idiosyncratic to the worker.
Even with a generous allowance for measurement error in annual hours of


        20n the other hand, in a world of perfect foresight, workers would
prefer to work in a labor market with variable wages and consequently
variable weeks, as against a market with a constant wage equal to the
mean of the wage in the other market. The workers in the variable
market would earn and consume more than those in the stable market,
because they would work harder when wages were high.

                                    14
work, it appears that the standard deviation of hours around the labor
supply schedule is at least 13 weeks per year, or about 25 percent of the
normal level of work.3 Variations occur within jobs—temporary layoffs
and deferred vacations—and between jobs, as spells of unemployment.
Among groups who normally work close to 50 weeks per year, there is an
inevitable asymmetry in the variability—weeks can drop by a large
amount but cannot rise above 52.
        The central question of variability, from the point of view of the
worker, is whether the occasional interruptions in work create valueless
idle periods (inelastic labor supply) or whether workers can make valuable
use of stretches of non-work (elastic labor supply). The preferences
described in this section can give different answers depending on the
duration of time out of work. The high-a worker can make good use of
time off in both the short and medium runs. The worker has numerous
opportunities to benefit from the use of time other than in work and does
not exhaust the stock of those opportunities even over several years. The
low-a, high-w worker has good alternatives to work in the short run, but
exhausts them after a few months or a year and finds himself
unproductively idle thereafter. The low-a, low-co worker cannot make
good use of time away from work even in the short run.




        3See MaCurdy [1981]   and related papers.

                                    15
3.3. Life cycle wage and work profiles


        Because  the typical life-cycle wage pattern is smooth, memory as
measured by the parameter w is unimportant in the life-cycle relation
between wages and work effort. To see this, consider the simple case of an
individual with exponential decline in leisure hours over the life cycle:


                            7   —       = 70e0                            (3.10)


The inverse labor supply function from equation 3.4 is

                                             T       0
                      to1
                            =       —
                                        w)Ewe
                                                     U
                                                                          (3.11)


                                                 r
                                                 I
                                                            i—l
                                                         0/0-i
                                                                      0
                                —   1
                                —
                                    (1—w)70Ll—we            J     C




The rate of growth of the wage is the rate of growth of leisure, 0, divided
by the elasticity of substitution, o-, without any adjustment for the
persistence of memory of past work, w. To put it differently, studies of
labor supply using panel data on individuals, with instruments such as age
and education that are associated with gradual life cycle changes in wages,
will reveal the low elasticity,      not the high elasticity, u7j-
                                   the high frequency movements of the
The key parameter w is identified by

wage, such as the coming and going of special opportunities, not the low
frequency movements over the life cycle.



                                        16
3.4. Panel studies of labor supply


         Pencavel [1986] and Heckman and Killingsworth [1986] survey the
direct evidence on labor supply for panel data on individuals. MaCurdy
[1981] is one of the leading studies they consider. The basic approach is
the following: The elasticity of labor supply is the ratio of the change in
work effort to the change in wage that occurs as the result of a change in
one or another instrumental variable. For example, as a worker moves
from age 29 to age 30, his wage typically rises because this is a steep part
of the age-wage rate profile. If hours of work also rise from age 29 to age
30, there is a positive wage-elasticity of labor supply. Given that age
effects are largely anticipated,the response is a pure substitution effect.
Pencavel's Table 1.22; p. 85  suggests that the elasticity estimated on this
basis is somewhere between 0 and 0.45 for men.
         In view of the fact that researchers have not been able to find
instruments that identify temporary changes in wages (ones lasting two
years or less), it seems appropriate to view the estimates from panel data
as measuring the medium-run elasticity of labor supply, e(oo) in the
notation of section 1. The estimates are thus consistent with short-run
elasticities of 1 or 2 or even more, if amplification occurs through memory
of recent work effort.
        Pencavel devotes considerable attention to the one group of short-
run exogenous events whose labor supply effects are well documented—the
negative income tax experiments. Experimental subjects experienced a
three-year reduction of 30, 50, or 70 percent in effective wages. Pencavel's

                                     17
survey reaches the conclusion that the elasticity of the response of labor
supply to these wage reductions was in the fairly narrow range from .06 to
.19 (Table 1.21, p. 80). This finding is the single most telling criticism of
the view that intertemporal substitution is high in the short run.
         The negative income tax findings are less than definitive for the
following reason: For good reasons relating to asymmetric information,
workers delegate to their employers the determination of weeks of worh.
Workers shop among employers with different policies for setting weeks,
but once the worker accepts a job, the weeks he puts in at that job are
largely out of his control. In particular, if an event occurs that is personal
to the worker, but not within the class of events (such as disability)
contemplated by the employment arrangement, it is unlikely that the
employer will agree to a reduction in weeks ad hoc. Employment
arrangements with given, understood rules are the solution to the problem
of opportunistic behavior by both employers and workers. Of course,
workers can always take extra weeks off by quitting one job and delaying
taking another job, but that step involves the sacrifice of the advantages
of seniority. The finding of small reductions in weeks of work in the
negative income tax experiments is not inconsistent with the hypothesis
that much larger reductions can occur when the marginal revenue product
of labor declines in   a downturn.   One is unprecedented and unfamiliar,
completely   new       to the   environment under which employment
arrangements have evolved; the other is exactly within the historical
experience that shaped those arrangements.
       Another reason that the panel studies, both survey and experi-
mental, are not good evidence against elastic short-run supply is the

                                     18
amount of variability they reveal in annual work effort. According to
MaCurdy [1981], the standard deviation of annual hours of work around
the predictions of his labor supply function is several hundred hours, a
significant fraction of the normal level of around 2000 hours. The supply
function has a different intercept for each worker, so all of this noise
represents variability over time in relation to the worker's own normal
level. If the intertemporal elasticity of labor supply is as low as the
numbers in Pencavel's survey, with respect to substitution between one
year and the next, then the deadweight burden of the unexplained
variability of work is extremely high. A more reasonable conclusion is
that the low elasticities apply to life-cycle influences but that much higher
elasticities operate at year-to-year frequencies.


3.5. Abowd and Ashenfelter's study of wage premiums for variable work
schedules


         Abowd and Ashenfelter [1981] investigate the tradeoff between the
level of earnings and the variability of work effort by asking what wage

premium is required to attract workers to variable employment. They
consider the case of a worker whose alternative employment is at a
constant wage and where the worker can choose the number of hours to
work, given that wage. The employer at hand also pays a constant wage,
but it must embody a premium because the employer has the right to
make random interruptions in the worker's schedule. Each year, hours are
reduced by a random variable with mean p and standard deviation 6. In
slightly simplified form, the theoretical expression for the wage premium

                                       19
they derive is

                                           1   rol2
                                    M
                             /1+1/112                                   312


ilere 7 is the fraction of lost earnings replaced by unemployment insurance
(UI), is the elasticity of the compensated labor supply schedule, r is the
                                 and ii is the unconstrained level of
coefficient of relative risk aversion,
hours.     The first term measnres the desirability of employment
fluctuations when there is unemployment compensation. For small
amounts of unemployment, workers prefer variability because they value
leisure at the market wage, but receive unemployment compensation as
well during periods of extra leisure. The second term measures the area
above the labor supply schedule associated with the average depression, p,
of work below the worker's optimum. The third term measures the
burden of stochastic variability.
        Abowd and Ashenfelter develop their theory within a one-period
stochastic setting. An alternative would be to consider the variability of
hours of work over time instead of over states of the world. In that case,
with time-separable preferences, the coefficient of relative risk aversion, r,
would be   the reciprocal of the labor supply elasticity, €. The secondtwo
terms would combine into a single term involving expected squared
unemployment, /22+62
         The empirical work carried    out by Abowd and Ashenfelter
examined the relation in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics of the mean
and variance of unemployment to the actual wage and observed
determinants of the alternative wage. A preliminary study of annual

                                     20
hours of unemployment yielded the estimated mean and variance of
unemployment for each worker. Then a regression of the log of the actual
wage on mean unemployment divided by hours, the mean squared divided
by hours squared, and the variance divided by hours squared yields
estimates of the key parameters.
        Although the theory invoked by Abowd and Ashenfelter deals
with a wage premium for employment variability, the data reveal that
wages for workers facing more unemployment are lower than are wages for
otherwise identical workers in jobs with little unemployment. In order to
fit this feature of the data, the estimation process has to come up with a
very high estimate of the UI replacemeiit rate, 7. The estimate claims
that the worker receives $2.49 in unemployment benefits for each dollar of
lost earnings. In such a world, employers with frequent temporary layoffs
could attract workers with lower base wages than those offered by other
employers, because each layoff is a paid vacation at over double normal
earnings.
        Abowd and Ashenfelter are aware that their estimated replace-
ment rate is high. They offer some calculations to try to convince the
reader that the estimates are only a little too high, and that an alternative
estimate of around one is completely reasonable. I believe that these
calculations are quite erroneous. First, they contradict evidence presented
in Table 4.A.l of the paper which show that industry average replacement
rates are in the range of 10 to 25 percent. These replacement rates seem
quite reasonable in the light of nominal replacement rates of around 50
percent subject to limitations in the first week of unemployment and
exhaustion of benefits.    Second,   the calculations themselves seem to

                                     21
contain an outright error. Rather than simply compare the replacement
rates themselves, Abowd and Ashenfelter look at average UI benefits as a
fraction of total earnings. This is just the first term in equation 3.12. To
convert the actual data on benefits/lost earnings to the form of
benefits/total income, one should multiply by lost earnings/total income,
which is the unemployment rate of hours. According to Table 4.A.1, the
average worker lost 27 hours to unemployment in 1973. The average
amount of work and unemployment in the same year was 2360 hours, so
the unemployment rate of hours was 1.2 percent. Thus the observed
average UI benefits in 1973 were 0.130 (the 1973 replacement rate) times
1.2 percent, or 0.15 percent of earnings. By contrast, the "observed

average" presented in Table 4.5 is 1.10 percent, almost an order of
magnitude higher. The explanatory notes for Table 4.5 indicate the the
"observed average" is calculated as the product of the replacement rate (13
percent) and the fraction of the sample who had positive unemployed
hours (10.8 percent). Apparently, Abowd and Ashenfelter confused the
fraction with some unemployment with the unemployment rate of hours.
The two differ by almost an order of magnitude (10.8 percent against 1.2
percent).
        The fact of the matter is that the estimated replacement rate of
2.5 is more than an order of magnitude too high. Even in the alternative
estimates of Table 4.4, the replacement rate of 1.2 is about 6 times too
high. What accounts for the gross overstatement? I think that the answer
is probably the problem that dogs all research on wages—there are
important unmeasured individual wage determinants that are correlated
with the right-hand variable. In this instance, workers who are in jobs

                                    22
with unusually large amounts of unemployment tend to be workers with
adverse unmeasured earning potential. It appears to be a hopeless task to
tease out the small effects of employment variability from data
contaminated by unmeasured wage determinants.



3.6. Ramey's evidence on prodnct supply


       Valerie Ramey [1988] has assembled evidence on intertemporal
substitution in production. All of the production substitution issues
discussed in Value and Capital are considered in her work. She examines
the joint behavior of output and finished goods inventories in industries
that produce to stock rather than to order. The basic idea is that a
convex technology with rising marginal cost and limited intertemporal
substitution creates an incentive to produce to inventory in anticipation of
increases in demand.       The incentive to use inventories to avoid
fluctuations in output is even stronger when the firm internalizes the
short-run labor supply schedules of its workers. Earlier work by West
[1986]and others showed that inventory investment does not smooth
production. Ramey's work interprets that fact as revealing that marginal
cost is flat or even downward-sloping. Her results, taken at face value,
require a combination of a high elasticity of intertemporal substitution
and large movements of the shadow wage. That is, a boom is either a
time when workers work much harder in response to a modest increase in
the incentive to work, or a time when economies of scale permit a
substantially higher shadow real wage.

                                    23
        The following simplification of Ramey's approach shows how in-
ventory behavior reveals the extent of intertemporal substitution oppor-
tunities. Within   a broader  optimization problem through which the firm
determines its sales, there is a sub-problem of minimizing the cost of those
sales. Suppose the expected cost of producing to meet given sales is

proportional to


                         F2    [7   y + (x1 — a                           (3.13)


Here F2   is the expectation conditional on information at time 2, y is
output, x is the end-of-period stock of finished-goods inventories, and s is
the level of sales. The parameter y controls intertemporal substitution; if
the firm perceives an upward-sloping short-run labor supply schedule for
its workers or if the technology itself is convex,                        The
                                                          will be positive.

parameter a controls the inventory/sales ratio.          An identity links the
variables:


                               =    X2_1   + y2   —                           (3.14)


A first-order condition necessary for the optimal scheduling of production
is


                               —            + x1   —           =
                    F2   [(2 2+i                       asjjj       0          (3.15)


This condition characterizes the cost-minimizing policy, for negative as
well as positive values of 7 (see Ramey [1988]).

                                       24
        Now let


                                 =       —
                                             asj+l                      (3.16)
                                     =       —         —
                                                           (as11
                                                                   —



The variable    is inventory investment in excess of the amount needed to
maintain the level of inventories at its usual relation to sales; h1 measures
inventory investment undertaken to smooth production plus a purely
random element related to surprises in sales. The first-order condition in
terms of    is


                        IIh1 =               —                          (3.17)
                                     7(Yj        E,Yj+j)

Alternatively,


                            =     7(Y1
                                         —
                                             Yji) +                     (3.18)


Here c is an expectation error satisfying E1E1 = 0.
         Equation 3.18 strips the first-order condition to its bare essentials.
A firm with low intertemporal substitution ('y >> 0) will deplete     its
inventories by setting h1<0 when it is producing more this period than it
plans to produce next period (vj-.-Yt+l>O). Note that the inventory
draw-down affects the magnitude of —                   and        are all
                                                 y4;
                                                h1,
variables controlled directly by the firm. When the optimal output plan
calls for lower output this period than next period, the firm with rising

marginal cost will accumulate inventories in excess of the level required by

                                      25
maintenance of the inventory/sales ratio.
        Imperfect intertemporal substitution has a sharp and robust impli-
cation: When an outside event stimulates product demand temporarily, it
should also cause an inventory draw-down, in the sense of a negative value
of h. To put it differently, an instrumental variable positively correlated
with —        should be negatively correlated with h1. The negative of
the ratio of the covariances is the instrumental variable estimator of 7.
By contrast, the firm with perfect intertemporal substitution (highly
elastic labor supply and no convexity of technology) is indifferent to the
scheduling of production.       Its only objective is to maintain its
inventory/sales ratio at the prescribed level a, so it always plans for
                                                                          =
0. An instrumental variable positively correlated with     —       will have
zero correlation with excess inventory accumulation. The instrumental
variable estimator for 7 will be zero.
        For a firm with decreasing marginal cost (7<0), it is efficient to
bunch production. The firm would produce its output for all periods in
the first period but for the cost of departing from the normal inven-
tory/sales ratio, a. Even in the face of that cost, the firm amplifies
fluctuations in output so as to obtain the economies of bunching output.
Equation 3.18 shows that the firm builds extra inventories in the same
periods when current output exceeds expected future output. An
instrument positively correlated with —     will also be positively
correlated with h1, and the IV estimate of 7 will be negative.
        Ramey's model as estimated is considerably more elaborate than
the one just discussed. The cost function is cubic in output and the linear
term depends on the wage, the price of materials, and the price of energy.

                                     26
There is a time trend in the quadratic term.           There are costs of
adjustment of the level of output in the form of a term involving the
square of — y11. Finally, there are random shifts in the technology
itself, in the adjustment cost term, and in the target inventory/sales ratio.
In principle, the use of a wage in the model means that the estimate of the
slope of marginal cost does not measure the slope of the labor supply
schedule. Ilowever, there is very little variation apart from trend in the
real wage. Hence the results are almost exactly the same if the wage is
omitted and the slope parameter is interpreted to include the slope of
labor supply. To put it another way, the stability of the real wage means
either that labor supply is highly elastic or that the wage does not reflect
the true shadow price of labor over the cycle.
         In Ramey's work, the exogenous variables that shift product
demand and do not shift product supply are three measures of federal
military spending, the relative price of oil, a dummy variable for the
political party of the president, and population. The seven industries
Ramey studies are food, tobacco, apparel, chemicals, petroleum, and
autos. Except for the auto industry, a dummy for auto strikes also serves
as an instrument.    For the tobacco industry, a set of variables charac-
terizing federal regulation is included. In all seven induAtries, the esti-
mate of y, the slope of the marginal cost schedule, is negative. In four of
the seven industries, the point estimate of y is more than two standard
errors below zero, so the evidence against rising marginal cost is
statistically unambiguous. All seven of the industries tend to bunch
production during times of high sales. They typically accumulate inven-
tories beyond the amount needed to maintain the normal inventory/sales

                                     27
ratio at the same time that output is strong because sales are high. Firms
with rising marginal cost would behave in the opposite way, building
inventory stocks in times of weak sales and drawing tbem down when sales
are high. Itamey's strong statistical evidence in favor of production
bunching is inconsistent with rising marginal cost.
         The bunching of production revealed in Ramey's study means that
work effort is equally bunched. Nothing in the results rules out the
possibility that management is setting a work schedule that is painful to
workers because of its irregularity, but that some kind of coordination
failure leaves management with no incentive to smooth the work schedule.
The opportunity to accumulate and decumulate inventories means that
management could smooth work schedules al relatively low cost. But the
most reasonable conclusion from these observations, in my opinion, is that
the disamenity of irregular work schedules is sufficiently low to be offset
by fluctuations in the shadow value of work. Workers would gain
relatively little by trading the current practice of taking extra time off
when demand is low for taking the same time off every August.



3.7. Bus' evidence on overtime


        Mark Bils [1987] presents evidence that appears to be unfavorable
to the hypothesis of high intertemporal substitution in labor supply. Bils
argues that the effective marginal cost of labor input to the firm rises
sharply when output and labor input rise in an expansion. He reaches this
conclusion through a detailed analysis of data on the cost of overtime

                                    28
hours and on the way that firms divide an increase in labor input into
increases in weekly hours and in the number of workers at work each week.
He makes a convincing case that a larger fraction of incremental hours of
work have to be paid at the 150 percent overtime rate when hours are
close to the 40-hour limit on straight-time hours mandated by the Fair
Labor Standards Act than when average hours are below that limit. If
firms perceive overtime premiums as an extra cost associated with the use
of labor at the time the premiums are paid, then Bils' conclusion about
fluctuations in the effective marginal cost of labor are inescapable.
However, as Bils points out,    it   is    far from an obvious hypothesis that
overtime premiums are a cost. Firms may be committed to paying
premiums of a certain amount on the average, as part of their employment
agreements. Then paying a premium during one episode relieves them of
a future compensation obligation. Bils attempts to show that overtime
premiums are treated as true costs by the firm. Rather than pay extensive
overtime premiums when demand is strong, be argues, firms incur
substantial adjustment costs to add more workers. Because the firm
should always equate the marginal costs of labor input from adding hours
and adding workers, the cyclical pattern of marginal adjustment costs also
reveals the cyclical pattern of the cost of a marginal hour. That pattern is
quite similar to the one inferred directly from overtime premium costs.
        Bils' position on marginal labor costs is fundamentally at odds
with high intertemporal substitution in labor supply. One of the ways
that firms can adjust labor input is to vary the annual weeks of work of
their long-term workers.    The firm should equate the marginal cost of
labor from this type of adjustment to the marginal costs of adding weekly

                                          29
hours or adding more workers. If the labor supply schedule is flat, and
adjustment costs for variations in weeks are minor, then cyclical
fluctuations in marginal labor cost should be small. Bils' claim to finding
large fluctuations contradicts the flatness of the supply of weeks, even
though he gives no explicit consideration to the weeks dimension. There is
no reason why firms should be running up substantial overtime costs when
they could increase weeks without raising the marginal cost of labor. Bils'
finding needs to be recnciled with Ramey's evidence of flat or declining
marginal cost. If the bunching of output raises average cost because of
overtime premiums, then firms should smooth output. Their failure to
smooth suggests that overtime payments are not a cost or that the cost
reductions associated with the bunching are large enough to offset the
extra overtime expense.
        Bus' evidence is completely convincing that compensation paid for
the marginal hour rises sharply when employment is high. Data on total
and overtime hours shows that an increase in total hours from 40 to 41
increases overtime by 0.39 hours whereas an increase from 41 to 42
increases overtime by 0.50 hours (Bils [1987], p. 845). The marginal wage
is 4.6 percent higher at 41 hours than at 40 hours. Average weekly hours
in manufacturing decline by a little over an hour in the typical recession.

Although these calculations depend on the assumption that the 50 percent
overtime premium dictated by the Fair Labor Standards Act is actually
paid, Bils cites evidence that complianceis virtually universal.
        Bils explains in detail why the evidence on overtime payments is
inconclusive:
       The wage   a firm pays takes a very large jump   of 50 percent at 40

                                    30
        hours per week due to the overtime premium. Workers' disutility
        of working is presumably smoothly increasing in hours. This
        implies workers would strictly prefer working some overtime hours
        to working 40 hours per week (in fact, overtime hours are rationed
        in many instances). By offering workers overtime hours, therefore,
        a firm may incur some goodwill, which allows it to lower
        compensation in another form, if not then, at some other time.
        The implication is that the effective cost premium of an overtime
        hour may be less than the 50 percent explicit payment. (p. 843)


Bils' response is to try to infer the slope of the marginal cost of labor from
variations in the cost of adding workers. In equilibrium, the firm will
equate the marginal costs of labor along both the honrs and workers
dimensions. i3ils hypothesizes adjustment costs for adding workers. His
formula for the marginal cost of an hour of work obtained along the
worker dimension is


                       (1   + J)4#2 + q2     log   Nj+i                (3.19)


Here   f is
          the amount of fringe benefits not related to hours of work,
expressed as a fraction of total earnings (reported by the Chamber of
Commerce), H is weekly hours, W(ll) is the average hourly wage at H
hours, w is the straight-time hourly wage, q is the adjustment cost
parameter, and N1 is the number of workers. Note that marginal cost is
measured in units of the straight-time wage. The marginal cost of an
added hour in the weekly hours dimension is W(R), which is specified as a

                                     31
cubic in H multiplied by tbe straight-time wage.
        Bus' estimating equation is

             A2 log PT11   =   (1 +J)          —          +q          (3.20)


Here    is the reciprocal of the adjustment cost parameter and ij is a
random disturbance. All of the variables in W(R)/w have unknown
parameters, so identification hinges on variation in W(ll)/w tbat is
independent of variation in IXT(ll)/w . At the most general level, it is
clear that identification from this source of variation must fail; W is just
the marginal to W, so there can be no independent variation. Bils'
equation does not suffer from perfect collinearity for three reasons: First,
there is some variation over time in f, the element of compensation that is
independent of weekly hours. Second, although W and W have an exact
functional relation, they are not precisely linearly dependent, so the
estimation does not break down numerically. Third, Bils uses actual data
on average hourly compensation to calculate W/w, rather than imposing
the relation between W and W dictated by his theory.            Because   the
Bureau of Labor Statistics does not use exactly Bils' formula to derive
straight-time earnings w from average hourly earnings W, the dependence
between W and W is broken.
         The basic train of logic implicit in Bils' work is the following: We
observe the ratio between incremental hours and incremental workers when
total labor input rises. This ratio identifies the ratio of the slopes of the
two implicit supply schedules for hours and workers. If we can determine
the slope of the implicit supply schedule for workers, then we can infer the

                                     32
slope of the supply of hours from our knowledge of the ratio. The slope of
the marginal cost schedule for workers can he inferred from the way that
the number of workers changes when there is a change in the cost of
workers without any change in the cost of hours. In the data, such
independent changes occur because the BLS method for determining
straight-time hourly earnings has some noise in it and because of
variations in the fixed element of compensation. Absent this variation,
only the ratio of the slopes would be identified.
         One of the implicit identifying assumption in Bils' work is that
the noise in the calculation of straight-time wages is a genuine measure of
the cost of adding a worker to the payroll, independent of variations in the
cost of adding an hour to a worker's weekly schedule. There is no basis for
this assumption. If the BLS approach to straight-time wage measurement
is really better than the one based on Bils' formula, then fluctuations in
 W/w ought to be incorporated in W/w as well.
         Quite apart from the objection that the basic estimating equation
is identified only by the modest variability of the fixed component of
compensation, there is an even more fundamental objection to Bils'
procedure for measuring the slope of the implicit supply of hours.
Measurement of the slope of the marginal cost schedule for workers rests
on knowledge of the allocational price of added workers. Without com-
ment, Bils assumes that the out-of-pocket current payroll cost, W, is the
true effective cost of obtaining an added hour of work through a new hire.
But W includes current overtime and any other element of compensation
that may not be part of the effective cost of labor. There is no more basis
for   the use of average hourly earnings,   W,   as the measure of the effective

                                     33
cost of an hour in the worker dimension than there is for the use of its
marginal, W, as the effective cost of an hour in the hours dimension. The
criticisms quoted above from Bus apply with equal force to his measure of
the effective cost of an hour obtained by hiring.
          Bils is unsuccessful, in my opinion, in his attempt to corroborate
his finding of highly cyclical marginal cost of labor by measuring it
without assuming that overtime premiums are a true cost. The reliable
finding of his work is that marginal cost is cyclical assuming that the out-
of-pocket costs of overtime are the true costs. Ramey's evidence that
firms behave as if marginal cost was fiat or downward sloping suggests
that the assumption does not hold or that the economies of bunching
output are extremely strong. If overtime costs are not true costs, Firms
are happy to bunch output even though it appears to add to compensation
costs through overtime premiums, because the overtime payments go into
a bank, from which they can withdraw in the future.


3.8. Seasonal fluctuations   in production and work effort


        Closely relatedto the finding that firms behave over the cycle as if
they had near-perfect intertemporal substitution in production is the
considerable amplitude of seasonal movements in labor input and in
production. If labor supply is not itself seasonal, and if the marginal
disamenity of work is a rising function of the amount of work, then work
schedules should not be seasonal. Because seasons are completely
predictable, the test of this proposition is simple. Barsky and Miron

                                      34
[1987]  find the following seasonal averages in percent growth at quarterly
rates for the private non-agricultural sector of the U.S. economy:


                                                  Quarter
                                  1            2               3       4
Number of workers employed —1.65             1.09            0.84    —0.27
Weekly hours                 —1.08          0.74            0.95    —0.61
Total                        —2.73         1.83             1.79    —0.88


The obvious candidate for a seasonal shift in supply would be the third
quarter, when most families take their vacations. But both employment
and hours reach their peak levels in the third quarter (July, August, and
September). Labor input reaches its trough in the winter. Shifts in
demand, related to weather, appear to be the seasonal driving force. If
workers had a strong aversion to uneven work schedules, institutions
would develop   to smooth employment over the seasons. For example,
construction workers, who currently work very hard during the spring,
summer, and fall, and take the winter off, would develop ways to apply
their skills in the winter and would work normal schedules the rest of the
year.



4.       EVIDENCE     ON    INTERTEMPORAL            SUBSTITUTION IN
CONSUMPTION


         Although research on consumption in an explicit intertemporal

                                     35
setting has flourished since the publication of Value     Capital (see Hall
[forthcoming] for a survey), measurement of the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution has not been a major focus. My own work (Hall [1988]) will
be the primary subject of my discussion. The work is nothing more than a
systematic investigation of the proposition developed in Chapter XVIII of
Value and Capital that a higher real interest rate will cause households to
defer consumption through an intertemporal substitution effect. The
research measures that deferral in a framework in which income effects are
cleanly controlled. Earlier research on   the responses of consumption or
saving to interest rates failed to control for income effects. Value      4
Capital, through its rigorous application of standard consumer theory to
the intertemporal problem, insisted on the importance of distinguishing
income and substitution effects in the intertemporal problem.
        The essential idea of the research is that consumers plan to change
their consumption from one year to the next by an amount that depends
on their expectations of real interest rates. Actual movements of
consumption differ from planned movements by a completely unpredic-
table random variable that indexes all the information available next year
that was not incorporated in the planning      process the year before.   If
expectations of real interest rates shift, then there should be a
corresponding shift in the rate of change of consumption. The magnitude
of the response of consumption to a change in real interest expectations
measures the intertemporal elasticity of substitution.
        The model of the joint behavior of consumption and asset returns
employed in this work was developed by Douglas Breeden [1977, 1979] and
Lars Hansen and Kenneth Singleton [1983]. The joint distribution of the

                                     36
log of consumption in period I,   c, and the return earned by the consumer
from period i—i to period 1,  r,   is normal with a covariance matrix that
is unchanging over time. The means of the two variables obey the linear
relation,


                              =        +   c1 + k   .                   (4.1)


That is, the expected change in the log of consumption is the
intertemporal elasticity of sbustitution, ci, times the expected real return
pius a constant.
        The interpretation of equation 4.1 has been assisted by recent
developments in the theory of intertemporal choice under uncertainty.
Epstein and Zin [1987a, 1987h] and others have applied a general
framework due to Kreps and Porteus [1978] in order to understand how
equation 4.1 can be derived from explicit preferences and probability
distributions and to interpret the coefficient ci. The central issueis the
relation between risk aversion and intertemporal substitution. If the
consumer orders uncertain future streams of consumption by computing
the expected value of an intertemporally separable utility function, then
the coefficient a is both the intertemporal elasticity of substitution and the
reciprocal of the coefficient of relative risk aversion. Both substitution and
risk aversion are controlled by the curvature of the one-period utility
function, which is controlled in turn by a. In order to make a distinction
between substitution and risk aversion, an assumption must be relaxed.
One possibility is to drop intertemporal separability. Another is to drop
expected utility.    In both cases, equation 4.1 results from utility

                                     37
maximization and the coefficient        is unambiguously the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution. Risk aversion affects the constant, k, but not the
slope,   a.
          If data on the expected real interest rate,      i, are available directly
(from a market for indexed bonds or by subtracting a measure of expected
inflation from a nominal interest rate), then the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution, a-, is the slope coefficient in the regression,


                              zXc   =   ui-1+k+c           .                   (4.2)


Estimation is nothing more than checking whether consumption has
tended to grow more in periods of high expected returns. On the other
hand, if data are available only for the realized real interest rate, rt, but
thereare instrumentalvariables,Xt, so tbat


                                        =   xJ3   + th ,                       (4.3)


then an estimate of      a-   is available by applying instrumental variables
estimation to


                              L\c =     ar1 + + e + Ic         q   ,           (4.4)


using    z1   as instruments. In effect, the second procedure calculates a
proxy for the expected real interest rate as the fitted values from a
regression of the realized real interest rate on the instruments, and then
estimates the intertemporal elasticity of substitution by regressing the rate

                                            38
of change of consumption on the proxy.
        The first approach yields estimates of the intertemporal elasticity
of substitution, a, using postwar data on consumption changes and on
expected inflation. The latter come from Joseph Livingston's survey of
inflation forecasters conducted every November. I have obtained separate
estimates of   a   forthe returns on each of three assets: Treasury bills,
savings accounts, and a diversified portfolio of common stocks (the S&P
400 portfolio). For the first two, the point estimates of the elasticity are
about 0.3, but with a fairly large standard error (also about 0.3) because
there has been relatively little variability in expected real returns. For
common stocks, the estimate is .07 with a standard error of .05, 80 the
finding of a a close to zero is quite strong.
        The second approach can be applied to a longer period of data
because it does not require survey evideace on expected inflation. With
annual data on consumption changes and real returns on Treasury bills
over the period from 1924 through 1940 and 1950 through 1983, the
estimate of a is — .40 with a standard error of .20 (lagged values of the
endogenous variables served as instruments). Evidence against inter-
temporal substitution is statistically unambiguous. A negative value of a
is inconsistent with standard theory, of course, but the data do not show
the tendency for consumers to postpone consumption in times of high real
returns that would occur with significant intertemporal substitution.
         The time series evidence on intertemporal substitution in consump-
tion is far from definitive. Similar procedures applied to data on hours of
work suggest that intertemporal substitution in labor supply is low,
contrary to the conclusion reached in the previous section—see N. Gregory

                                     39
Mankiw, Julio Rotemberg, and Lawrence Summers [1985]. Some of the
same objections can be raised in the case of consumption as in labor
supply. For example, the expected real interest rate used in my work may
be no better a measure of the true allocational intertemporal price ratio
than is the measured real wage a measure of the true price ratio of labor
to goods. Moreover, panel data on the consumption of individual families
shows a large transitory component (see Hall and Mishkin [1982]). Just as

high variability in work schedules is evidence in favor of substantial
intertemporal substitution in labor supply, high variability in consumption
may be evidence in favor of intertemporal substitution in consumption.



5. CONCLUSIONS


          Both as          of theory and empirical findings, the following
                    a matter
view of economic fluctuations seems attractive: Intertemporal substitution
in labor supply is reasonably high and in product supply is extremely high.
The movements in employment and output that occur over the business
cycle carry with them relatively small changes in the real interest rate and
the real wage, though there may be a good deal of concealed variation in
the shadow value of work. On the other hand, intertemporal substitution
in consumption is very low; consumption hardly changes over the cycle.
When an increase in government purchases of goods and services or other
increase in product demand occurs, current production rises. Investment
falls,   but consumption remains more or                          the
                                           less unchanged. Although

simple Keynesian expenditure model describes the process roughly, the

                                    40
richer model of Value and Capital, with its emphasis on intertemporal
equilibrium, gives a much more satisfactory account.




                                 41
REFERENCES




Abowd, John      M. and     Ashenfelter,   Orley [1981].   "Anticipated

Unemployment, Temporary Layoffs, and Compensating Wage
Differentials." In Sftulies in Labor Markets, edited by Sherwin Rosen.
Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press, pp. 141—170.


Ando, Albert and Modigliani, Franco [1963]. "The 'Life Cycle' Hypothesis
of Saving: Aggregate Implications and Tests." American Economic
Review 53 (March): 55—84.


Barro, Robert J. [1981]. "Output Effects of Government Purchases."
Jonrnal of Poliica1 Economy 89 (December): 1086—1121.

                                                                    and
Barsky, Robert B. and Miron, Jeffrey A. [1987]. "The Seasonal Cycle
the Business Cycle." Univ. Michigan, April.


Bus, Mark [1987]. "The Cyclical Behavior of Marginal Cost and Price."
American Economic Review 77 (December): 838—855.


Breeden, Douglas T. [1977]. "Changes in Consumption and Investment
Opportunities and the Valuation of Securities." Ph.D. disseration,
Stanford Univ.

                                                                   with
 Breeden, Douglas T. [1979]. "An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model

                                     42
Stochastic Consumption and Investment Opportunities."           Journal of
Financial Economics 7 (September): 265—296.


Epstein, Larry G., and Zin, Stanley E. [1987a]. "Substitution, Risk
Aversion, and the Temporal Behaviour of Consumption and Asset
Returns. I: A Theoretical Framework." Working Paper 8715. Toronto:
Univ. Toronto.


Epstein, Larry G., and Zin, Stanley E. [1987b]. "Substitution, Risk
Aversion and the Temporal Behaviour of Consumption and Asset Returns.
II: An Empirical Analysis." Discussion Paper no. 698. Kingston, Ont.:
QueensUniv.


Friedman, Milton. [1957]. A Theory of        he   Consumpiion    Funciion.
Princeton.


Hall, Robert E. [1980]. "Employment Fluctuations and Wage Rigidity."
Brooking Papers on Economic Activity   1:   91—141.


Hall, Robert E. [1988]. "Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption."
Journal of Political Economy 96 (April): 339—357.


Hall, Robert E. [forthcoming]. "Consumption." In Handbook of Modern
Business Cycle Theory, edited by Robert J. Barro, Harvard University
Press.



                                 43
Hall, Robert E., and Mishkin, Frederic S. [1982]. "The Sensititivy of
Consumption to Transitory Income: Estimates from Panel Data on
Households." Econometrica 50 (March): 461-481.


Hansen, Lars Peter, and Singleton, Kenneth J. [1983]. "Stochastic
Consumption, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Asset
Returns." Journal of Political Economy 91 (April): 249-265.


lleckman, James J. and Killingsworth, Mark R. [1986]. "Female Labor
Supply: A Survey." In Handbook of Labor Economics, edited by Orley
Ashenfelter and Richard Layard. Amsterdam: North Holland.


Hicks, J.R. [1946]. Value and CapitaL Second edition. London: Oxford
Univ. Press.


Jorgenson Dale W. [1963] "Capital Theory and Investment Behavior."
American Economic Review 53 (May): 247—259.


Kreps, David M. and Porteus, Evan L. [1978]. "Temporal Resolution of
Uncertainty and Dynamic Choice Theory." Econometrzca 46 (January):
185 —200.


Kydland, Finn E. and Prescott, Edward C. [1982]. "Time to Build and
Aggregate Fluctuations." Econometrica 50 (November): 1345—1370.


Lucas, Robert J. [1972]. "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money."

                                   44
Journal of Economic Theory 4 : 103—124.


Lucas,Robert J. and Rapping, Leonard A. [1969] "Real Wages,
Unemployment and Inflation." Journal of Political Economy 77
(September/October): 721—754.


MaCurdy, Thomas [1981]. "An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a
Life Cycle Setting." Journal of Political Economy 89 (December):
1059— 1085.



Mankiw, N. Gregory, Rotemberg, Julio J., and Summers, Lawrence H.
[1985] "Intertemporal Substitution in Macroeconomics." Quarterly Journal
of Economics 100 (February): 225-256.

Modigliani, Franco, and Brumberg, R.E. [1954]. "Utility Analysis and the
Consumption Function: An Interpretation of Cross-Section Data." In
Post—Keynesian Economics, edited by K.K. Kurihara. New Burnswick.


Pencavel, John. [1986] "Labor Supply of Men: A Survey." In handbook
of Labor Economzcs, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard.
Amsterdam: North Holland.


Prescott, Edward C. [1986] "Theory ahead of Business Cycle
Measurement." In Real Business Cycles, Real Exchange Rates and Actual
Policies, Volume 25 in the Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy, edited by Karl Brunner and Allan Meltzer. Amsterdam:

                                  45
Northilolland, pp. 11—44.


Ramey, Valerie A. [1988]. "Nonconvex Costs and the Behavior of
Inventories." Department of Economics, University of California, San
Diego, June.


Rees, Albert    [1970]. "On Equilibrinm in Labor Markets." Journal of
               0.
Political Economy 78 (March): 306—310.


Sargent, Thomas J. [1979]. Macroeconomic Theory.         New York:
Academic Press.


Summers, Lawrence II. [1986]. "Some Skeptical Observations on Real
Business Cycle Theory." Quarterly Review, Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis (Fall): 23—27.


West, Kenneth D. [1986] "A Variance Bounds Test of the Linear
Quadratic Inventory Model." Journal of Political Economy 94 (April):
374—401.




                                 46
