NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARY POLICY COOPERATION/COORDINATION AND GLOBAL FINANCIAL
CRISES IN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Michael D. Bordo
Working Paper 27898
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27898

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2020

Paper prepared for the conference “From Bretton Woods to 2008 and Beyond: Global Monetary
Governance” Brussels, Belgium September 18 2020 The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Michael D. Bordo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Monetary Policy Cooperation/Coordination and Global Financial Crises in Historical Perspective
Michael D. Bordo
NBER Working Paper No. 27898
October 2020
JEL No. E58,F33,N20
ABSTRACT
The COVID-19 pandemic spawned a global liquidity crisis in March 2020. The global liquidity
crisis was alleviated by the Federal Reserve and other advanced country central banks
cooperating by extending the swap lines they developed in the Global Financial Crisis
2007-2008. Central bank cooperation in 2020 evolved from a two-century history across several
monetary regimes that is surveyed in this paper. I find that in monetary regimes which are rulesbased cooperation was most successful. International currency swaps developed to manage
exchange rates during the Bretton Woods era have evolved into the leading tool to manage
international liquidity crises. The swap network can be viewed as a step in the direction of a
global financial safety net.

Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

Monetary Policy Cooperation/ Coordination and Global Financial Crises in Historical
1. Introduction

Perspective

We are currently in the midst of the global Covid 19 pandemic which is ravaging

both advanced and emerging countries. Unless an effective vaccine is adopted,

we may follow the path of the 1918 Spanish flu pandemic and not be out of the
woods for another year.

The advent of the pandemic in Europe and the U.S. in March 2020 led to a global
financial crisis once most countries locked down their economies. The crisis has
a number of dimensions including: domestic liquidity; international liquidity; a

sudden stop; sovereign debt default; a most serious recession and challenges to

the global monetary order. So far, the domestic and international liquidity crises
have been well managed by central banks following tried and true policies.

The recent experience of successful central bank cooperation evolved from a

two-century history that I describe in this paper. 1 By central bank cooperation is

meant: lender of last resort actions; the sharing of information and techniques of
central banking and the discovery of common problems. By coordination is

meant policy actions formally agreed upon and taken by groups of policy makers

to achieve beneficial outcomes for the international monetary system as a whole.

I first survey the history of central bank cooperation and coordination across
historical regimes: the classical gold standard 1880-1914; the interwar gold

exchange standard 1924-1939; the Bretton Woods System 1944-1973; and the
1

See Bordo and Schenk (2016)

2

present fiat money managed floating exchange rate regime. With this back

ground I then focus on the two recent global financial crises: the Global Financial
Crisis (GFC) of 2007-2008; and the current Covid 19 pandemic since March
2020.

2. The History of Central Bank Cooperation/Coordination
2.1 The Classical Gold Standard 1880-1914
The classical gold standard was the original rules based monetary policy regime
(Bordo and Kydland 1995). The basic rule for each monetary authority was to

maintain convertibility of its paper currency in terms of gold at the official nominal
price (or as a fixed number of ounces of gold). This required subsuming domestic
policy goals to the dictates of external balance panic.

Central banks in advanced countries before 1914 did consistently follow the

convertibility rule (except during wartime emergencies and serious banking panics
when they suspended convertibility). To the extent that central banks adhered to
the gold standard rule of convertibility they implicitly cooperated.

Cooperation during the gold standard was quite limited. To the extent that central
banks adhered to the gold standard they implicitly cooperated. Even the minor

violations of the gold points that occurred were never sufficient to threaten the
international monetary system.

There is evidence that in the face of several large financial crises (e.g. 1890 and

1907) the Banque de France, which had very large gold reserves, lent gold on
commercial terms to the Bank of England, to allow it to avoid suspending

3

convertibility. Some argue that that this cooperation was essential to the survival of
the gold standard (Borio and Toniolo 2005, Eichengreen 1992) but the evidence
suggests otherwise (Flandreau 1997 and Bordo and Schwartz 1999).

The Bank of England held a ‘thin film of gold’ because it had a long record of

credibility which ensured that capital flows would be stabilizing. Moreover, in

financial crises which did not involve rescue loans the Bank requested a ‘Treasury

Letter’ allowing it to temporarily suspend convertibility. When this happened, as in
1825 and 1847, the panic ended.

Finally, several early unsuccessful attempts at international monetary coordination
occurred at a number of conferences (in Paris 1867 and 1878) held to try to

standardize gold coins across the major countries foundered on the rocks of

sovereignty. Later in the century, at the height of the Free Silver movement, a
number of international conferences were held in the US to promote global
bimetallism. Nothing came out of them.

The gold standard was successful because it was rules based and each member

voluntarily adhered to the convertibility rule. Despite its success as a rules-based

system, the gold standard collapsed because World War I completely unraveled the
global financial system and virtually bankrupted all of the European belligerents.

Had the War not happened it could have lasted longer.

2.2. The Interwar Gold Exchange Standard 1924 to 1936
After World War I, Great Britain, France and other countries expressed a strong
desire to restore the gold standard but high inflation and debt overhangs, many

4

believed, would require major international cooperation and coordination to
restore it.

Two important conferences in Brussels 1920 and Genoa 1922 set the stage for the

restoration of the gold standard. Because of a predicted gold shortage (the real price
of gold had been vastly deflated by the global wartime inflation) it was to be a gold
exchange standard under which members would hold both foreign exchange

(dollars and pounds sterling) and gold as international reserves. Great Britain and

the US were to be the center countries of the new international monetary system

and they were to hold their international reserves in gold valued at the prewar
parities.

Extensive international cooperation was required to stabilize the central European
countries which had run hyperinflations. The stabilization packages were imposed

by the League of Nations and private sector lenders such as JP Morgan in return for
the loans required to build up the reserves needed to restore convertibility which

involved massive disinflation and budget balance. To facilitate Great Britain’s return
to gold in 1925, the New York Fed established a $200 million line of credit for the

Bank of England in New York (Bordo, Humpage and Schwartz 2015 chapter two).
The Fed also kept its policy looser than would otherwise have been the case
(Friedman and Schwartz 1963).

The interwar gold standard was based on the convertibility rule as was its prewar
ancestor, but the rule was more fragile and less credible. One key difference

between the gold exchange standard and the classical gold standard was that few

countries were perceived to be willing to maintain external balance at the expense
5

of domestic policy goals.2 Central banks began to focus more on stabilizing the

business cycle in support of expansionary economic policy targets for employment
and growth .In addition, many of the post WWI parities were misaligned, reflecting
mis-calculation of equilibrium exchange rates and political pressures. Sterling was

pegged to gold at an overvalued (pre-war) parity in April 1925 while France went

back in 1926 after an 80% devaluation, at a greatly undervalued parity. This meant
that the adjustment mechanism of the gold standard was destined to malfunction

(Meltzer 2003). The Bank of England had to continually tighten monetary policy to

protect its gold reserves in the face of persistent balance of payments deficits, which

continually deflated the British economy (Keynes 1925). At the same time, France
ran persistent balance of payments surpluses, which should have led to an

expansion in the money supply and inflation but instead were continuously

sterilized. This meant that France was absorbing a larger and larger amount of the
world’s gold reserves (Irwin 2013). The US kept sterilizing its surpluses, joining

France in sucking gold from the rest of the world. In addition to the maldistribution
of gold, the system was further weakened by failing confidence in sterling as a

reserve currency. Declining gold reserves at the Bank of England and Federal

Reserve sterilization policies prompted countries to shift their foreign exchange

reserves from sterling to dollars (Eichengreen et al 2016).

Because of the extension of the franchise in most countries, the growth of organized labor and the
fresh responsibilities of governments for the economic and social welfare of their populations after
the terrible experience of war, more emphasis was placed on domestic output, employment and price
stability (Eichengreen 1992)

2

6

Against this background of flawed rules, considerable central bank cooperation was

required just to prop up the system. Much of the cooperation was personal; between
Montagu Norman, Governor of the Bank of England, Benjamin Strong, Governor of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Hjalmar Schacht, President of the

Reichsbank and Emile Moreau, President of the Banque de France (Clarke 1967,

Ahamed 2009, James 2016). Norman and Strong worked tirelessly to get the gold
standard working. Once underway, the perennial problem of sterling’s weakness
came to the fore. It was aggravated by the Banque de France’s pro gold policy of
converting sterling bills into gold. In July 1927 Strong organized a clandestine

meeting between the four governors at the Under Secretary of the Treasury Ogden

Mills’ house on Long Island. At this meeting one of the classic monetary policy co-

ordinations of all time was worked out to protect sterling. The New York Fed agreed
to cut its discount rate and to conduct expansionary open market operations while
the Banque de France (and the Reichsbank) agreed to shift their gold purchases

from London to New York. Sterling was saved for another day but the meeting led to
serious criticism of Strong’s actions by Adolph Miller, a Governor of the Federal

Reserve Board, who blamed his actions for fueling the Wall Street boom which burst
in October 1929. Board. Moreover, Strong’s actions bailing out Britain on two

occasions may have encouraged moral hazard by discouraging the British from
learning to adjust (Meltzer 2003).

After Strong’s death in 1928 and Schacht’s departure from the Reichsbank, Norman

pushed hard to institutionalize monetary policy cooperation, which came to fruition
with the creation of the Bank for International Settlement (BIS) in Basel in 1930.

7

The initial operational purpose for the BIS was to manage German reparations after
the Young Plan, but its more fundamental function was to provide a forum to

promote central bank cooperation. It was also supposed to be a venue for central
bank cooperation by sharing information and providing a confidential forum for

central bankers to meet on a regular basis as well as providing services for central
banks (e.g. gold swaps, deposits, lines of credit) (Toniolo and Clemet, 2005, Borio

and Toniolo 2005). But its early attempts at cooperation were not successful (James,
2016). The BIS was involved in two failed attempts in spring/summer of 1931 to

rescue the Austrian schilling and the German mark. Its resources were too small and
the rescues did not have the political backing of France.

The architecture of the interwar gold standard emphasized the importance of
central banks for the exercise of monetary policy. The delegates at the Genoa

International Economic Conference in 1922 explicitly stated that central bank

cooperation was a vital aspect of a prospective new gold standard and that this

should be institutionalized in a convention or ‘entente’ (Schenk and Straumann

2016; James 2016). Montagu Norman promoted a network of central banks modeled
on the Bank of England that could cooperate to deliver ‘orthodox’ policies aimed at
monetary and exchange rate stability. His vision was supported by the Financial
Committee of the League of Nations, which sent missions to a range of central

European states in the mid-1920s as part of creating a coordinated international
monetary system. With the increased prominence of central banks and the

establishment of the Bank for International Settlements, the interwar gold standard

8

(while itself a failure of cooperation and coordination) set the foundations for
central bank cooperation for the next century.

The gold exchange standard collapsed amid the shocks of the Great Depression.

Two major attempts at monetary policy coordination were undertaken in the 1930s
as the gold exchange standard collapsed, one a disaster and one quite successful.

The League of Nations sponsored the London Monetary and Economic Conference in
June 1933 to try to stabilize exchange rates and achieve concessions on trade

restrictions. The London conference failed, torpedoed by President Franklin Delano
Roosevelt’s unwillingness to be constrained by the gold standard.

Three years later, the timing was more propitious for successful cooperation under
the Tripartite Agreement of 1936 between the US, UK and France as the French

position had become untenable when the dollar and sterling depreciated against

gold. France needed a coordinated devaluation to prevent a free fall in the franc, and

the US and UK also had an interest in an orderly depreciation of the franc. With this
coincidence of interest, it was possible to agree to a common strategy not to

manipulate exchange rates for national advantage. Each country’s Exchange

Stabilization Fund engaged in daily coordinated exchange market intervention to
produce an orderly devaluation of the French franc. It ended at the outbreak of
WWII (Bordo, Humpage and Schwartz 2015 chapter 3.)

Monetary policy cooperation and coordination certainly contributed to the interwar
gold exchange standard’s problems by propping up a flawed system and possibly

even helping fuel the 1920s asset price boom. Central bankers were later blamed for
the Great Depression and had their powers and independence stripped, with

9

important consequences for the postwar period. Unlike the prewar gold standard,
although the gold exchange standard was rules based, the circumstances and

implementation of the rules were flawed from the beginning. Central bank monetary
policy cooperation and coordination did not function well in this environment.
2.3. The Bretton Woods International Monetary System 1944 to 1973
A key goal of the post-war period was to create a framework for cooperation and
coordination underpinned by credible rules to ensure a lasting and prosperous

peace (Giovannini, 1993). For monetary policy, the rules were to maintain pegged

exchange rates within narrow bands (+/- 1%) supported by controls on short term
capital flows and access to short term credit (from the International Monetary

Fund) to cover temporary balance of payments imbalances. Unlike the interwar

system, member countries could adjust their parities in the event of a ‘fundamental
disequilibrium’ (which was never defined). The gold convertibility rule was

preserved through fixing the gold price of the US dollar at $35/oz. The other
members pegged their currencies to the dollar.

It took until December 1958 for the Bretton Woods system to get underway once
the Western European countries achieved current account convertibility. In the

immediate aftermath of the war other systems of coordination were formed to allow
multilateral trade without full convertibility: the European Payments Union (EPU)
and the Sterling Area were the two most prominent examples (Bordo and Schenk
2016).

10

Once the Bretton Woods system was set up it began to face stresses that required

increased cooperation. However as long as the center country, the U.S. followed the
basic convertibility rule and maintained low inflation the system held up.

In the 1960s it became increasingly difficult to contain capital movements once
inconsistencies between domestic priorities and the peg opened up. Offshore

markets in London tested the credibility of adherence to the exchange rate rule, and

there were repeated parity adjustments that undermined the system as a whole.

The pegged rate rule was operated too inflexibly, so instead of small and frequent

adjustments, there were repeated speculative rushes on the DM, Franc and sterling,

in particular, through the 1960s. By the end of the 1960s these attacks had spread to
the dollar at the heart of the system and the gold convertibility rule was effectively
abandoned in March 1968.

The Bretton Woods system is an example of an elaborate effort at institutionalized

coordination that failed because of fundamental flaws in the rules underpinning the
system (Schenk, 2016). Instead, a set of cooperative initiatives were deployed to
prop the system up on an ad hoc basis until the convertibility and exchange rate
rules finally gave way in 1973. This cooperation among leading industrial

economies (promoted in part by Cold War ideology) allowed the global economy to
reap the benefits of freer trade and technological innovation during the first 30

years after the end of the Second World War so that the Bretton Woods era was
characterized by low inflation and rapid growth (Bordo 1993).

The most serious vulnerability in the Bretton Woods rules arose from the use of the

dollar as an international reserve currency, and therefore reliance on US monetary

11

policy. After European states declared current account convertibility at the end of

1958, Robert Triffin (1960) warned that once outstanding dollar reserves held by

the rest of the world surpassed the US monetary gold stock that this would increase
the possibility of a run on the dollar and a collapse of the system (Bordo and

McCauley 2019). Thinking in terms of the interwar experience, Triffin worried that
US monetary authorities would tighten policy leading to a world depression. For
him the solution was the creation of an alternative reserve asset subject to
coordinated management, like Keynes’s (1943) proposed bancor.

Closely related to the Triffin paradox was the critique that the US gained an

exorbitant privilege from the dollar’s position in the system. Since the dollar was an

international reserve currency, the US did not have to adjust to balance of payments

deficits, could promote outward direct investment (acquiring foreign assets) and the
US government could borrow at lower rates than otherwise because of the global

appetite for dollar denominated assets. The French in particular resented this and
periodically pressed for the world to return to the classical gold standard (with

disruptive effects (Rueff 1961). Recent efforts to measure the ‘privilege’ accorded to

the USA find it to be very small (McCauley, 2015). Meanwhile, West Germans viewed
the US deficits as inflationary, which ran counter to Germany’s strong preference for
stable prices and inhibited the Bundesbank from adjusting the DM or reducing
persistent German balance of payments surpluses (Emminger 1965).

Nevertheless, the dollar persisted at the core of the system because of its desirable
properties as a vehicle currency and the unrivalled breadth and depth of US

financial markets. At the time, Depres, Salant and Kindleberger (1966) argued that
12

the US acted as a financial intermediary borrowing short term deposits and lending
long term foreign investment. In this view, as long as the Fed followed credible
monetary policy the dollar standard could persist.

As threats to the Bretton Woods system mounted through the 1960s, enormous
energy was put into efforts to renew the framework for international policy

coordination. The General Arrangements to Borrow (GAB) in 1961 created a line of
credit at the IMF sufficient to satisfy a speculative attack on a large country like the
U.S. Its lasting importance is perhaps less through its direct effect and more from

the creation of a new tier of leadership in the global system. The Group of 10

countries involved in the GAB became an alternative to the IMF Executive Board as
leaders of reform and as a forum for cooperation, challenging the broader

constituency of the IMF and the interests of emerging market economies. 3 The G10
as a coordinating forum was further reinforced since the G10 central bank

governors formed the governing board of the Bank for International Settlements.

In addition to these ambitious efforts at renewed coordination through the IMF, was

the increased intensity of central bank cooperation through the auspices of the Bank
for International Settlements. The monthly meetings of G10 central bank governors,
supported by a technocratic secretariat and a set of topic-based expert standing

committees (Goodhart 2011, Toniolo and Clement 2005) provided an opportunity

for ‘soft’ cooperation through a sharing of ideas, policies and instruments as well as

G10 were Canada, UK, USA, Italy, France, Belgium, Netherlands, Japan, Sweden, and West Germany.
Switzerland also participated in multilateral activities through the BIS. Luxembourg also joined for
the Basel Committee.

3

13

flexible, simple and effective responses such as coordinated lines of credit and
swaps.

The meetings were private and secret, with no formal minutes and this promoted a
frank exchange of views. The monthly meetings of G10 central bank governors and
their staffs in Basel did not attract political attention or require parliamentary

oversight in the way that IMF meetings and edicts did. The BIS, therefore, became a

preferred venue for cooperation for countries such as the UK, which struggled to

maintain the sterling exchange rate through the 1960s until it floated in June 1972
(Schenk 2010; Schenk 2016).

There were three main cooperative efforts among central banks to support the gold
and exchange rate rules of the Bretton Woods system; the Gold Pool, multilateral
Group Arrangements and bilateral Fed swaps.

The Gold Pool began as an intergovernmental initiative from the US Treasury

Secretary in September 1961 to keep the market gold price at the official price

(Bordo, Naef, and Monnet 2019). It was thrust upon the G10 central bank governors
in November 1961; only the Bundesbank was an enthusiastic supporter from the
outset (Toniolo and Clement, 2005 pp. 376-77). Each central bank pledged a set

amount for gold sales to the pool and the US Fed matched the amounts of the other
members to a total of $270 million. On the other side, the Bank of England

intervened to buy gold when this would not raise the gold price. Part of the

proceeds from these operations ($30 million) was kept to fund sales, thus saving the
formal gold pool for times when there was a sustained upward pressure on the gold

14

price, which started from 1965.4 The Pool operated reasonably well until after the

devaluation of sterling by 14.3% in November 1967. This prompted a fatal loss of
confidence in the gold value of the dollar and the market rate of gold was finally
allowed to rise after a run in March 1968, although central banks and the IMF

agreed to continue to trade at the official rate of $35/oz. At this point, it became

clear that the resources of central banks could not ‘buck’ the market for any length
of time and the Gold Pool was abandoned.

A second (and less well known) support was the arrangement of coordinated lines

of credit among the G10 central bank governors at the BIS starting in 1960 (Schenk

2010; Toniolo and Clement 2005). A spike in the London gold price to $40.00 in

October 1960 on fears that John F Kennedy would follow an inflationary policy if

elected led to a flurry of attempts at cooperation (including gold swaps) between

the ESF and a range of European central banks, a $1 billion credit line of gold from
the BIS and finally revaluation of the DM and Dutch guilder in March 1961.

In this context of dollar fragility, the British convinced the G10 that supporting

sterling was a vital bulwark for the continuation of the Bretton Woods system and

thereby garnered multilateral support. The Italian lira received significant support
but sterling was the main beneficiary, repeatedly arranging emergency short term
lines of credit: $904 million in 1961, $250 million in March 1963, $1 billion in
September 1964, $3 billion in November 1964.

4Canada,

Japan and Sweden joined in 1964, creating the G10 Gold and Foreign Exchange Committee,
the precursor to the current Markets Committee.

15

From 1965 the Bank of England began to negotiate a longer-term solution to the
retirement of sterling as a reserve asset, culminating in the First Group

Arrangement between the G10 central banks and the BIS in 1966, for up to $1

billion in support to be activated by a specific fall in global sterling reserves (Schenk,
2010).

In the midst of a run on the dollar and the collapse of the Gold Pool in March 1968,

the Bank of England tried unsuccessfully to get a new package of $5 billion in credit.

Instead central banks pledged $1.175 billion, almost half from extending the Fed’s
UK swap facility from $1.5 billion to $2 billion. Soon after, the BIS began to plan a

Second Group Arrangement to retire sterling, supported by a $2 billion line of credit
(equiv. $38b today). This time, the UK was forced to negotiate bilateral agreements
with each individual country that held substantial sterling reserves (34 in all) to
limit the diversification of their reserves. 5 This Second Group Arrangement was

finally concluded in September 1968, popularly known as the Basel Agreement. It

was renewed several times (despite the depreciation of the dollar in 1971 and the
float of sterling in 1972).

A third defense for the dollar was the Federal Reserve’s series of bilateral swap lines

between the US and major currencies begun in 1962. The swaps were covered

short-term loan facilities between the Fed and other central banks, usually for 3
months, and served two purposes. Countries outside the US drew dollars to

intervene in foreign exchange markets to support their currencies (the Bank of

England drew $8.65b from 1962-71. On the other side, the Fed drew on the swaps to
5

In 1968, 23 countries held over half of their reserves in sterling.

16

support the dollar price of gold. These swaps provided a short-term exchange value
guarantee and thereby discouraged central banks from converting their unwanted

or ‘excess’ dollars to gold6. The Fed drew $11.6b in foreign currencies from 1962-71

(Bordo, Humpage, Schwartz, 2014). These swap lines were sometimes retired with
foreign exchange or Roosa bonds (US Treasury securities denominated in foreign
currencies) (Bordo, Humpage and Schwartz 2015 Ch. 4). The swap network

expanded from less than a billion dollars in 1962 when the first swap was made
with France, to close to $12 billion by August 1971 and $20b by in mid-1974 by

which time the network included 14 central banks (including the BIS). (See figure 1)
These tools and rescue packages all worked in the short-run to head off the ‘crise du
jour’ but the system was no longer consistent with US domestic policy goals. By the

spring of 1971 the French and British threatened to convert their outstanding dollar
holdings into gold (Garber 1993, Bordo 1993) and in August 1971 President Nixon
closed the US gold window on the advice of his Treasury Secretary Connolly. The

Bretton Woods system did not collapse into deflation as Triffin prophesized; rather

the problem was inflation. The US followed the key gold standard rule of keeping

inflation low until 1965, but from then on, the Fed followed expansionary monetary
policy to help finance the Vietnam War and LBJ’s Great Society. It thus broke the
basic rule of the Bretton Woods System and the Europeans became increasingly

critical of US inflation (Bordo 1993).

Swaps were also used to stabilize the Eurodollar market, a market set up in London primarily to
circumvent U.S. financial regulations such as regulation Q, the ceiling rate on time deposits. Swaps
between the Fed and the BIS were used on occasion in the 1960s to smooth spikes in the spreads
between offshore and US interbank rates. A key reason for their use was to aid the Fed in its
monetary policy objectives. See McCauley and Schenk (2020)

6

17

Like the interwar system, Bretton Woods was a rules-based system but the rules
were both analytically flawed and incompatible with the political economy

environment of the time. In each case the exchange rate rule was formally set (and
in Bretton Woods there was an elaborate institutional framework to promote

coordination) but there was no underpinning domestic policy rule to support the

system. Policy makers at the time had an incomplete understanding of the role and
effect of monetary policy and they prioritized the pursuit of full employment over
price stability (to varying degrees). To top this off, the US as center country broke
the key rule of the system by running an inflationary policy. That the Bretton
Woods system lasted as long as it did was due in a significant way to effective

central bank cooperation encouraged by a deep fear of floating exchange rates and
the impact on the global economy of a collapse of the exchange rate rules. This

cooperation transcended the collapse of the system that it was supposed to defend.
2.4. The Managed Float

After President Richard Nixon closed the gold window in August 1971 there was

still considerable interest among major countries in restoring the par value system.
The Smithsonian Agreement in December 1971 rebuilt the pegged exchange rate

system with wider bands, but the credibility of the system quickly evaporated in the
face of continued U.S. inflation which precipitated repeated runs on the dollar until
most countries had abandoned their dollar pegs by the spring of 1973.
2.4.1 The 1970s

The international monetary system switched to a managed floating regime in 1973.
Milton Friedman (1953) argued that floating rates had the advantages of insulating

18

the domestic economy from external monetary shocks and that they gave monetary
authorities the independence of conducting monetary policy to satisfy domestic

goals without imposing capital controls. According to Friedman, independence from
the constraint of pegged exchange rates required monetary authorities to follow

stable rules based monetary policies. Otherwise monetary instability, in addition to
producing instability in prices and real income, would also lead to instability in the
nominal exchange rate.

It took close to two decades for the Federal Reserve and other central banks (with
the principal exceptions of the Bundesbank and the Swiss National bank) to learn
this lesson. The 1970s was a decade of monetary instability manifest in high and
variable inflation. This was reflected in exchange rate volatility.

Monetary authorities engaged in extensive intervention to stem the perceived

volatility of exchange rates. The Fed and other central banks believed that foreign

exchange markets were inherently unstable and that exchange market intervention
was required to keep exchange rates close to their fundamentals and to reduce

unexplained volatility (Bordo, Humpage and Schwartz 2015 chapter five). It was not
until the next decade that the Fed and other central banks learned that stable
domestic monetary policy geared to low inflation would reduce instability in
nominal exchange rates.

The Fed’s central bank swap system also continued, and, it increasingly drew on the
swap system to support the U.S. monetary authorities’ intervention to stabilize the

dollar. By 1978 total facilities totaled $29.4b, although at its highest point (in 1978)
outstanding Fed swap obligations amounted to only $5.5b. The publicized ceilings

19

had a largely representational purpose to demonstrate the commitment of the
partners (Bordo, Humpage and Schwartz 2014).

Against the background of rising inflation and with the dollar depreciating against

the DM and yen and other currencies, the Federal Reserve engaged in frequent and
massive sterilized exchange market intervention. Many of the sales of DM and Yen

were financed by borrowing via swap lines with the Bundesbank and other central
banks until 1980. Some of the Fed interventions were coordinated with similar
operations by the Bank of Japan, Bundesbank and other central banks.

After December 1975 the Fed cooperated closely with other central banks, keeping
them informed daily of their actions, although all of the operations in this period

were covert. Empirical evidence suggests that much of the intervention had very

small and possibly very temporary effects in reversing exchange rate movements.

Bordo, Humpage and Schwartz 2015 (p. 236) concluded that for the 1974 to 1977

period “only 49 per cent of the active interventions to support the dollar and only 64
per cent of the passive interventions to acquire German marks appear successful.”
The situation worsened in the next three years. In 1978 the dollar went into a free
fall reflecting the Fed’s lack of success in arresting inflation. On November 1 1978,

the Carter administration (along with the Fed) announced a massive dollar defense
package consisting of a 1 percentage point increase in the discount rate to 9½ per

cent, a $30b increase in foreign resources and closer cooperation with Germany,

Japan and Switzerland. The foreign currency package included a $47.6b increase in
the Fed’s swap lines with these countries. The Treasury also would issue up to $10

billion in German mark and Swiss franc denominated securities, called Carter bonds
20

(Bordo, Humpage and Schwartz 2015 page 243). Massive coordinated exchange

market interventions with the Bundesbank and other central banks followed in the
next two months. In reaction to these actions the dollar began appreciating against
the mark.

But the evidence for the period September 1977 to October 5 1979 suggests that

“despite the changes in amounts, frequency, objectives and openness, US operations
were no more effective than the earlier operations. As in the pre-1977 period, they
demonstrated some tendency to moderate exchange rate movements” (Bordo,
Humpage and Schwartz 2015 page 247).

In reaction to the volatility in the dollar and the public’s reaction to rising inflation

and inflation expectations, President Carter appointed Paul Volcker as Chairman of
the Federal Reserve Board in October 1979 with the mandate to end the inflation.

The Volcker shock of October 5 1979 when the Fed shifted to a tight monetarist type
monetary (non-borrowed reserves) targeting strategy, raised the discount rate,

imposed reserve requirements and allowed interest rates to rise dramatically,

eventually broke the back of inflation and inflationary expectations and reversed the
decline of the dollar. Similar policies were followed in other countries.

The 1970s was a low point for the IMF as the official hub of international monetary
coordination. It was only in 1976 that the IMF finally recognised the legitimacy of
flexible or floating exchange rates and from this time the IMF, seeking a role to
replace the one it had lost, turned more resolutely to focus on the interests of
developing economies rather than governance of the international monetary

system. This effort also brought mixed success as the gap between rich and poor
21

countries widened and many economies accumulated unsustainable amounts of
debt, which erupted in the 1982 sovereign debt crisis.

Instead, the mid-1970s gave rise to the ‘G’-summits, starting with the G6 at

Rambouillet in 1975, adding Canada in 1976 and then Russia in 1998 to form the G8.
These were annual meetings of political leaders supported by finance ministers’

meetings and meetings of central bankers. For central banks, of course, the summits
supplemented the regular monthly meetings among G10 central bank governors at
Basel. The summits generally resulted in rather mundane and repetitive public

statements committing the participants to ensuring stable markets, but they also
provided an opportunity for sharing of ideas and approaches to global economic
challenges informally

Monetary cooperation via coordinated exchange market intervention (EMI) and

other strategies did not function well in the 1970s. This was because most central
banks did not follow a rules-based policy of keeping domestic inflation low,

consistent with being on a floating exchange rate (Bordo, Humpage and Schwartz
2015).

2.4.2 The 1980s

The 1980s saw a return to a consensus in monetary theory and policy. Paul

Volcker’s success in stemming inflation in the US was applauded by central bankers

and governments across the developed world. An examination of the minutes of the
monthly meetings of the G10 central bank governors shows that in the 1970s they

shared their common frustrations with their governments’ inability to be consistent
in their policy guidance and the ensuing lack of credibility of monetary policy. They

22

wriggled under their lack of independence when orders came from ministries to

reverse tight money to promote growth targets at the expense of higher inflation.

Through these regular meetings at the BIS the G10 central bank governors created
an epistemic community with shared goals for inflation but also a general

commitment to avoid destabilising short term exchange rate changes. As the

operational arm for coordination, this forum was important for sharing information,

debate and forming opinion even though they lacked policy independence. This
observation goes beyond Eichengreen’s (2013a) identification of the Basel

Committee on Banking Supervision as an epistemic community, to include the
formative development of common approaches to monetary policy.

Volcker’s policy shift set the stage for a new domestic based rule for monetary

policy that was eventually adopted by other advanced country central banks. The
ability to follow a monetary rule was dramatically reinforced by innovations in

smaller countries. New Zealand’s experiment with central bank independence and
transparent inflation targeting set the model for the transformation of the

credibility of monetary rules, just as economic theory and understanding of

monetary policy was enhanced by the identification of the Taylor Rule. By the end of
the 1980s, therefore, we had returned to a rule-based system founded on domestic

monetary policy actions by independent central banks acting in their own countries’
interests, which seemed to generate a lasting period of moderate inflation. But the

lingering ambitions for more elaborate coordination had much less success.

While central bankers moved closer to a common understanding on monetary

policy, governments and Treasury bureaucrats continued to seek exchange rate
23

stability or at least the ‘orderly exchange markets’ described as the agreed goal in
the revised IMF statutes. Exchange rate volatility continued as central banks

learned to adopt and operate the new set of domestic monetary rules, and the 1980s
witnessed a series of grand gesture summitry to coordinate exchange rate and fiscal
policy that produced mixed results.

The Volcker shock and three years of tight monetary policy led to a decline in

inflation from a peak of 15% in 1979 to 3% by the mid-1980s. This led to a marked
appreciation in the dollar to advanced countries by 55% on a trade weighted basis.

By 1985 Germany and other countries were complaining about the imbalances and
the Bundesbank had been intervening to offset the depreciating mark. More

important, the strong dollar was harming the exports of US manufactured goods and
this led to threats in the Congress to raise tariffs. The incoming Secretary of the

Treasury James Baker was a much bigger fan of macroeconomic policy coordination
and of EMI than his predecessor Donald Regan (under whose watch there was only

limited EMI). So, at the G7 Finance Ministers Summit meeting at the Plaza hotel in

New York City on September 22 1985 ministers agreed that coordinated EMI would
be used to depreciate the dollar. They also agreed that the US would follow
expansionary monetary policy and Japan would do the opposite.

Immediately upon the announcement the dollar declined. However, it had been
falling since February 1985 and the increase before the meeting was only a

temporary blip. Massive coordinated intervention by the Fed, Bundesbank and Bank

of Japan lasted two weeks but the evidence that it was successful is limited Feldstein

(1986); Humpage (1988) argued that monetary policy had turned looser well before
24

the Plaza and that this more likely explained the turnaround in the dollar. Bordo,
Humpage and Schwartz 2015 (page 304) found that the EMI did not have much
effect on the exchange rate. On the other hand, Dominguez and Frankel (1993)

found that coordinated EMI did have significant effects and Frankel (2016) argued

that the Plaza was a success. However, the part of the agreement that urged Japan to
follow tighter monetary policy than consistent with macro fundamentals led the

Bank of Japan to keep rates higher than would be the case had it followed a Taylor
rule in 1986 (IMF 2011, Taylor 2016).

The dollar declined through 1986 leading to concerns that it had fallen too far.

Members at the G7 meeting at the Louvre February 22 1987 agreed to coordinate

policies to stabilize the dollar. This meant coordinated EMI in the opposite direction
than at the Plaza, and that Japan would follow more expansionary monetary and
fiscal policy while the US and Germany and the others would keep their macro

policies constant. As with the Plaza Agreement, there is strong evidence that the EMI
had little effect (Bordo, Humpage and Schwartz 2015) but there were longer lasting

effects on the Japanese economy that were devastating. After the Louvre Accord

policy rates deviated in a negative way from a rules-based policy and many argue

that this expansionary monetary policy triggered the asset price boom bust leading
to a serious banking crisis, and over a decade of stagnation.
2.4.3 The Great Moderation 1985 to 2006

By the late 1980s most advanced countries had low inflation, had adopted central

bank independence, and were following rules based monetary policy. This led to a
25

20-year period of stable and low inflation, and stable and rapid real growth called
the Great Moderation. Most of the disturbances in the global economy arose in

emerging economies rather than industrialised countries at the core of the global
trade and financial system.

Beginning in the late 1980s the Federal Reserve began to turn away from the use of

exchange market intervention as a significant policy tool. An extensive debate at the
FOMC and in the academy argued that sterilized EMI and credible monetary policy
were conflicting goals. By 1995 Chairman Greenspan agreed and the US only

undertook such actions on three occasions since. Also, in this period economists

argued, based on game theory and multi country econometric models, that central

banks that pursued credible rules based monetary policy minimized the spillovers
that were believed to have necessitated coordinated policies (Taylor 1985). As it
turned out, in this period there were fewer occasions when there was a call for

monetary policy coordination other than the mundane statements at G7 summits.

Instead, the main focus of cooperation/coordination returned to crisis management

in a series of emerging market crises.
3.Emerging Market Crises

While industrial countries mainly adopted floating or managed floating exchange
rates, many emerging market economies with underdeveloped financial systems,
and thin and shallow domestic foreign exchange markets opted for adjustable

pegged exchange rates. Through the mid-1980s many of these economies grew

quickly through export-oriented industrialization, particularly in East Asia. They

were encouraged by the IMF and World Bank to liberalize their capital markets but
26

their institutions were not strong and this contributed to a rash of financial and
currency crises in the 1990s as the dollar appreciated. 7

These episodes were viewed as posing systemic threats via contagion to the

advanced countries and prompted calls for international cooperation, with central

banks serving as lenders of last resort to supplement the resources of the IMF. The
pattern of support packages echoed several aspects of the Basel Agreements of the
1960s and 1970s; the reluctance of debtors in crisis to submit to the IMF as a first

line of defense, the insistence of creditors on an IMF seal of approval before offering
coordinated bilateral support, the preference of central banks and governments to
provide only contingent lines of credit that they hoped would not be drawn. But

they differed significantly because the operations were bail-outs rather than rescues
(in the lender of last resort sense) (Bordo and Schwartz, 1999, 2000) and this
heightened the moral hazard.

In each case (Mexico, Thailand, Indonesia, South Korea, Brazil, Argentina, Russia)

the crisis arose from overvalued currencies pegged to the US dollar, which were
toppled by a sudden reversal of capital flows that prompted uncontrolled

devaluation and a financial crisis. Weak financial sectors, heavy foreign currency
denominated borrowing, government guarantees and exuberant investors

contributed to the fragility of the system (Bordo and Meissner 2016). In each case
the debtor country initially sought to by-pass the conditionality of the IMF and

activate swaps or bilateral support (Boughton, 2010). But, in line with the final
In the 1990s many emerging market countries were advised to adopt firm pegs or currency boards
to import credible non-inflationary monetary policies.

7

27

coordinated support offered by the G10 to the UK in the 1970s, creditor countries
insisted on an IMF ‘seal of approval’ through a contingent (smaller) stand-by

agreement with a letter of intent. The IMF insisted on devaluation, restructuring

financial markets and fiscal retrenchment, with mixed success. International policy
coordination was thus operated through the IMF Executive Board and then central

banks and finance ministers supplemented this credit, often in larger amounts. The
difference from the 1960s and 1970s was that the funds were used to bail out

creditors rather than as a resource for central banks to gain a breathing space. The

coordinated operations therefore created moral hazard that was only partially offset

by the IMF-induced restructuring programs (more successful in some countries than
others).

The coordinated response to the emerging market financial crises was not a full

success. Although the crises were eventually stemmed and growth returned under
more flexible exchange rates, they left a legacy of institutional problems that

exposed the weaknesses of these regimes a decade later. The bail-outs did not

remove the incentive of countries to accumulate substantial precautionary reserves
through persistent surpluses. The fragility of the global system was increased by

many countries aiming to run persistent balance of payments surpluses during the
2000s as insurance against a future sudden stop and to avoid the necessity of
submitting again to the disciplines of a future rescue package.

While the currency crises of the 1990s pushed most emerging market economies to

greater flexibility by 2000, the People’s Republic of China became an increasingly

important non-conformist. The RMB exchange rate was not devalued in the wake of
28

depreciations elsewhere in Asia and this helped to support export recovery in the

region as Chinese economic growth accelerated in the run-up to WTO accession in
2001. From claims that the RMB was overvalued in the early 1990s, critics soon

pointed to China’s huge surpluses as proof that the RMB was undervalued. Capital

controls and consistently high growth allowed China to resist calls to appreciate its

currency, but the increasingly large and persistent current account surpluses, most
of which was unsterilized, came at some cost to price stability, particularly in

volatile real estate and other asset markets. At the same time, China’s role in the
governance of the global monetary system became more and more distant from
China’s importance in the global economy. In 2005 the RMB was appreciated

slightly and a more flexible regime was adopted to allow an orderly appreciation,
although the results were at first somewhat disappointing. China has had a

challenging history with the IMF, mainly focused around the historically small quota
(and therefore small voting rights), their iconoclastic international monetary policy
and continued exchange controls (Schenk 2015).

Thus, the coordinated rescues during the emerging market crises of the 1990s were

quite far removed from rules-based policy. First the rescues were bailouts to
countries facing insolvency and not to countries facing a temporary liquidity

shortfall, hence violating a key Bagehotian principle and engendering moral hazard

for future crises (Bordo and Schwartz 2000). Second, these countries did not follow
rule like domestic monetary policies because they had not developed sufficiently in
the sense of following the rule of law and having deep and liquid financial markets

29

etc. However, some of these countries in recent years have adopted rule like policies
e.g. Mexico and South Korea, but not all (Bordo and Siklos 2020).
4. The Global Financial Crisis 2007-2008

The default on a significant fraction of subprime mortgages after the collapse of

house prices in 2007 in the U.S. produced spillover effects around the world—via

the securitized mortgage derivatives into which these mortgages were bundled—to
the balance sheets of investment banks, hedge funds, and conduits (which are bank
owned but off- their balance sheets) which intermediate between mortgage and

other asset- backed commercial paper and long-term securities. The uncertainty
about the value of the securities collateralized by these mortgages spread

uncertainty through the financial system. All of this led to the freezing up of the
interbank lending market in August 2007.

In an attempt to allay what it perceived as a liquidity crisis, the Fed then extended
and expanded its discount window facilities and cut the federal funds rate by 300
basis points. A principal innovation was the Term Auction Facility (TAF) which
allowed banks to bid anonymously for funds from the Fed. It was designed to

encourage banks to go to the discount window by avoiding the “stigma problem”
which had been so important in the 1930s.

The financial crisis led to severe pressures on dollar funding in the global financial

system. This can be seen in figure 2 in a spike in the spread between the borrowing
rate of overseas and U.S. banks (the overseas-U.S. Libor spread). The Federal

Reserve set up swap facilities with the ECB and the SNB in December 2007 to
30

facilitate their creation of TAF-like auction facilities to provide dollar liquidity to
their domestic banks.

Following the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers on September 15, 2008 the swap

lines were made available to the Bank of Canada, Bank of England and the Bank of

Japan, and then to 4 more central banks (the central banks of Brazil, Mexico, Korea
and Singapore). The swaps operated like a Bagehotian lender of last resort facility
with a small penalty rate.

The Fed viewed the swaps as both aiding its domestic policy objectives by

preventing capital outflows which would hamper its domestic policy objectives and
as central bank cooperation (McCauley and Schenk 2020).

The swaps increased from $20 billion to a peak of $580 billion in December 2008
(see figure 3). The swap program was highly successful in reducing the Libor OIS
spread (McCauley and Schenk 2020, Bahaj and Reis 2019). 8 (see figure 4)

The restored swap facilities echoed their use in the 1960s to alleviate pressure in
the Eurodollar market. Indeed, swaps can be viewed as a form of International

Lender of Last Resort and as a very successful form of central bank cooperation.
Indeed, cooperative policy may have averted a global panic. 9

In addition to the swaps, at the Summit in Washington DC in November 2008,

leaders of the G20 committed themselves ‘to stabilize financial markets and support
economic growth’, with particular emphasis on ‘the importance of monetary

support’ as well as fiscal expansion. They also committed themselves anew to
The swap lines were reopened during the Eurozone crisis in 2010 and were ended in 2013. Again,
like in the GFC, they were successful in reducing strains in the offshore dollar market.
9See Tooze (2018)
8

31

reforming the architecture of the international financial system and the governing
board of the BIS was extended to allow nine other central banks to be members.

At the November 2008 G20 meeting new institutions were created to provide for a

for cooperation. The IMF was tasked with monitoring spillover effects, publishing an
annual report. The Financial Stability Board (2009) brought together central banks,

finance ministries and supervisory agencies to encourage ‘coherent implementation
’of good practice and implement agreed standards and codes, undertaking peer

reviews of macro-prudential frameworks. The exchange of information, ideas and

communication may bear some fruit in the long-term in creating consensus around
a common or agreed framework of rules.

By the end of 2008, the financial crisis had ended but the real economy was still

contracting and the federal funds rate and other central bank’s policy rates had hit

or were close to the zero-lower bound. The Fed announced its policy of quantitative

easing (QEI) in December 2008—the unconventional policy of large-scale open

market purchases of long-term Treasury securities and Agency mortgage backed
securities. In addition to the purchases the Fed began forward guidance to guide

financial markets expectations. The Bank of England similarly engaged in

quantitative easing from March 2009 and forward guidance from August 2013,

related to a target unemployment rate of 7%. The ECB followed in May 2009. Japan

had a longer history of QE from March 2001-2006 and renewed its policy in October
2010. These initiatives were successful in arresting the Great Recession by June

2009 in the US, but the recovery that followed was anemic. Further, the spillover
effects were controversial.

32

QE policies deployed by advanced economies were particularly criticized for

adverse effects on emerging market countries, primarily through capital flows and
exchange rates. Investors surged into emerging markets, increasing asset prices
and appreciating currencies. These spillover effects undermined export

competitiveness, increased exchange risk on debt and threatened asset price

bubbles. In May 2013, when Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke suggested

that QE would be ‘tapered’, volatility in emerging market asset prices led to renewed
calls for greater coordination. The specter of the inter-war crisis returned and (as in
the interwar period) there were calls for greater monetary cooperation to avert a
‘currency war’ (described in Eichengreen, 2013b).

The extent and cause of spill-over effects has been disputed. Certainly, US monetary
policy has global implications because of the importance of US capital markets and
the role of the dollar. Spillover effects appear greatest when Fed announcements

surprise the markets and there is evidence that these effects were greater after the
global financial crisis than before it (Chen et al., 2014). The evidence seems to

suggest that advanced economies should signal their policy to the market. Indeed
Taylor (2016) argued that it is deviations from rules-based policies and towards

discretion since 2002 (i.e. quantitative easing and forward guidance) that have led
to the spillovers and that the solution is to return to the policies followed in the

Great Moderation. This could involve a movement away from enlarged central bank
balance sheets, quantitative easing and forward guidance—i.e. the normalization of
policy rates and their use as a central bank’s key policy tool. The case that greater
monetary cooperation is a necessary solution to spillover effects is not proven.

33

5. The Covid 19 Pandemic crisis of 2020

The Covid 19 pandemic became global in February and March 2020 when it spread
from China to Europe and North America. When the authorities across the world

mandated lockdowns on their economies it precipitated a global financial panic. The
Federal Reserve and other central banks revisited their playbooks from the GFC a

decade earlier and provided lender of last resort facilities to their domestic financial
institutions. In the U.S. the Fed reinstituted many established as well as some novel

liquidity provisions. As in the previous crisis there was an excess demand for dollar
funding in other countries.

The Fed expanded its existing swap lines with five other central banks (Bank of

Canada, Bank of England, Bank of Japan, ECB and SNB) on March 15. On March 18,

for these countries, the spread on the swap line over OIS was cut from 50 to 25 basis
points. As in the GFC, the haircut on the swap lines acted as a Bagehotian penalty
rate. A new program with nine other central banks (Australia, Brazil, Mexico,

Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Korea, New Zealand and Singapore) was created (See
figure 5).

In addition to the swap lines, the Fed announced a new repo facility, the FIMA, a

temporary repurchase facility for foreign and international monetary authorities.

The new facility would allow approved holders to temporarily exchange their U.S.

Treasury securities with the Fed for U.S. dollars. These can then be made available
to their financial institutions.

34

As in the GFC, these policies quickly allayed the funding pressure in the countries

with access to the swap lines in comparison to those which did not have such access.
(See figure 6)

Thus, the Fed greatly expanded the scope of international monetary cooperation

and its international lender of last resort role. Other large important central banks
also have swap line networks with other countries that they are connected to.

However, there are a number of countries which for various (often political) reasons
do not have access to the swap network. A number of commentators have suggested
possible reforms involving the IMF that could extend the swap network and create a
truly global financial safety net.

Some have suggested that SDRs be used to back swap access (O’Neill and Lombardi

2020). Others have suggested that the IMF could underwrite the swap lines as they
did in the 1960s to secure a dollar swap line for the UK (McCauley and Schenk

2020). Collins, Potter and Truman (2020) as well as Reis (2020) advocate expanding
the IMF’s financial resources to fight the pandemic and that the major central banks
should link their swap lines to it. Levy Yeyati (2020) views the IMF as the dealer

between the funding central bank and the borrowing country or as a central bank

clearing house. Velasco (2020) makes the case for the IMF, the World Bank and the

regional development banks to establish a special purpose vehicle (SPV) that would

issue bonds to be purchased by leading central banks. In this vein, Brunnermier and
Huang (2018) propose a global synthetic safe asset (SBBS) that each country would
set up. The SPV would tranche the country’s sovereign debt into junior and senior
bond, in which the junior bond would absorb losses and protect the senior bond.

35

Finally, Eichengreen (2020) proposes that we revisit J.M. Keynes idea that the IMF

become a global central bank that issues bancor, a global currency. Whether any of
these proposals will ever be adopted is an interesting question.
6. Policy Issues
A number of issues for economic policy follow from this survey:

1. Monetary policy cooperation generally was successful when done in a rulesbased environment. This was the case under the Gold Standard and in the

Great Moderation. Cooperation in these regimes was done for technical or

Lender of Last Resort reasons and supported the communication needed to
develop a shared consensus about what rule was best.

2. Monetary policy cooperation was often problematic when domestic and

international policy priorities were inconsistent, i.e. when an international
policy rule (e.g. exchange rate stability) conflicted with domestic goals of
price stability or full employment. Thus, the agreed international rules
conflicted with domestic priorities during the interwar gold exchange

standard, the Bretton Woods System and the early 1980s. Under the classical
gold standard and during the Great Moderation, by contrast, the nominal
anchor rules were consistent with price stability.

3. It follows that short-term efforts at international monetary policy

coordination tended to be unsuccessful when they involved a departure from

domestic policy fundamentals e.g. Long Island 1927 and the Plaza and Louvre
Accords.

36

4. The coordinated rescues of the emerging countries in the financial crises of

the 1990s were mainly bailouts and were not based on Bagehot’s principles.

This may have promoted future risky behavior. Moreover, in a number of

cases the recipients did not graduate to the monetary policy strategies of the
advanced countries, leading to later instability. Recent cooperation, largely
through the BIS, has helped to create an epistemic community of central

banks that has learned to follow rules-based policy. This has been beneficial

but may be challenged by the addition of new members to the BIS governing
board and by the proliferation of multi-agency groups.

5. The use of swaps, earlier developed in the 1960s, by the Federal Reserve and
other advanced country central banks to allay the international liquidity
crisis of both the GFC and the Covid 19 pandemic crises was a perfect

example of central bank cooperation. Extending the network to all emerging
countries could help to create a global financial safety net.

6. A return to a rules-based system under floating exchange rates once the

Covid 19 Crisis is long past could possibly provide an environment conducive
to stable economic growth and low inflation for the world as was the case
during the Great Moderation.

7. Conclusion
The evolution of central bank cooperation and coordination since the classical gold
standard has closely followed the evolution of central bank credibility (Bordo and
Siklos 2014, 2016). Under the classical gold standard central banks had high

37

credibility because the gold standard rule was primarily a domestic rule and the
international gold standard rule followed from that (Bordo and Kydland 1995).

Central bank cooperation was perfectly consistent with that arrangement. In the
Great Moderation, central banks enjoyed high credibility because under floating

exchange rates they learned to follow domestic rules-based policy focused on price
stability and had the independence to pursue their targets consistently.

But in the intervening seven decades, central bank credibility declined because the
underlying theoretical and political economy framework dramatically changed

towards maintaining domestic aggregate demand and full employment along with
fixed exchange rates and the gold convertibility rule-- an impossible task, which
became evident in the interwar and later in the Bretton Woods era, even with

capital controls. Central bank cooperation and coordination was effectively used to
prop up the Bretton Woods system through short term fixes, but ultimately these
regimes were doomed by the growing inconsistency of policy goals. It took the

strains of the Great Inflation to create the learning environment to restore central

bank credibility and identify a sustainable rule based on domestic monetary policy.

However, since the GFC the use by all central banks of quantitative easing and
forward guidance some argue may have led to a departure from rules based

monetary policy towards discretion. In the international sphere it is argued that this
may have led to increased spillovers across countries and a return to the threat of
competitive devaluations of the 1930s and currency wars.

38

Whether it is possible to return to the world before the GFC of small central bank

balance sheets, normalized interest rates and the policy rate as the instrument is an
open question.

In the face of a global financial crisis as in 2007-2008 and 2020, central banks may
have learned to effectively cooperate to prevent a liquidity panic using the swap

network to pursue the well-known tenets of Bagehot’s rules. The international swap
network can be viewed as a step in the direction of a global financial safety net. The
disastrous experience of the 1930s may have led them to adopt this policy
framework.

39

Figure 1. US Swap Lines 1962-1998

Source: Graph 2 from McCauley, R. N., & Schenk, C. R. (2020). “Central bank swaps then and now:
swaps and dollar liquidity in the 1960s” BIS Working Paper 851 paper

Figure 2. Pressure on overseas dollar funding 2007-2008

Source: Chart 6 from Fleming, M. J., & Klagge, N. (2010). The Federal Reserve’s foreign exchange swap lines.
Current Issues in Economics and Finance, 16(4).

40

Figure 3. US Dollar Liquidity Swaps by Central Bank 2008- Total Amount Outstanding(USD million)

*Others: Banco de Mexico, Bank of Korea, Danmarks Nationalbank, Norges Bank, Reserve Bank of Australia,
Sveriges Riksbank, Swiss National Bank
Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Own Calculations

Figure 4. Pressure on dollar funding eases 2008

Source: Graph 9 from McCauley, R. N., & Schenk, C. R. (2020). “Central bank swaps then and now:
swaps and dollar liquidity in the 1960s” BIS Working Paper 851 paper

41

Figure 5. US Dollar Liquidity Swaps by Central Bank 2020- Total Amount Outstanding(USD million)

Others: Bank of Canada, Swiss National Bank, Reserve Bank of Australia, Danmarks Nationalbank, Norges Bank,
Monetary Authority of Singapore, Banco Central Do Brasil, Bank of Korea, Banco de Mexico, Reserve Bank of
New Zealand, Sveriges Riksbank
Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Own Calculations

42

Figure 6. CIP Deviations and Fed Swap Intervention Spring 2020
a- Original Swap Network Members

b- New Swap Members Network

c- Currencies without access to the Swap Network

Source: Figures 1,2 and 5 Bahaj, S., & Reis, R. (2020). Central bank swap lines during the covid-19 pandemic.
Covid Economics, 2.

43

References
Ahamed L (2009) Lords of Finance: The Bankers Who Broke the World, New York:
Penguin.

Bahaj, S and R. Reis (2020) “Central bank Swap Lines During the Covid 19 Pandemic.
Covid Economics. Issue 2 April 8
Bahaj, S and R. Reis (2019) “Central bank Swap Lines: Evidence on the Effect of the
Lender of Last Resort” Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies. Bank of Japan
Discussion Paper No. 2019-E-9
Bordo M (1993) ‘The Bretton Woods International Monetary System: a Historical
Overview’ in Michael D Bordo and Barry Eichengreen (eds), A Retrospective on the
Bretton Woods System: Lessons for International Monetary Reform. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, pp 3-108.
Bordo, M., O. Humpage and A. Schwartz (2015) Strained Relations: US Foreign
Exchange Operations and Monetary Policy in the Twentieth Century. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Bordo, M. and F. Kydland (1995) “The Gold Standard as a Rule” Explorations in
Economic History.
Bordo, M. and C. Meissner (2016) ‘Fiscal and Financial Crises’ NBER Working Paper
22059, March.

Bordo, M and R. McCauley (2019) “Triffin: Dilemma or Myth” IMF Economic Review.
July

Bordo, M, A. Naef, and E. Monnet (2019) “The Gold Pool (1961-1968) and the Fall of
the Bretton Woods System: Lessons for Central bank Cooperation” Journal of
Economic History Vol 79 Issue 4 December

Bordo, M and C. Schenk (2016) “Monetary Policy Cooperation and Coordination: An
Historical Perspective on the Importance of Rules” in Michael D Bordo and John
Taylor (eds) Rules for International Monetary Stability: Past, Present, and Future.
Hoover Institution Press

Bordo, M. and A.J. Schwartz (2000) ‘Measuring Real Economic Effects of Bailouts:
Historical Perspectives on How Countries in Distress Have Fared With and Without
Bailouts’ Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy. December Vol 53, pp
81-16.

44

Bordo, M and A.J. Schwartz (1999) ‘Under What Circumstances Past and Present,
Have International Rescues of Countries in Financial Distress Been Successful?’
Journal of International Money and Finance 18 (4): pp 683-708.

Bordo. M, and P. Siklos (2019) “The Transformation and Performance of Emerging
Market Economies Across the Great Divide of the Global Financial Crisis” NBER
Working Paper 26342
Borio, C. and G. Toniolo (2005) “One Hundred and Thirty Years of Central Bank
Cooperation: A BIS Perspective” BIS working paper 197.

Boughton, J. (2012) Tearing Down Walls; the IMF 1990-1999, IMF, Washington D.C.

M.K. Brunnermeier and L. Huang (2018) “A Global Safe Asset for and from Emerging
Market Economies” Princeton University (mimeo)

Chen, K., T. Mancini-Griffoli and R. Sahay, (2014) Spillovers from US Monetary Policy
on Emerging Markets: different this time? IMF Working Paper 240.
Stephen V.O Clarke (1967) Central bank Cooperation 1924-31 Federal Reserve Bank
of New York
Collins C., S. Potter and E. Truman (2020) “Enhancing Central bank Cooperation in
the Covid 19 Pandemic” Peterson Institute for International Economics April 9.

Despres, E., C. Kindleberger and W. Salant (1966) ‘The Dollar and World Liquidity: A
Minority view’ Economist 5 February, pp 526-529.

Dominguez, K. and J. Frankel (1993) Does Foreign Exchange Intervention Work?
Washington DC. Institute for International Economics.

Eichengreen, B. (2013a) ‘International Policy Coordination: The Long View’ in
Robert Feenstra and Alan M. Taylor (eds) Globalization in an Age of Crisis:
Multilateral Economic Cooperation in the Twenty-First Century, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, pp 43-82.
Eichengreen, B. (2010) Exorbitant Privilege: the Rise and Fall of the Dollar and the
Future of the International Monetary System. New York: Oxford University Press.
Eichengreen B (1992) Golden Fetters. New York. Oxford University Press.

Eichengreen, B., M. Flandreau, A. Mehl and L. Chitu (2016) ‘International Currencies
Past, Present and Future: Two views from Economic History’ (mimeo)
Eichengreen (2020) “Dollar Sensationalism” Project Syndicate August 18.

45

Emminger, O (1967) ‘Practical Aspects of the Problem of Balance of Payments
Adjustment’ Journal of Political Economy 75 9, pp 512-522.

Feldstein, M. (1986) ‘New Evidence on the Effects of Exchange Rate Interventions’
NBER Working Paper 2052.

Flandreau, M. (1987) ‘Central bank cooperation in Historical Perspective: a skeptical
view’ Economic History Review Vol 50 No.4 pp 735-763.
Frankel J. (2016) ‘The Plaza Accord 30 Years Later’ in C. Fred Bergsten and Russell
A. Green (eds) International Monetary Cooperation: Lessons from the Plaza Accord
After Thirty Years. Washington DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics.
Pp 53-72.
Friedman M (1953) ‘The Case for Floating Exchange Rates’ in Milton Friedman,
Essays in Positive Economics. Chicago; University of Chicago Press. Pp157-203.

Garber, P (1993) ‘The Collapse of the Bretton Woods Fixed Exchange Rate System’ in
M. Bordo and B. Eichengreen, (eds) A Retrospective on the Bretton Woods System:
Lessons for International Monetary Reform. Chicago: University of Chicago Press pp
461 -494.
Giovannini, A. (1993), ‘Bretton Woods and its precursors: rules versus discretion in
the history of international monetary regimes’, in M. Bordo and B. Eichengreen eds.,
A Retrospective on the Bretton Woods System: Lessons for International Monetary
Reform, Chicago.
Goodhart, C. (2011), The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision; a history of the
early years, Cambridge.

Humpage, O. (1988) ‘Intervention and the Dollar’s Decline’ Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland, Economic Review 2492; pp. 2-16.
International Monetary Fund (2011) ‘Did the Plaza Accord Cause Japan’s Lost
Decades?’ World Economic Outlook Box1.4, (April)

Irwin, D (2013) ‘The French Gold Sink and the Great Deflation’ Cato Papers on Public
Policy (2) pp3-45.

James, H. (2016) ‘International Cooperation and Central Banks’ in Y. Cassis, R.
Grossman and C.R. Schenk, eds., Oxford Handbook of Banking and Financial History,
Oxford.

Keynes J.M. (1943) ‘Proposals for an International Clearing Union’ in Horsefield, J.K.
(1969) The International Monetary Fund, 1945-1965: Twenty Years of International

46

Monetary Cooperation, vol 3, Documents. Washington DC: International Monetary
Fund pp 19-36.
Levy Yeyati, E (2020) “Covid, Fed Swaps and the IMF as Lender of Last Resort”
VoxEU March 31

McCauley, R.N. (2015) ‘Does the US dollar confer an exorbitant privilege?’ Journal of
international Money and Finance, 57, pp. 1-14.
McCauley, R.N and C.R. Schenk (2015), ‘Reforming the International Monetary
System in the 1970s and 2000s: would an SDR substitution account have worked?’
International Finance, 18(2), pp. 187-206
McCauley, R.N. and C. Schenk (2020) “Central bank Swaps Then and Now: Swaps
and Dollar Liquidity in the 1960s” BIS Working Paper 851 April
Meltzer, A. (2003) A History of the Federal Reserve Vol 1: 1913-1951. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Reis R (2019) “A Solution to Sudden Stops: The IMF and Central banks Should Work
Together to Resolve Financial Crises” Finance and Development, June.
Rueff, J (1961) ‘The West is Risking a Credit Collapse’, Fortune, July.

Schenk, C. R. (2016) ‘Coordination failures during and after Bretton Woods’, in M.
Qureshi, A. Ghosh ed., From Great Depression to Great Recession: The Elusive Quest
for International Policy Cooperation, International Monetary Fund, Washington D.C.
(forthcoming).
Schenk, C.R. (2015), ‘China and the International Monetary Fund 1945-1985’ in
Yago, K., Asai, Y. and Itoh, M. (eds.) History of the IMF: Organization, Policy and
Market, Springer, pp 275-309.

Schenk, C. R. (2010) The Decline of Sterling: managing the retreat of an international
currency 1945-92, Cambridge University Press.

Schenk, C. R. and Straumann T. (2016) ‘International Monetary Policy Regimes:
Historical Perspectives’, in Michael Bordo, Oyvind Eitrheim, Mark Flandreau and Jan
Qvigstad (eds) Central Banks at a Crossroad: What Can Be Learned from History. New
York: Cambridge University Press (in press).
Taylor, J. (1985) ‘International Coordination in the Design of Macroeconomic Policy
Rules’, European Economic Review 28: pp 53-81.
Taylor, J. (2016) “A Rules based Cooperatively Managed International Monetary
System for the Future” in C. Fred Bergsten and Russell A. Green (eds) International

47

Monetary Cooperation: Lessons from the Plaza Accord After Thirty Years. Washington
DC. Peterson Institute for International Economics. pp 217-236.

Toniolo, G. with Clement, P, (2005) Central Bank Cooperation at the Bank for
International Settlements, 1930-1973, Cambridge University Press.

Tooze A (2018) Crashed: How a Decade of Financial Crises Changed the World
London: Penguin.
Triffin, R (1960), Gold and the Dollar Crisis. New Haven, Yale University Press.

Velasco A (2020) “Preventing an Emerging Market Meltdown” Project Syndicate
June 9

48

