                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




DISCOVERING TREATMENT EFFECTIVENESS VIA MEDIAN TREATMENT EFFECTS—
              APPLICATIONS TO COVID-19 CLINICAL TRIALS

                                          John Mullahy

                                      Working Paper 27895
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27895


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




Thanks are owed to Chris Adams, Marguerite Burns, Domenico Depalo, Chuck Manski, Dan
Millimet, Ciaran O'Neill, and Jon Skinner for helpful comments on an earlier draft. NICHD grant
P2CHD047873 to the Center for Demography and Ecology and NIA grant P30AG017266 to the
Center for Demography of Health and Aging, both at UW-Madison, provided logistical support.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by John Mullahy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Discovering Treatment Effectiveness via Median Treatment Effects—Applications to COVID-19
Clinical Trials
John Mullahy
NBER Working Paper No. 27895
October 2020
JEL No. C18,I10,I18

                                           ABSTRACT

Comparing median outcomes to gauge treatment effectiveness is widespread practice in clinical
and other investigations. While common, such difference-in-median characterizations of
effectiveness are but one way to summarize how outcome distributions compare. This paper
explores properties of median treatment effects as indicators of treatment effectiveness. The
paper's main focus is on decisionmaking based on median treatment effects and it proceeds by
considering two paths a decisionmaker might follow. Along one, decisions are based on point-
identified differences in medians alongside partially identified median differences; along the
other decisions are based on point-identified differences in medians in conjunction with other
point-identified parameters. On both paths familiar difference-in-median measures play some role
yet in both the traditional standards are augmented with information that will often be relevant in
assessing treatments' effectiveness. Implementing both approaches is shown to be
straightforward. In addition to its analytical results the paper considers several policy contexts in
which such considerations arise. While the paper is framed by recently reported findings on
treatments for COVID-19 and uses several such studies to explore empirically some properties of
median-treatment-effect measures of effectiveness, its results should be broadly applicable.


John Mullahy
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Dept. of Population Health Sciences
787 WARF, 610 N. Walnut Street
Madison, WI 53726
and NBER
jmullahy@facstaff.wisc.edu
1. Introduction
       In a study published online on March 18, 2020, comparing lopinavir–ritonavir treatment
for COVID-19 with standard care, Cao et al., 2020, report:

       Patients assigned to lopinavir–ritonavir did not have a time to clinical
       improvement different from that of patients assigned to standard care alone in
       the intention-to-treat population (median, 16 days vs. 16 days; hazard ratio for
       clinical improvement, 1.31; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.95 to 1.85; P=0.09)…

       On April 29, 2020, the U.S. National Institute on Allergy and Infectious Diseases
(NIAID, 2020a) announced in a news release summarizing a separate study:

       Hospitalized patients with advanced COVID-19 and lung involvement who
       received remdesivir recovered faster than similar patients who received placebo.…
       Specifically, the median time to recovery was 11 days for patients treated with
       remdesivir compared with 15 days for those who received placebo.1

On the basis of that study the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) two days later issued
an Emergency Use Authorization for remdesivir (U.S. FDA, 2020a), noting:

       While there is limited information known about the safety and effectiveness of
       using remdesivir to treat people in the hospital with COVID-19, the
       investigational drug was shown in a clinical trial to shorten the time to recovery
       in some patients.

This study, the Adaptive Covid-19 Treatment Trial or ACTT Study (Beigel et al., 2020), was
subsequently published online on May 22, 2020.
       In a third study, published online May 8, 2020, Hung et al., 2020, report on a trial
comparing combination therapy for COVID-19 with lopinavir–ritonavir alone. The authors note:

       The combination group had a significantly shorter median time from start of
       study treatment to negative nasopharyngeal swab (7 days [IQR 5–11]) than the
       control group (12 days [8–15]; hazard ratio 4·37 [95% CI 1·86–10·24], p=0·0010).

       Apart from their focus on treating COVID-19, a common feature of these three studies2
is that they summarize their respective primary endpoints as medians of each arm's time-to-


1
 Mass media wasted no time reporting these findings. An April 29 headline in the Washington
Post read: "Gilead’s remdesivir improves recovery time of coronavirus patients in NIH trial."
2
 The Cao et al., 2020, Beigel et al., 2020, and Hung et al., 2020, studies will be referenced
henceforth simply as Cao, Beigel, and Hung. They will be revisited later in the paper.



                                                 1
event (TTE) distribution, and then judge the treatments' efficacy or effectiveness by the
difference between those medians. Such median-based comparisons are common in the clinical
literature, so common perhaps that they and the information they convey to decisionmakers
may be taken for granted.
          Much is at stake on the manner in which the effectiveness of candidate COVID-19
treatments and vaccines is assessed, using clinical trial data or otherwise. Loading this burden
onto two parameters—median outcomes under treatment and comparator—is a high-stakes
gamble. Consider for instance figure 1 whose top panel depicts by the two indicated points the
results reported in the NIAID news release (NIAID, 2020a); until the publication of the Beigel
study over three weeks later this was the only information about the study's effectiveness known
by the public. (The bottom panel of figure 1 reproduces the results reported by Beigel.) Is this
information alone sufficient for a decisionmaker to conclude that remdesivir is effective since it
will "shorten the time to recovery in some patients"? Analogously does the finding that median
outcomes do not differ in the Cao study mean that decisionmakers should not prefer one
treatment over the other (see figure 2)? Or might in both instances regulators, clinicians,
patients, and others wish to know more about the distributions of outcomes before arriving at
such conclusions?
                                      [figures 1 and 2 about here]


          The perhaps-obvious points are that there are many ways subject-level outcome data can
be summarized or aggregated across a sample3 and that these alternative approaches may not
yield the same conclusion about treatments' effectiveness, nor should they. Understanding the
nature, merits, and shortcomings of the methods chosen as well as how those methods stack up
against alternatives should thus be instructive for COVID-19 decisionmaking and beyond.
          Numerous comparisons of candidate COVID-19 vaccines and treatments will be
contemplated, studied, and reported. It is thus timely to review and assess the properties and
decisionmaking value of treatment effect (TE) measures defined by distributions' medians—like
those featuring in the studies described above—as summaries of treatments' effectiveness: In a
nutshell, what is learned about treatments' effectiveness from consideration and comparison of
two distributions' medians?
          The paper argues that a reasonable answer to this question is: "Probably something but
often little." To learn more about treatments' effectiveness the paper suggests two paths
decisionmakers might follow. Along path 1 decisions are based on point-identified differences in
median outcomes—as is customary—in conjunction with medians of the distribution of
differences in outcomes, i.e. the treatment effect distribution (section 2). The latter medians are

3
    See Zarin et al., 2011, who discuss data aggregation in the context of clinical-trial reporting.



                                                    2
typically partially identified since the distribution of differences may not be observable.4 Along
path 2 decisions are again based on point-identified differences in medians in conjunction with
additional point-identified parameters whose nature will be discussed in section 5. On either
path it is proposed that the basis of decisions is enhanced by considering features of
distributions in addition to differences in median outcomes. In both cases conventional
differences in medians play some role so that decisionmakers accustomed to relying on such
criteria should find nothing particularly foreign in the proposed strategies.
       Given the urgency of discovering effective treatments and vaccines for COVID-19 it is
timely to consider measures of effectiveness that align with what is important to decisionmakers
and those affected by their decisions. What is proposed here may be helpful to this end,
particularly since the paper strives to offer intuitive and easily implemented strategies.
       Section 2 offers definitions and other preliminaries. Section 3 discusses basic elements of
decisions based on median treatment effects. Sections 4 and 5 present the key issues and results
for paths 1 and 2 as described above. Section 6 illustrates the applicability of these ideas using
three COVID-19 clinical studies. Section 7 summarizes. While the discussion throughout is
motivated and framed by attempts to discover the effectiveness of COVID-19 treatments, the
issues addressed should be broadly applicable in contexts where considerations of median
treatment effects arise.5


2. Definitions and Other Preliminaries
       Consider two subject-specific outcomes, y0 and y1 , which might be health status under

treatment 0 ( T0 ) and treatment 1 ( T1 ) and which may or may not—depending on particulars—

be potential outcomes where only one of y0 or y1 is observed. Suppose throughout that each

y j is non-negative and has either continuous or discrete (integer) measurement. Whether or not

both y j are observed for each subject, define the subject-level treatment effect as Δ = y1 − y0 .6

Unless noted otherwise smaller values of y will correspond to better health outcomes.
       Let Pr (…) denote a probability mass or density and F (…) its corresponding cumulative.

4
 Partial identification strategies have recently been used to understand aspects of COVID-19
prevalence and treatment decisions (see Manski, 2020b, and Manski and Molinari, 2020).
5
 To streamline the paper many technical details and in-depth discussions appear in appendixes
and footnotes.
6
  In this paper the term "treatment effect" when unqualified has the precise meaning indicated
here. The expressions "median treatment effect," "quantile treatment effect," "treatment
effectiveness," and others are generic; their meaning depends on particular context.



                                                 3
                        (       )
Define Fj (y) = Pr y j ≤ y for j ∈ {0,1} . 7 Fj (y) will sometimes be abbreviated as Fj . Each y j

has support Yj , which may be continuous or discrete. Y = Y0 ∪ Y1 is the common support of

y0 and y1 ; often Y0 = Y1 . Define the α–quantile of Fj (y) as8



                            {               }
           q j (α) = infy∈Y y Fj (y) ≥ α for α ∈ (0,1) .                                     (1)



m j is shorthand used henceforth for the marginal medians q j (.5) . 9 Define the interquartile

range (IQR) of each Fj as



                    {                 }
           IQR j = q j (.25), q j (.75) .                                                    (2)



Note that IQR j is defined as a two-element set not as an interval as perhaps more conventional.

          It is assumed at this point that the Fj are point identified over relevant subsets of Y;

requiring identification to be over all y ∈ Y or only over subsets will be considered in context.10
Whether identification results from a randomized trial or some other method is unimportant;
indeed each Fj can be learned from a different data source.

          Define the difference-in-y-probabilities treatment effect as


7
  This paper will focus only on issues of identification leaving considerations of inference
involving sampling variation for future study. (Goldman and Kaplan, 2018, offer innovative
perspectives on hypothesis testing in contexts like those considered here.) Distinguishing
population from sample parameters as might be typical is thus of little consequence. The N-
observation sample data can be treated as if they are a finite population of size N. This is noted
here so that notation can be streamlined, e.g. one needn't distinguish population distributions
Fj (y) from sample or empirical distributions Fj,N (y) . Thus interpreted a randomized trial splits
the population of size 2N into subpopulations of size M and 2N–M and administers accordingly
T0 and T1 ; the resulting Fj characterize the counterfactual full-population distribution of
outcomes under each treatment.
8
 "min" suffices for most cases covered here but "inf" is technically appropriate (see Hansen,
2020, section 11.13).
9
     See appendix A for discussion of medians' computation and measurement.
10
     In some cases (e.g. right censoring) point identification need hold only up to some value.



                                                     4
          ΔF (y) = F1 (y) − F0 (y) ,                                                        (3)


a familiar endpoint in TTE and other studies (e.g. difference in 12-month survival probabilities).
Define the difference-in- α -quantiles treatment effect as


          Δq (α) = q1 (α) − q 0 (α) .                                                       (4)


A special case of (4) is the difference-in-medians treatment effect


          Δm = m1 − m0 = Δq (.5) .                                                          (5)


Δm is a prominent measure used to compare treatments' effectiveness in clinical studies,
particularly albeit not exclusively for TTE outcomes. 11 Δm is point identified under the

                                                               {           }
assumption that both Fj (y) are point identified at least for y Fj (y) ≤ .5 .

          The treatment effect distribution is F (Δ) , where the distribution of Δ derives from the

joint distribution Pr (y0, y1 ) . In potential-outcomes and other contexts Pr (y0, y1 ) is not point

identified so that F (Δ) is consequently not point identified. 12 When F (Δ) is not point

identified, that it can generally be informatively partially identified is an important
consideration in what follows.
          Quantiles of the treatment effect distribution are


                         {
          q (α) Δ = min Δ F (Δ) ≥ α .   }                                                   (6)


with the median-difference treatment effect defined as


11
  Other characterizations of median TEs based on ratios or percentage changes instead of
differences have been considered; see Lee and Kobayashi, 2001, and Rogawski et al., 2017.
12
     In some instances Pr (y0, y1 ) is point identified even though the corresponding F (Δ) would
not readily admit interpretation as a distribution of counterfactual outcome differences.
Examples include pre-post and crossover designs. See Fan et al., 2003, for an example in
ophthalmology research where individuals' left eyes and right eyes are randomized to serve as
treatment and control "subjects."



                                                   5
                                    (      )          {
          mΔ = q (.5) Δ = med F (Δ) = min Δ F (Δ) ≥ .5 .           }                        (7)


With a few exceptions this paper's discussion focuses on Δm and mΔ rather than general
quantile treatment effects, this owing to the prominence13 of medians in empirical clinical and
health research; most results generalize readily to other quantiles. Manski (2007, chapter 7)
notes the inequality


          mΔ ≠ Δm ,                                                                         (8)


and proceeds to suggest that "a researcher reporting a median treatment effect must be careful
to state whether the object of interest is the left- or right-hand side [of (8)]."14
          As will be seen in section 4 understanding and computing bounds on mΔ is facilitated
by reference to the inequality probabilities (IPs) Pr (y1 > y0 ) = Pr (Δ > 0) . Like mΔ IPs are

generally not point identified but are partially identified using information on the Fj . Define



                          {                }
          D jk = max y∈Y Fj (y) − Fk (y), 0 , for j,k ∈ {0,1} .                             (9)



The D jk are the largest vertical differences between Fj (y) and Fk (y) over the common support

Y.15 These measures, known commonly as Kolmogorov's D-statistics, are depicted in figure 3.
Note that at most one of the D jk can exceed .5, a result that will prove useful later.


                                           [figure 3 about here]


13
     A pubmed.gov search conducted on September 8, 2020 yielded:
          — 90,192 hits using the search string: "median time to" OR "median survival" OR
                "median progression-free" OR "median length" OR "median duration"
          — 185,333 hits using the search string: "median difference" OR "median change" OR
                "median percentage change" OR "median percent change" OR "median relative
                change" OR "difference in median" OR "difference between median"
          — 253,125 hits using the union of these search strings
14
   Δm and mΔ are what Manski, 1997, refers to generically and respectively as " ΔD" and
" DΔ " treatment effects; thus the Δm and mΔ notation used here.
15
     The corresponding y-ordinates that define the D jk may not be unique.




                                                      6
3. How Δm May Inform Decisions
       There are many standards by which two or more outcome distributions might be
compared: moments, quantiles, dominance, etc. On what principles might Δm be advocated to
inform decisions? While Δm may have reasonable statistical properties this is a different
matter from it possessing well grounded conceptual properties. For instance comparison of the
medians (or other quantiles) of observed marginal distributions are uninformative about the
distribution of gains and losses arising from an imagined change from T0 to T1 , i.e. F (Δ) .

       Imbens and Wooldridge, 2009, raise two issues to support their claim that Δm may
often be of greater interest than mΔ or other features of F (Δ) . First, they assert that it is

natural for decisionmakers to compare policies via differences between outcome distributions,
which differences "can often be summarized by differences in the quantiles." Second, they note
that F (Δ) and associated parameters like mΔ cannot generally be point identified. Each claim

has some merit.
       Yet two counterclaims might be advanced to support consideration of mΔ . The first is
statistical: While mΔ cannot generally be point identified it can generally be partially
identified informatively, and in a subset of such cases can be sign identified (section 4 and
appendix C). The second is conceptual: While decisionmakers may assess treatments'
effectiveness by comparison of resulting marginal outcome distributions, they may also care
about policies' distributional consequences, e.g. the fractions of the population that benefit or
suffer from policy change and how much they benefit or suffer. The latter concerns are not
informed by examination of the marginal distributions but require consideration of the joint
distribution Pr (y0, y1 ) or, specifically, F (Δ) . Heterogeneous response to policy in direction and

magnitude may be important considerations: As articulated nicely by Koenker and Bilias, 2000,
"treatment may make otherwise weak subjects especially robust, and turn the strong to jello."
       Decisionmakers may or may not feel that the basis of their decisions is enhanced by
information on F (Δ) or mΔ . Either way a revealed preference argument suggests that Δm

measures of treatments' effectiveness provide them with at least some useful information about
their choices (see footnote 13). Ease of computation, applicability with right-censored data, and
parsimony in summarizing data are three plausible reasons for such popularity. The following
two sections discuss decisionmaking that does (path 1; section 4) and does not (path 2; section
5) admit roles for partially identified parameters like mΔ working in conjunction with Δm . In
both instances it is suggested that the basis of decisions may be enhanced by considering
parameters beyond Δm . To implement the strategies proposed along either path analysts need
appeal only to information contained in F0 and F1 ; how that information gets used is quite



                                                 7
different along the two paths, however.16
       Finally, while the analytical results reported in sections 4 and 5 may be of interest per
se, considering how they may be applicable in real-world decision and policy settings is
appropriate. Rather than disrupting the flow of the paper here with a lengthy discussion,
appendix E describes several policy or regulatory contexts wherein considerations of median or
more general quantile TEs are or at least arguably should be prominent.17 To anticipate that
discussion it is worth noting briefly one example of regulatory language that naturally motivates
such considerations. The regulatory language governing FDA's determination of effectiveness of
biological products is:

       Effectiveness means a reasonable expectation that, in a significant proportion of
       the target population, the pharmacological or other effect of the biological
       product, when used under adequate directions, for use and warnings against
       unsafe use, will serve a clinically significant function in the diagnosis, cure,
       mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in man. [21 CFR 601.25(d)(2)]
       (emphasis added)

Note that this standard entails considerations of both population quantiles ("significant
proportion") and treatment effect magnitudes ("clinically significant function"). Appendix E
suggests statistical formalization of this language and suggests further how the discussion in
sections 4 and 5 may usefully address such regulatory questions.


4. Path 1: Assessing Treatments' Effectiveness via Δm and Partially Identified mΔ
       The essence of decision problems in this context is captured by a simple picture. Figure 4
depicts some population's discrete Pr (y0, y1 ) that puts probability mass 1/3 on three (y0, y1 )


16
  Regulatory language suggests that parameters like medians on their own may inadequately
describe outcomes. In its guidance for product labeling, the FDA (FDA, 2006) notes:
       When time-to-event endpoints (e.g., mortality) are used, median or mean
       survival alone is not usually an adequate descriptor. Survival curves (or event-
       free survival curves) and hazard ratios are often effective ways to display such
       data. Data can also be summarized at specific times (e.g., prevalence at 3, 6, 9,
       12 months) or at specific event frequency (e.g., time to 25 percent, 50 percent,
       and 75 percent prevalence of events).
17
  While it is straightforward to imagine how understanding IPs may be valuable in informing
certain decisions (see Mullahy, 2018a) it is maybe less obvious how knowledge of, or knowledge
of bounds on, mΔ is informative. While applicability to practical questions may be more
nuanced there are nonetheless real-world settings where knowledge of mΔ —or more generally
of q (α) Δ —should be decision-relevant as will be suggested in appendix E.



                                                8
values,   {(3, 8), (15,11), (17, 21)} .   Imagine Pr (y0, y1 ) is known. There is nothing particularly

peculiar about the depicted probability structure (Pearson correlation .77, rank correlation 1.0).
Yet Δm = −4 < 0 and mΔ = 4 > 0 . A decisionmaker knowing nothing more than the pictured
information must select T0 or T1 . Which should be chosen? (Which would you choose?)


                                             [figure 4 about here]


          In general one would appeal to the decisionmaker's utility or loss function to answer this
question. But this is not the main issue here: Important here is whether the assumed knowledge
of mΔ might influence even to some degree a decisionmaker's attitudes about the relative
merits of T0 and T1 given that Δm is presumed known. Would such knowledge be even

partially influential then the obstacle to decisionmaking based on mΔ in settings where
Pr (y0, y1 ) is not known is mΔ ' s point identification not, as Imbens and Wooldridge hint,

irrelevance of mΔ per se. In these cases partial identification may support such decisionmaking.


Partial Identification of and Bounds on mΔ
          Since mΔ is generally partially but not point identified, a decisionmaker whose choice
would depend to at least some degree on knowing it must accept that knowing a range of
possible values is the best to be hoped for. Whether the knowable range of its possible values
suffices for decisionmaking is context dependent.
          A parameter θ is partially identified when it is known to be in the closed, half-open, or

                                                                     {       }
open bounds interval b (θ) . Define the bounds set B (θ) = L (θ), U (θ) where L (θ) = inf b (θ) (    )
                  (     )
and U (θ) = sup b (θ) . 18 L (θ) and U (θ) are valid bounds since θ ∈ b (θ) but may not be the

tightest bounds. The bounds B (θ) are considered sharp when L (θ) and U (θ) are the largest

and smallest values learned from the data that are consistent with knowledge of θ . These

                                                                                   {
tightest bounds and corresponding bounds interval are denoted B* (θ) = L* (θ), U* (θ)           }   and

b* (θ) . A partially identified parameter θ is sign identified when b* (θ) excludes zero. 19



18
     Using inf/sup instead of min/max covers cases where b (θ) may be half or fully open.
19
  The paper does not consider monotone treatment response (Manski, 1997) or related
considerations (Lee, 2000). See appendix B for a brief discussion.



                                                      9
Strategies for computing B* (mΔ) are discussed in appendix C.20


Bounds with Partially Observed Outcome Data
         Because they are relevant in the case studies appearing in section 6, a few considerations
involved in computing bounds on mΔ under two forms of partially observed outcomes—right-
censored data and IQR data—are sketched here and discussed more fully in appendix C.
         Right-censoring of outcome data is common in TTE studies. Given noninformative right-
censoring at yc (outcomes unobserved if they exceed yc ) three scenarios can be considered:


         a. both F0 (yc ) and F1 (yc ) are greater than .5 (both m0 and m1 are point identified)

         b. one of F0 (yc ) and F1 (yc ) is greater than .5, the other is not (one of m0 or m1 is

                point identified, the other is not)
         c. both F0 (yc ) and F1 (yc ) are less than than .5 (neither m0 nor m1 is point identified)


These cases, depicted in the top panel of figure 5, have different implications for the
identification of Δm and mΔ :


         a. Δm is point identified; mΔ is partially identified with finite bounds
         b. both Δm and mΔ are partially identified with one finite bound
         c. neither Δm nor mΔ is informatively bounded (no finite bounds)


None of these results is surprising. Yet even under scenario (a) it is noteworthy that while the
particular right-censoring threshold yc is of no consequence for point identifying Δm —i.e. m0 ,

m1 , and Δm are invariant with respect to any yc that exceeds both m0 and m1 —this is not
so for computation of mΔ bounds. The extent of right-censoring affects the amount of


20
     A Stata program, medte, computes B* (mΔ) with uncensored or right-censored outcomes. A
zip file containing the do-file defining the medte program is available here. medte reports Δm ,
B* (mΔ) , the IP bounds defined in appendix C ((C.1) and (C.2)), and the approximate central
aperture measures defined in section 5. The zip file also contains a readme file and the two
datasets used for the analyses reported in those tables. (It may be of interest to note that
B* (mΔ) = {−6, 6} for the data depicted in figure 4, with this B* (mΔ) computed using the
permutation approach described in appendix C.)



                                                  10
information used to compute the mΔ bounds. Reducing right-censoring—i.e. increasing yc —

can never widen mΔ bounds but may narrow them. See appendix C for discussion.21


                                         [figure 5 about here]


       The second form of partially observed data of interest here is interquartile-range data.
IQRs are often reported alongside medians, sometimes in settings where data are also right
censored. For instance IQRs are reported for the primary endpoints in the Cao study that
reported entire data (their figure 2 and table 3) as well as in the Hung study that reported the
two arms' quartiles only (their table 2; figure 6 here). Indeed it is not unusual to find the only
outcome information reported to be that on each outcome's three sample quartiles.


                                         [figure 6 about here]


       Recall the definition of IQR j in (2). It turns out that mΔ can be bounded

informatively using only the IQR j . When outcomes are continuously distributed and the Fj (y)

are everywhere-increasing in y the IQR-based bounds are


       BIQR (mΔ) =   {(q1 (.25) − q0 (.75)), (q1 (.75) − q0 (.25))} ,                      (10)



where the q j (.25) and q j (.75) are the observed data. When outcomes are measured as integers

the corresponding IQR-based bounds are


       BIQR (mΔ) =   {(q1 (.25) − q0 (.75) −1), (q1 (.75) − q0 (.25) + 1)} .               (11)


Appendix C provides details.


Relationships between Δm and B* (mΔ)
       While Δm and mΔ describe different quantities, understanding relationships between

21
  For ethical and statistical reasons stopping clinical trials "early for benefit" is controversial
(Pocock, 1992). Ethical considerations aside, if the only endpoints of interest are the median
TTE outcomes m0 and m1 then there is no further statistical benefit to be realized by waiting
to amass more data once the events for half the subjects in each treatment arm have occurred.



                                                   11
them may enhance understanding of treatment effectiveness when knowledge of Δm alone

inadequately informs choice. If so, whether knowing B* (mΔ) instead of mΔ itself will satisfy a

decisionmaker will depend on context.

         This subsection presents results on relationships between Δm and B* (mΔ) . Knowledge

of Δm turns out to be partially informative about B* (mΔ) and vice versa; since both Δm

and mΔ derive from Pr (y0, y1 ) this is not surprising. The results are explained in appendix D.


Result 1 (R1):   Suppose Δm < 0 . Then:
                       a. 0 ≤ D01 ≤ .5

                       b. 0 < D10 ≤ 1

                       c. L* (mΔ) ≤ 0



R1(c) means that knowing sign (Δm) suffices to sign L* (mΔ) when Δm < 0 . An interpretation

is that the data cannot reject sign (mΔ) = sign (Δm) . Alternatively, if mΔ is sign identified—

with Δm < 0 this means U* (mΔ) < 0 —then its sign must be the same as Δm ' s , i.e. mΔ and

Δm cannot be sign identified in opposite directions. This result is generalized with Result 2:


Result 2 (R2):   L* (mΔ) ≤ Δm ≤ U* (mΔ)


Result 3 (R3):   Suppose D10 > .5 . Then:

                       a. Pr (y1 ≤ y0 ) > .5

                       b. Δm < 0
                       c. mΔ < 0


Finding D jk > .5 is powerful, sufficing to sign identify mΔ and offer a strong statement about

     (      )
Pr y j < y k .22 Indeed, mΔ is sign identified if and only if one of the D jk exceeds .5.


22
  With smaller values of y corresponding to better health it might be reasonable in such cases
to consider Tj to be a breakthrough treatment. See appendix E.




                                                 12
       Figure 7 integrates these ideas. Depicted are two different joint probability structures.

Pr(a) (y0, y1 ) , where y0 and y1 are proximate, has Δm = 2 , mΔ = 2 , B* (mΔ) = {−1, 4} ,

                  (            )
D01 = .4 , and B* Pr (y1 > y0 ) = {.4,1} . Conversely Pr(b) (y0, y1 ) , where y0 and y1 are distant,

has Δm = 6 , mΔ = 6 , B* (mΔ) = {3, 8} , D01 = 1 (zero-order dominance; see Castagnoli, 1984),

       (              )
and B* Pr (y1 > y0 ) = {1,1} . Roughly speaking, joint distributions placing probability mass

further northwest of the y0 = y1 locus yield stronger identifying information along with larger

median treatment effects; in such instances the marginals F0 and F1 are "farther apart" in an
important sense explored further in section 5.


                                       [figure 7 about here]


Informing Decisions with Δm and Partially Identified mΔ
       Imagine a decisionmaker for whom both Δm and mΔ are decision-relevant parameters.
Consider a stylized policy or decision function


        pβ = βΔm + (1 − β) mΔ ,                                                             (12)



where β ∈ ⎡⎢0,1⎤⎥ is presumed known and reflects the relative importance to the decisionmaker of
           ⎣ ⎦
Δm and mΔ . With smaller y corresponding to better health, positive and negative values of
pβ favor T0 or T1 , respectively. In general pβ is only partially identified, with



           ( ) {
       B* pβ = βΔm + (1 − β) L* (mΔ), βΔm + (1 − β) U* (mΔ) .    }                          (13)



However sign identification of pβ would be valuable for decisionmaking. Consider three cases:



       a. Suppose Δm = 0 . Then for any β ∈ ⎡⎢0,1⎤⎥ pβ would be sign-identified only if mΔ is
                                             ⎣ ⎦
               sign-identified. But from R2 mΔ is not sign identified when Δm = 0 .
       b. Suppose Δm ≠ 0 and mΔ is sign-identified. Then pβ is sign-identified for any

               β ∈ ⎡⎢0,1⎤⎥ since from R2 the signs of Δm and mΔ coincide when mΔ is sign-
                    ⎣ ⎦
               identified.



                                                  13
          c. Suppose Δm ≠ 0 and mΔ is not sign-identified. Then pβ is sign-identified for some

                 values of β . E.g. suppose Δm < 0 and U* (mΔ) > 0 . Then pβ is sign identified

                         (         (             ⎤
                                                   )
                 for β ∈ U* (mΔ) U* (mΔ) − Δm , 1⎥ . Knowing this range may be instructive.
                                                 ⎦


          Decisionmakers may be positioned to make coherent choices even when they know only
(13) and not (12). If pβ is sign identified then the decision at hand is well supported and there

can be no regret. If not then it is appropriate to admit reservations about whatever decision is
made since it might be regretted and since certitude about its merits is not credible (Manski,
2020a). Either way to the extent that mΔ is at least minimally important to a decisionmaker
its partial identification needn't hinder information on its bounds supporting or cautioning
choices that must be made.23,24


5. Path 2: Assessing Treatments' Effectiveness via Δm and Other Point-Identified Parameters
          Recall from section 3 that Imbens and Wooldridge, 2009, have argued that typical policy
choices will appropriately be based on consideration of quantiles of F0 and F1 , writing: "choice

should be governed by preferences of the policymaker over [ F0 and F1 ] (which can often be
summarized by differences in the quantiles)." One might thus imagine a decision function in
which various quantiles hold different importance for a decisionmaker:


          pω (J) = ∑ α∈J ωα ×Δq (α) ,                                                       (14)



where J is the set of quantiles of interest and ωα are importance weights. Should all the Δq (α)

in (14) be point identified then Imbens and Wooldridge's claim suggests that the sign of p ω will
determine the policymaker's choice; its magnitude might also be of interest in some contexts.
Basing choices on Δm alone is a particular version of (14) with J = {.5} and ω.5 = 1 .


23
     See Manski, 2018a,b, for important insights on decisionmaking in clinical and related contexts.
24When β is unknown, a more modest yet quite pragmatic suggestion—one that still
acknowledges both the decision-relevance of mΔ as well as its partial identification—is simply
to routinely report B* (mΔ) alongside point estimates of Δm when a study's results are
tabulated. For instance, one might report -4 {-15,10} in a tabular summary of the results
reported in table 1 (being careful to note that this is not a conventional confidence interval).


                                                  14
        Still in the spirit of Imbens and Wooldridge's suggestion of comparing marginal
distributions, policy choices might alternatively depend on a set of probability treatment effects,


        pπ (K) = ∑ k∈K π k ×ΔF (y k ) ,                                                    (15)


where K is the set of y-values of interest (e.g. 6-, 12-, and 24-month survival) and π k are

importance weights. Again the sign and perhaps the magnitude of pπ may be decisive for
treatment choice. Familiar single-outcome criteria, e.g. differences in 12-month survival
probabilities, are specific versions of (15).
        Of course (14) and (15) might both be of interest in which case a general choice function


                  (
        pboth = v pω (J), pπ (K) )                                                         (16)


may underpin decisions.


Aperture and Weighted- Δm Measures of Treatment Effectiveness
        Point-identified parameters beyond Δm may provide decisionmakers more-nuanced
perspectives on treatment effectiveness than those offered by Δm alone. The search is for
broadly applicable parameters that provide such perspectives while also being straightforward to
implement in empirical studies. The perspective here is that of a decisionmaker who is not
prepared to entirely abandon Δm but is willing to temper decisions by additional criteria. One
approach, seemingly novel, is suggested here.25
        As used in the preceding paragraph "treatment effectiveness" is intended to describe a
broad sense of the extent to which one treatment makes people better off than another. In the
following discussion greater treatment effectiveness means some amalgam of larger α–quantile

treatment effects Δq (α) over some α ∈ (0,1) and larger y–probability treatment effects ΔF (y)

over some y ∈ Y . In essence, greater treatment effectiveness means F0 and F1 are "farther
apart" in some directions. The practical challenge is how to summarize this notion with a single
parameter, i.e. how to define decision-informative yet simple and parsimonious representations
of "farther apart" and "some direction."
        Define the area between F0 and F1 over some interval y ∈ (r, s) as the local aperture of

25
  The approach suggested here is admittedly speculative; its merits—should it appear to have
any—would need to be vetted more thoroughly than the scope of this paper permits.



                                                  15
F0 and F1 and denote this area A (r, s) . 26 "Aperture" signifies that A (r, s) measures the

"opening" between F0 and F1 over the interval (r, s) . Intuitively, the larger is A (r, s) the more

effective is Tj relative to Tk in the vicinity of (r, s) as F0 and F1 are locally "farther apart."27

          For any point (y,α) in the region bounded by F0 and F1 over y ∈ (r, s) define two

approximations to A (r, s) as



                        (                 ) (
          a1 (y,α) = F0 (y) − F1 (y) × F1−1 (α) − F0−1 (α)                ),                           (17)
                   = −ΔF (y)×Δq (α)

and

                       ( (               ) (                   )) (
          a 2 (α) = .5× F0 F1−1 (α) − F1 F0−1 (α) × F1−1 (α) − F0−1 (α)        )
                                                                                                       (18)
                  = .5×(F (F 0
                                  −1
                                  1    (α)) − F (F
                                                1
                                                        −1
                                                        0    (α)))×Δq (α).

          Using the idea of aperture and its approximations to devise broadly applicable and
point-identifiable measures of treatment effectiveness, it is natural to consider aperture at a
"central" location in the data, or central aperture. Letting (r, s) = m j, m k     (   ) (i.e. r is the smaller
                                                                (          )
of m0 or m1 ), define central aperture as A m j, m k . From (17) and (18) it follows that two

easily computed approximations to central aperture are:


          a1 (m*,.5) = −ΔF (m *)×Δm
                                                                                                       (19)
                        = δ1 ×Δm
and

                            ( (           )         (
          a 2 (.5) = .5× F0 F1−1 (.5) − F1 F0−1 (.5) ×Δm        ))                                     (20)
                  = .5×δ2 ×Δm


26
     With discrete data "area" should be interpreted as a scaled sum over a set y ∈ Q = {r,…, s} ,

e.g. A (r, s) =   R−1
                   R    ∑ y∈Q (F0 (y) − F1 (y)) if Q is a set of consecutive integers (with   R = #Q ).

27
     Imagine at this point that F0 and F1 do not cross on the interval (r, s) . Crossovers are seen
below to be irrelevant for the particular approaches proposed here.



                                                                     16
where m* = .5 (m0 + m1 ) .28,29

          a1 (m*,.5) and a 2 (.5) are necessarily non-negative since for any y between m0 and m1

Δm has the opposite sign of the terms multiplying it in (19) and (20).30 For practical purposes
it is useful to re-define a1 (m*,.5) and a 2 (.5) so their signs indicate the Δm -direction of

treatment effectiveness, i.e.


          a1 (m*,.5) = sign (Δm)×(δ1 ×Δm)                                                         (21)

and
          a 2 (.5) = sign (Δm)×(.5×δ2 ×Δm) ,                                                      (22)



          (
with A m j, m k   ) analogously signed. These revised definitions are used henceforth.
          Figure 8 depicts a1 (m*,.5) and a 2 (.5) when y0 and y1 are imagined to be gamma-

distributed with m0 = 4 and m1 = 2 . In the top panel −a1 (m*,.5) = .70 is the area of the

shaded rectangle while in the bottom panel −a 2 (.5) = .64 is the area of the shaded trapezoid.31


                                          [figure 8 about here]

28
  Note that m * may or may not be in the common support Y (e.g. if Y is the set of non-
negative integers).
29
     The vertical distances between F0 and F1 described by the δ j not only define probability
treatment effects but also correspond roughly to the degree of informativeness (or tightness) of
bounds on parameters like mΔ and IP (see section 4 and appendix C). Moreover while the roles
played by the δ j in (21) and (22) may be intuitive per se, it might also be noted that they are

respectively     (if   positive)   Boole-Fréchet   lower   bounds   on      (
                                                                          Pr y j < m*, y k > m *  )   and

     (                  )
Pr y j < m k , y k > m j (if the δ j < 0 then reverse the inequality directions in these probability

statements). These translate roughly as " y j is small and y k is large so y k − y j is large."

30
     Note that F0 and F1 cannot cross over their local domains in the definitions of a1 (m*,.5)

and a 2 (.5) . E.g. suppose m1 < m0 ; then F1 (y) ≥ .5 and F0 (y) < .5 for all y ∈ (m1, m0 ) .

31
     The .5 multiplier in the expression for a 2 (.5) in (22) arises since the area of the trapezoid
PQRS is the combined area of the two right triangles PSQ and RQS.



                                                   17
          Noteworthy from (21) and (22) is that a1 (m*,.5) and a 2 (.5) respect but augment Δm .

Both are intuitive, easily computed indicators of treatment effectiveness,32 measures that provide
broader characterizations of effectiveness than does Δm on its own. That is a1 (m*,.5) and

a 2 (.5) describe more comprehensively than does Δm the divergence of F0 and F1 in the

"middle" of the data. In an important sense a1 (m*,.5) and a 2 (.5) combine the motivations

underlying (14) and (15); for instance


                                   (     ( )         (
          a1 (m*,.5) = sign (Δm)× −pω {.5} ×pπ {m *} .      ))                                       (23)


          The sense in which central aperture and its approximations are indicators of treatment
effectiveness can be appreciated with reference to figure 9 where m0 = 4 and m1 = 2 in both

panels wherein F0 is the same but F1 differs (each Fj is gamma distributed). In the top panel

δ1 = −.08 and a1 (m*,.5) = −.16 while in the bottom panel δ1 = −.18 and a1 (m*,.5) = −.35 .

This difference in approximate central aperture conforms to a notion that the effectiveness of T1

relative to T0 is greater in the scenario depicted in the figure's bottom panel even though

Δm = −2 in both cases. If a decisionmaker must choose among T0 , T1(top) , or T1(bottom) which

do they select? Might knowledge of the respective a1 (m*,.5) influence or support their choice?33


                                           [figure 9 about here]


32
     a1 (m*,.5) and a 2 (.5) can be estimated even with right censoring; they are point identified so

long as both Fj (y) are point identified for all y ≤ max {m0, m1 } .

33
     For positive y the global aperture of F0 and F1 —the area between F0 and F1 over the

entirety of Y—is the difference in means E0 ⎡⎢ y ⎤⎥ − E1 ⎡⎢ y ⎤⎥ = −ΔE ⎡⎢ y ⎤⎥ (necessarily finite in a sample
                                             ⎣ ⎦          ⎣ ⎦           ⎣ ⎦
but perhaps not so in a population where Y is unbounded). If a decisionmaker uses ΔE ⎡⎢ y ⎤⎥ to
                                                                                                         ⎣ ⎦
inform choice they are appealing to the global aperture of F0 and F1 even if they do not

appreciate this explicitly. While ΔE ⎡⎢ y ⎤⎥ could be used to gauge treatment effectiveness it will
                                        ⎣ ⎦
often be impractical in clinical studies to do so due to right censoring. Also note that F0 and F1
can cross over Y, making any corresponding notion of aperture as "opening" somewhat fuzzy.



                                                     18
       One might also consider tail aperture or quartile aperture to assess treatment

                                                                                 (
effectiveness, akin to how one might consider comparisons of IQRs, e.g. A q j (α), q k (α) for )
α = .25 , α = .75 , etc., implemented using a j (…) approximations. A vector of such measures

might complement the Imbens and Wooldridge, 2009, approach described in (14) and (15), e.g.

                      (             )
pξ (J) = ∑ α∈J ξα ×A q j (α), q k (α) . Such indicators may be instructive regarding treatment

effectiveness even when the information conveyed by a1 (m*,.5) or a 2 (.5) is tenuous, as with

                                    (      )
the Cao et al., 2020, data where A m j, m k = a1 (m*,.5) = a 2 (.5) = Δm = 0 (see figure 2).

       Inspection of (21) and (22) suggests that a1 (m*,.5) and a 2 (.5) can be interpreted as

weighted Δm . One might thus consider more generally a class of weighted Δm , w ×Δm ,
where w ∈ ⎡⎢0,1⎤⎥ are point-identifiable weights describing some decision-relevant aspects of the
           ⎣ ⎦
divergence of F0 and F1 . Conventional analysis effectively sets w = 1 but there is no reason to
believe w = 1 best informs a decisionmaker's choice. Such weighted Δm parameters build on
Δm but downweight it the smaller is w. Reasonable candidates for w might include δ1 and

.5×δ2 as in (21) and (22), as well as other parameters that characterize vertical distances

between F0 and F1 , e.g. the D jk .34

       The preceding discussion is not advocacy for using a particular aperture measure or
weighted Δm as a decision standard. Instead it is an appeal for future research to assess the
merits of easily implementable and point-identified criteria like a1 (m*,.5) and a 2 (.5) for

decisionmaking using point-identified parameters, the premise being that decisions should be
informed more comprehensively than by appealing to Δm alone. Consideration of central
aperture might serve as a useful starting point for such exploration but is unlikely to be its
destination. Moving beyond the intuition that parameters akin to a1 (m*,.5) and a 2 (.5)

describe treatment effectiveness to a formal assessment of welfare differences they may describe
might also be a valuable step.
       Determining what values of a1 (m*,.5) or a 2 (.5) —or indeed any other parameters



34
   Referring to w ×Δm to gauge treatment effectiveness recalls the Harberger, 1971 (eq. 2),
first-order approximation to welfare change due to a "treatment": the product of marginal value
and quantity change. Quantity change alone—here Δm —tells an incomplete story; a fuller
story unfolds by considering as well the worth of quantity along the margin of quantity change.



                                                19
advanced in such discussions—correspond to "clinically significant" differences between F0 and

F1 will also require novel consideration. (For instance if ΔCS is considered a clinically

significant Δm in a particular treatment context then might a magnitude of a1 (m*,.5) or

a 2 (.5) exceeding .25×ΔCS suggest clinical significance? Or .1×ΔCS ? Or … ?) While ultimately

essential, such pragmatic considerations ought not postpone exploring the merits of parameters
that better inform decisionmakers about treatment effectiveness than do those conventionally
used, particularly when such novel parameters are straightforward to implement in practice.


6. COVID-19: Three Case Studies
Case Study 1: Remdesivir for COVID-19 Treatment (Beigel et al., 2020)
       The Beigel study reports results of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
of intravenous remdesivir in adults hospitalized with COVID-19. Its primary outcome is time to
recovery (TTR) measured in days, with recovery determined by a patient meeting a pre-
specified threshold on an ordinal scale. The intention-to-treat sample analyzed here35 consists of
538 and 521 observations on treated and control patients, respectively, of which 147 and 181
observations are right-censored after 28 days. The bottom panel of figure 1 depicts these data.
       Table 1 summarizes the results. As noted earlier Δm = −4 , favoring treatment over

control, while B* (mΔ) = {−15,10} . The bounds interval is fairly wide as can be expected from

the wide IP bounds. While the Δm result might lead a decisionmaker to favor treatment over
control, wide bounds on mΔ might encourage that same decisionmaker to be conservative in
advancing such a recommendation should considerations beyond Δm be relevant. Using earlier
arguments, however, note that pβ is sign identified (negative) for β ∈ ⎡⎢5 7,1⎤⎥ , so that a
                                                                        ⎣      ⎦
decisionmaker who appeals to (12) and who weighs Δm no more than 2 7 is positioned to
recommend treatment over control.
       Finally, for the Beigel data the central aperture measures are A (m1, m0 ) = −.394 ,

a1 (m*,.5) = −.386 , and a 2 (.5) = −.375 .


Case Study 2: Lopinavir-Ritonavir for COVID-19 Treatment (Cao et al., 2020)
       The Cao study reports the results of an RCT involving hospitalized patients with


35
   The data used in this section's analyses of the first two case studies as well as in producing
figure 1 (bottom panel) and figure 2 were coded from "eyeball analysis" of Beigel's figure 2A and
Cao's figure 2 then calibrated as necessary to match the reported sample medians.



                                               20
confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection. Treatment consisted of receipt of lopinavir-ritonavir plus
standard care, while control consisted exclusively of standard care. The trial's primary endpoint
is time to clinical improvement (TTI), measured in days. The trial was open label; moreover the
authors report that placebo treatment in the control group was not possible due to the trial's
emergency nature. The intention-to-treat sample consists of 199 patients with 99 and 100
randomized to treatment and control, respectively. By the administrative censoring time of 28
weeks clinical improvement was observed for 77 of the 99 treatment subjects and 70 of the 100
control subjects; thus 22 and 30 subjects' data, respectively, are treated as right-censored. Figure
2 reproduces the data depicted in Cao's figure 2.
          Median TTI is 16 days in both arms of the trial so Δm = 0 . A decisionmaker concerned

only with marginal median outcomes would favor neither treatment. But B* (mΔ) = {−9,7} , so

the magnitude of mΔ could be quite substantial in either direction. Regarding central aperture

     (      )
A m j, m k = a1 (m*,.5) = a 2 (.5) = 0 in the Cao sample as Δm = 0 .36,37


Case Study 3: Combination Therapy for COVID-19 Treatment (Hung et al., 2020)
          The Hung study reports the results of an open-label randomized phase-2 trial comparing
combination treatment for COVID-19 (interferon beta-1b plus lopinavir–ritonavir plus ribavirin)
with lopinavir–ritonavir alone in a sample of hospitalized patients. The study's primary outcome
is time to providing a nasopharyngeal swab negative for severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 RT-PCR. 86 and 41 patients were randomly assigned to treatment and control.
The time to negative test (TTNT) outcomes are reported as integers (days) and analyzed in an
intention-to-treat context.38

36
     As seen in figure 2 F0 first-order dominates F1 (at least up to the censoring threshold), so
that a decisionmaker might have other reasons to favor T1 .
37
     While this paper has sidestepped issues of sampling variation and inference it might be noted
that a1 (m*,.5) and a 2 (.5) are themselves subject to sampling variation. Even in a case like the
Cao data where the point estimates of both measures are zero (since Δm = 0 ) there will
generally arise non-degenerate sampling distributions. A simple bootstrap with 1,000 replications
shows for those data 95% central sampling intervals of ⎡⎢−.85,.09⎤⎥ for a1 (m*,.5) and ⎡⎢−.80,.07 ⎤⎥
                                                          ⎣       ⎦                     ⎣          ⎦
for a 2 (.5) with respective sampling distribution medians of −.04 and −.04 . (For the Beigel

data the corresponding results are ⎡⎢−1.15,−.05⎤⎥ for a1 (m*,.5) and ⎡⎢−1.11,−.04 ⎤⎥ for a 2 (.5) with
                                    ⎣           ⎦                     ⎣            ⎦
respective sampling distribution medians of −.42 and −.40 .)
38
  The Hung study reports no information on right-censoring. The analysis proceeds as if the
data are uncensored, i.e. that the reported quantiles are those corresponding to the full sample.


                                                 21
          Figure 6 depicts the medians and IQRs reported in Hung's table 2; this is the only
information the study provides on the outcomes' marginal distributions. As such, the reported
TTNT data are right-censored and interval-measured (e.g. q1 (.25) = 5 implies F1 (5) ∈ ⎡⎢.25,.5) ,
                                                                                        ⎣
as depicted by the closed and open symbols in figure 6). For these data Δm = −5 . Applying
(11) to these data yields BIQR (mΔ) = {−11, 4} .39


 7. Summary
          Ease of computation, broad applicability, and parsimony in summarizing outcome data
are three plausible statistical reasons for the prominence of Δm in clinical research. By a
revealed preference argument, Δm must routinely provide decisionmakers with useful
information about the choices they confront. Yet this popularity could arise either because
parameters other than Δm are not of interest 40 or because parameters beyond Δm are of
interest but the cost of using them to inform choices is perceived to be too great.
          This paper has suggested that it is straightforward to augment the signals about
treatment effectiveness sent by Δm with information about other features of outcomes'
distributions in such ways as should more comprehensively inform decisionmakers who must
choose on the basis of the data at hand, whether or not those other features are point identified.
In essence the strategies presented in this paper may serve to reduce the perceived costs of
appealing to parameters beyond just Δm for those decisionmakers who do find them of interest.
          While one might imagine a portfolio of alternative approaches, the particular ideas
advanced here are designed to be broadly roadworthy since they are easily implemented and
require—whether a decisionmaker follows path 1 or path 2—assumptions hardly more stringent
than those needed for identification of Δm itself. That the measures of treatment effectiveness
proposed here are all anchored to Δm should also be of comfort to decisionmakers who have
traditionally and broadly relied on Δm in making choices. How these approaches perform in
practice, whether they provide useful information to decisionmakers, and how corresponding


39
     A curiosity is that IQRs and medians are sometimes reported when right-censoring
probabilities exceed .25 or .5. For example, the Cao study reports IQR 0 as {15,18} even though
the right-censoring fraction in the control group is .30. Other clinical studies report analogous
results. Whether what is reported in such instances derives from model-based predictions (e.g.
from proportional hazard models), from other sources, or from erroneous calculations is not
always evident. In no event, however, are right-censoring probabilities exceeding .5 or .25
logically consistent with point-identified medians or .75-quantiles.
40   For example, β = 1 in (12) or J = {.5} , ω.5 = 1 , and v (…) is invariant w.r.t. pπ in (16).




                                                   22
standards for clinical significance should be defined are among the issues still to be resolved.
       Finally the paper has focused on issues involving identification, ignoring considerations
of inference used to understand implications of sampling variation. Such considerations may be
of interest in some decisionmaking contexts and, if so, would be useful to tackle in future study.


Acknowledgments
       Thanks are owed to Chris Adams, Marguerite Burns, Domenico Depalo, Chuck Manski,
Dan Millimet, Ciaran O'Neill, and Jon Skinner for helpful comments on an earlier draft.




                                                 23
References
Beigel, J.H. et al. 2020. "Remdesivir for the Treatment of Covid-19—Preliminary Report."
       NEJM. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2007764
Cao, B. et al. 2020. "A Trial of Lopinavir–Ritonavir in Adults Hospitalized with Severe Covid-
       19." NEJM 382: 1787-1799.
Castagnoli, E. 1984. "Some Remarks on Stochastic Dominance." Revista di Matematica per le
       Scienze Economiche e Sociali 7: 15-28.
Cravens, S.M.R. 2002. "The Usage and Meaning of 'Clinical Significance' in Drug-Related
       Litigation." Washington and Lee Law Review 59: 553-597.
European Medicines Agency (EMA). 2020. ICH E9 (R1) Addendum on Estimands and
       Sensitivity Analysis in Clinical Trials to the Guideline on Statistical Principles for
       Clinical Trials—Step 5. Document EMA/CHMP/ICH/436221/2017. Amsterdam: EMA.
Fan, D.S.P. et al. 2003. "Ocular-Hypertensive and Anti-Inflammatory Response to Rimexolone
       Therapy in Children." Archives of Ophthalmology 121: 1716-1721.
Fan, Y. and S. S. Park. 2010. "Sharp Bounds on the Distribution of Treatment Effects and
       Their Statistical Inference." Econometric Theory 26: 931-951.
Ganz, R.A. et al. 2013. "Esophageal Sphincter Device for Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease."
       NEJM 368: 719-727.
Goldman, M. and D.M. Kaplan. 2018. "Comparing Distributions by Multiple Testing across
       Quantiles or CDF Values." Journal of Econometrics 206: 143-166.
Hansen, B. 2020. Introduction to Econometrics (Vol. 1). Web textbook. University of Wisconsin-
       Madison, Department of Economics. (https://www.ssc.wisc.edu/~bhansen/probability/,
       accessed May 21, 2020) (May 2020 version).
Harberger, A.C. 1971. "Three Basic Postulates for Applied Welfare Economics: An Interpretive
       Essay." Journal of Economic Literature 9: 785-797.
Heckman, J.J., J. Smith, and N. Clements. 1997. "Making the Most Out of Programme
       Evaluations and Social Experiments: Accounting for Heterogeneity in Programme
       Impacts." Review of Economic Studies 64: 487-535.
Hung, I. F.-N. et al. 2020. "Triple Combination of Interferon beta-1b, Lopinavir–Ritonavir, and
       Ribavirin in the Treatment of Patients Admitted to Hospital with COVID-19: An Open-
       label, Randomised, Phase 2 Trial." The Lancet 395: 1695-1704.
Imbens, G.W. and J.M. Wooldridge. 2009. "Recent Developments in the Econometrics of
       Program Evaluation." Journal of Economic Literature 47: 5-86.
Koenker, R. and Y. Bilias. 2001. "Quantile Regression for Duration Data: A Reappraisal of the
       Pennsylvania Reemployment Bonus Experiments." Empirical Economics 26: 199-220.
Lee, M.-J. 2000. "Median Treatment Effect in Randomized Trials." JRSS-B 62: 595-604.
Lee, M.-J. and S. Kobayashi. 2001. "Proportional Treatment Effects for Count Response Panel


                                                24
       Data: Effects of Binary Exercise on Health Care Demands." Health Economics 10: 411-
       428.
Manski, C.F. 1997. "Monotone Treatment Response." Econometrica 65: 1311-1334.
Manski, C.F. 2007. Identification for Prediction and Decision. Cambridge: Harvard University
       Press.
Manski, C.F. 2018a. "Credible Ecological Inference for Medical Decisions with Personalized Risk
       Assessment." Quantitative Economics 9: 541–569.
Manski, C.F. 2018b. "Reasonable Patient Care under Uncertainty." Health Economics 27: 1397-
       1421.
Manski, C.F. 2020a. "The Lure of Incredible Certitude." Economics and Philosophy 36: 216-245.
Manski, C.F. 2020b. "Bounding the Predictive Values of COVID-19 Antibody Tests." Working
       Paper (May 14, 2020, version). Department of Economics and Institute for Policy
       Research, Northwestern University.
Manski, C.F. and F. Molinari. 2020. "Estimating the COVID-19 Infection Rate: Anatomy of an
       Inference Problem." Journal of Econometrics (in press) https://doi.org/10.1016/
       j.jeconom.2020.04.041.
Manski, C.F. and A. Tetenov. 2020. "Statistical Decision Properties of Imprecise Trials
       Assessing COVID-19 Drugs" NBER Working Paper 27293.
Mullahy, J. 2018a. "Individual Results May Vary: Inequality-Probability Bounds for Some
       Health-Outcome Treatment Effects." Journal of Health Economics 61: 151-162.
Mullahy, J. 2018b. "Health Status Measurement." Chapter in Oxford Research Encyclopedia of
       Economics and Finance, A. Jones, Ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pocock, S.J. 1992. "When to Stop a Clinical Trial." BMJ 305: 235-240.
Rogawski, E.T. et al. 2017. "Estimating Differences and Ratios in Median Times to Event."
       Epidemiology 27: 848-851.
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services. 2016. 42 CFR Part 11, Clinical Trials Registration
       and Results Information Submission; Final Rule. Federal Register 81(183), Part II
       (September 21, 2016).
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 2006. Clinical Studies Section of Labeling for Human
       Prescription Drug and Biological Products—Content and Format: Guidance for Industry.
       Rockville, MD: U.S. FDA.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 2009. Guidance for Industry: Patient-Reported Outcome
       Measures: Use in Medical Product Development to Support Labeling Claims. Rockville,
       MD: U.S. FDA.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Center for Devices and Radiological Health. 2012.
       Transcript of the January 11, 2012, Meeting of the Gastroenterology and Urology
       Devices    Advisory      Panel.   https://wayback.archive-it.org/7993/20170113191551/


                                              25
       http://www.fda.gov/downloads/AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeetingMaterials/Med
       icalDevices/MedicalDevicesAdvisoryCommittee/Gastroenterology-UrologyDevicesPanel/
       UCM291391.pdf (accessed May 28, 2020).
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 2020a. Coronavirus (COVID-19) Update: FDA Issues
       Emergency       Use       Authorization      for     Potential      COVID-19       Treatment.
       https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/coronavirus-covid-19-update-fda
       -issues-emergency-use-authorization-potential-covid-19-treatment (May 1, 2020; accessed
       May 6, 2020).
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 2020b. FDA Guidance on Conduct of Clinical Trials of
       Medical Products during COVID-19 Public Health Emergency. Rockville, MD: U.S. FDA
       (version May 14, 2020).
U.S. National Institute on Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID). 2020a. NIH Clinical Trial
       Shows     Remdesivir        Accelerates      Recovery      from       Advanced     COVID-19.
       https://www.niaid.nih.gov/news-events/nih-clinical-trial-shows-remdesivir-accelerates-
       recovery-advanced-covid-19 (April 29, 2020; accessed May 6, 2020).
U.S. National Institute on Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID). 2020b. Adaptive COVID-19
       Treatment       Trial     (ACTT).         ClinicalTrials.gov      Identifier:    NCT04280705.
       https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/record/NCT04280705 (accessed May 6, 2020).
Washington Post. 2020. "Gilead’s remdesivir improves recovery time of coronavirus patients in
       NIH trial." https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2020/04/29/gilead-says-positive-
       results-coronavirus-drug-remdesivir-will-be-released-by-nih/ (reported April 29, 2020;
       accessed May 6, 2020).
Zarin, D.A. et al. 2011. "The ClinicalTrials.gov Results Database—Update and Key Issues."
       NEJM 364: 852-860.
Zarin, D.A. et al. 2016. "Trial Reporting in ClinicalTrials.gov—The Final Rule." NEJM 375:
       1998-2004.




                                                  26
Appendix A: Computing Medians
       The definition of m j in section 2 may not coincide with how statistical packages

compute medians for samples where N is even. In these cases the definition (1) selects the .5N
low-to-high order statistic, y(.5N) , while some packages (e.g. Stata commands, including

centile, summarize, and tabstat) compute the median as the average of y(.5N) and y(.5N+1) .

While this discrepancy will typically be inconsequential when analyzing large samples this is not
necessarily so for smaller samples (see table A1).
       As such, understanding what formulae are used in published research and whether these
align with the parameters that are conceptually of interest may be worthwhile. Also noteworthy
is that Stata has several commands that compute percentiles, and for quantiles other than the
median these may not yield the same results (though the different formulae are documented; e.g.
compare centile and summarize). In small-to-medium-sized samples such differences may be
nontrivial in estimating some parameters, e.g. IQRs.


Additional Measurement Considerations
       Measuring TTEs as integers (e.g. days) may introduce a form of measurement error.
Suppose the outcome of interest is TTR. As in the Beigel study, a patient is assessed once daily
at an unreported time with respect to recovery status. Suppose an assessment performed at one
second after midnight on day two indicates the patient as not recovered but that recovery
occurs at some point later on day two. Assuming recovery is an absorbing state, then the
assessment taken sometime on day three would indicate recovery. That day-three assessment
could in theory take place as late as one second before midnight. Thus observing the patient's
TTR as day=3 means that the true recovery time could be anywhere in the open interval (2, 4) .

Therefore the true difference in median outcomes is only partially identified, known only to be
in the interval (Δm − 2, Δm + 2) where Δm is the observed integer difference in medians.

While such complications could be relevant in practice—especially when TTEs are "small"—they
are ignored in this paper.




                                                27
Appendix B: Monotone Treatment Response and Distributional Assumptions
Monotone Treatment Response
       While this paper does not make use of assumptions about monotone treatment response,
its prominence in related work merits brief mention. In a foundational paper Manski, 1997,
shows the potential identifying power of monotone response to treatment in partial
identification settings. While typically not testable, assumptions about monotone response—
outcomes are increasing or at least non-decreasing in treatment—will generally provide tighter
bounds on partially identified parameters.
       Several researchers have considered special cases in the spirit of monotone response that
may yield tighter bounds on mΔ and related parameters. Lee, 2000, describes five cases
("Special Models," or SM):


       (SM1) y1 = y0 + q , q ≥ 0

       (SM2) y1 = y0 + ε , ε ≥ 0

       (SM3) y1 = y0 + ε , ε unrestricted

       (SM4) y1 = y0 + ε , ε symmetric

       (SM5) y1 = ξ (y0 ) , ξ (y0 ) ≥ y0 and ξ (y0 ) increasing in y0



Relating sign (mΔ) to sign (Δm )

       Lee draws on this framework to derive necessary and sufficient conditions under which
Δm = 0 → mΔ = 0 and Δm > 0 → mΔ > 0 . Specifically Δm = 0 → mΔ = 0 if and only if


       Pr (y0 − m0 < y1 − m1 < 0) = Pr (0 < y1 − m1 < y0 − m0 ) ,                         (B.1)


what Lee calls "equal probability of octants." Moreover, Δm > 0 → mΔ > 0 if and only if


       Pr (m1 < y1 < y0 ) < Pr (y0 < y1 < m1 ) .                                          (B.2)



These conditions are not verifiable when the joint distribution F (y0, y1 ) is unknown.


Stochastic Dominance
       Determining that F0 (y) and F1 (y) obey a stochastic dominance relationship is of limited

value for understanding magnitude or sign relationships between Δm and mΔ . For example, a


                                                 28
first-order dominance relationship between F0 (y) and F1 (y) implies knowledge of sign (Δm) as

well as the signs of all marginal quantiles' differences, but implies nothing correspondingly about
sign (mΔ) . Higher-order dominance is no more informative.




                                                29
Appendix C: Details on Computation of Bounds on mΔ
Computing Bounds using Permutation Distributions
          A intuitive strategy for computing tightest bounds on mΔ imagines a sample of
N0 = N1 = N observations on y0 and y1 , each gathered into N-vectors y j . Define Π (y1 ) as the

N×N! matrix whose columns are the N! permutations of y1 . Then the distributions of the

elements of each column of the N×N! matrix D whose p-th column is Π (y1 ) − y0 ,
                                                                                                p

p ∈ {1,…, N!} , are all the possible treatment-effect distributions consistent with the data.

          Let m = ⎡⎢ m1,…, mN! ⎤⎥ be the 1×N! vector of column medians of D. Given the data the
                   ⎣            ⎦
tightest possible bounds L* (mΔ) and U* (mΔ) are the smallest and largest elements of m; this

holds since any claimed lower bound larger than min (m) or upper bound smaller than max (m)

is inconsistent with the data. When N is odd these permutation bounds are unique; when N is
even one must decide how to define medians, as discussed in appendix A.
          While intuitively straightforward, this approach is of limited value in applications. When
N0 ≠ N1 D cannot be defined as above.41 Even if N0 = N1 relying on permutations becomes less
practical as N increases. 42 Moreover, with right-censored data it is not evident how the
permutation approach can be used even if N0 = N1 .


Computing Bounds using Djk

          In lieu of permutation-based solutions one can appeal to a generally applicable approach
that relies on D01 and D10 and the inequality probabilities defined in (9). Tightest bounds on

the IP (Fan and Park, 2010; Mullahy, 2018) are given by


          D01 ≤ Pr (y1 > y0 ) = Pr (Δ > 0) ≤ 1 − D10                                            (C.1)

and


41
     If N0 ≠ N1 then imagine the imbalance arises from different sampling probabilities. Let C be
the least common multiple of N0 and N1 . Then replicating each y j C N j times yields a
balanced sample of C observations from which the permutation distribution can be computed.
42
     Heckman et al., 1997, suggest approximating such data by defining the y j as selected
quantiles of each Fj , so that N0 = N1 , and undertaking permutation analysis of the quantiles.



                                                  30
        D10 ≤ Pr (y0 > y1 ) = Pr (Δ < 0) ≤ 1 − D01 .                                         (C.2)


       For an intuition on determining the tightest bounds on mΔ use (C.2) and consider a
case where it is observed that D10 > .5 . Then it follows from (C.2) and R3 that Pr (Δ < 0) > .5

so that mΔ must be negative. To determine the value of U* (mΔ) consider an algorithm where

the elements of y1 are all displaced by some positive amount d (i.e. y1 + d ) and then compute

                                    {                    }
the corresponding D10 (d) = max y F1 (y + d) − F0 (y) . If D10 (d) ≥ .5 then U* (mΔ) is no greater

than -d; if D10 (d) < .5 then U* (mΔ) is between -d and zero. Repeating this search over all

possible d identifies the largest value of d for which D10 (d) ≥ .5 , thus defining U* (mΔ) = −d .

       If initially D10 < .5 then U* (mΔ) is positive. To determine this bound reverse the

previous procedure: displace the elements of y1 as y1 − d until is determined the smallest d for

which D10 (d) ≥ .5 which value of d will define U* (mΔ) = d . Determining L* (mΔ) is

analogous, using D01 and corresponding D01 (d) . With integer-valued outcomes like the TTE

data examined in this paper the determination of B* (mΔ) is straightforward since the d-search

is over a regular (integer) grid; with continuous outcomes the search will rely on some
reasonably selected step sizes.43
       This discussion establishes a link between the D jk and sign identification of mΔ .

Specifically mΔ is not sign identified unless one of the D jk exceeds .5. That is sign

identification of mΔ corresponds to a lower bound greater than .5 on one of the D jk .

Pr (y1 > y0 ) > .5 if and only if L* (mΔ) > 0 .44

       Figure C1 demonstrates the intuition of the search algorithm using the Cao sample
where the outcomes are measured as integers. For these data D10 < .5 . The top panel of Figure


43
  This search algorithm is equivalent to, but the inverse of, the algorithm proposed in lemma
2.3 of Fan and Park, 2010, that searches over u to determine the largest difference
F1−1 (u) − F0−1 (u + .5) over the domain u ∈ ⎡⎢0,.5⎤⎥ .
                                              ⎣     ⎦
44
   The distinction between strict and weak inequalities in the preceding discussion is largely
irrelevant if the focus is on continuously distributed outcomes. With discrete/integer outcomes,
however, such distinctions may be important.



                                                    31
C1 indicates that a displacement of d = −8 results in D10 (−8) = .48 so that the displacement

of -8 is not sufficiently large to determine U* (mΔ) . However, with a displacement of d = −9

(bottom panel of Figure C1), D10 (−9) = .52 . As such U * (mΔ) = 9 .


                                     [figure C1 about here]


       Using simulated integer data and small N0 = N1 = N (N≤12), the medte program

mentioned in section 4, which uses the D jk − based algorithm described here, is seen to have the

following properties when compared with the exact permutation algorithm: when N is even
medte returns bounds between those returned by the permutation algorithm based on the .5N

and .5N + 1 order-statistic median definitions (e.g. B* = {−1, 6} versus {−2,5} or {0,7} ); when

N is odd medte returns bounds one unit more conservative than those returned by the

permutation algorithm (e.g. B* = {−2, 9} versus {−1, 8} ).


Computing Bounds with Right-Censored Data
       Computation of mΔ bounds with right-censored outcomes is no different than with fully
observed outcomes so long as the censoring is properly accommodated in the various
probabilities involved in computation.
       While such bounds will generally not be tightest in the sense of the bounds that would
arise were the data not censored they will still generally be informative. Moreover as noted in
section 4 reducing the amount of right-censoring—i.e. increasing yc —can never widen mΔ

bounds but may narrow them. To see this consider an extreme example depicted in the bottom
panel of figure 5 where yc = 11 (i.e. all values of y greater than 11 are unobserved). In this

example the marginal medians and Δm are identified, with m0 = m1 =10 and Δm =0. Based

on the observable (uncensored) data the mΔ bounds are B* (mΔ) = {−10,10} . Were the data

fully uncensored the resulting bounds would be B* (mΔ) = {−10, 2} whereas with a less

stringent censoring threshold, say yc = 15 , the bounds would be B* (mΔ) = {−10,7} .


Computing Bounds with Quartile Data
       Because it does not use information from the entirety of the Fj marginals BIQR (mΔ)




                                               32
                                                                                                  (
defined in section 4 is not generally sharp though in some specific cases (e.g. y j ∼ N µ j, σ2 ) it         )
is. In any event bounding mΔ using information only on quartiles requires that the IQR j be

point identified, which may be problematic when right-censoring is prevalent. Just as the m j

are not point identified when right-censoring fractions exceed .5, IQR j is not identified when

Fj (y) is right censored at y < Fj−1 (.75) .45

         The basic idea in computing BIQR (mΔ) can be illustrated concretely for integer-
                                                           46
measured     outcomes    using   the    Hung     data.          The   estimated   bounds   from       (11)       are
BIQR (mΔ) = {−11, 4} (note Δm = −5 ). Figure C2 depicts the computation of the lower bound.

The distribution F1 (y) is displaced rightward by one-unit increments until the maximum (over

y) vertical distance between F0 (y) and the displaced F1 (y + d) can be determined to be at least

.5. Imagine a rightward displacement of F1 (y) of d = −10 . At y=15 F1 (y −10) ∈ ⎡⎢.25,.5) and
                                                                                  ⎣
F0 (y) − F1 (y −10) ∈ (.25,.75⎤⎥ . Consequently the distribution has not been displaced sufficiently
                               ⎦
far rightward to determine LIQR (mΔ) . Consider now a rightward displacement of F1 (y) of

d = −11 . At y=15 F1 (y −11) ∈ ⎡⎢0,.25) and F0 (y) − F1 (y −11) ∈ (.5,1⎤⎥ . Thus
                                ⎣                                       ⎦


          LIQR (mΔ) = q.25,1 − q.75,0 −1 = 5 −15 −1 = −11                                              (C.3)



since d = −11 is the smallest possible shift guaranteeing F0 (y) − F1 (y + d) ≥ .5 .


45
     Some simulations suggest that BIQR (mΔ) is often close to the sharp bounds obtained from

                                                  (        )
fully observed data. E.g. with Fj = uniform 0, a j and a 0 < a1 B* (mΔ) = {.5a1 − a 0, .5a1 } and

BIQR (mΔ) = {.25a1 −.75a 0, .75a1 −.25a 0 } ; for a 0 = .8 and a1 = 1 B* (mΔ) = {−.3, .5} while

BIQR (mΔ) = {−.35, .55} .
46
  One can also consider outcomes having continuous distributions. In samples drawn therefrom,
however, F0 and F1 will not be smooth but instead will have a finite number of jump points at
irregularly spaced non-integer y-values. Determining the bounds in such instances is
conceptually no different but practically would need to accommodate irregularly spaced jump
points in the search algorithm.



                                                      33
                                                  [figure C2 about here]


Computing Bounds with Transformed Outcomes
          The signs but not the magnitudes of both Δm and mΔ are invariant to monotone-

                                       ( )
increasing transformations t y j . Define Δt = t (y1 ) − t (y0 ) . Then47



                ( ( ( ))
          sign med F1 t (y) − med F0 t (y)      ( ( )))       = sign (Δm)                         (C.4)

and

                (       (
          sign med F (Δt )       ))   = sign (mΔ) .                                               (C.5)



                                                   (          )
          To determine bounds on med F (Δt ) two considerations arise: the first is whether the

                                                  ( )
monotone positive transformation t y j is affine; the second is whether both the original and

transformed outcomes are integers.
          The general result is that the signs of the tightest lower and upper bounds on

      (         )
med F (Δt ) are the same as those on mΔ . While the monotone positive transformations t y j          ( )
                                                                       ( )
change the shapes of the distribution functions F y j they do not change D01 or D10 , only

their corresponding y-ordinates. As shown above it is the D jk —in particular whether or not

they exceed .5—that determine the bounds' signs. When furthermore the outcomes and

                                              ( )                   ( )
transformed outcomes are continuous and t y j is affine (i.e. t y j = a + by j with b>0) then

L* (med (F (Δt ))) = a + bL* (mΔ) and U* (med (F (Δt ))) = a + bU* (mΔ) .

                                      ( )
          When the y j and t y j are all integers—e.g. converting outcomes from weeks to days

                                            ( )
by multiplying by seven—and t y j is affine then



            (       (       ))              (
          L* med F (Δt ) = a + b L* (mΔ) + 1 −1           )                                       (C.6)



47
   Such sign-invariance does not hold for average treatment effects                      (ATEs)    where
      (             )                                                    (   )
sign E ⎡⎢ y1 − y0 ⎤⎥ has no necessary implications for sign E ⎡⎢ t (y1 ) − t (y0 )⎤⎥ .
        ⎣          ⎦                                           ⎣                   ⎦




                                                                  34
and

          (    (         ))       (
       U* med F (Δt ) = a + b U* (mΔ) −1 + 1 .       )                                          (C.7)



                                           (     )
As such the sharp bounds on med F (Δt ) have the same sign as those on mΔ except when

L* (mΔ) = 0 or U* (mΔ) = 0 in which cases L* med F (Δt )      (   (   ))   takes the sign of U* (mΔ) if

                     (
L* (mΔ) = 0 and U* med F (Δt )(       ))   takes the sign of L* (mΔ) if U* (mΔ) = 0 . While perhaps

curious on first impression this result arises because the bounds in such cases are defined as
integers and respect the mechanical definition medians in (1).




                                                         35
Appendix D: Explanation of Results 1-3


Result 1 (R1):     Suppose Δm < 0 . Then:
                           a. 0 ≤ D01 ≤ .5

                           b. 0 < D10 ≤ 1

                           c. L* (mΔ) ≤ 0

Explanation

                                                               {                }
          a. F0 (y) < .5 for all y < m0 so 0 ≤ D01 = max F0 (y) − F1 (y), 0 < .5 for all y < m0 .

                 Since m1 < m0 then F1 (y) ≥ .5 for all y ≥ m0 , and since F0 (y) ≤ 1 then

                  0 ≤ D01 ≤ .5 for all y ≥ m0 . Thus 0 ≤ D01 ≤ .5 .

          b. Since m1 < m0 there is at least one value of y ≤ m1 where F1 (y) > F0 (y) so that

                  D10 > 0 . Since 0 ≤ F0 (y) < .5 for all y < m0 and since .5 ≤ F1 (y) ≤ 1 for all

                  y ≥ m1 then 0 ≤ D10 ≤ 1 for all y ∈ ⎡⎢ m1, m0 ⎤⎥ . Thus 0 < D10 ≤ 1 .
                                                       ⎣         ⎦
          c. Follows directly from (a).


Result 2 (R2):     L* (mΔ) ≤ Δm ≤ U* (mΔ)

Explanation:
          Consider the permutations Π (y1 ) defined in appendix C. One column of Π (y1 ) (say the

          p-th) must be perfectly negatively rank correlated with the elements of y0 .48 The median
                                                ⎡                                               ⎤
          of that permutation's TE distribution ⎢ min (y1 ) − max (y0 ),…, max (y1 ) − min (y0 )⎥ is
                                                ⎣          p                        p           ⎦
          m1 − m0 = Δm . Thus Δm is one element of the vector of permutation-distribution

          medians, m. Result 2 holds since L* (mΔ) and U* (mΔ) are the smallest and largest

          elements of m.


Result 3 (R3):     Suppose D10 > .5 . Then:

                           a. Pr (Δ < 0) > .5

                           b. Δm < 0

48
     With ties in the data more than one column may have this property.



                                                    36
                      c. mΔ < 0
Explanation:
       a. Follows from (C.2).
       b. Since D10 > .5 then there is at least one value of y where F1 (y) > .5 > F0 (y) . Such

               values of y must satisfy m1 ≤ y < m0 . Thus m0 > m1 or Δm < 0 .

       c. Follows from (C.2) with U* (mΔ) < 0 implying mΔ < 0 .




                                              37
Appendix E: Median and Related Treatment Effects in Policymaking Contexts
         This appendix reviews several policy contexts within which considerations of median and
other quantile measures and treatment effects do (or should) figure prominently.


FDA Effectiveness Criteria for Biological Products
         FDA's standards for determining effectiveness of biological products (21 CFR
601.25(d)(2)) were quoted in section 3. Similar regulatory language defining effectiveness
governs medical devices (21 CFR 860.7(e)(1)) and over-the-counter drugs (21 CFR
330.10(a)(4)(ii)). These standards rely on two key parameters: a significant proportion of the
target population being affected, and effect magnitudes that are clinically significant.49
         One perhaps fair interpretation of "clinically significant function" is that the outcome
under T1 is better than the outcome under T0 by at least the some prespecified amount (say

ΔCS ). That is, for a given subject y1 − y0 = Δ ≤ ΔCS when smaller outcomes correspond to
better health.50
         Consider the top panel of figure E1. Assume that larger values of y correspond to worse
health ( Δ < 0 is an improvement in health). Let ΔCS < 0 be the threshold for the clinically

significant improvement in outcome; as such Δ ≤ ΔCS is required to demonstrate effectiveness.

(Note that smaller—more negative—values of ΔCS correspond to more stringent standards.)

Let αSP ∈ (0,1) be the threshold for the significant proportion of the population experiencing the

clinically significant improvement; as such α ≥ αSP is required to demonstrate effectiveness,

where α is the fraction of the population for which Δ ≤ ΔCS . (Note that larger values of αSP

correspond to more stringent standards.) Then the two shaded regions in figure E1's top panel
indicate the combinations (ΔCS, αSP ) corresponding to T1 being effective or ineffective relative

to T0 given the treatment effect distribution F (Δ) indicated in the figure.




49 Cravens, 2002, offers a detailed assessment of the role of "clinical significance" in legal and
regulatory contexts, noting: "At its worst, 'clinical significance' is assigned no explicit meaning at
all, but simply appears in passing.…it makes sense either that the phrase should be endowed
with some specific meaning or that it should not be used at all."
50
     Often policy does not work from a position of equipoise between T0 and T1 but rather
privileges or gives deference to a status quo (e.g. non-inferiority trials). (See Manski and
Tetenov, 2020.)



                                                 38
                                         [figure E1 about here]


        In general some α − quantile of F (Δ) determines whether the CFR standard is met. If

αSP = .5 then the magnitude of mΔ is determinative. While αSP = .5 is not privileged in this
regulatory context is nonetheless has some intuitive appeal (though see the case study reported
in the final subsection of this appendix).
        When mΔ cannot be point identified appealing to its bounds is partially informative
about whether these regulatory standards are met. The bottom panel of figure E1 depicts the
regions where it is possible to determine effectiveness or ineffectiveness when only bounds (sharp
or otherwise) on the quantiles of the treatment effect distribution q (α) Δ are available.

        Related considerations arise in the determination of breakthrough therapies. Suppose
smaller values of y represent better health. It might be reasonable in cases like those covered in
R3 (section 4) to consider T1 a breakthrough therapy. 51 Consider FDA policy for expedited

approval of drugs that treat serious or life-threating illnesses:

        The Secretary shall, at the request of the sponsor of a drug, expedite the
        development and review of such drug if the drug is intended, alone or in
        combination with 1 or more other drugs, to treat a serious or life-threatening
        disease or condition and preliminary clinical evidence indicates that the drug may
        demonstrate substantial improvement over existing therapies on 1 or more
        clinically significant endpoints, such as substantial treatment effects observed
        early in clinical development. (In this section, such a drug is referred to as a
        “breakthrough therapy”.) [21 USC 356(a)(1)] (emphasis added)

As with the determination of effectiveness of biological products, what constitutes "substantial
improvement" presumably affects determination of breakthrough therapy status.


Outcome Measurement in ClinicalTrials.gov Registration and Reporting
        At the stage when an "applicable" clinical trial is registered, as required, in the
ClinicalTrials.gov registry the registrant is not required to specify the particular "measure type"
they will be estimating as the parameter that summarizes the trial's primary or secondary
outcome, e.g. a median, mean, or probability. It is instructive to compare 42 CFR 11.28 ("What
constitutes clinical trial registration information?") with 42 CFR 11.48 ("What constitutes
clinical trial results information?").

51
  FDA approvals of breakthrough therapies are catalogued at https://www.fda.gov/drugs/
nda-and-bla-approvals/breakthrough-therapy-approvals



                                                  39
       While recording information on the measure type is not mandated when a trial is
registered in ClinicalTrials.gov—although it can be provided optionally (Zarin et al., 2016)—this
information is required when a trial's results are reported. Whether it is appropriate to report
the "measure type" at the initial registration stage or not until results are reported has been
debated,52 but in principle allowing measure types (parameters) to be specified after a trial's
data have been realized raises possibilities of cherry picking (Zarin et al., 2011).
       What is variously called the "method of aggregation," (Zarin et al., 2011, 2016), the
"population-level summary" (EMA, 2020), or the "measure type" (42 CFR 11.48(a)(3)(iii)(E); 42
CFR 11.48(a)(3)(v)(B)(2)(ii)) is what would be known familiarly as a parameter.53

       When specifying the Measure Type, the responsible party is required to select
       one option from the following limited list of options: "Count of participants,"
       "count of units," "number," "mean," "median," "least squares mean," "geometric
       mean," and "geometric least squares mean." When specifying the associated
       Measure of Dispersion, the responsible party is required to select one option from
       the following limited list of options: "Standard deviation," "inter-quartile range,"
       "full range," and "not applicable" (which would be permitted only if the specified
       measure type is "count of participants," "count of units," or "number"). [U.S.
       DHHS, 2016, p. 25084]

"median time to response" is noted explicitly as a measure type that may be suitable for time-to-
event data (U.S. DHHS, 2016, p. 25087). Though perhaps of little practical importance it is
noteworthy that the median is the only quantile recognized in the regulatory language:


       No "other" option is available for either Measure Type or Measure of Dispersion,
       but responsible parties have the option of voluntarily providing additional
       information about the baseline measures as part of a freetext description of the
       baseline measure. [U.S. DHHS, 2016, p. 25084]

A Case Study—Torax Medical, Inc. and the LINX Reflux Management System
       In 2010, Torax Medical, Inc., submitted to the FDA a premarket approval application
for its LINX Reflux Management System, an "implantable device for the treatment of pathologic
Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD) in patients who continue to have chronic GERD


52
  Zarin et al., 2011: "Some argue that the method of aggregation…is part of the statistical
analysis plan and may properly be specified later—after data accrual but before unblinding."
53
   Confusion may arise with the regulatory terminology: "outcome measure type" refers to
primary vs. secondary outcomes; "measure type" refers to the parameter; compare CFR
11.48(a)(3)(iii)(D) with CFR 11.48(a)(3)(iii)(E). Moreover the meaning of an "estimand" may
also not align with standard usage of that term in econometrics; see EMA, 2020.



                                                 40
symptoms despite antireflux therapy" (U.S. FDA, 2012).         The key results supporting the
sponsor's PMA application are from a pre-post clinical study reported in Ganz et al., 2013. The
primary outcome is the proportion of patients experiencing a reduction of at least 50% in the
fraction of a 24-hour period with a pH less than four. The sponsor specified ex ante that
"effectiveness" would be determined by whether at least 60% of subjects met or bettered the
50% criterion (but see transcript below).
        The following are excerpts from the official transcript of the January 11, 2012, meeting
of the FDA's Medical Devices Advisory Committee, Gastroenterology and Urology Devices
Panel.54


     DR. VENKATARAMAN-RAO [FDA Presenter]: ...As shown by this table, 64 out
     of 100 subjects met the primary effectiveness endpoint. Of these, 56 had
     pH normalization and 8 had an at least 50% reduction in total time that
     their pH was less than 4. As the lower limit of the confidence interval
     was found to be 53.8%, the results for this endpoint do not support the
     claim that the success probability is greater than 60%.

                                             . . .

     DR. SCHROEDER [FDA Presenter]: ...From the statement of the hypothesis
     given on this slide, it can be seen that the Sponsor was attempting to
     show that the true success probability associated with this endpoint is
     greater than 60%. Of the 100 implanted subjects, 64 could be classified
     as treatment success based on the esophageal pH monitoring endpoint.
     The observed success rate was 64%, and the 95% confidence interval for
     this success rate ranged from 54% to 73%. Note that 4 subjects with
     missing responses, including 3 explants, were treated as failures in
     this analysis. Since the lower bound of the confidence interval is less
     than 60%, there is not enough evidence to conclude that the true success
     rate is greater than 60%, so the primary endpoint for the study was not
     met.
                                      . . .

     DR. AFIFI [Panel Member]: ... My question is about the choice of the 60%
     figure for the target improvement. How was that arrived at? And was it
     really sort of a compromise between sample size available or anticipated
     sample size? And because there could've been other choices. If you could
     answer that question.

     MR. PULLING [Sponsor Advisor]: ...The 60% performance goal was,
     admittedly, largely arbitrary in choice. We did a careful assessment of
     the, you know, current feasibility data we had available at the time. We


54
  While the FDA is not required to follow the recommendations of its Advisory Committees, it
does so in the great majority of cases.



                                               41
considered other performance goals and really between 50% and 60%. As
you know, had we gone down to 50, sample size requirements would've been
much, much less; settled on 60 with a high degree of confidence that
even though the bar was set a little higher than we probably needed to,
we felt it was something we would've met.

DR. SHAHEEN [Panel Member]: I'd like to first say that, unlike some that
may speak later, I'm not particularly -- I don't feel very off-put by
the fact that you didn't make the primary outcome variable. It's
actually laudable that you used a physiologic outcome variable as
opposed to just symptoms, which we know, in almost all of these previous
studies, will respond to these kind of therapies. So I think that,
especially given that there's nothing magical about the lower 95%
confidence interval on 60%, I think that those numbers are fine.

                                 . . .

MS. OLVEY [FDA Advisor]: ...The primary effectiveness endpoint is based
on esophageal pH testing at baseline and 12 months. An individual
subject was defined as a success if either of the following criteria
were met:

- normalization of pH, with normalization defined as a pH < 4 for no
more than 4.5% of the monitoring time; or

- reduction of at least 50% in total time that pH < 4 relative to
baseline.

For the primary endpoint, the LINX pivotal study required that the
success rate be at least 60% as indicated by the lower bound of a 97.5%
confidence interval. Sixty-four of the 100 implanted patients achieved
success, resulting in an observed success rate of 64% with a 97.5% lower
confidence bound of 54%. Since this lower bound falls below 60%, the
primary endpoint was not met.

Please discuss whether these data support the effectiveness of the LINX
device.

DR. WOODS [Panel Chair]: Okay, so I'm going to move around the table and
ask everyone for their answers. If it appears that we're quickly coming
to consensus, then we may not need everyone to answer. But we will start
with Dr. Shaheen.

DR. SHAHEEN [Panel Member]: Well, clearly by the a priori outcome, the
device did not make the primary endpoint. However, it's been discussed
here already, the primary endpoint in this situation is fairly arbitrary
and could just as easily have been picked to be 50%. I think that the
important thing is to look at the totality of the data and to understand
that within the field, which is that most previous devices that have
attempted to do something similar to this device haven't even used the
physiologic primary outcome and have relied primarily on symptom


                                   42
   control. Given that situation, I think that there is substantial
   evidence that the device does have efficacy in the setting, although I
   think we do need to acknowledge it did not meet this primary endpoint.

   DR. WOODS [Panel Chair]: Okay. Dr. Inge.

   DR. INGE [Panel Member]: I don't disagree. In fact, I think that he's
   made the exact points that need to be made.

                                              . . .

   DR. WOODS [Panel Chair]: Okay. So, Dr. Lerner, the Panel is unanimous in
   its belief that the data do support the effectiveness of the LINX
   device. Is that sufficient for you?

   DR. LERNER [FDA Representative]: Yes, thank you.

   MS. WATERHOUSE: ...We will proceed to Question 2. Question 2 reads as
   follows: Is there reasonable assurance that the LINX Reflux Management
   System is effective for use in patients who meet the criteria specified
   in the proposed indication? Please lock in your votes.

   (Panel vote.)

   MS. WATERHOUSE [Panel Member, Designated Federal Officer]: The poll is
   now closed.

   ...On Question 2, the Panel members voted unanimously yes, so they voted
   9 to 0 that there is reasonable assurance that the LINX Reflux
   Management System is effective for use in patients who meet the criteria
   specified in the proposed indications for use.


       Note foremost the seemingly arbitrary choice by the sponsor of αSP , the target

population fraction parameter.
       The FDA followed the recommendations of the Advisory Committee and approved the
Linx System for marketing on March 22, 2012. How the data were summarized mattered, and
could have mattered much more had the Advisory Committee been convinced by the FDA
staff's assessments. (See Mullahy, 2018b, for extended discussion.)




                                                43
Figure 1 — Time-to-Recovery Outcomes in the Beigel et al., 2020, ACTT Remdesivir Study:
   Outcomes reported in NIAID, 2020 (top); Reproduction of Beigel's figure 2A (bottom)

                  1




       Proportion
       Recovered .5




                      0                  11       15                          29
                                               Days (=y)


                                       Control (m0)        Tx (m1)



                  1




       Proportion
       Recovered .5




                                         11       15                          29
                                               Days (=y)


                                     Control (F0(y))             Tx (F1(y))




                                          44
Figure 2 — Time-to-Improvement Outcomes in the Cao et al., 2020, Lopinavir–Ritonavir Study
                            (Reproduction of Cao's figure 2)

                 1




         Cumul.
         Improv. .5
          Rate




                      0    4       8          12         16   20       24     28
                                                   Day (=y)


                                       Control (F0(y))         Tx (F1(y))




                                              45
           Figure 3 — Defining D01 and D10


      1

                                             D01




Fj(y) .5




                       D10



      0
                                 y


                         F0(y)          F1(y)




                         46
Figure 4 — Defining Δm and mΔ with Known Pr (y0, y1 )


       y1
                                             y0=y1




      m1




     mΔ

       0                                        y0
                                   m0

     Δm

                   Pr(y0,y1)=1/3




                         47
           Figure 5 —Identifying Δm and mΔ with Right-Censored Outcomes:
Three right-censoring scenarios (top); Degree of right censoring affects mΔ bounds (bottom)

              1




        Fj(y) .5




              0
                                             yc,1         yc,2   yc,3
                                                      y


                                           F0(y)                    F1(y)



              1




        Fj(y) .5




                   0                             10       yc                   20
                                                      y


                                           F0(y)                    F1(y)




                                            48
Figure 6 — Time-to-Negative-Test Outcomes in Hung et al., 2020, Combination-Treatment
                 Study (Quartiles and IQR reported in Hung's table 2)

               1



              .75



      Fj(y)    .5



              .25




                    0              5       7    8           11   12      15
                                   Days to Negative Test (=y)


                                  Control (F0(y))     Tx (F1(y))




                                          49
Figure 7 — Comparing Implications of Two Different Joint Distributions


           y1
                                                          y0=y1




        mΔ(b)




        mΔ(a)

            0                                             y0

                    Pr(a)(y0,y1)=.2     Pr(b)(y0,y1)=.2




                                  50
  Figure 8 — Approximate Central Aperture, m0 = 4 , m1 = 2 , y j ~ gamma γ j, δ j with       ( )
γ0 = 4 and γ1 = 1 : a1 (m*,.5) = −.70 (top); a 2 (.5) = −.64                (bottom) (Note: (m j, γ j ) fix δ j )


                    1




               F1(m*)

       Fj(y)       .5



               F0(m*)




                        0         m1          m*        m0
                                                                y

                                      F0(y)                     F1(y)                 –a1(m*,.5)



                   1



                                                        P
               F1(m0)




       Fj(y)                      Q
                   .5                                       S




               F0(m1)                 R


                        0         m1                    m0
                                                                y

                                          F0(y)                     F1(y)               –a2(.5)




                                                   51
                                                                   (   )         (      )
Figure 9 — a1 (m*,.5) , with m0 = 4 , m1 = 2 , y j ~ gamma γ j, δ j (Note: m j, γ j fix δ j ):

 γ0 = .3 , γ1 = .2 , a1 (m*,.5) = −.16 (top); γ0 = .3 , γ1 = .9 , a1 (m*,.5) = −.35 ) (bottom)


                   1




              F1(m*)
      Fj(y)       .5
              F0(m*)




                       0          m1        m*        m0
                                                           y

                                    F0(y)                  F1(y)           –a1(m*,.5)



                   1




              F1(m*)

      Fj(y)       .5
              F0(m*)




                       0          m1        m*        m0
                                                           y

                                    F0(y)                  F1(y)           –a1(m*,.5)




                                                 52
      Figure C1 — Computation of L (MTE) , Cao et al., 2020, Data:

      F1 (y − d) with d = −8 (top); F1 (y − d) with d = −9 (bottom)


           1




Cumul. .57
Improv.
 Rate
                                                 .48




          .09

                0   4      8      12       16          20     24     28
                                               Day (=y)


                        Control (F0(y))                 Tx (F1(y))        F1(y–8))



           1




          .61
Cumul.
Improv.
 Rate
                                                   .52




          .09

                0   4      8      12       16          20     24     28
                                               Day (=y)


                        Control (F0(y))                 Tx (F1(y))        F1(y–9))




                                          53
Figure C2 — IQR-Based Computation of LIQR (mΔ) , Hung et al., 2020, Data


         1



        .75


                                                        .5
Fj(y)    .5



        .25




              0       5      7 8          11 12        15 16      18         22
                              Days to Negative Test (=y)


                   Control (F0(y))        Tx (F1(y))         Tx (F1(y-11))




                                     54
      Figure E1 — Visualizing FDA Effectiveness Criteria for Biological Products:
F (Δ) and q (α) Δ point identified (top); F (Δ) and q (α) Δ partially identified (bottom)


                 1




                          { (ΔCS, αSP) | T1 is Ineffective }


      F(Δ),
      α, αSP



                                                               { (ΔCS, αSP) | T1 is Effective }




                 0
                                                          Δ, ΔCS


                                                               F(Δ)



                 1




                     { (ΔCS, αSP) | T1 is Ineffective }


     L-1, U-1,
      α, αSP



                                                                      { (ΔCS, αSP) | T1 is Effective }




                 0
                                                          Δ, ΔCS


                                               L–1(qΔ(α))                  U–1(qΔ(α))




                                                     55
Table 1 — Empirical Results, Beigel et al., 2020, Remdesivir Trial
            (Output from medte Stata Program)


   Median Treatment Effects and Related Parameters

   Outcome variable:             ttr
   (integer-valued)

   Group variable (g):           tx

      Uncensored Obs. for g=0:                 340
      Uncensored Obs. for g=1:                 391

      Right-censored Obs. for g=0:             181
      Right-censored Obs. for g=1:             147

   Median Treatment Effects

      Sample median for g=0 (m0):               15
      Sample median for g=1 (m1):               11

      Diff. in medians m1-m0:                   -4

      Lower bound on med(F(y1-y0)):            -15
      Upper bound on med(F(y1-y0)):             10

   Central Aperture Measures

      a1(m*,.5):                               -0.3862
      a2(.5):                                  -0.3747

   Bounds on Inequality Probabilities

      Lower bound on Prob(y1>y0):               0.0000
      Upper bound on Prob(y1>y0):               0.8856




                               56
Table 2 — Empirical Results, Cao et al., 2020, Lopinavir–Ritonavir Trial
                (Output from medte Stata Program)


       Median Treatment Effects and Related Parameters

       Outcome variable:            tti
       (integer-valued)

       Group variable (g):          tx

         Uncensored Obs. for g=0:                  70
         Uncensored Obs. for g=1:                  77

         Right-censored Obs. for g=0:              30
         Right-censored Obs. for g=1:              22

       Median Treatment Effects

         Sample median for g=0 (m0):               16
         Sample median for g=1 (m1):               16

         Diff. in medians m1-m0:                    0

         Lower bound on med(F(y1-y0)):             -9
         Upper bound on med(F(y1-y0)):              7

       Central Aperture Measures

         a1(m*,.5):                                0.0000
         a2(.5):                                   0.0000

       Bounds on Inequality Probabilities

         Lower bound on Prob(y1>y0):               0.0000
         Upper bound on Prob(y1>y0):               0.8259




                                  57
Table A1 —Simulated Relative Frequencies of Differences between
                                           (               )
 Two Median Computation Methods, .5× y(.5N) + y(.5N+1) − y(.5N)

( y ~ Discrete Uniform ∈ {0,1,…,100} ; 10,000 replications for each N)


                                   Sample Size = N
Difference            20            50        100              1,000
     0               .09           .21        .37                .90
    .5               .17           .31        .41                .10
     1               .14           .19        .15                  0
   1.5               .11           .12        .05                  0
     2               .09           .07        .02                  0
   2.5               .07           .04        .01                  0
     3               .06           .02      <.005                  0
   3.5               .05           .01      <.005                  0
     4               .04           .01      <.005                  0
   4.5               .03           .01          0                  0
    ≥5               .14           .01          0                  0




                                 58
