                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  NOTES ON CREDIBILITY AND STABILIZATION




                             Rudiger Dornbusch




                          Working Paper No. 2790




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                December 1988




This research is part of NBERS research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                   NBER Working Paper #2 790
                                   December 1988


               NOTES ON CREDIBILITY AND STABILIZATION


                              ABSTRACT




     Do existing theories of stabilization help understand the
credibility issues involved in such programs? The experience with
stabilization in a hyperinflation setting in Israel and Latin America
makes it worthwhile to ask how much existing theories help understand
the success and failure of these experiments. Theories typically
focus on interaction between policy makers and the public, with
imperfect information about the true nature of the government and
resulting games. But this model often does not help greatly in
explaining stabilization. These notes raise some of the questions
left unanswered by the traditional modelling of credibility.
               The first sections deals with stabilization as a one-
shot problem. This approach is used to ask what "credibility might
mean in a world where it is inconceivable that a program will succeed
with probability 1. A model is spelled out where the equilibrium
program has an ex ante probability of success. The model draws
attention to the factors which raise or lower the probability of
success of a stabilization program. The next section deals with the
problem of waiting which is familiar from the option literature and
recent international applications. It is shown here that in the
immediate aftermath of stabilization there is a great difficulty in
persuading the public to repatriate assets and engage in irreversible
investment except at a large premium. But generating that premium is
politically difficult.




                                   Rudiger Dornbusch
                                   E52- 357
                                   MIT
                                   Cambridge, MA   02139
                NOTES ON CREDIBILITY AND STABILIZATION1

                      Rudiger Dornbusch

              Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                            and
                National Bureau of Economic Research


                     The experience with stabilization in a hyperinflation

setting in Israel and Latin America makes it worthwhile to ask how much

existing   theories help understand the success and failure of these experiments.

Many theories focus on interaction between policy makers and the public, with

imperfect information   about   the true nature of the government and resulting

games. But this model often does not seem to help greatly in explaining

stabilization. Interest rates do not behave as if they were generated by this

model and the very   fact of   stabilization has interesting     aspects that are
neglected in the   reputation paradigm. These notes raise some of the questions

left unanswered by the traditional modelling of credibility.

                     The first sections deals with stabilization as a one-shot

problem. This approach is used to ask what credibility" might mean in a world

where it is inconceivable that a program will succeed with probability 1. A

model is spelled out where the equilibrium program has an cx ante probability

of success. The model draws attention to the factors which         raise   or lower the

probability of success of a stabilization program. The next section deals with

the problem   of waiting which is familiar from    the option literature and recent

international   applications. It   is   shown here that in the   immediate   aftermath of

     1Thesenotes represent research in progress rather than completed work. I am
    indebted to Alberto Alesina, Peter Diamond, Avinash Dixit, Elhanan Helpman,
    Michael Mussa and Aaron Tornell for helpful suggestions.
                                             2


stabilization there is a great difficulty in persuading the public to

repatriate assets and engage in irreversible investment except at a large

premium. But generating that premium is politically difficult.



1. A POSITIVE THEORY OF CREDIBILITY AND STABILIZATION

                   Sargent's work on the end of four big inflations made the

term "credible" a household word.2 Stabilizations which proved successful did

so because they were credible. But Sargent did not offer a formal model of

credibility nor did he consider other stabilization programs that had much the

same features as the successful ones, but ultimately failed. In Dornbusch and

Fischer (1986) we review a large number of stabilization attempts and conclude

that slippage of fiscal policy is invariably the reason for a sliding back into

high inflation.3 But this subsequent deterioration often is not apparent at the

outset of the program. By contrast, in several of the stabilizations that did

succeed there was initially a serious lack of credibility, at least in so far

as daily newspapers allow us to ascertain.

                   In Dornbusch (1987) I study public assessment of the German

stabilization and conclude that rather than being an instantly recognized fact.

stabilization only gradually became a success. But initially and for some

months it continued to be viewed with great scepticism. Many of the budget

reforms initially announced, in fact never took place. As another example, in

1924 Poincare attempted a stabilization in France and after a short period the


    2For a review of the credibility literature see Persson (1988).
    3See,too, Webb (1988) who discusses the failed stabilizations in Germany
    preceding that of November 1923.
                                         3



program failed. In 1926 Poincare tried again, undertook much the same measures

and succeeded. Much of the uninformed discussion plays up Poincare as a

"credible" policy maker and his program as one sure to succeed. But there is an

obvious difficulty in reconciling the 1924 and 1926 experiences.

                   There is a more substantive point to be made about

credibility: governments cannot, in fact, create facts that are set once and

for ever, immutably. Any program can be undone (with more or less difficulty)

by the next government. And this potential lack of persistence feeds back to

the current policy actions required to make the program survive. Moreover, even

a well-designed program may not be sturdy enough to withstand shocks such as a

major, unexpected terms of trade deterioration. Thus credibility is a relative

term and there is a need for a model of credibility.4 A stabilization is ex

ante more or less credible. We need a theory to capture how the public forms a

judgment of this credibility and how that judgment possibly interacts with the

credibility.

                   Broadly, stabilization fails for one of four reasons. The

first is that a government is ignorant of economics. The program, although

believed to be a good one, is demonstrably unsustainable. We have no theory of

why governments might be ignorant and information costs (given the price of

economics) is merely a way of covering this up. A second possibility which is


    'Research by Calvo (1987,88) focus precisely on this point. There is, of
    course, an ample literature on credibility in models of repeated games and
    reputation (See Persson (1988)), but their primary focus is on dynamics,
    learning and dissimulation. This may be an important complication of the
    stabilization problem. A first useful step is to highlight the issues that
    arise in a one-shot game as is done below.
                                            4



central to the imperfect information-reputation literature on credibility

resides in excessive doubts by the public about the policy maker's willingness

to see the program through.

                      My interest is in the other two reasons for failure which

arise from uncertainty about either the effectiveness of the program or about

uncontrollable events (say export prices or worl1 interest rates) which

interact with the program and influence its success or failure. I will focus

first on this latter uncertainty and develop a specific model.



A Model: Suppose, for concreteness, that we discuss a situation of exchange

rate stabilization. We think of the problem as a one-shot game. The

stabilization program is the solution to minimizing a loss function:



(1)            L —     (pK +



where p denotes the probability of program failure and A stands for adjustment

effort. The government assigns a cost K to failure and hence pK is the expected

cost of program failure. The second term measures the cost of adjustment.

Adjustment means real wage cuts or real spending cuts and as such is

politically costly.

                      The adjustment effort, A,   is   one of the determinants of the

probability that the program will succeed. Once the adjustment effort is

undertaken the private sector responds by deciding whether or not to undertake

capital flight. The model is completed by a realization from the stochastic
                                                  5



process that influences foreign exchange revenues. Our           attention   now focuses on

the construction of the cx ante probability of program success or failure.

                      The probability of failure of a stabilization program is the

result of an optimizing approach of the government which involves

interdependence with the publics judgment of how successful stabilization will

be. We start from a model in which there are no capital flows and only later

introduce this complication. The program fails if net foreign exchange

disbursements, F, exceed available reserves, R.




(2)             }'—x -aA>R


Net foreign exchange disbursements have two           components. There is a random
component, x, and there is also the component that depends on adjustment effort

(the real exchange rate). The more substantial the adjustment effort, other

things equal, the smaller expected net disbursements. Specifically, a real

depreciation (an increase in A) would reduce the trade deficit and hence the

foreign exchange drain.

                       The probability      of failure is   the probability of net foreign

exchange   disbursements in excess     of   reserve holdings:


(3)               p   —
                          p(x)'R+aA)
                                               6


              At this stage we can assume a particular distribution to calculate a

closed form expression for p. An alternative route is to employ Tchebycheff's

inequality which yields an upper bound on the probability of program failure:5



(4)              p (x>R+aA) — o2/(R+oA)2



where     is the variance of x.

                        The goverlunent minimizes the loss function subject to (4).

The first order condition then is:



(5)             AA —   aK2/(aA+R)3


                        Figure 1 illustrates the solution. The marginal cost of

adjustment (NC) is proportional to the level of adjustment effort, ).A. The

coefficient    A is the parameter determining the marginal cost of adjustment. The
marginal benefit MB—aci2K/(mA+R)3 deriving from the reduction in the expected
cost of program failure is shown by the downward sloping      schedule.

                       The   equilibrium adjusent effort is denoted by A*:

(6)



      5From the inequality p(x1w) l/k2 with c the standard deviation of the zero
      mean distribution of x, let ko—aA+R to obtain the upper bound on the
      probability shown in the text.
MC, Ml




                    MC




                         MB




                              Adj usttient


         Figure 1
                                               7



and, from substitution in (3) there is a corresponding equilibrium probability

of program failure:




(7)               p* —



                         The next step is to enquire what are the properties of this

probability. To fix ideas we use the case of a symmetric uniform distribution

with maximum realizations of x denoted by rn.6 In that case the probability of

program failure as a function of adjustment effort is:




(3a)              p — (m-R-aA)/2m



To derive the comparative static properties it is helpful to focus on Figure 2

which shows iso-cost curves corresponding to eq. (1) as well as the probability

schedule corresponding to (3a). The optimal choice of adjustment effort and the

corresponding equilibrium probability of program failure are shown by point E.

                         The optimal adjustment effort becomes:



(6a)             A*



and the resulting optimal probability of program       failure    becomes:




(7a)          p* (l-R/m)/2 - a2K/8Am2


       6We concentrate on the case where >R.
p




       E




               A




    Figure 2
                                          8




A shift in R, a or a will affect the probability schedule while changes in A or

K affect the iso-loss loci. Using the diagram or equations (7a) it is straight

forward to derive the following properties.

                     Program failure is less likely the higher the initial

stock of reserves, R. This point draws attention to the role of foreign loans

in stabilization programs. Austria in the l920s benefited from League of

Nations Loans and Israel in its stabilization could call on US aid. In much the

same way Bolivia announced suspension of external debt service which amounted

to a self-administered external loan. In the literature on stabilization

foreign loans are discussed as the sine qua non. In the present model they do

play a role because they are a substitute for adjustment.

                     A higher marginal cost of adjustment (a larger A) implies

a higher probability of program failure. In societies that are politically

highly polarized adjustment is much more costly. As a result adjustment effort

will be less and hence the probability of program failure will be larger. The

coefficient A could be interpreted in terms of the scope for cooperation

between unions and the government: in Israel and texico such cooperation is

possible and important, in Argentina it is excluded. Alesina (1988),

Eichengreen (1988) and Dornbusch (1985) have emphasized the political costs in

polarized societies of undertaking adjustment programs.

                     A   higher responsiveness of the   trade balance to adjustment

effort implies a larger optimal adjustment effort and hence a reduced
probability of failure. This responsiveness can be interpreted as the extent to
                                                 9



which an economy is open or closed. An open economies can achieve major trade

improvements with relatively small real depreciation. Very closed economies

have to achieve larger depreciation or expenditure cuts.

                     • Countries with a more volatile external balance, in the

sense of a, will make larger adjustment efforts. But the larger adjustment

effort does not translate into a reduced probability of failure.

                     • The higher the cost of program failure, K, the larger the

adjustment effort and the lower the probability of failure. One might

conjecture that in a situation where there have been marty previous failures the

costs in terms of prestige or politics are small. Hence the investment in

stabilization will be small and, in a self-fulfilling way, most programs will

fail except if they were to experience unusually favorable (unexpected)

conditions.

                      These predictions make up a positive theory of adjustment.

The testing involves a cross section of stabilization programs where the

characteristics of countries (R,a,A,a,K) are used to determine their a priori

probability of success.



Capital flight: The most jedia:e extension is to consider a role for capital

flows. Specifically assume that private capital flight will depend on the

probability    of program failure anticipated by the public which   we denote by p.

Our    criterion for the probability of program failure now becomes:


 (8)                p—   p( x >   R   +aA -np)
                                            10




where p measures the response of capital flight to the perceived probability of

failure. We consider first the case where the government selects its adjustment

effort, followed then by the capital flight decision of the public before the

realization of the trade shocks is seen. In this case a Stackelberg solution is

appropriate. The government recognizes that the public will evaluate the

adjustment effort in the same way the government does and hence arrive at the

same estimate of the probability of success. We therefore immediately set p—p'

in (5). Now Tchebycheff's inequality yields a more complicated relation for the

probability of failure, namely:



(9)           R+aA - pp—a/Jp


                      The solution for the probability is a cubic the analytical

solution to which is not very helpful. From Figure 3 where we plot the left

(LH) and right hand side (RH) of the     equation it is apparent that now there is
a possibility of multiple equilibria.     But in the Stackelberg case this is not a

problem    since the public will assume that the government will select among the
two possible solutions the adjustment effort which represents yields minimum
cost.
                      We can once again look at   the   case of a uniform distribution
which yields as the equilibrium failure probability:7


        7We assume that 2m)P and in>R.
LU, RH




                    LB


                    RH



                         Adj usttent




         FIgure 3
                                                 11


(7b)   pt —   (l-R/m)/(2-fl/m)     2K/2A(2m-fl)2



                      It is readily verified that this expression is an increasing

function of p.   Increased capital leads to a larger adjustment effort but even
so brings with it an increased probability of program failure.



Nash Eouilibrium: In our analysis above the Stackelberg solution was

appropriate since the public decides on capital flight only after the

government selects the adjustment effort. Rut if the capital flight decision

were to be made concurrently with the government's choice of the adjustment

effort a Nash equilibrium is also a plausible solution.

          Now the government finds the optimal adjustment effort for a given

p'. Then the rational expectations assumption p—p' is imposed on the solution.

The resulting expression for the equilbrium probability of program failure is:




(7c)         p* —   (l-R/m)/(2-fl/m)   -   a2K/A(2m-fl)



Comparison   with (7a) readily reveals that in the Nash case, because the
government does not internalize at the optimization stage the effects of
adjustment on capital flight, adjustment effort is less and the probability of
program failure is higher.
                                                 12




Extensions: There is a number of directions in which the model can useful;y be

extended.

            • Rather than assuming that capital flight takes the simple form p,

a more appropriate model involves the expected interest differential adjusted

for exchange losses. Thus the capital flight component,           , rather than being p

becomes:




(10)              C   — [i*   -
                                  (l-p)i   -pt



where i and j* are the home and foreign interest Orates and          is the percentage

loss suffered in case of program failure. This will typically be an exchange

loss. In this extended model interest rates and the extent of exchange loss

under program failure become additional determinants of the ex ante probability

of failure.

            • The kind of uncertainty. Rather than focusing on the program parts,

we can look at uncertainty about key parameters in the optimal stabilization.

Specifically, there might      be   uncertainty about the coefficient a which links

adjusent effort to trade performance. There might          also   be uncertainty about

the costs of stabilization so that the coefficient          is random. This multiplier

uncertainty is imtortant because, unlike in the model developed above, the

government's adjustment effort will influence the variance of foreign exchange

flows.

            • Modelling stabilization as a two-period problem. In the first

period the government undertakes stabilization, (followed by capital flight or
                                              13



not) and the realization of stochastic slW€kJ.. Then, using the accumulated

information prior to a second period, the government makes "readjustments" in
                                                      be particularly useful if we
its stabilization program. This modelling would
                                                           of programs. It also applies
deal with uncertainty regarding the effectiveness

if in fact the public doubts that the government will in fact carry ott
                                                                                     the

program   as initially announced.

              The model has been developed in terms of an exchange rate

stabilization problem. But the approach is obviously more general. Specifically

it should be possible to express a theory of fiscal and inflation stabilization

in these terms.



2. WAITING

                        A common problem in the aftermath of stabilization is the

 lack of a stabilizing capital reflow. Investors have an option to postpone the

 return of flight capital     and they   will wait until    the   frontloading   of returns
 is   sufficient to compensate for the risk of relinquishing the liquidity            option

 of a wait-and-see position. This is the case even when interest rates are high

 and   rewarding.   Moreover, when capital does return      it chooses a highly liquid
 form,   sitting so to speak in the parking lot, with the engine running. There is
 definitely little coimaitment to a rapid resumption of real investment. The
 reason for this is residual uncertainty whether stabilization can in              fact-be

 sustained.
                        In the literature this topic has been addressed in a number
 of ways, mostly in terms of irreversible investment          decisions.8   We concentrate

                             van Wijnbergen (1985), Bodin and Serven (1986), Reynoso
                                         14



here on a very simple two-period example to make the basic point. Suppose that

investors have the choice between investing in the US or in Mexico. The return

in the US in both periods is R*_(l+r*). In Mexico the first period certain

return is R*+m. In the second period, with probability p events are good and

the return is RG. With probability (l-p) they are bad and the return is only

R.
                   The question now is how much of a first period premium is

required to induce investors to accept the uncertainty and invest immediately

for two periods. We assume that investors have the choice to postpone the

decision to invest until the uncertainty is resolved; they cannot, however,

disinvest in Mexico after the first period, upon finding out that a bad state

has materialized. The decision then is to invest now or to wait until

uncertainty is resolved.


Table 1   Expected Investment Returns

                           1st Period                2nd Period


Invest in Mexico           R* + m                   pRG +   (l-p)R
Now Irreversibly


Wait and See                 R*                       pRG +   (lp)R*

                    To sharpen the point we assume that the    expected   return in

the second period is equal to the US return, that   is   R* pEG + (1p)RB. Tne

relevant criterion for immediate investment in Mexico then is:
                                            15



(11)      (R*+m)[pRG +   (l-p)Rl   > R*(pRC + (1p)R*)



which, noting that R*_pRC +   (1-p)R8, this expression reduces to



(12)         a (1p)(R* - RB)


                    Thus a risk neutral investor requires a premium to make an

investment which has the same second period expected return (R*) as his

alternative investment opportunity. The reason is that with waiting an even

higher return can be achieved, once uncertainty is resolved (or narrowed down).

The premium required for immediate investment is higher the larger is the

probability of a bad state and the larger is the discrepancy between the

foreign rate of return and that prevailing in an adverse state.

                     But how can governments reassure investors? The common

answer is to bring about a "credible" stabilization. In practice it comes     down

to   high interest rates and an exchange rate so competitive that expected

further depreciation is unlikely. But high interest rates are counterproductive

from a point of view of growth because they lead to holding of paper assets

rather than real investment. A low real exchange rate cuts the standard of

 living and thus reduces domestic demand and profitability for all investments

 except in the traded goods sector.

                     But if real depreciation is not sufficient to bring about

 investment the government faces a very awkward position: income is being

 redistributed from labor to capital, but because the real depreciation is not
                                               16



sufficient (in terms of (12)), the increased profits are taken out as capital

flight. Labor will obviously insist then that the policy be reversed. This

uncertainty is an important feature in understanding the real exchange rate -

capital   flight relationships and the post-stabilization difficulties in

developing countries and the stabilization experience of the 1920s.



Extensions:            The model as set out misses one important point. The Wait-

and-see strategy may forego capital gains which go to those who invest early.

Therefore the criterion in (12) may be overly stringent. Of course, that need

not be the case since in bad outcomes there will be capital losses and these

act as a deterrent to early investment. On balance therefore the capital gain

issue may not create a bias either way.

                       The model can be taken in two directions. One is to develop

an extension that fleshes Out the good and bad states in terms of a more

complete model of the economy. Specifically it is important to model the

relationship between real wages and the profitability of capital. If this model

is   to be   used to explain the reluctance to invest in real assets in a

precarious     country then the returns must be linked to      factor costs and   exchange
rates.    Such a model brings   Out the   adjustment   costs required to bring in direct

investment.

                       The   other direction of research is to explore wIth this
model the actual pattern of capital return: how rapidly do financial flows
reverse themselves and how long does it take before investment in real assets
resumes.
                                         17




REFERENCES
                                             and Reputation in a Model of
Barro,R. and R.Gordon (1983) "Rules, Discretion
Monetary Policy" rnal of Monetary EconorniCL 12, 101-121.
                                              and Economic Fluctuations"
Calvo, C.(1988a) "Idiosyncratic Expectations
Unpublished manuscript. University of Pennsylvania.

        (l988b) "Notes on Credibility and Economic Policy" Unpublished
manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.
                                                           the experience of
DornbusCh.R. (1987) "Stopping Hyperinflation. Lessons from
Germany in the 1920s" in J.Bossons, R.Dornbusch and S.Fischer (eds.)
Macroeconomics and Finance. Essays in Honor of Franco Modiliani, MIT Press

            and S.Fischer (1986) "Stopping Hyperinflation Past and Present"
Weltwirtschaftliches Archly, 122: 1-66.
                                                    Inflation. Book Review"
Eichengreen, B. (1986) "Rational Expectations and
.Journal of Economic Literature, December.

          (1988) "The End of Large Public Debts: Comment" in F.Ciavazzi and
L.Spaventa (eds.) High Public Debt. The Italian Experience Cambridge University
Press.
                                                                   Some Linear
Flood, R. and P.Garber (1984) "Collapsing Exchange Rate Regimes:
Examples." Journal of International Economics, February.

 Froot,K. (1988) "Credibility, Real Interest Rates and the Optimal Speed of
 Trade Liberalization." mimeo, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

 Helpman,E. and L.Leiderman (1988) "Stabilization in High Inflation Countries:
 Analytical Foundations and Recent Experience." in Carneie Rochester Conference
 Series, 28: 10-84

 Kr,xan,P. (1979) " A Model of Balance of Payments Crises" Journal of Monev
 Credit and Banking, 3, 311-325.

 Persson,T. "Credibility of Macroeconomic Policy: An introduction and a    Broad
 Survey." Euroean Economic Review, 519-532.

 Obs:feld,M.(1986a)"Ra:ional and Seiffulfilling Balance of Payments Crises"
 American Economic Review,l, 72-81

           (1986b) "Speculative attack and External Constraint in a Maximizing
 Model of the Balance of Payments" Canadian Journal of Economics,l, 1-22.
                                         18



Reynoso.A. (1988) "Capital Flight: The Case of Mexico". Unpublished manuscript,
MIT.

Sargent,T. (1982) "The Ends of Four Big Inflations" in R.Hall (ed.) Inflation,
University of Chicago Press

             (1986a) "Stopping Moderate Inflation: The Methods of Poincare and
Thatcher" in R.Dornbusch and M.Si,sonsen (eds.) Inflation. Debt and Indexation,
MIT Press.

           (l986b) Rational Expectations and Inflation Harper and Row

Tornell,A. (1988) "Credibility and Irreversible Investment and the Tobin Tax,"
mimeo, Columbia University

van Wijnbergen.S.(1985) "Trade Reform, Aggregate Investment and Capital Flight:
On Credibility and the Value of Information". Economic Letters, 19.

Webb,S. (1988) Inflation and Stabilization in Germany. Oxford University Press,
forthcoming.
</ref_section>
