                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         FLIGHT TO SAFETY:
       HOW ECONOMIC DOWNTURNS AFFECT TALENT FLOWS TO STARTUPS

                                       Shai Bernstein
                                    Richard R. Townsend
                                          Ting Xu

                                     Working Paper 27907
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27907


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




We thank Kunal Mehta for data assistance and seminar participants at the Junior Entrepreneurial
Finance/Innovation Lunch Group for valuable comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Shai Bernstein, Richard R. Townsend, and Ting Xu. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Flight to Safety: How Economic Downturns Affect Talent Flows to Startups
Shai Bernstein, Richard R. Townsend, and Ting Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 27907
October 2020
JEL No. E32,J22,J24,L26,M13

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper investigates how economic downturns affect the flow of human capital to startups.
Using proprietary data from AngelList Talent, we study how individuals’ online job searches and
applications changed during the emergence of the COVID-19 crisis. We find that job seekers
shifted their searches toward larger firms and away from early-stage ventures, even within the
same individual over time. Simultaneously, job seekers broadened their other search parameters,
considering lower salaries and a wider variety of job types, roles, markets, and locations. Relative
to larger firms, early-stage ventures experienced a decline in the number of applications per job
posting, a decline driven by higher quality and more experienced job seekers. This led to a
deterioration in the quality of the human capital pool available to early-stage ventures during the
downturn. These declines hold within a firm as well as within a job posting over time. Our
findings uncover a flight to safety channel in the labor market, which may amplify the pro-
cyclical nature of entrepreneurial activities.

Shai Bernstein                                   Ting Xu
Harvard Business School                          Darden School of Business
Soldiers Field                                   University of Virginia
Boston, MA 02163                                 100 Darden Blvd
and NBER                                         Charlottesville, VA 22903
sbernstein@hbs.edu                               xut@darden.virginia.edu

Richard R. Townsend
Rady School of Management
University of California at San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
rrtownsend@ucsd.edu
1     Introduction

Economists have long debated the role of entrepreneurship during economic downturns.

Under the cleansing hypothesis, recessions are times of accelerated reallocation, where inef-

ficient incumbents are replaced by new firms who seize market opportunities (Foster et al.

(2001); Davis et al. (1996); Collard-Wexler and De Loecker (2015)). However, an increas-

ing body of evidence highlights that early stage ventures may be particularly vulnerable to

economic downturns, and therefore less able to drive such cleansing effects (Decker et al.

(2014, 2016); Fabrizio and Tsolmon (2014)). Existing explanations of startup vulnerability

during recessions primarily focus on the role of financing constraints early stage ventures face

when attempting to raise capital during downturns (Barlevy (2003); Aghion et al. (2012);

Townsend (2015); Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2016); Howell et al. (2020)). In this paper we

explore a new channel—the ability of early stage companies to attract human capital during

economic downturns.

    It is theoretically unclear how downturns should affect the ability of early stage ventures

to attract human capital. On the one hand, downturns may lead to increased risk aversion

among workers, making safer and more established firms more appealing than startups.

This could be viewed as analogous to the phenomenon of “flight to safety” among investors

(Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2008); Baele et al. (2020)). On the other hand, many workers

lose their jobs during downturns or face worse career trajectories at established firms, and

thus face lower opportunity costs in joining riskier and less established firms (Gottlieb et al.

(2019)). Thus, the overall increase in the supply of potential workers for early stage ventures

may offset any changes in worker preferences away from them.

    Empirically exploring whether and how the supply of talent available to startups changes

during economic downturns is challenging due to the difficulty of distinguishing between



                                               1
supply and demand factors that drive labor market outcomes. For example, a decline in

hiring by early stage ventures could reflect a change in the hiring policies of such firms

(labor demand), a decline in worker interest in such firms (labor supply), or both. A handful

of recent studies have used online job posting data to investigate various questions about

labor demand (Campello et al. (2019, 2020b); Kahn et al. (2020b)); however, such data tell

us little about labor supply.

   In order to analyze labor supply, we make use of a novel data set that we obtained from

AngelList Talent, the largest online recruitment platform for private and entrepreneurial

companies. In the most recent completed year, AngelList Talent had 3.6M active job seekers

and over 185,000 new jobs listed. The data we use come from their backend system, and

therefore include not only publicly visible job postings, but also the history of each user’s

job searches on the platform, their application submissions, as well as whether employers

responded to these submitted applications. Because we can observe the activities of job

seekers in these data, we can learn about changes in labor supply. In particular, we are able

to track changes in the search behavior of the same job seeker over time. This allows us to

explore whether worker preferences shift, independently of changes in labor demand—and

if so, what type of workers experience changes in preferences. Moreover, these data also

allow us to explore how the quantity or quality of workers who apply to the same job posting

changes after the onset of an economic downturn, which again is unconfounded by changes

in labor demand.

   The economic downturn that we focus on is the emergence of the COVID-19 crisis. The

crisis caused massive economic disruption with widespread and immediate impact. Impor-

tantly, the origins of the COVID-19 crisis did not arise from changes in underlying economic

conditions, thus providing an ideal, exogenous setting to study the response of job seekers

to adverse economic shocks.

                                             2
   Exploring changes in the search parameters of AngelList users, we find that job candi-

dates searched for significantly larger companies after March 13, 2020, the date that a state

of national emergency was first announced in the U.S. Specifically, the average size of firms

searched by candidates increased by 25%, and candidates became 20% more likely to search

for firms with more than 500 employees. This result holds both across candidates and, im-

portantly, within candidates over time. In other words, the COVID crisis led job candidates

to shift their search preferences toward established and mature firms. At the same time, job

candidates became less choosy as they broadened their search criteria on other dimensions

in order to be employed by more established firms. Candidates became more likely to search

for part-time jobs or internships, to lower their minimum required salary, and to search for

a wider range of roles, locations, and markets. Next, we examine whether changes in the

search preferences of job seekers also translated into job applications. Consistent with the

changes in job searches, we find a significant increase in the average size and financing stage

of companies receiving job applications after the onset of the crisis. Again, these effects

not only hold in the cross section across all candidates on the platform, but also take place

within candidates, suggesting that the crisis changed the type of firms candidates chose to

apply to.

   Next, we explore whether the flight to safety effects that we document vary across different

types of job seekers. In particular, we partition candidates according to two characteristics

that we can observe in the data: their number of years of work experience in their current role

and an estimated score of their overall quality. The latter measure is created by AngelList

based on an algorithm that accounts for applicants’ experience, skills, and education. We find

that more experienced as well as higher quality job seekers drive most of the flight to safety

in job applications, shifting away from smaller and earlier stage firms. This result contrasts

with the idea that higher quality and more experienced job candidates are better shielded

                                              3
from labor market risks (Carmichael (1983); Idson and Valletta (1996)), and is consistent

with the greater bargaining power and flexibility these candidates may have during job

search.

   The results described above suggest a shift in worker preferences away from early stage

firms after the emergence of COVID-19. However, it is possible that despite this shift, early

stage firms had no difficulties attracting human capital, or even had an easier time. In

particular, it could be that there was a large enough influx of new, high-quality job seekers

after the crisis, that it offset the change in worker preferences. Thus, in the second part

of the paper, we turn to estimating effects at the firm level. We find that, on average, the

number of applications received per job posting did decline significantly after the onset of the

crisis. We also find again that the decline was concentrated within smaller and earlier-stage

startups and was driven by a decline in high-quality/experienced applicants. In principle,

these results could reflect changes in the type of jobs posted by these firms. However, we find

similar results within jobs. That is, holding the job posting fixed, high-quality/experienced

applications declined after the crisis, and more so for jobs posted by smaller/younger firms.

These results highlight the difficulty early stage ventures face when attempting to attract

human capital during downturns.

   We conduct a variety of robustness tests. First, we show that our main results are absent

over the same time period in 2019, suggesting our results are not driven by seasonality or

unobserved trends. Second, through non-parametric graphs, we show that our main results

do not reflect a general downward trend in the labor market. Instead, reactions are steep

and immediate, and coincide with the onset of the COVID-19 outbreak in the U.S. Small

startups and large startups also shared similar application trends in the months before the

crisis. Third, we find a similar flight to safety when using candidates’ clicks on job postings

as an alternative indictor of job interest. Fourth, our results are similar when we use the

                                               4
state-level number of COVID cases as a continuous treatment variable; they are also similar

when we drop candidates or startups from California and Massachusetts, suggesting that

the documented patterns are national rather than concentrated in innovation hubs. Lastly,

to address remaining concerns about demand side factors driving our results, we exploit job

posting data to show that demand side changes are actually the opposite of what we find on

labor supply: job postings by smaller startups did not decline during COVID, while those by

larger ones did. Further, neither group exhibited a downskilling in labor demand, as salaries

or experience requirements did not decline. Our main results are thus unlikely to be driven

by unobserved demand side factors.

   Overall, our findings illustrate how the onset of COVID-19 impacted the quantity and

quality of talent available to early stage ventures. Specifically, job seekers shift towards larger

and more mature companies, consistent with a flight to safety channel in which workers seek

firms that would be most likely to weather the economic downturn. Interestingly, the effect is

mostly driven by higher quality job seekers, leading to a brain drain for early stage ventures

relative to established firms. Importantly, our results are unlikely to be driven by changes in

startups’ demand for human capital, since we document changes in the search parameters of

job candidates, as well as changes in applicants’ response to the same job posting over time.

   Ultimately, flight to safety in the labor market likely stems from a belief among workers

that larger employers offer better job security during downturns, due to, for example, their

better ability to secure financing or to maintain product demand. These beliefs need not

be rational, and could reflect overreaction by job candidates. Although pinning down the

source of flight to safety and its rationality is beyond the scope of this paper, our results

present a new channel that helps to explain startups’ vulnerability to economic downturns.

Our results also suggest that labor market frictions may aggravate the pro-cyclical nature of

entrepreneurship activities.

                                                5
   Our paper contributes to the literature on business cycles and entrepreneurship. Ca-

ballero and Hammour (1994), Davis et al. (1996), Foster et al. (2001), and Collard-Wexler

and De Loecker (2015) document accelerated reallocation and cleansing of inefficient incum-

bents during economic downturns; Koellinger and Roy Thurik (2012) find that upswings in

unemployment rate are followed by increases in entrepreneurship. In contrast, Parker (2009),

Decker et al. (2014), Decker et al. (2016), and Fabrizio and Tsolmon (2014) show that en-

trepreneurship and R&D are pro-cyclical rather than counter-cyclical. This pro-cyclicality

has been attributed to financing frictions (Aghion et al. (2012); Townsend (2015); Nanda and

Rhodes-Kropf (2016)), R&D externality (Barlevy (2007)), and entrepreneurs’ human capi-

tal choice (Rampini (2004)). Our paper introduces a new labor channel to explain startup

vulnerability during economic downturns. Related to our paper, Howell et al. (2020) and

Gompers et al. (2020) examine the impact of the COVID-19 crisis on VC investment, while

Bartik et al. (2020a) and Fairlie (2020) study its impact on small businesses.

   We also add to an emerging literature on the startup labor market. Babina and Howell

(2018), Babina et al. (2019), and Babina et al. (2020) study human capital flows between

incumbents and startups. Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2012) and Babina et al. (2019) ex-

amine employment and wages dynamics by young firms and their cyclicality. These papers

study equilibrium employment outcomes, while we focus on individuals’ labor supply in the

job search and match process. In that sense, our paper is related to a handful of papers

that study job searches and applications (Brown and Matsa (2016); Gortmaker et al. (2019);

Brown and Matsa (2020); Cortes et al. (2020)). Different from these papers, we focus on

the startup labor market, which has received little attention relative to the broader labor

market.

   Lastly, we add to a recent string of papers that study the labor market consequence

of COVID-19. Using job posting and unemployment insurance data, Kahn et al. (2020a)

                                             6
document a broad-based decline in job postings of 30% by the end of March 2020. Using

household survey data, Coibion et al. (2020) estimate a 20 million job loss and a 7 percentage

point drop in labor participation rate by April 2020, both of which are greater than what

happened over the entire Great Recession. Bartik et al. (2020b) show that low-wage workers

and business closures drive most of the decline in small business employment at the onset

of COVID-19. Using job posting data, Campello et al. (2020b) show that, among public

firms, small and credit constrained firms cut back on job postings more during COVID-19;

there is also a larger decline in high-skill jobs relative to low-skill ones. Our paper focuses

on labor supply and the ability of startups to attract talents during the COVID-19 crisis.

We also highlight the stark contrast between mature and early-stage companies, as well as

the disparate responses by high-quality and low-quality job candidates.



2     The AngelList Talent Platform

AngelList was originally founded in 2010 as a platform to connect startups with potential

investors. In 2012, it expanded into startup recruiting. The original investment portion of

the site, now called AngelList Venture, was separate from the recruiting portion of the site,

AngelList Talent. One of the key features of AngelList Talent was that it did not allow third

party recruiters. It also encouraged transparency about salary and equity upfront, before

candidates applied.

    Since its launch, AngelList Talent has rapidly grown in popularity, becoming an impor-

tant part of the startup ecosystem. Over its lifetime, more than 10M job seekers have joined

the platform, more than 100,000 startups have posted a job there, and more than 5M con-

nections have been made between job seekers and startups. In the most recent completed

year, AngelList Talent had 3.6M active users, 185,000 new jobs listed, and 1M connections


                                              7
made.

   The way that AngelList Talent works is is illustrated in Panel A of Figure 1. Startups can

post job openings, specifying their job’s location, role, description, type (i.e., full-time/part-

time), salary range, equity range, and other details (Figure A.1 shows an example). Job

postings are also linked to AngelList startup profiles that provide further firm-level infor-

mation, including funding status, size, industry, and team members. After job postings are

reviewed for spam they become live for search. Users can search live job postings, potentially

specifying a variety of filters based on the job and startup characteristics above (Panel B of

Figure 1 shows an example). Importantly for our purposes, a user must register on the site

and provide basic resume information before s/he can perform a search. Thus, all searches

can be linked to a user by AngelList—although user searches are not publicly visible to

startups or other users.

   After a user performs a search, the results are displayed. The results can be sorted

by “recommended” (i.e., jobs that AngelList thinks are best suited to the user’s profile),

“newest” (i.e., most recently posted), or “last active” (i.e., jobs that engaged most recently).

Sorting by recommended is the default. If there are multiple matching jobs for a given

startup, they are displayed together in a group, even if the jobs rank very differently in

terms of the sorting variable. The display rank of the startup’s jobs is based on the highest

ranking matching job of the startup.

   Users can engage with search results in multiple ways. First, they can click on the

name/logo of the startup to get further information about the firm. Second, they can click

on the job title to get further information about the position. Third, they can click on the

“apply” button to begin the application process. The apply button is embedded in each

search result and also appears on the startup profile and job profile pages just described.

After clicking the apply button, users are taken to an application page, which may ask

                                                8
for further resume information and/or provide space for a cover letter. To complete the

application process, users must fill out the required fields and click on the “send application”

button. Approximately 70% of users who click on the apply button end up sending an

application.

    After a user sends an application to a startup, the startup can “request an introduction”

to the user, “reject” the user’s application, or do nothing—in which case the user’s application

is automatically rejected in 14 days. Requesting an introduction to a user allows the two

parties to communicate directly. After this connection is made, the rest of the hiring process

occurs outside of the platform. Thus, AngelList does not directly observe if a given candidate

ends up being hired.



3        Data

3.1        Measurement

The data we use in this paper were provided directly by AngelList and were collected by

their backend system. Our sample period runs from February 5 to June 18, 2020, and for

comparison we also obtain data from the same period in 2019. In the data we can observe

all user activities, including searches, clicks, applications by job candidates, and responses to

those applications by startups. We also observe all jobs ever posted on AngelList Talent, with

associated job and startup level characteristics, and the dates the jobs were live in search.

Finally, we also observe candidate characteristics, including location, current role, experience

in current role, and an measure of overall candidate quality developed by AngelList.

    In our analysis of searches, our main focus is the size of the firms workers search for, as

measured by the number of employees.1 Users can filter on employment size by selecting any
    1
        Job candidates can also filter on companies’ financing stage, but these data are only available after late


                                                         9
of the seven size bins: 1-10, 11-50, 51-200, 201-500, 501-1000, 1001-5000, and 5000+. We take

the mid point of each bin, average it across all bins a user selects, and then log transform it.2

Additionally, we define a large startup indicator variable equal to one if the average selected

size is above 500 employees. We also examine additional search parameters that capture

other job dimensions, such as job type (full-time, internship, contractor), minimum required

salary, roles, markets (i.e., sectors), locations, as well as the number of keywords used for

screening. These search dimensions capture how flexible or selective job seekers are in their

screening for jobs.

    To measure talent flows to startups, we look at job application volume. Although not

all job applicants are eventually hired, job applications allow us to measure the size of the

talent pool available to startups. Specifically, we measure the number of job applications

at the job posting level. This allows us to condition the supply of applications within each

“unit” of labor demand, thus addressing concerns that changing talent flows to startups are

driven by shifts in their labor demand or job requirements. We also study startup responses

to job applications. As discussed earlier, we are able to observe whether a startup requests

an introduction from the applicant, which indicates the initiation of further interactions. Al-

though we do not observe the final hiring decision, these introduction requests are precursors

to eventual hiring.

    Finally, we exploit two measures of job candidate quality. The first measure is the

number of years experience an individual has in her current role. The second is a quality

score created by AngelList based on a proprietary algorithm that scores candidates based

on their experience, education, skills, as well as platform activities.




March in our search sample.
    2
      For the “5000+” bin, we set the upper bound to be 20,000 employees. Our results are similar if we use
a lower or higher upper bound.


                                                    10
3.2       Sample Restrictions

We limit our sample to include only the activities of users and startups located in the U.S. in

order to ensure that our findings do not reflect a mix of countries with very different startup

ecosystems. We also exclude the top 1% of users in terms of their number of searches during

the sample period so as to limit the influence of “bots” (i.e., fake users) that might be

scraping the AngelList website. Consistent with the idea that these users are bots, their

search activity does not fluctuate between weekdays and weekends in the same way as that

of other users. Our final sample includes 178,793 users and 83,921 job applicants that were

active during our sample period, and 113,382 jobs that were live for search during that

period.



4     Empirical Strategy

Our goal is to explore whether worker preferences toward startups changed following the

emergence of the COVID-19 crisis in the U.S., which we use as an adverse economic shock.

Unlike other economic crises, the COVID-19 crisis did not originate from changes in under-

lying economic conditions. Its timing is thus exogenous with respect to the outcomes we

study. More importantly, the crisis caused immediate and massive economic disruptions,

allowing us to observe labor market reactions within a relatively short period of time. Most

of our analyses focus on the few months (February to May) surrounding the onset of the

crisis, thus mitigating the effects of confounding events that could become relevant in the

medium to long run.

    We use the online search and application activities of job candidates on AngelList to

identify changes in their preferences and labor supply. Our data have several advantages

relative to existing data used in the literature. First, our search parameter data allow us


                                              11
to capture job seeker preferences independent of the job vacancies posted by firms, thus

separating the supply of labor from labor demand. This is not feasible with job posting

data that has been used thus far (Campello et al. (2019, 2020b); Kahn et al. (2020b)).

Second, compared with surveys on job seekers (Coibion et al. (2020); Mui and Schoefer

(2020)), our data also allows us to measure job seekers’ preferences at a higher frequency

and without potential self-reporting biases. Lastly, our granular job application data contain

complete information on candidates, jobs, and firms. This allows us to conduct important

within-candidate and within-job analyses, which are critical in controlling for compositional

changes among job seekers and changes in labor demand by firms.



4.1     Effect on Worker Preferences

4.1.1    Search Parameters

We first explore changes in the search parameters of job seekers on AngelList Talent around

the onset of the COVID-19 crisis. Specifically, we estimate the following specifications at

the search level:

                      SearchP arameterit = –i + — (P ostCOV IDt ) + ‘it                            (1)

where SearchP arameterit is a search parameter specified by candidate i searching at time

t, such as firm size, job type, role, market, location, etc, and P ostCOV IDt is a dummy

indicating dates after March 13, 2020, the date that a state of national emergency was first

announced in the U.S.3 Our main specification includes job seeker fixed effects –i to study

how the preferences of the same individual change in response to the COVID crisis. In some

specifications we eliminate these individual fixed effects to allow for compositional changes

in the types of individuals seeking jobs around the crisis. We cluster standard errors by the

   3
   In robustness tests, we show our results are similar if we use the national or state-level number of
COVID cases as continuous treatment variables.


                                                  12
state in which the user is located.


4.1.2    Applications

We also use a similar specification to explore changes in the types of firms job seekers apply

to. Specifically, we explore whether individuals tended to submit applications to larger or

later stage firms after COVID hit. In addition, we examine whether application preferences

change differentially for higher quality job candidates. To do so, we estimate the following

specification at the job application level:

  StartupM aturityif t = –i + — (P ostCovidt )+

                                      “ (P ostCovidt ) ◊ (HighQualityi ) + ” Xt + ‘i,f,t (2)
                                                                                Õ




where StartupM aturityif t represents either the number of employees or the financing stage

of the firm f candidate i applied to at time t; High Qualityi is an indicator for whether

candidate i had above median work experience in her current role or an above median quality

score; Xt is a vector of day-level controls that include the average number of employees of

firms hiring on AngelList and the total number of job postings on AngelList. Similar to

equation (1), we include candidate fixed effects –i in the full specification to examine within-

candidate changes in application preferences. Standard errors are clustered by a candidate’s

state.



4.2      Effect on Firms

The estimation strategies described above allow us to learn about how worker preferences

shifted after the emergence of COVID-19. However, it is possible that the effect of such

a shift in preferences on firms could be offset or even reversed by a large enough influx of

new job seekers after the crisis. In other words, even though workers may be less interested


                                              13
in working for small/early-stage startups, there may be enough additional workers seeking

jobs due to the crisis that these startups actually find it easier to attract human capital. To

explore this possibility, we also estimate effects on job applications at the job posting-day

level.

    Our baseline specification here examines whether the number of applications received by

jobs declined following the onset of the crisis. In addition, we examine whether applications

declined more for less mature startups than for more mature startups. We estimate the

following equation at the job posting-day level:

  Applicationsf jt = –j + ◊jt + — (P ostCOV IDt )+

                           “ (P ostCOV IDt ) ◊ (LowStartupM aturityf ) + ” Xf t + ‘f jt (3)
                                                                                       Õ




where Applicationsf jt is the number of new applications to job j at startup f on day t;

LowStartupM aturityf is either an indicator for whether a startup has fewer than 50 em-

ployees or an indicator for whether it its last financing round was a series B round or earlier;4

◊jt are fixed effects for the number of days since the job was posted, which account for tem-

poral patterns in application volumes over the lifecycle of a job posting; Xf t is a vector of

controls that includes the total number of active job postings by a startup on a given day

and the average size (i.e., number of employees) of all startups hiring on AngelList on a

given day. In some specifications, we include firm fixed effects, –f , thus exploring changes

in application volumes within firms. However, changes in application volumes under this

specification may reflect changes in the amount or type of job vacancies posted by a firm,

thus picking up both supply and demand side factors. Therefore, in our main specification

we include job posting fixed effect, –j . By examining within-job changes in applications, we

are able to hold labor demand factors constant. This allows us to isolate changes in labor

   4
     Not all firms have financing round information on AngelList, thus our samples are smaller when using
financing round as the interaction variable.


                                                   14
supply. We cluster standard errors by a firm’s state.

     Lastly, we also examine how COVID-19 impacted the average quality of talent flowing

to startups. To do this, we estimate the following specification at the application level:

    ApplicantQualityif jt = –j + — (P ostCOV IDt )+

                               “ (P ostCOV IDt ) ◊ (LowStartupM aturityf ) + ” Xf t + ‘if jt (4)
                                                                                Õ




where ApplicantQualityif jt is the number of years of experience or the estimated quality score

for candidate i applying to job j at startup f at time t; LowStartupM aturityf is either an

indicator for whether a startup has fewer than50 employees or an indicator for whether its

last financing round was a seed or pre-seed round; X f,t includes the same controls as those

in equation (3). Standard errors are clustered by a firm’s state. Similar to equation (3), we

control for job fixed effects –j in the main specification, which ensures that any identified

changes in applicant quality are not driven by firms adjusting the types of jobs posted with

different job requirements.



5         Results

5.1         Summary Statistics

Table 1 provides basic summary statistics. Panel A presents statistics on search parameters

entered by job seekers when the unit of observation is at the search level. The average startup

size searched by job seekers is 162 employees, with 30% of searches looking for companies

with at least 500 employees. During our sample period, 89% of the searches are for full-time

positions, and 10% and 13% are for internship and contractor positions, respectively.5 The

average minimum required salary is around $66,000, and among searches with at least one

     5
         Users can search for multiple job types simultaneously.


                                                        15
filter, searches on average specify 1.6 roles, 3.0 markets, 1.5 locations, and 2.1 keywords.

Finally, 61% of job searches include remote jobs.

   Panels B and C present statistics on job applications at the job posting-day level and

application level, respectively. On an average day, a job posting receives 0.2 applications.

The average startup has about 2 live job postings on a given day. The average applicant

has 4.2 years of work experience and a candidate quality score of 13.2. About 76% of the

applications go to startups with fewer than 50 employees, 42% to startups in seed or pre-seed

stage, and 18% to startups post-C round. The average startup receiving applications has 26

employees. Finally, 7% of the submitted applications receive intro requests from startups,

which would lead to further interactions.



5.2     Effect on Worker Preferences

5.2.1   Job Search Parameters

We start by analyzing whether job seekers changed their job search and screening criteria

following the emergence of COVID-19. Table 2 presents the results estimated from equation

(1) with dependent variables related to the size of firms users search for as measured by

number of employees. The dependent variable in columns 1–2 is the log of the firm size

searched for and in columns 3–4 it is an indicator for whether the firm size searched for is

greater than 500 employees. The sample is at the individual search level. In column 1, we

find that following COVID-19, users increased the firm size they were searching for. The

coefficient of 0.223 is highly statistically significant and indicates a 22% increase in the size

of firms searched for after the crisis began. In column 2, we add job candidate fixed effects,

which ensures that the results are not driven by compositional changes in the type of users

seeking jobs on AngelList. We find a similar result, with a coefficient of 0.254, reflecting a



                                               16
25% increase in the size of firms searched for by the same user. Columns 3 and 4 reveal

similar findings when examining the likelihood of searching for companies with least 500

employees. Based on the coefficient in column 4 with candidate fixed effects, users are 20%

more likely to search for large firms with above 500 employees after the crisis. Overall, the

results from Table 2 are consistent with a flight-to-safety channel, in which the preferences

of job seekers shift towards larger and more established companies.

   In Table 2, we explore whether other search characteristics changed simultaneously with

the shift towards larger companies. We find that, post COVID, candidates were more likely

to search for part-time jobs, such as internships (column 1) or contractor positions (column

2). Additionally, job seekers were willing to accept a lower minimum salary, and became more

flexible along other dimensions as they increased the number of roles, markets, locations, and

keywords included in their searches. Moreover, consistent with the prevalence of working

from home during the pandemic, we also find a 21% increase in candidates’ willingness to

work remotely. These results suggest that job seekers became less selective and more flexible

in their job searches during the recession. Together with the results from Table 2, it appears

that users’ flight to safety—the desire to find employment with more established firms—is

accompanied by a willingness to compromise on other job dimensions.

   We check the validity of the above results in several ways. First, we plot the non-

parametric relationship between searched firm size and the date of search in Figure 2, re-

moving user fixed effects. We see a sharp jump in searched firm size around late March and

early April, which coincides with the outbreak of COVID-19 in the U.S. This sharp increase,

together with the lack of pre-trend, helps alleviate concerns that other non-COVID-related

events may drive such changes. To further alleviate such concerns, we examine whether such

changes are present in 2019 data over the same time period. Panel A of Table 8 presents

the result of this placebo test. We find no statistically significant changes in searched em-

                                             17
ployment size around March 13 in 2019. Not only are the coefficients insignificant, they are

economically minuscule. These results suggest that the flight-to-safety finding documented

around COVID-19 is unlikely to be driven by seasonality or unobserved trends in the data.


5.2.2   Job Applications

Do changes in search preferences translate into job applications? In Table 4, we investigate

this question using the specification in equation (3). The analysis is at the job application

level and the dependent variables are the log size (number of employees) of the firm applied

to and an indicator for whether the firm applied to is late stage (series C or later). We show

results without candidate fixed effects in Panel A and with candidate fixed effects in Panel

B. Consistent with our findings on changes in search parameters, we find that job candidates

applied to larger and later-stage firms after the onset of the crisis. These changes hold even

within the same candidate over time, as shown in Panel B. For example, column 1 of Panel

B shows that job seekers applied to firms that are 8% larger and that are 22% more likely to

be late-stage after the start of the COVID recession. Interestingly, these results are stronger

among more experienced and higher quality applicants (columns 2-3 and 5-6), who shifted

to firms that are 13% larger and 25% more likely to be late-stage. Similar results are not

found in a placebo test using 2019 data (Panel B of Table 8). These findings contrast with

the idea that higher quality and more experienced job candidates are better shielded from

labor market risks (Carmichael (1983); Idson and Valletta (1996)) and thus have less need

to seek shelter with a larger employer. Instead, it is consistent with the greater bargaining

power and labor market flexibility for high-quality candidates in the job search and match

process. Overall, flight-to-safety appears to persist from search activities to job applications,

and is stronger among higher quality candidates.




                                               18
5.3    Effect on Firms

So far, we have documented a significant shift in worker preferences away from small and

early-stage firms following the emergence of the COVID-19 crisis, an effect driven mostly

by higher quality and more experienced workers. How do these changes impact startups?

In this section, we examine the effect of the crisis on the quantity and the quality of talent

flows to startups.

   We first examine how COVID-19 impacted the volume of job applications to startups.

If flight-to-safety is prevalent, we should see a drop in job applications to startups, as job

seekers who would otherwise work for startups turn to larger and more established employers.

Further, such flight-to-safety should also drive a wedge between larger and smaller (or later-

versus earlier-stage) startups.

   Panel A of Table 5 presents the results. The specification is based on equation (3) and

the dependent variable is the number of new applications to a job posting in a given day.

We find that, within a firm, the average number of applications to a job posting declined

by 10.2% overall during COVID, when compared with pre-COVID means (column 1). We

then examine whether this decline is homogeneous across firms in columns 2–3. We find that

the decline is stronger for smaller and earlier-stage firms. For example, startups with fewer

than 50 employees saw a 13.7% decline in applications compared with just a 3% decline for

startups with above 50 employees (column 2). Similarly, job applications to earlier-stage

startups declined by 13.5%, while those going to later-stage startups declined by only 5.2%

(column 3). In columns 4–6, we further include job-posting fixed effects, therefore exploring

the shift in the number of applications holding fixed the same job posting. We find similar

results with slightly smaller magnitudes. This within-job analysis rules out the possibility

that our results are driven by changes in the quantity or type of jobs posted by firms.



                                             19
   In Panels B and C we explore what type of candidates drive the declines in applications

to smaller and earlier-stage startups. Specifically, we split the number of applications by

candidate experience or quality score at the median. Panels B and C of Table 5 show the

results, controlling for firm fixed effects and job fixed effects, respectively. In both panels, we

find that the stronger declines in applications to smaller and earlier-stage startups are driven

entirely by high-quality candidates (columns 1–2 and 5–6), while low-quality candidates did

not apply deferentially to startups of different sizes or stages (columns 3–4 and 7–8), as

indicated by the insignificant interaction terms. These results hold whether we measure

candidate quality by experience or AngelList’s proprietary quality score. Moreover, the

results are absent in a placebo test using 2019 data (Panel C of Table 8), suggesting they

are not driven by general time trends over these particular months of the year.

   How do these application patterns impact the average quality of talent available to

startups? Table 6 investigates this, focusing on applicant quality at the application level.

Columns 1 and 4 of Panel A show that, within a firm, the average applicant quality declined

by 6.5% and applicant experience by 1.5% after COVID hits. However, such an average

decline is driven entirely by smaller and earlier stage firms, as shown in columns 2–3 and

5–6. In particular, startups with fewer than 50 employees experienced a 8.4% decline in

applicant quality and a 3% decline in applicant experience. Similarly, average applicant

quality dropped by 6.7% for seed or pre-seed startups and applicant experience dropped by

5.1%. In contrast, larger and later-stage startups saw no significant declines in applicant

quality and, if anything, experienced increases. Panel B shows that these results hold not

only within firms, but also within jobs, suggesting declining applicant quality is not driven

by firms lowering job requirements or canceling higher-skilled jobs (i.e., downskilling in labor

demand).

   Figures 3 and 4 show changes in applications and applicant quality graphically. In Figure

                                                20
3, we see that large and small firms, as well as late-stage and early-stage firms have very

similar trends in number of applications received per job before late March. Yet they start to

diverge significantly after the end of March, when the COVID crisis intensified. In particular,

smaller and earlier-stage startups saw a larger drop in the number of applications per job

than larger and later-stage startups. Further, all firms saw a precipitous drop in applications

around late March, suggesting the result is not simply a continuation of a previous downward

trend. Figure 4 shows that the average quality of job applicants to small startups dropped

sharply around mid-March. This holds whether we measure quality by job experience (Panel

A) or AngelList’s quality score (Panel B). In contrast, applicant experience did not decline

significantly for large startups, and applicant quality in fact increased. Further, small and

large startups trended similarly in applicant quality measures before COVID. These patterns

suggest that our results are not driven by a general downward trend in applicant quality for

small startups, or these startups being on a differential trend than large ones.

   Taken together, our results show that workers’ desire to join safe firms during economic

downturns has real adverse consequences for smaller and younger firms in terms of their

ability to attract talent. Job candidates, especially high-quality ones, fly to larger and later-

stage firms, resulting in a brain drain for less mature ventures.



5.4    Firm Response to Job Applications

Our results thus far document a significant decline in both the quantity and quality of

talent flows to startups during the COVID-19 crisis, especially for nascent startups. How

do startups react to these changes? Do they simply hire the next best candidate, or do

they cut back on hiring? We shed light on these questions by examining whether startups

respond positively to applications by requesting introductions and thereby initiating further

interactions. Although these further interactions do not necessarily lead to eventual hiring,

                                               21
they are a necessary precursor. We estimate the following specification at the application

level similar to equation (4):

   (RequestIntroif jt ) = –j + — (P ostCOV IDt )+

                          “ (P ostCOV IDt ) ◊ (LowStartupM aturityf ) + ”Xjt + ‘if jt (5)


where RequestIntroif jt is an indicator for whether the application submitted by candidate

i at time t for job j received an intro request from startup f ; –j are job fixed effects;

LowStartupM aturityf is either an indicator for whether a startup has fewer than 50 em-

ployees or an indicator for whether its last financing round was a series B round or earlier.

We control for the log number of applications received by a job as of time t in Xjt .

   Table 6 presents the results. We find that, within a firm, startups are 23% less likely to

respond positively to an application with a request for an introduction after the onset of the

COVID crisis (column 1). This decline is again driven by smaller and earlier-stage startups,

which had a 31% and 38% decline in intro rate respectively (columns 2-3). Similar results

obtain when we control for job fixed effects (columns 4 to 6). In contrast, larger and later-

stage startups barely saw any changes in their intro rate within firms, and actually increased

their intro rate within jobs during COVID. This dramatic divergence in the likelihood of

responding to applications highlights the consequence of the diminished applicant quality

available to small and young startups. Facing worse talent pools, rather than hiring a

potentially unqualified candidate, smaller and earlier-stage ventures scaled back their hiring,

potentially leading some of their positions to remain unfilled. These results also suggest

that labor demand by nascent firms is quite sensitive to talent quality. The type of human

capital available to startups is therefore crucial to understanding the unique challenges facing

startups in economic downturns.




                                              22
6       Robustness

We provide additional robustness tests to our main analyses. First, we exploit candidates’

clicking behavior as another indicator of their job interests. After inputting search filters,

candidates can click on the returned job postings to obtain more information, or click on the

startup name to view detailed startup info. Because the size of a startup is visible before

candidates click for more information, clicks are good indicators of candidates’ preferences

conditioning on the set of jobs they see.6 We therefore estimate a specification similar to

equation (2) to examine how the size and stage of the startups clicked by candidates changed

around the onset the COVID recession. Table A.1 presents the results. We find that can-

didates clicked on larger and later-stage firms after COVID hit. Based on within-candidate

results in columns 2 and 4, candidates clicked on firms that have 18% more employment

after COVID starts, and were 12% more likely to click on late-stage firms that are post-C

round.

    Next, we show in Table A.2 that our main results are similar if we use the cumulative

number of COVID-19 cases at the state-level as an alternative treatment variable in place

of the post-March 13 indicator. The local number of cases captures not only the onset of

COVID-19 but also the differential escalations of the pandemic in different regions, which

may shape job candidates’ or firms’ expectations.7

    Third, to make sure that our results are not just driven by job candidates or firms in

traditional tech hubs, in Table A.3 we show that our results are robust to dropping candidates

or firms from California and Massachusetts from our samples. Further, the magnitudes are

similar to our main results, suggesting that the labor market reactions we document are

    6
    These clicks do not include applications.
    7
    It is also possible that job candidates or firms react to the pandemic situation at the national rather
than at the local level. Our main results are similar if we use the national number of COIVD-19 cases as
another alternative treatment variable.


                                                    23
broad-based and not just concentrated in tech hubs.8

    Fourth, to address potential concerns that users update search filters in reaction to re-

turned results within a short period of time, we restrict our search sample to fresh searches

that are not preceded by any prior searches by the same user in the last 24 hours. Table A.4

shows that the results on this restricted search sample remain similar in both significance

and magnitude.

    Lastly, to ameliorate any remaining concerns about demand side factors potentially driv-

ing our results, we explicitly examine changes in firms’ labor demand in Appendix B by

analyzing job posting data. Table A.5 shows that job postings on AngelList Talent declined

by about 30% over all, similar to the magnitude reported in Kahn et al. (2020b). Inter-

estingly, these declines are driven mainly by larger startups, while smaller startups did not

see a significant decline. Further, startups did not lower their requirement on candidates’

experience, or salaries, suggesting limited downskilling in labor demand. These demand

side results therefore go against what we find on the supply side, suggesting that our main

findings are not driven by demand side factors.



7       Further Discussion

The main contribution of our paper is to document a flight to safety in labor market that

negatively affects startups’ ability to attract talent during economic downturns. But what

explains this flight-to-safety preference? Just as investors fly to safer assets during finan-

cial crises (Vayanos (2004); Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2008); Baele et al. (2020)), job

candidates may fly to larger employers due to beliefs that these employers offer better job


    8
     This finding is consistent with Kahn et al. (2020b), who document that the drop in job vacancies
happened similarly across all U.S. states, regardless of the intensity of the initial virus spread or timing of
stay-at-home policies.


                                                      24
security or job prospects during a recession. For example, larger companies may be better

able to secure financing or maintain product demand in downturns; they may also have

steadier labor policies. Importantly, these beliefs need not be rational, and could instead

reflect irrational responses by job candidates. Pinning down the source of flight to safety

and the rationality of these beliefs is beyond the scope of this paper. However, regardless,

such a preference by job seekers represents a mechanism that exacerbates difficulties already

facing startups during downturns.



8    Conclusion

Young firms are central to innovation and productivity growth. Yet their ability to grow

and innovate depends crucially on their ability to attract high-quality talent, potentially

from established firms. Before achieving standardization, human capital is fundamentally

intertwined with the success of early-stage ventures. In this paper, we show that young firms’

ability to attract talent suffered during the most recent economic downturn—the COVID-19

crisis. Using unique job search data as well as within-candidate and within-job analysis, we

show that job seekers pivot to larger and more mature firms when a downturn hits. This

leads to a decline in talent flows to startups, especially to nascent ones. Importantly, such

flight-to-safety is stronger among higher-quality candidates, leading to a deterioration in the

quality of human capital available to small, young startups. Our results provides a novel

mechanism through which economic downturns negatively impact entrepreneurship. More

broadly, our study highlights the importance of labor market frictions in understanding the

pro-cyclicality of entrepreneurship.




                                              25
REFERENCES


Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Askenazy, Nicolas Berman, Gilbert Cette, and Laurent Eymard,
  2012, Credit Constraints and the Cyclicality of R&D Investment: Evidence from France,
  Journal of the European Economic Association 10, 1001–1024, Publisher: Oxford Aca-
  demic.

Babina, Tania, and Sabrina T Howell, 2018, Entrepreneurial spillovers from corporate r&d,
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Babina, Tania, Wenting Ma, Christian Moser, Paige Ouimet, and Rebecca Zarutskie, 2019,
  Pay, employment, and dynamics of young firms, Employment, and Dynamics of Young
  Firms (July 23, 2019) .

Babina, Tania, Paige Ouimet, and Rebecca Zarutskie, 2020, Ipos, human capital, and labor
  reallocation, Available at SSRN 2692845 .

Baele, Lieven, Geert Bekaert, Koen Inghelbrecht, and Min Wei, 2020, Flights to safety, The
  Review of Financial Studies 33, 689–746.

Barlevy, Gadi, 2003, Credit market frictions and the allocation of resources over the business
  cycle, Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 1795–1818.

Barlevy, Gadi, 2007, On the cyclicality of research and development, American Economic
  Review 97, 1131–1164.

Bartik, Alexander W, Marianne Bertrand, Zoe B Cullen, Edward L Glaeser, Michael Luca,
  and Christopher T Stanton, 2020a, How Are Small Businesses Adjusting to COVID-19?
  Early Evidence from a Survey, Working Paper 26989, National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search, Series: Working Paper Series.

Bartik, Alexander W, Marianne Bertrand, Feng Lin, Jesse Rothstein, and Matt Unrath,
  2020b, Measuring the labor market at the onset of the COVID-19 crisis, Working Paper
  27613, National Bureau of Economic Research, Series: Working Paper Series.

Brown, Jennifer, and David A Matsa, 2016, Boarding a sinking ship? an investigation of job
  applications to distressed firms, The Journal of Finance 71, 507–550.

Brown, Jennifer, and David A Matsa, 2020, Locked in by leverage: Job search during the
  housing crisis, Journal of Financial Economics 136, 623–648.

Caballero, Ricardo, and Mohamad L. Hammour, 1994, The Cleansing Effect of Recessions,
  American Economic Review 84, 1350–68, Publisher: American Economic Association.

Caballero, Ricardo J, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2008, Collective risk management in a
  flight to quality episode, The Journal of Finance 63, 2195–2230.




                                             26
Campello, Murillo, Janet Gao, and Qiping Xu, 2019, Personal income taxes and labor down-
  skilling: Evidence from 27 million job postings, Kelley School of Business Research Paper
  .

Campello, Murillo, Gaurav Kankanhalli, and Pradeep Muthukrishnan, 2020b, Corporate
  Hiring under COVID-19: Labor Market Concentration, Downskilling, and Income In-
  equality, Working Paper 27208, National Bureau of Economic Research, Series: Working
  Paper Series.

Carmichael, Lorne, 1983, Does rising productivity explain seniority rules for layoffs?, The
  American Economic Review 73, 1127–1131.

Chiplunkar, Gaurav, Erin Kelley, and Gregory Lane, 2020, Which jobs are lost during a
 lockdown? evidence from vacancy postings in india, SSRN .

Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Michael Weber, 2020, Labor Markets During
  the COVID-19 Crisis: A Preliminary View, Working Paper 27017, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Series: Working Paper Series.

Collard-Wexler, Allan, and Jan De Loecker, 2015, Reallocation and technology: Evidence
  from the us steel industry, American Economic Review 105, 131–71.

Cortes, Patricia, Jessica Pan, Laura Pilossoph, and Basit Zafar, 2020, Gender differences in
  job search and the earnings gap: Evidence from business majors, Available at SSRN .

Davis, Steven J, John Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh, 1996, Small business and job creation:
  Dissecting the myth and reassessing the facts, Small business economics 8, 297–315.

Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, 2014, The Role of En-
  trepreneurship in US Job Creation and Economic Dynamism, Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives 28, 3–24.

Decker, Ryan A., John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, 2016, Where has
  all the skewness gone? The decline in high-growth (young) firms in the U.S., European
  Economic Review 86, 4–23.

Fabrizio, Kira R, and Ulya Tsolmon, 2014, An empirical examination of the procyclicality
  of R&D investment and innovation, Review of Economics and Statistics 96, 662–675,
  Publisher: MIT Press.

Fairlie, Robert W, 2020, The impact of covid-19 on small business owners: Continued losses
  and the partial rebound in may 2020, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Foster, Lucia, John C Haltiwanger, and Cornell John Krizan, 2001, Aggregate productiv-
  ity growth: lessons from microeconomic evidence, in New developments in productivity
  analysis, 303–372 (University of Chicago Press).



                                            27
Gompers, Paul A., Will Gornall, Steven N. Kaplan, and Ilya A. Strebulaev, 2020, Venture
 Capitalists and COVID-19, SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3669345, Social Science Research
 Network, Rochester, NY.
Gortmaker, Jeff, Jessica Jeffers, and Michael Junho Lee, 2019, Labor reactions to financial
 distress: Evidence from linkedin activity, Available at SSRN .
Gottlieb, Joshua D, Richard R Townsend, and Ting Xu, 2019, Does career risk inhibit
 potential entrepreneurs? .
Hershbein, Brad, and Lisa B Kahn, 2018, Do recessions accelerate routine-biased technolog-
  ical change? evidence from vacancy postings, American Economic Review 108, 1737–72.
Howell, Sabrina T, Josh Lerner, Ramana Nanda, and Richard R Townsend, 2020, Finan-
  cial distancing: How venture capital follows the economy down and curtails innovation,
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Idson, Todd L, and Robert G Valletta, 1996, Seniority, sectoral decline, and employee reten-
  tion: an analysis of layoff unemployment spells, Journal of Labor Economics 14, 654–676.
Kahn, Lisa B, Fabian Lange, and David G Wiczer, 2020a, Labor Demand in the Time
 of COVID-19: Evidence from Vacancy Postings and UI Claims, Working Paper 27061,
 National Bureau of Economic Research, Series: Working Paper Series.
Kahn, Lisa B, Fabian Lange, and David G Wiczer, 2020b, Labor Demand in the Time
 of COVID-19: Evidence from Vacancy Postings and UI Claims, Working Paper 27061,
 National Bureau of Economic Research, Series: Working Paper Series.
Koellinger, Philipp D, and A Roy Thurik, 2012, Entrepreneurship and the business cycle,
 Review of Economics and Statistics 94, 1143–1156.
Moscarini, Giuseppe, and Fabien Postel-Vinay, 2012, The contribution of large and small
 employers to job creation in times of high and low unemployment, American Economic
 Review 102, 2509–39.
Mui, Preston, and Benjamin Schoefer, 2020, Reservation raises: The aggregate labor supply
 curve at the extensive margin, Technical report, CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP14209.
Nanda, Ramana, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2016, Financing Risk and Innovation, Man-
  agement Science 63, 901–918, Publisher: INFORMS.
Parker, Simon C, 2009, The Economics of Entrepreneurship (Cambridge University Press).
Rampini, Adriano A, 2004, Entrepreneurial activity, risk, and the business cycle, Journal of
  Monetary Economics 51, 555–573.
Townsend, Richard R., 2015, Propagation of Financial Shocks: The Case of Venture Capital,
  Management Science 61, 2782–2802, Publisher: INFORMS.
Vayanos, Dimitri, 2004, Flight to quality, flight to liquidity, and the pricing of risk, Technical
  report, National bureau of economic research.


                                               28
                                          Figure 1
                                AngelList Talent Platform

Panel A shows the job search and match process on the AngelList Talent platform. The dashed
box indicates activities that happen within the platform. Panel B shows a screen shot of the job
search interface with various search filters.

                  Panel A: Job search and match process on AngelList




                                 Panel B: Job search filters




                                              29
                                                                 Figure 2
                                                    Changes in Searched Firm Size

Panel A (Panel B) shows within-user changes in the logarithm of average employment size searched
by users (the likelihood of average employment size being larger than 500) from February to June
2020. The binscatter graphs remove user fixed effects. The dashed vertical line indicates March
13, 2020, the date that a state of national emergency was first announced in the U.S.

                                          Panel A: Changes in searched firm size: ln(emp)
                                          5.3
                                          5.2
                 Mean of ln(employment)
                                          5.1
                                          5
                                          4.9
                                          4.8




                                           Feb12 Feb26 Mar11 Mar25    Apr8   Apr22   May6 May20   Jun3   Jun17


                                  Panel B: Changes in searchd firm size: emp>=500
                                          .35
                                          .33
                 Mean of emp>500
                                          .31
                                          .29
                                          .27
                                          .25




                                            Feb12 Feb26 Mar11 Mar25   Apr8   Apr22   May6 May20   Jun3   Jun17




                                                                      30
                                                                           Figure 3
                                         Changes in the Number of Applications Per Job

Panel A (Panel B) shows within-job changes in the number of applications received for that job
posting from February to May 2020. The binscatter graphs remove job fixed effects and control for
the log number of active job postings by a firm on a day as well as the average size of firms hiring on
AngelList on a day. Small (large) firms are startups with no more than (more than) 50 employees
at the time of application. Early-stage (late-stage) firms are startups with financing stage before
(at or post) C round at the time of application. The dashed vertical line indicates March 13, 2020,
the date that a state of national emergency was first announced in the U.S.

          Panel A: Changes in the number of applications per job by firm size
                                         .4
                                         .35
                  Applications per job
                                         .3
                                         .25
                                         .2
                                         .15
                                         .1




                                               Feb25    Mar6     Mar16    Mar26       Apr5     Apr15     Apr25     May5   May15

                                                                         Large firms                Small firms




         Panel B: Changes in the number of applicaitons per job by firm stage
                                         .35
                                         .3
                  Applications per job
                                         .25
                                         .2
                                         .15
                                         .1




                                                Feb25     Mar6     Mar16      Mar26          Apr5      Apr15      Apr25   May5

                                                                         Late-stage                 Early-stage




                                                                                31
                                                                        Figure 4
                                                          Changes in Applicant Quality

Panel A (Panel B) shows within-firm changes in the average experience (quality score) of job
applicants from February to May 2020. The binscatter graphs remove startup fixed effects and
control for the log number of active job postings by a firm on a day as well as the average size of
firms hiring on AngelList on a day. Small firms are startups with no more 50 employees and large
startups are those with more than 50 employees. The dashed vertical line indicates March 13, 2020,
the date that a state of national emergency was first announced in the U.S.

                 Panel A: Changes in applicant experience by firms size
                                         4.3
                  Applicant experience
                                         4.2
                                         4.1
                                         4




                                                Feb5   Feb15 Feb25   Mar6   Mar16 Mar26   Apr5   Apr15 Apr25   May5

                                                                      Large firms          Small firms




                                Panel B: Changes in applicant quality by firms size
                                         14
                                         13.5
                  Applicant quality
                                         13
                                         12.5




                                                Feb5   Feb15 Feb25   Mar6   Mar16 Mar26   Apr5   Apr15 Apr25   May5

                                                                      Large firms          Small firms




                                                                             32
                                                 Table 1
                                          Summary Statistics

This table presents summary statistics for the main variables used in our analysis. Panel A presents
the statistics for search parameters at the search level. Panel B presents statistics on job application
volume and control variables at the job posting-day level. Panel C presents statistics on job
applications and control variables at the application level.

                                       Panel A: Search level
                Variable              N         Mean       Std. Dev. Min.     Median      Max.
                Ln(emp)             390,005      5.09        2.11      1.87      4.86      9.43
                Emp>500             390,005      0.30        0.46      0.00      0.00      1.00
                Internship         3,903,401     0.10        0.30      0.00      0.00      1.00
                Contractor         3,903,401     0.13        0.33      0.00      0.00      1.00
                Full-time          3,903,401     0.89        0.32      0.00      1.00      1.00
                Ln(min. salary)    1,120,913     4.19        0.96      0.00      4.39      5.44
                No. of roles       3,572,005     1.55        1.38      1.00      1.00     21.00
                No. of markets      337,116      2.96        2.39      1.00      2.00     15.00
                No. of locations   4,645,381     1.50        1.23      1.00      1.00     25.00
                Open to remote     5,397,027     0.61        0.49      0.00      1.00      1.00
                No. of keywords     186,916      2.11        1.85      1.00      2.00     34.00

                           Panel B: Applications: job posting-day level
     Variable                                     N         Mean     Std. Dev.    Min.    Median    Max.
     No. of applications                 1,465,942          0.18       0.77       0.00     0.00     81.00
     No. of applications - high quality  1,465,942          0.09       0.44       0.00     0.00     51.00
     No. of applications - low quality   1,465,942          0.09       0.43       0.00     0.00     35.00
     No. of applications - experienced   1,465,942          0.09       0.48       0.00     0.00     58.00
     No. of applications - inexperienced 1,465,942          0.09       0.44       0.00     0.00     41.00
     Emp<50                              1,465,942          0.68       0.46       0.00     1.00     1.00
     Pre-C                                531,164           0.73       0.45       0.00     1.00      1.00
     Avg ln(emp) of recruiting firms     1,465,942          3.50       0.13       3.29     3.51      3.71
     Ln(no. of active jobs by the firm)  1,465,942          1.88       1.06       0.69     1.61     5.55

                             Panel C: Applications: application level
       Variable                                  N         Mean     Std. Dev. Min.       Median    Max.
       Applicant experience                    400,454      4.18      3.47       0.00     3.00     10.00
       Applicant quality                       397,981     13.21     15.67       0.00     7.06     85.23
       Emp<50                                  400,454      0.76      0.43       0.00     1.00      1.00
       Seed                                    141,555      0.42     0.49        0.00     0.00     1.00
       Avg ln(emp) of recruiting firms         400,454      3.51     0.13        3.29     3.51     3.71
       Ln(no. of active jobs by the firm)      400,454      1.69     0.87        0.69     1.61      5.55
       Ln(emp)                                 418,450      3.25     1.42        1.70     3.42      9.43
       Late-stage                              144,338      0.18      0.39       0.00     0.00      1.00
       Request intro                           436,198      0.07      0.26       0.00     0.00      1.00
       Ln(total no. of appl. for a job)        436,198      2.60      1.26       0.69     2.48      7.35



                                                      33
                                                Table 2
                Change in Search Parameters: Startup Employment Size

This table examines changes in employment size searched by job candidates around the onset of
COVID-19 from February to June 2020. The sample is at the search level. The dependent variable
Ln(emp) is the log number of employees averaged across all size bins selected in a search; Emp>500
is an indicator equal to one if the average employment size is larger than 500. Post_Mar13 is a
dummy indicating dates after March 13, 2020, the date that a state of national emergency was first
announced in the U.S. Columns 1 and 3 include fixed effects for candidate’s state and columns 2
and 4 include candidate fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by candidate’s state. *, **, and
*** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                       Ln(emp) Ln(emp) Emp>500 Emp>500
                                          (1)          (2)      (3)          (4)
                 Post_Mar13            0.223***    0.254***   0.053***    0.052***
                                        (0.047)     (0.021)    (0.012)     (0.006)
                 Candidate FE             No         Yes        No          Yes
                 Candidate state FE       Yes        No         Yes         No
                 N                      390,005    390,005    390,005     390,005
                 Adj. R-sq               0.013      0.811      0.014       0.733
                 % change                22%           25%      20%         20%




                                                  34
                                                                          Table 3
                                            Change in Search Parameters: Other Search Dimensions

     This table examines changes in other search parameters by job candidates around the onset of COVID-19 from February to June 2020.
     The sample is at the search level. Post_Mar13 is a dummy indicating dates after March 13, 2020, the date that a state of national
     emergency was first announced in the U.S. All columns include candidate fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by candidate’s
     state. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                    Internship Contractor    Full-time   Ln(min. salary) No. of roles   No. of markets   No. of locations   Open to remote   No. of keywords




35
                       (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)               (7)               (8)               (9)
     Post_Mar13     0.006***    0.032***       -0.001       -0.018***      0.069***        0.083**          0.043***           0.111***         0.233***
                     (0.001)     (0.003)      (0.001)        (0.006)        (0.008)        (0.038)           (0.007)            (0.007)          (0.063)
     Candidate FE      Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
     N              3,903,401   3,903,401    3,903,401      1,120,913      3,572,005       337,116          4,645,381         5,397,027          186,916
     Adj. R-sq        0.853        0.74        0.857          0.935          0.749          0.752             0.698             0.640             0.794
     % change         6.5%       27.6%         -0.1%         -1.8%           4.4%           2.7%              2.9%              21.2%            11.1%
                                              Table 4
                      Change in Size and Stage of Firms Applied To

This table examines changes in the size and financing stage of the firms candidates apply to around
the onset of COVID-19 from February to May 2020. The sample is at the application level. The
dependent variable Ln(emp) is the log number of employees of the firm being applied to. Late
stage indicates that the firm being applied to has a financing stage later than C round (D, E,
F... or exited). Post_Mar13 is a dummy indicating dates after March 13, 2020, the date that
a state of national emergency was first announced in the U.S. Experienced indicates candidates
with above median number of years of experience. High quality indicates candidates with above
median quality score as estimated by AngelList. Panel A include fixed effects for candidate’s state.
Panel B includes candidate fixed effects. All columns control for day-level average employment size
of firms hiring on AngelList and total number of job postings on AngelList. Standard errors are
clustered by candidate’s state. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

                               Panel A: Without candidate FE
                                              Ln(emp)                          Late stage
                                     (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)
      Post_Mar13                   0.041**      -0.015    0.010     0.022***   0.013**      0.016***
                                   (0.019)     (0.025)   (0.023)     (0.005)    (0.005)      (0.005)
      Post_Mar13 ◊ Experienced                0.116***                         0.017***
                                               (0.022)                          (0.003)
      Post_Mar13 ◊ High quality                          0.083***                           0.013***
                                                          (0.015)                            (0.004)
      Candidate state FE             Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
      Controls                       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
      N                            418,450    418,450    418,450    144,338     144,338     144,338
      Adj. R-sq                     0.013      0.013      0.013      0.004       0.004       0.004
      % change - worse                         -1.5%      1.0%                    6.7%       8.2%
                                    4.1%                             11.3%
      % change - better                        10.1%      9.3%                   15.5%       14.9%


                                  Panel B: With candidate FE
                                              Ln(emp)                          Late stage
                                     (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)
      Post_Mar13                   0.077***     0.023      0.028  0.043*** 0.038*** 0.036***
                                    (0.016)    (0.016)    (0.018)  (0.006)  (0.007)  (0.010)
      Post_Mar13 ◊ Experienced                0.109***                      0.010*
                                               (0.020)                      (0.005)
      Post_Mar13 ◊ High quality                          0.108***                     0.009
                                                          (0.021)                    (0.006)
      Candidate FE                   Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes
      Controls                       Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes
      N                            418,450     418,450    418,450    144,338    144,338      144,338
      Adj. R-sq                     0.144       0.144      0.145      0.037      0.037        0.038
      % change - worse                         2.3%        2.8%                  19.5%       18.4%
                                    7.7%                             22.1%
      % change - better                        13.2%      13.6%                  24.6%       23.0%

                                                  36
                                                                          Table 5
                                                                      Job Applications

     This table examines changes in job applications received by startups around the onset of COVID-19 from February to May 2020. The
     sample is at the job posting-day level. The dependent variable in Panel A, No. of applications per job, is the number of new applications
     to a job posting on a given day. In Panels B and C, the dependent variables are the number of applications to a job posting on a given
     day from candidates with above/below median experience or above/below median quality. Post_Mar13 is a dummy indicating dates
     after March 13, 2020, the date that a state of national emergency was first announced in the U.S. Emp<=50 indicates startups with no
     more than 50 employees at the time of job application. Pre-C indicates startups with a financing stage before C round (i.e., pre-seed,
     seed, A and B) at the time of job application. All panels include fixed effects for the number of days since a job was posted and control
     for the log number of active job postings by a startup on a day and the average employment size of all startups hiring on AngelList on
     a day. Panel B controls for firm fixed effects and Panel C controls for job posting fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by firm’s
     state. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                              Panel A: All applications
                                                                                   No. of applications per job




37
                                                                (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)            (5)        (6)
                              Post_Mar13                     -0.020**      -0.006       -0.010     -0.010         -0.001     0.000
                                                              (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.006)    (0.007)        (0.009)    (0.005)
                              Post_Mar13 ◊ Emp<=50                       -0.021***                               -0.013*
                                                                          (0.004)                                (0.007)
                              Post_Mar13 ◊ Pre-C                                     -0.016***                             -0.021***
                                                                                      (0.004)                               (0.004)
                              Firm FE                           Yes         Yes         Yes         No        No             No
                              Job FE                            No          No          No          Yes       Yes            Yes
                              Days since posting FE             Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes            Yes
                              Controls                          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes            Yes
                              N                              1,465,942   1,465,942    531,164    1,465,942 1,465,942       531,164
                              Adj. R-sq                        0.234       0.234       0.199       0.368     0.368          0.362
                              % change - large/late-stage                  -3.0%        -5.2%                    -0.5%       0.0%
                                                              -10.2%                               -5.1%
                              % change - small/early-stage                -13.7%       -13.5%                    -7.1%      -10.9%
                                                            Table 5
                                                           (Continued)

                Panel B: Applications by applicant experience and quality, within-firm
                                                                      No. of applications per job
                                        Experienced            Inexperienced             High-quality            Low-quality
                                       (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)           (6)        (7)       (8)
     Post_Mar13                       0.001       -0.001      -0.006*     -0.008**    -0.007*       -0.005*     0.000     -0.003
                                     (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.004)    (0.004)       (0.003)    (0.002)   (0.005)
     Post_Mar13 ◊ Emp<=50           -0.017***                  -0.002                -0.013***                  -0.002
                                     (0.003)                  (0.002)                 (0.003)                  (0.002)
     Post_Mar13 ◊ Pre-C                         -0.012***                   -0.003               -0.010***                -0.003
                                                 (0.002)                   (0.003)                (0.003)                (0.004)
     Firm FE                           Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes      Yes
     Days since posting FE             Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes      Yes
     Controls                          Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes      Yes
     N                              1,465,942   531,164      1,465,942    531,164    1,465,942      531,164   1,465,942 531,164
     Adj. R-sq                        0.198      0.171         0.179       0.134       0.179         0.149      0.172    0.145
     % change - large/late-stage      1.1%        -1.1%       -6.5%         -8.7%      -7.3%         -5.2%      0.0%      -3.0%
     % change - small/early-stage    -16.8%      -13.7%       -8.7%        -12.0%     -20.8%        -15.6%      -2.0%     -5.9%




38
                  Panel C: Applications by applicant experience and quality, within-job
                                                                      No. of applications per job
                                        Experienced            Inexperienced            High-quality             Low-quality
                                       (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)       (5)            (6)        (7)       (8)
     Post_Mar13                       0.002       0.001        -0.003       -0.003     -0.005        -0.001      0.006    0.001
                                     (0.004)     (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.002)    (0.005)       (0.002)    (0.004)   (0.003)
     Post_Mar13 ◊ Emp<=50           -0.012**                   -0.001                -0.009**                   -0.003
                                     (0.005)                  (0.003)                 (0.004)                  (0.004)
     Post_Mar13 ◊ Pre-C                         -0.013***                   -0.004               -0.011***               -0.005*
                                                 (0.003)                   (0.003)                (0.004)                (0.003)
     Job FE                            Yes         Yes          Yes      Yes      Yes                 Yes        Yes      Yes
     Days since posting FE             Yes         Yes          Yes      Yes      Yes                 Yes        Yes      Yes
     Controls                          Yes         Yes          Yes      Yes      Yes                 Yes        Yes      Yes
     N                              1,465,942    531,164     1,465,942 531,164 1,465,942            531,164   1,465,942 531,164
     Adj. R-sq                        0.308       0.289        0.322    0.321    0.266               0.248      0.304    0.309
     % change - large/late-stage      2.1%        1.1%         -3.3%       -3.3%      -5.2%          -1.0%      5.9%      1.0%
     % change - small/early-stage    -10.5%      -12.6%        -4.3%       -7.6%     -14.6%         -12.5%      3.0%     -4.0%
                                                Table 6
                                           Applicant Quality

This table examines changes in applicant quality around the onset of COVID-19 from February to
May 2020. The sample is at the application level. The dependent variables are the number of years
of experience or the quality score of the applying candidate. Post_Mar13 is a dummy indicating
dates after March 13, 2020, the date that a state of national emergency was first announced in the
U.S. Emp<=50 indicates startups with no more than 50 employees at the time of job application.
Seed indicates startups at seed or pre-seed round at the time of job application. Panel A includes
startup fixed effects and Panel B includes job posting fixed effects. Demand controls include the
log number of active job postings by a startup on a day and the average employment size of all
startups hiring on AngelList on a day. Standard errors are clustered by firm’s state. *, **, and ***
indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                         Panel A: Within-firm
                                     Applicant experience                        Applicant quality
                                   (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)           (6)
 Post_Mar13                      -0.063*       0.084       0.093**     -0.834***       -0.239        0.165
                                 (0.036)      (0.060)      (0.037)      (0.265)       (0.245)       (0.308)
 Post _Mar13 ◊ Emp<=50                       -0.205***                               -0.828***
                                              (0.054)                                 (0.182)
 Post_Mar13 ◊ Seed                                         -0.302***                             -1.052***
                                                            (0.029)                               (0.236)
 Firm FE                           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
 Controls                          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
 N                               400,454      400,454      140,978      397,981       397,981       141,555
 Adj. R-sq                        0.230        0.231        0.167        0.065         0.065         0.045
 % change - large/late-stage                    2.0%        2.3%                       -1.9%         1.2%
                                 -1.5%                                   -6.5%
 % change - small/early-stage                  -2.8%        -5.1%                      -8.4%         -6.7%


                                         Panel B: Within-job
                                         Applicant experience                   Applicant quality
                                    (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)
  Post_Mar13                      -0.088**      -0.047      -0.022     -0.812***      -0.417      -0.170
                                   (0.034)     (0.047)     (0.040)      (0.270)      (0.307)     (0.340)
  Post_Mar13 ◊ Emp<=50                          -0.054                              -0.522***
                                               (0.034)                               (0.169)
  Post_Mar13 ◊ Seed                                        -0.086**                              -0.656**
                                                            (0.034)                               (0.258)
  Job FE                            Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes
  Controls                          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes
  N                               400,454      400,454     140,978     397,981       397,981     141,555
  Adj. R-sq                        0.353        0.353       0.343       0.100         0.100       0.091
  % change - large/late-stage                   -1.1%       -0.5%                     -3.3%         -1.3%
                                   -2.1%                                -6.4%
  % change - small/early-stage                  -2.4%       -2.7%                     -7.4%         -6.2%

                                                      39
                                             Table 7
                                Likelihood of Requesting Intro

This table examines changes in the likelihood of a submitted job application receiving intro from
the startup around the onset of COVID-19 from February to May 2020. The dependent variable
Request Intro is a dummy equal to one if the submitted application received an intro from the
startup. Post_Mar13 is a dummy indicating dates after March 13, 2020, the date that a state of
national emergency was first announced in the U.S. Emp<=50 indicates startups with no more
than 50 employees at the time of job application. Pre-C indicates startups with a financing stage
before C round (i.e., pre-seed, seed, A and B) at the time of job application. Columns 1-3 control
for startup fixed effects and columns 4-6 control for job posting fixed effects. All columns control
for the total number of applications received for a job posting as of a given day. Standard errors
are clustered by firm’s state. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

                                                           Request intro
                                    (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)
 Post_Mar13                      -0.018***     -0.002     0.000    -0.012***    0.008***   0.010***
                                  (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.001)      (0.002)    (0.002)
 Post_Mar13 ◊ Emp<=50                        -0.022***                         -0.026***
                                              (0.001)                            (0.001)
 Post_Mar13 ◊ Pre-C                                   -0.016***                     -0.022***
                                                       (0.001)                       (0.002)
 Ln(no. of applications received) -0.019*** -0.018*** -0.011*** -0.027*** -0.026*** -0.018***
                                   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
 Firm FE                            Yes        Yes         Yes        No         No          No
 Job FE                             No         No          No         Yes        Yes         Yes
 N                                436,198    436,198     151,196    425,623    425,623     146,934
 Adj. R-sq                         0.281      0.282       0.197      0.316      0.316       0.223
 % change - large/late-stage                    -3%        0%                     10%       24%
                                   -23%                              -15%
 % change - small/early-stage                  -31%       -38%                   -23%       -29%




                                                40
                                              Table 8
                               Placebo Tests Based on 2019

This table presents placebo tests for our main analysis using 2019 data. Panel A examines changes
in average firm size searched by candidates. Panel B examines changes in the size and stage of
firms applied to by candidates. Panel C examines within-job posting changes in the number of
applications by firm size and candidate quality at the job posting-day level. Post_Mar13 is a
dummy indicating dates after March 13, 2019. Other variables and controls are defined in the same
way as those in Tables 2, 4, and 5. Standard errors are clustered by candidate’s state in Panels A
and B and by firm’s state in Panel C. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively.

                       Panel A: Average employment size searched
                                     Ln(emp) Ln(emp) Emp>500 Emp>500
                                        (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)
               Post_Mar13              -0.062       0.035         -0.001      0.001
                                      (0.037)      (0.036)       (0.001)     (0.003)
               Candidate FE             No           Yes           No         Yes
               Candidate state FE       Yes          No            Yes        No
               N                      170,057      170,057       170,057    170,057
               Adj. R-sq               0.011        0.718         0.004      0.324
               % change                -1.7%          0.9%       -3.8%        3.8%


                        Panel B: Size and stage of firms applied to
                                        Ln(emp) Ln(emp)           Post-C    Post-C
                                           (1)           (2)        (3)       (4)
                 Post_Mar13               0.012         0.004      -0.002    -0.001
                                         (0.015)       (0.019)    (0.007)   (0.006)
                 Candidate FE             No            Yes         No      Yes
                 Candidate state FE       Yes           No          Yes     No
                 N                      592,982       592,982     200,828 200,828
                 Adj. R-sq               0.002         0.129       0.002   0.033
                 % change                 0.4%          0.1%       -1.2%    -0.6%




                                                 41
                                  Table 8
                                (Continued)

                 Panel C: Number of applications per job
                                        No. of applications per job
                        All     Emp>50 Emp<=50 High quality Low quality
                        (1)       (2)           (3)          (4)        (5)
Post_Mar13             0.002    0.008**       0.000         -0.001     0.003
                      (0.002)   (0.004)      (0.003)       (0.003)    (0.002)
Job FE                  Yes       Yes          Yes           Yes        Yes
Days since posting FE   Yes       Yes          Yes           Yes        Yes
Controls                Yes       Yes          Yes           Yes        Yes
N                     759,409   175,788      583,621       759,409    759,409
Adj. R-sq              0.282     0.253        0.287         0.184      0.232
% change               1.2%      6.3%          0.0%         -1.1%      3.7%




                                        42
Appendix For Online Publication
A     Appendix Exhibits

                                         Figure A.1
                      Example of Job Posting on AngelList Talent

This figure shows an example of a job posting on AngelList Talent.




                                               1
                                                     Figure A.2
                                               Job Posting Volume

This figure shows the weekly number of job postings and the number of startups posting jobs on
AngelList Talent from February to June 2020. The dashed vertical line indicates March 13, 2020,
the date that a state of national emergency was first announced in the U.S.
                       8000




                                                                                               2000
                            6000




                                                                                                  Number of startups
             Number of jobs




                                                                                                           1600
                4000




                                                                                               1200
                       2000




                                                                                               800
                       0




                                   Feb 5   Mar 11           Apr 15      May 20            Jun 24

                                           Number of jobs            Number of startups




                                                              2
                                            Table A.1
                      Size and Stage of Firms Clicked by Candidates

This table examines changes in the size and financing stage of firms candidates click on around the
onset of COVID-19 from February to May 2020. The sample is at the click level and includes all
clicks on job postings or firms that are not job applications. The dependent variable Ln(emp) is the
log number of employees of the firm being clicked (or firm associated with the job being clicked).
Late stage indicates that the firm being clicked (or firm associated with the job being clicked) has a
financing stage later than C round (D, E, F... or exited). Post_Mar13 is a dummy indicating dates
after March 13, 2020, the date that a state of national emergency was first announced in the U.S.
Columns 1 and 3 include candidate state fixed effects and columns 2 and 3 include candidate fixed
effects. All columns control for day-level average employment size of all firms with job openings
on AngelList and total number of job postings on AngelList. Standard errors are clustered by
candidate’s state. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                              Ln(emp)               Late stage
                                           (1)           (2)       (3)        (4)
                 Post_Mar13             0.123*** 0.178*** 0.013*** 0.030***
                                         (0.011)  (0.014)  (0.004)  (0.005)
                 Candidate FE              No            Yes       No         Yes
                 Candidate state FE        Yes           No        Yes        No
                 Controls                  Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes
                 N                       999,267       999,267   397,097    397,097
                 Adj. R-sq                0.015         0.228     0.007      0.146
                 % change                 12.3%        17.8%      5.1%      11.6%




                                                   3
                                                   Table A.2
             Robustness: Local Number of COVID-19 Cases as Treatment

This table shows robustness of our main results using the state-level number of COVID-19 cases
as an alternative treatment variable. Panel A examines within-candidate changes in the average
employment size searched by candidates (column 1) as well as the employment size and financing
stage of the firms candidates apply to (columns 2 and 3). Panel B examines within-job posting
changes in the number of applications by firm size and candidate quality at the job posting-day
level. Ln(no. of cases) is the logarithm of the cumulative number of COVID-19 cases reported
at the state-day level obtained from the New York Times COVID-19 database. Panel C examines
within-job posting changes in applicant experience or quality. All variables and controls are defined
in the same way as those in Tables 2, 4, 5, and 4. Standard errors are clustered by candidate’s
state in Panel A and by firm’s state in Panels B and C. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

              Panel A: Size and stage of firms being searched or applied to
                                                   Ln(emp)        Ln(emp) Late-stage
                                                  Search-level       Application-level
                                                      (1)            (2)         (3)
                               Ln(no. of cases)    0.037***        0.007**    0.007***
                                                    (0.007)        (0.003)     (0.001)
                               Candidate FE           Yes            Yes         Yes
                               N                    390,005        418,450     144,338
                               Adj. R-sq             0.811          0.144       0.037


                               Panel B: Number of applications per job
                                                            No. of applications per job
                                          All      Emp>50 Emp<=50 High quality Low quality
                                          (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)
            Ln(no. of cases)            -0.002*      0.000        -0.003**     -0.001***        0.000
                                        (0.001)     (0.002)        (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.001)
            Job FE                   Yes              Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
            Days since posting FE    Yes              Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
            Controls                 Yes              Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
            N                     1,465,942         463,344      1,002,598     1,465,942      1,465,942
            Adj. R-sq               0.371            0.322         0.382         0.269          0.310


                                       Panel C: Applicant quality
                                                     Applicant experience       Applicant Quality
                                                        (1)            (2)        (3)        (4)
                  Ln(no. of cases)             -0.006    -0.003   0.095** 0.094**
                                              (0.007)   (0.008)   (0.044)  (0.047)
                  Ln(no. of cases) ◊ Emp<=50 -0.012***           -0.072**
                                              (0.003)             (0.027)
                  Ln(no. of cases) ◊ Seed              -0.019***          -0.069**
                                                        (0.005)            (0.031)
                  Job FE                                Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes
                  Controls                              Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes
                  N                                   400,454       140,978     397,981    141,555
                  Adj. R-sq                              4
                                                       0.353         0.343       0.100      0.091
                                                 Table A.3
                  Robustness: Dropping California and Massachusetts

This table shows robustness of our main results removing candidates in California and Mas-
sachusetts (Panel A) or firms in California and Massachusetts (Panels B and C). Panel A examines
within-candidate changes in the average employment size searched by candidates (column 1) as
well as the employment size and financing stage of the firms candidates apply to (columns 2 and
3). Panel B examines within-job posting changes in the number of applications by firm size and
candidate quality at the job-day level. All variables and controls are defined in the same way as
those in Tables 2, 4, 5, and 4. Standard errors are clustered by candidate’s state in Panel A and by
firm’s state in Panels B and C. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

              Panel A: Size and stage of firms being searched or applied to
                                                Ln(emp)        Ln(emp) Late-stage
                                               Search-level       Application-level
                                                   (1)            (2)         (3)
                              Post_Mar13        0.227***       0.094***    0.053***
                                                 (0.031)        (0.028)     (0.010)
                              Candidate FE         Yes            Yes         Yes
                              N                  170,057        245,422      73,133
                              Adj. R-sq           0.718          0.139       0.033


                          Panel B: Number of applications per job
                                                          No. of applications per job
                                       All      Emp>50 Emp<=50 High quality Low quality
                                       (1)         (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)
            Post_Mar13                -0.020      -0.007       -0.026**     -0.018***        0.001
                                     (0.012)     (0.012)        (0.013)      (0.005)        (0.007)
            Job FE                  Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
            Days since posting FE   Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
            Controls                Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
            N                     932,613        283,194       649,419       932,613       932,613
            Adj. R-sq              0.389          0.350         0.397         0.286         0.333


                                    Panel C: Applicant quality
                                                 Applicant experience       Applicant Quality
                                                    (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)
                  Post_Mar13             -0.011    0.024     -0.106    0.078
                                        (0.057)   (0.048)   (0.354)   (0.439)
                  Post_Mar13 ◊ Emp<=50 -0.133***           -0.779***
                                        (0.040)             (0.270)
                  Post_Mar13 ◊ Seed              -0.279***           -0.957**
                                                  (0.045)             (0.372)
                  Job FE                            Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes
                  Controls                          Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes
                  N                               252,115        83,008     249,692     83,127
                  Adj. R-sq                        0.347          0.333      0.099       0.086

                                                          5
                                             Table A.4
                                  Robustness: Fresh Searches

This table examines changes in searched firm size around the onset of COVID-19, restricting to
fresh searches that are not preceded by any prior searches by the same user in the past 24 hours.
The sample is at the search level. The dependent variable Ln(emp) is the log number of employees
averaged across all size bins selected in a search; Emp>500 is an indicator equal to one if the
average employment size searched is larger than 500. Post_Mar13 is a dummy indicating dates
after March 13, 2020, the date that a state of national emergency was first announced in the U.S.
Columns 1 and 3 include fixed effects for candidate’s state and columns 2 and 4 include candidate
fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by candidate’s state. *, **, and *** indicate significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                              Ln(emp)                Emp>500
                                            (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)
                 Post_Mar13              0.265*** 0.208*** 0.055*** 0.038***
                                          (0.035)  (0.019)  (0.009)  (0.007)
                 Candidate FE               No           Yes       No          Yes
                 Candidate state FE         Yes          No        Yes         No
                 N                        22,742       22,742    22,742      22,742
                 Adj. R-sq                 0.014        0.910     0.013       0.894
                 % change                  27%          21%       18%         13%




                                                   6
                                                                  Table A.5
                                                         Labor Demand: Job Postings

    This table uses job postings data to examine how startups’ labor demand changed around the onset of COVID-19 from February to May
    2020. Panel A looks at the number of job postings per startup-day. The sample is at the startup-day level. Days when a startup did
    not post any jobs are filled with zero job postings. Panel B examines changes in average job characteristics. Post_Mar13 is a dummy
    indicating dates after March 13, 2020, the date that a state of national emergency was first announced in the U.S. All columns include
    startup fixed effects. Panel C provides summary statistics for the outcome variable used in Panels A and B. Standard errors are clustered
    by state. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                         Panel A: Job posting volume
                                                              No. of job postings per startup-day
                                                                 All         Emp>50     Emp<=50
                                                                 (1)           (2)         (3)
                                                Post_Mar13 -0.026*** -0.073***            -0.002
                                                            (0.004)   (0.008)            (0.002)
                                                Firm FE          Yes           Yes         Yes
                                                N              531,855       164,042     367,813




7
                                                Adj. R-sq       0.073         0.055       0.100
                                                % change        -30%          -49%         -3%


                                                   Panel B: Job posting characteristics
                                          All                                Emp>50                               Emp<=50
                           Ln(min. salary) Min. experience     Ln(min. salary) Min. experience      Ln(min. salary) Min. experience
                                 (1)               (2)                 (5)               (6)              (3)                 (4)
            Post_Mar13          -0.027          0.171***            0.018              0.273**           -0.048             0.102**
                               (0.033)           (0.046)           (0.056)             (0.116)          (0.030)             (0.041)
            Firm FE               Yes              Yes               Yes                 Yes             Yes                  Yes
            Job type FE           Yes              Yes               Yes                 Yes             Yes                  Yes
            Role FE               Yes              Yes               Yes                 Yes             Yes                  Yes
            N                   27,810           35,316             5,204               5,793           18,415              26,630
            Adj. R-sq            0.867            0.812             0.755               0.499            0.84                0.745
            % change            2.7%              5.1%              1.8%                9.0%            -4.8%                3.4%
                                    Table A.5
                                   (Continued)

                          Panel C: Summary statistics
Variable                              N       Mean   Std. Dev. Min.       P50   Max.
                                                       All firms
No. of job postings per startup-day 531,855   0.09     0.76        0.00   0.00 165.00
Ln(min. salary)                      27,810   3.28     2.11        0.00   3.71 9.55
Min. experience                     35,316    3.39     2.88        0.00   3.00 10.00
                                                       Emp>50
No. of job postings per startup-day 164,042   0.15     1.07        0.00   0.00 165.00
Ln(min. salary)                      5,204    4.07     2.02        0.00   4.26 8.85
Min. experience                      5,793    3.30     2.40        0.00   3.00 10.00
                                                      Emp<=50
No. of job postings per startup-day 367,813   0.06     0.57        0.00   0.00 125.00
Ln(min. salary)                      18,415   3.56     1.97        0.00   3.83 9.55
Min. experience                     26,630    2.83     2.34        0.00   2.00 10.00




                                          8
B       Firms’ Labor Demand

One of the contributions of our paper is to isolate job candidates’ labor supply preferences
using unique search parameter data and job fixed effects. Nevertheless, to address any re-
maining concerns about demand side confounding factors, we directly examine what happens
to startup labor demand during COVID. Specifically, for demand side factors to explain our
supply side results, we need to observe lower labor demand by small startups, as well as
downskilling in their labor demand, i.e., lowering job requirements or offering lower-skilled
jobs.9 To examine these possibilities, we turn to job vacancy postings data.
    Figure A.1 shows that the number of job postings by startups indeed declined overall
since the onset of COVID, so did the number of startups posting jobs. This is also confirmed
in Panel A in Table A.5 when we control for firm fixed effects. Within firms, there is a 30%
drop in job posting volumes on average (column 1), a magnitude similar to that reported in
Kahn et al. (2020b). However, this decline masks great heterogeneity between small and large
startups. When examining these two groups of firms separately, we find that the decline is
only present among larger startups with above 50 employees (-49% in column 2). For smaller
startups with fewer than 50 employees, there is almost no decline in their labor demand (-
3% in column 3). We further examine the experience requirement and salaries offered in job
postings. Downskilling in labor demand should predict lower job experience requirement as
well as lower salaries. In Panel B of Table A.5, we find no such decreases. Salaries offered
by startups did not change significantly during COVID, and the minimum required years
of experience actually increased. These results hold for both larger and smaller startups.
Taken together, these demand side results paint a picture opposite of what is happening on
the supply side: Smaller startups did not see a weakened labor demand in either quantity
or quality. Our main results are therefore unlikely to be driven by changes in demand side
factors.

    9
    The literature has found mixed evidence on the effect of recessions on firms’ skill demand (Hershbein
and Kahn (2018); Campello et al. (2020b); Chiplunkar et al. (2020))


                                                   9
