                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         CAPITAL FLOWS IN RISKY TIMES:
                RISK-ON/RISK-OFF AND EMERGING MARKET TAIL RISK

                                         Anusha Chari
                                      Karlye Dilts Stedman
                                       Christian Lundblad

                                       Working Paper 27927
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27927


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Anusha Chari, Karlye Dilts Stedman, and Christian Lundblad. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Capital Flows in Risky Times: Risk-on/Risk-off and Emerging Market Tail Risk
Anusha Chari, Karlye Dilts Stedman, and Christian Lundblad
NBER Working Paper No. 27927
October 2020
JEL No. F21,F3,G15

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper characterizes the implications of risk-on/risk-off shocks for emerging market capital
flows and returns. We document that these shocks have important implications not only for the
median of emerging markets flows and returns but also for the left tail. Further, while there are
some differences in the effects across bond vs. equity markets and flows vs. asset returns, the
effects associated with the worst realizations are generally larger than that on the median
realization. We apply our methodology to the COVID-19 shock to examine the pattern of flow
and return realizations: the sizable risk-off nature of this shock engenders reactions that reside
deep in the left tail of most relevant emerging market quantities.


Anusha Chari                                    Christian Lundblad
Department of Economics, CB #3305               Department of Finance
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill     University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599                           Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3490
and NBER                                        christian_lundblad@unc.edu
achari@unc.edu

Karlye Dilts Stedman
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
1 Memorial Dr.
Kansas City, MO 64108
karlye.stedman@kc.frb.org
1    Introduction

While portfolio flows to emerging markets offer well-documented benefits (Bekaert, Harvey

and Lundblad (2005); Chari and Henry (2004, 2008); Henry (2007)), tail events such as sud-

den stops present challenges that prove particularly pressing for investors and policy makers

(Forbes and Warnock (2012, 2019); Rey (2013); Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020)). There is,

of course, a large literature on cross-border capital flows and their implications for financial

market returns.1 However, extant research has largely focused on the first moment of the rel-

evant distributions of these important quantities. In sharp contrast, building on Gelos et al.

(2019), we focus on the full distributions of emerging market capital flows and returns; most

important, we characterize the manner in which extreme capital flow and returns realizations

are tied to global risk appetite (“risk-on/risk-off” or RORO).

     Despite still being somewhat imprecisely defined, the RORO terminology has come into

pervasive use in the financial press and among policy makers in the years since the global fi-

nancial crisis. In this paper, we focus on RORO shocks as a reflection of variation in global

investor risk aversion. As investors rebalance their portfolios away from risk assets and to-

ward safe assets in the face of risk aversion shock, RORO variation has important implica-

tions for asset price determination, particularly for so-called “risk assets”. Jotikasthira, Lund-

blad, and Ramadorai (2012), for example, document this shock transmission mechanism to

emerging market capital flows and asset prices. In response to funding shocks from their in-

vestor base (possibly linked to RORO), global funds substantially alter their portfolio alloca-
    1 See for example a non-exhaustive list of papers in Section 1 of the online appendix, Alfaro, L., S. Kalemli-

Ozcan, and V. Volosovych (2008, 2014); Avdjiev, S., L. Gambacorta, L. S. Goldberg, and S. Schiaffi (2017); Ammer,
J., M. De Pooter, C. J. Erceg, and S. B. Kamin (2016); Baskaya, Y. S., J. di Giovanni, S. Kalemli-Ozcan, J.-L. Peydro,
and M. F. Ulu (2017); Bauer, M. D., & Neely, C. J. (2014); Broner, F., Didier, T., Erce, A., & Schmukler, S. L. (2013);
Bruning, F. and V. Ivashina (2019); Bruno, V. and H. S. Shin (2014, 2015); Calvo, G. A., L. Leiderman, and C. M.
Reinhart (1993, 1996).; Cerutti, E., S. Claessens, and D. Puy (2019); Chari, A., K. Dilts Stedman, and C. Lundblad
(2020); Chen, J., Mancini Griffoli, T., & Sahay, R. (2014); Clark, John, Nathan Converse, Brahima Coulibaly, and
Steve Kamin (2016); Dedola, L., G. Rivolta, and L. Stracca (2017); Dilts Stedman, K. (2019); Eichengreen, B. and
P. Gupta (2017); Forbes, K. J. and F. E. Warnock (2012, 2019); Fratzscher, M. (2012); Fratzscher, M., Duca, M. L.,
& Straub, R. (2016, 2018); Georgiadis, G., & Grab, J. (2015); Ghosh, A. R., Kim, J., Qureshi, M., and Zalduendo, J.
(2012); Gilchrist, S., Yue, V., & Zakrajsek, E. (2014, November); Gourinchas, P. O., & Obstfeld, M. (2012); Karolyi,
G. A., & McLaren, K. J. (2016); Kim, S. (2001); Kroencke, T. A., Schmeling, M., & Schrimpf, A. (2015); Jotikasthira,
P., C. Lundblad, and T. Ramadorai (2012); McCauley, R. N., McGuire, P., & Sushko, V. (2015); Miranda-Agrippino,
S. and H. Rey (2019); Milesi-Ferretti, G., & Tille, C. (2011); Mishra, P., Moriyama, K., N’Diaye, P. M. B., & Nguyen,
L. (2014); Moore, J., Nam, S., Suh, M., & Tepper, A. (2013); Neely, C. J. (2010); Obstfeld, M. (2015); Obstfeld, M., J.
D. Ostry, and M. S. Qureshi (2018); Rogers, J.H., Scotti,C., & Wright,J.H.(2014); Reinhart, C. and V. Reinhart (2009);
Rey, H. (2013).




                                                           2
tions to emerging markets with important implications for local asset prices.

    To capture realized variation in global investor risk appetite, we consider two comple-

mentary approaches to RORO measurement. The first is a RORO index that we build using

the first principle component of daily data from both the United States and the Euro area.

This approach has the advantage of incorporating a multi-faceted set of signals from relevant

asset markets, but it may confound information about variation in risk appetite with varia-

tion in physical risk. To address this, we consider a complementary model-based approach

from Bekaert at al. (2020). This has the advantage of measuring risk aversion using a struc-

tural model specifically designed to separate the price of risk (or risk aversion) from the quan-

tity of risk. However, inference about this separation may, of course, be contaminated by any

model mis-specfication. Given these competing concerns, we consider both approaches to

gauge the extent to which we can draw relatively robust conclusions regarding the effect of

RORO shocks on emerging market flows and returns.

    Using our first (largely statistical) approach, we summarize the risk-on and risk-off states

of the world with an amalgam of four broad categories that reflect variation in advanced

economy credit risk, equity market volatility, funding conditions, and currencies and gold.

With an eye to inferring the risk bearing capacity of international investors, our RORO in-

dex comprises the first principle component of daily changes in these series. Our index, along

with several associated sub-indices reflecting these four constituent groups, exhibits interest-

ing distributional features in the sense that it is well characterized by significant skewness

and fat tails. With fat tails, extreme events become both more probable and potentially more

destabilizing. As examples, we observe sharp risk-off movements during the global financial

crisis, the European debt crisis, the taper tantrum, and the COVID-19 crisis.

    Second, in recognition of the fact that our RORO measure reflects a largely statistical ap-

proach to measuring risk appetite, we also consider the measure of risk aversion from Bekaert

at al. (2020). As with our first RORO index, this model-based measure is also highly right-

skewed and fat tailed, spiking during the global financial and COVID-19 crises.

    Understanding the implications of variation in RORO for emerging market capital flow

and return distributions is the focus of our paper. We focus on the extent to which RORO

shocks alter the range of the distribution versus shift the distribution. As an example, an ad-


                                                3
verse, risk-off shock can make the whole emerging market capital flow or return distribution

wider by pulling out both of the tails. Alternatively, a risk-off shock could simply fatten the

left tail. These differences have important implications for how investors and policy makers

should consider downside risk.

     Using a panel quantile regression approach as in Machado and Santos Silva (2019), we

characterize the distributional implications of RORO shocks for emerging market capital

flows and returns. In order to obtain a multilateral, high frequency proxy of capital flows

into and out of emerging markets, we use the country flows dataset from EPFR Global. EPFR

Global publishes weekly portfolio investment flows by more than 14,000 equity funds and

more than 7,000 bond funds, collectively with more than 8 trillion U.S. dollars of capital un-

der management. To measure returns on emerging market assets, we use country level USD

and local currency equity return indices from MSCI, and our fixed income returns come from

Bloomberg local currency bond indices and the USD Emerging Market Bond Index from JP

Morgan. Due to the availability of EPFR data, the sample runs from January 7, 2004 to Apr. 9,

2020.

     The novel contribution of our paper is to characterize the impact of shifts in the distri-

butions of global risk on flows and returns as well as the dispersion in outcomes. In other

words, our methodology allows us to model both shifts and changes in the shapes of the dis-

tributions of global push factors and capital flow and return outcomes. We conclude that with

a few exceptions, the emphasis on measures of central tendency in the existing literature on

capital flows masks important underlying heterogeneity in the full distribution of global risk.

The weight placed on means and variances as sufficient summary statistics precludes the data

from speaking to the underlying distributional granularity of global risk – a challenge we

overcome by turning to heterogeneous effects across quantiles.2

     In addition to our focus on the distribution of global risk, our composite risk measure

illustrates that the underlying factors that constitute global risk can differ across crises and

evolve over time. We find that while advanced economy equity returns and volatility along

with corporate spreads proxying for credit risk were the most significant risk factors during
   2 The approach is similar to that taken in Adrian et al. (2019) characterizing “GDP-at-Risk” effects that vary

across quantiles.




                                                          4
the global financial crisis, movement in corporate spreads and stoppages in funding liquidity

predominantly explain capital flows and returns in the aftermath of Covid-19 shock. The cor-

porate spreads factor during the Covid-era are an order of magnitude compared to the global

financial crisis. The risk-aversion factor was more prominent in the global financial crisis rela-

tive to the quantity of risk, while the opposite prevails during the Covid crisis.

    Regardless of the method by which we measure RORO, we find that RORO shocks do

have important implications, not only for the median of emerging market flows and returns,

but also for the tails. We conclude that the focus in the literature on measures of central ten-

dency is incomplete. In particular, we find that the effects associated with the worst realiza-

tions, say the fifth quantile, are often more heavily affected by risk-off shocks, compared to

the median realization.

    We first consider the distributional implications for cross-border flows associated with

EPFR bond and equity mutual funds. For bond funds, risk-off shocks (however measured)

increase the worst portfolio outflow realizations more than they decrease median flows, and

therefore risk-off shocks significantly fatten the left tail of the portfolio flow distribution. The

net effect on bond flows from a risk-off event is that the entire distribution moves to the left.

In the equity fund space, in contrast, while we observe that a risk-off shock negatively affects

the overall distribution, we also observe that a risk-off shock modestly brings in both the tails.

Further, the focus on the estimates derived from the model-based version of RORO suggest

that the reactions that we observe, while robust from a directional standpoint, do vary de-

pending upon whether one separates out variation in risk aversion from variation in risk. Per-

haps not surprisingly, variation in global risk is also important for emerging market mutual

fund flows.

    Next, we turn to the distributional implications for emerging market returns. We find

that risk-off shocks negatively affect the worst return realizations more than they affect the

median return realization. Further, we find that are important differences across asset class

and currency denomination which are constitent across risk measures. Equity returns are

more sensitive than bond returns, and within asset classes, U.S. dollar indices are more sen-

sitive than local currency indices.

    Finally, we apply our framework to the COVID-19 shock. We examine the distributional


                                                  5
pattern of the flow and returns realizations in the face of the sizable risk-off nature of this

shock. In the COVID-19 era, a one standard deviation RORO shock expands (compresses)

the tail realizations of the weekly bond (equity) distribution by $45 ($6.8) million. A shock

equal in magnitude to the largest observation in the COVID-19 sample expands (compresses)

the tails realizations of the weekly bond (equity) distribution by $170.2 ($25.4) million. Using

the structural measure of risk aversion and risk from Bekaert et al (2020), our results suggest

that a one standard deviation shock composed of equal parts risk aversion and physical risk

separates the tails of the weekly bond (equity) distribution by $15.8 ($40.4) million.

Related Literature: Our paper is related to several strands of the literature on capital flows to

emerging markets. There is a vast literature on the role of global financial market conditions

and boom-bust cycles in emerging market capital flows and returns.3 This literature empha-

sizes the role of global push factors to explain the ebbs and flows in foreign investment alloca-

tions to emerging markets.

     Global financial conditions that serve as push factors include advanced economy mon-

etary policy, foreign investor risk aversion, international financial market liquidity, and ex-

change rate configurations. Forbes and Warnock (2012, 2019) show that global risk factors

drive emerging market capital flow surges, sudden stops and retrenchments. Jotikasthira et

al. (2012) report that ”global funds substantially alter portfolio allocations in emerging mar-

kets in response to funding shocks from their investor base.”4 Our paper contributes to the

literature on extreme capital flow movements by focusing on the distributions of capital flows

and returns conditional on the distribution of global risk factors.

     There are different views in the literature about what constitutes or summarizes changes

to global risk sentiment. At the same time, the provenance of risk can differ over time. Fo-

cusing on market risk and investor sentiment, Bekaert et al. (2013), Miranda-Agrippino and

Rey (2019) and many others use the VIX as a proxy to measure the risk appetite of global in-

vestors. Fratzscher (2012) includes the TED spread as a measure of credit risk and liquidity
   3A   non-exhaustive list includes Tornell and Schneider, 2007; Mendoza and Terrones, 2008; Mendoza 2010; Ob-
stfeld 2012; Diaz-Alejandro 1983; Calvo et al. 1993; Calvo et al. 1996; Eichengreen and Portes 1987; Reinhart and
Reinhart 2009; Reinhart and Rogoff 2009.
    4 Evidence suggests that spillovers from the U.S. to the rest of the world operate through changes in risk premia

that drive foreign investor risk tolerance (Borio and Zhu 2012). Caballero and Simsek (2019) provide a model for
analyzing capital flow retrenchments to highlight their fickleness, possibly related to asymmetric information or
Knightian uncertainty.


                                                         6
in international capital markets. Chari et al. (2020) use of high-frequency identification to ex-

tract U.S. monetary policy shocks using Treasury derivatives data to show that capital flows

to emerging markets are sensitive to term premium shocks in the U.S. yield curve. In this pa-

per, we examine an amalgam of global shocks that collectively comprise global “risk-on” or

risk-off environments in international financial markets to investigate the distributional im-

plications of emerging market capital flows and returns. To do so, our aim is also to arrive at a

measure of risk encapsulating the multi-faceted nature of global risk-on and risk-off states of

the world.

     In doing so, our paper draws upon existing evidence documenting the relationship be-

tween unitary risk sources and risk appetite. One strand of the literature examines the impact

of U.S. monetary policy on global investor risk appetite (Bruno and Shin, 20015 a,b; Chari et

al., 2020; Gourinchas and Obstfeld, 2012). Bekaert et al., 2013; Miranda-Agrippino and Rey,

2019; and Bruno and Shin, 2015a) show that U.S. monetary policy changes impact global risk.

Expansionary monetary policy corresponds to global ”risk-on” while tightening monetary

policy shocks correlate with ”risk-off” states of the world. Risk-on and risk-off states corre-

spond to changes in risk aversion holding fixed the quantity of risk. Our approach has the

advantage of measuring risk aversion using a structural model from Bekaert et. al. (2020)

that disentangles the price of risk (or risk aversion) from the quantity of risk.5 This literature

emphasizes the role risk premia as drivers of capital flows to emerging markets. Chari et al.

(2020) disentangle the channels through which U.S. monetary policy shocks can alter expec-

tations hypothesis-driven yields and risk premia in the term structure of U.S. interest rates.

Via portfolio rebalancing and signaling, changes in domestic yields and risk premia can have

a significant impact on equity prices and bond yields in emerging markets. Bruno and Shin

(2015 a, b) propose an international risk-taking channel that underscores the role of liquidity

in dollar funding markets–phases of expansionary monetary policy increase the risk-bearing

capacity of financial intermediaries and drives international banking flows to emerging mar-

kets.

     To proxy for global risk aversion, the literature documents the sensitivity of portfolio eq-
   5 However, inference about this decomposition could suffer from the drawback that the model is incorrectly

specified.




                                                       7
uity flows to the VIX (Avdjiev et al. 2019; Rey 2015). Recent evidence draws attention to the

diminished relationship between the VIX and other key variables after 2008 (Forbes, 2020;

Miranda-Agrippino and Rey, 2020, Burcu et. al 2020). Avdjiev et al. (2017) attribute the declin-

ing role of the VIX to the shifting composition of global capital flows. Cerutti et al. (2019) sug-

gest that correlation between the VIX and capital flows is limited to times of crisis and that the

role for the global financial cycle may have moderated. Burcu et. al (2020) point to a break-

down in the negative relationship between bank leverage and risk appetite since 2009 sug-

gesting that the VIX is no longer a reliable proxy for the price of bank balance sheets. Forbes

and Warnock (2020) and Miranda-Agrippino et al. (2020) highlight a declining role in the in-

formation content of the VIX for explaining credit growth and capital flows. In contrast, the

parameter values using our composite risk-on risk-off measure are remarkably stable (if not

stronger) over time given that the measure captures alternative sources of risk. The under-

lying constituent sources of risk assert their importance or come to the forefront at different

points in time.

    Our nearest neighbors in the literature are Gelos et. al (2019) who examine a “capital

flows-at-risk” model using a quantile regression framework, and Eguren-Martin et al (2020),

who examine the probability distribution of emerging market capital flows conditional on in-

formation contained in financial asset prices. Both papers propose to characterize the full dis-

tribution of capital flows in the face of shocks. Our paper differs from these in several ways.

First, using weekly data on flows and returns and daily risk measures, the frequency of our

outcome variables matches more closely to the risk measures. We thereby establish a tighter

link between the risk measure and our variables of interest, with less potential for confound-

ing influences between the measure of the flow or return, and the event(s) driving changes in

risk or risk aversion.

    Second, we focus our attention on global risk in particular, rather than taking a broader

look at “push” and “pull” factors, which Gelos et al (2019) consider individually and which

Eguren-Martin et al (2020) consider in a consolidated manner. Considering the former, a mul-

tifaceted measure of risk confers the advantages discussed previously compared to a unitary

risk measure like the BBB corporate spread used in Gelos et al (2019); namely, variable sources

of risk, geographic diversity, and plausible exogeneity. Eguren-Martin et al (2020) take an


                                                 8
approach more in line ours by putting forward the degree to which capital flows respond to

many types and sources of shocks, but their single-dimensional measure of global risk (in ad-

ditional to a local risk factor calculated as a residual) does not allow for a decomposition into

global risk drivers. Likewise, our paper acknowledges, and attempts to characterize, the dis-

tinction between risk and risk aversion in shaping outcomes within the distribution.

      The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 outlines the data and methodology for com-

puting our risk-on risk off measures. Section 3 presents our baseline specification and the re-

sults from our quantile regression analysis. Section 4 presents a quantitative exercise which

demonstrates the distributional implications of our findings applied to the the Covid-19 crisis.

Section 5 concludes.



2     The Data

2.1    Computing Risk-on/Risk-off

To capture realized variation in global investor risk appetite, we consider two complementary

measures of Risk-On, Risk-Off (RORO). First, we build a measure from the first principle com-

ponent of a multi-faceted set of daily data across several relevant asset markets. While defi-

nitely linked to variation in risk aversion, this measure may nevertheless confound informa-

tion about variation in risk appetite with variation in physical risk. Hence, we also consider a

complementary model-based approach from Bekaert at al. (2020). This has the advantage of

measuring risk aversion using a structural model specifically designed to separate the price of

risk (or risk aversion) from the quantity of risk. However, inference about this separation may,

of course, be contaminated by any model mis-specification.

      First, we construct a largely statistical RORO index in a manner similar to that described

in Datta et al (2017). Our RORO index comprises the z-score of the first principal component

of daily changes in several standardized asset market variables. We normalize components

such that positive changes imply risk-off behavior. Then, before taking the first principal com-

ponent, we scale these normalized changes by their respective historical standard deviations.

      Our first measure incorporates several series. To capture changes related to credit risk,

we use the change in the ICE BofA BBB Corporate Index Option-Adjusted Spread for the


                                                 9
United States and for the Euro Area, along with Moody’s BAA corporate bond yield relative

to 10-year Treasuries. To capture changes in risk aversion emanating from advanced econ-

omy equity markets, we use the additive inverse of daily total returns on the S&P 500, STOXX

50 and MSCI Advanced Economies Index, along with associated changes in option implied

volatilities from the VIX and the VSTOXX. To account for changes to funding liquidity, we in-

clude the daily average change in the G-spread on 2-, 5-, and 10-year Treasuries, along with

changes in in the TED spread, the 3-month LIBOR-OIS spread, and the bid-ask spread on 3-

month Treasuries. Finally, we include growth in the trade-weighted U.S. Dollar Index against

advanced foreign economies and the change in the price of gold. Figure 1 displays the time

series and histogram of the headline measure.

    To shed light on different components of risk or risk aversion, we also construct four

sub-indices. These groupings, chosen to maximize the total explained variation of the com-

ponents, fall into the four categories above: (1) spreads (credit risk), (2) advanced economy

equity returns and implied volatility, (3) funding liquidity, and (4) currency and gold. As in

the headline index, the subindices comprise the first principal component of the normalized

series. Table 1.1 displays summary statistics for the headline measure and subindices. Since

they are expressed as z-scores, we omit their means and standard deviations from the table.

    Defining a risk measure comprising multiple sources of risk confers several advantages.

First, agglomerating multiple sources of risk allows us to abstract from any one source of risk-

off behavior in our baseline analysis. Elevating any particular asset price in the measurement

of risk sentiment hazards the possibility that the relationship between the measure-asset and

the risk-affected-asset of interest arises from a particular set of market participants, the actions

of whom may not be generalizable across time and across assets. The group of market partici-

pants who take out, for example, S&P 500 options to hedge against U.S. equity volatility have

characteristics that may not extend equally to all other risk assets we might want to measure

in the face of a risk-off shock. Second, our multivariate measure of risk-on/risk-off further

permits the decomposition of baseline results into underlying drivers, offering insights into

the source of a given risk-on or risk-off event, which itself may differentially drive emerging

market capital flows and returns. Third, our measure recognizes sources outside of the United

States which may drive risk-on/risk-off changes. Finally, because we measure the relationship


                                                10
of our index to assets in emerging markets, we can appeal to the small open economy char-

acter of the recipient markets to strengthen the plausibility of the index’s exogeneity to local

market fundamentals.

      In recognition that the statistical approach used it deriving our first measure does not

structurally distinguish the price of risk (risk aversion) from the amount of risk (economic un-

certainty), we also turn to the method employed in Bekaert, Engstrom, and Xu (2020; BEX)

for our second model-based RORO measure. Employing a wide set of macro and financial

market data, BEX build on the family of habit-based asset pricing models (see, for example,

Campbell and Cochrane (1999)) to separately identify variation in risk and risk aversion. We

collect their daily measures of each, using variation in risk aversion as our second RORO

measure.6

      We present our first measure in Figure 1 (panels a and b), along with our second measure

based on the model-implied dis-aggregation into changes in risk aversion (our second RORO

measure in panel c) and risk (d). Both RORO measures exhibit (risk-off) skewness, excess kur-

tosis, and time varying volatility (see, also Table 1.1).Further, both measures show large spikes

during the global financial, the European debt, and the COVID-19 crises.


2.2    Capital Flows and Returns

In order to obtain a multilateral, high frequency proxy of capital flows into and out of emerg-

ing markets, we use the country flows dataset from EPFR Global. EPFR Global publishes

weekly portfolio investment flows by more than 14,000 equity funds and more than 7,000

bond funds, with more than USD 8 trillion of capital under management. The Country Flows

dataset combines EPFR’s Fund Flow and Country Weightings data to track the flow of money

into world equity and bond markets. While fund flow data reports the amount of cash flow-

ing into and out investment funds, the country weightings report tracks fund manager alloca-

tions to each of the various markets in which they invest. Combining country allocations with

fund flows produces aggregate fund flows into and out of emerging markets (see Jotikasthira,

Lundblad, and Ramadorai (2012)). Because the country flows comprise the sum of fund-level

aggregate re-allocations, they come cleansed of valuation effects and therefore represent real
  6 Thanks   to Nancy Xu for making these data available. https://www.nancyxu.net/risk-aversion-index


                                                      11
quantities.

     To measure returns on emerging market portfolio assets, we collect daily total returns

from a number of well-known indices. Individual country returns on USD and local currency

bonds come from J.P. Morgan’s Emerging Market Bond Index (EMBI) and the Bloomberg Bar-

clay’s Local Bond Index, while we measure country-level equity returns using the Morgan

Stanley Capital International (MSCI) local currency and USD indices. Figure 2 and Table 1.2

display the times series and summary statistics for return and flow measures.

     Reflecting the availability of EPFR data, the sample runs from January 7, 2004 to Apr. 15,

2020.7 The sample of countries comprises emerging markets appearing in each of the flow

and return data sets. Of these, we include countries with widespread recognition as emerg-

ing market economies.8 The final set of countries includes Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colom-

bia, Czech Republic, Egypt, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, Peru, the

Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Russia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, and the United

Arab Emirates.9


2.2.1     Control variables

The literature on patterns of international capital flows separates determinants into common,

global “push” factors associated with external shocks, and “pull” country-specific factors.

Our control variables include both “push” and “pull” variables suggested by the literature

on capital flows.

        Following the literature on capital flow determinants (see, for example, Calvo, Leider-

man, and Reinhart 1993; Fratzscher 2012; Fratzscher, Lo Duca, and Straub 2014; Passari and

Rey 2015; Milesi Ferretti and Tille 2011; Broner et al. 2013; Forbes and Warnock 2012), the cap-

ital flow and return regressions include a measure of advanced market returns (obtained from

Kenneth French’s website), the monetary policy stance of advanced economies as measured

by the shadow rate, and the advanced economy real GDP growth.10 We use year fixed effect
  7 The   exception is local currency bond returns, which only become available in 2008.
  8 We   exclude China due to its unique characteristics, including its size relative to other emerging market
economies and measurement issues.
   9 EM classifications considered include the IMF, BRICS + Next 11, FTSE, MSCI, S&P, EMBI, Dow Jones, Russell,

Columbia University EMPG and BBVA.
  10 All advanced economy variables comprise a USD real GDP-weighted average of the United States, the UK, the

euro area and Japan.


                                                      12
control for global conditions more broadly, as well as a lag of the left-hand-side variable to ac-

count for the autocorrelation introduced by scaling over lagged positions. Time fixed effects

account both for slow moving business cycles and structural changes in the market for ETFs

and mutual funds.

     Country-specific (pull factor) controls (see, for example, Ahmed and Zlate 2014; Forbes

and Warnock 2012; Fratzscher 2012; Fratzscher, Lo Duca, and Straub 2013; Eichengreen and

Gupta 2014; Moore et al. 2013; Chen, Mancini Griffoli, and Sahay 2014) include local policy

rates, average real GDP growth in the previous eight quarters, and the broad real effective

exchange rate (REER). To control for the influence of local macroeconomic news in the inter-

vening week or day, we include the Citigroup Economic Surprise Index (CESI) for emerging

markets. The CESI tracks how economic data compare to expectations, rising when economic

data exceed economists’ consensus forecasts and falling when data come in below forecast

estimates.11

     With the exception of emerging market news surprises, all control variables enter with

a lag to rule out simultaneity.12 Both sets of controls affect capital flows and returns, but also

likely react directly to changes in risk sentiment. In fact, our advanced economy push vari-

ables not only react to risk-on/risk-off shocks but likely also drive them. All daily variables

enter as the weekly moving average leading up to the week’s EPFR reporting date; thus, lagged

variables consist of the weekly moving average ending on the date one week before the report

of the measured flow.




  11 Indices are defined as weighted historical standard deviations of data surprises (actual releases vs. Bloomberg

survey median) and are calculated daily in a rolling three-month window. The weights of economic indicators are
derived from relative high-frequency spot FX impacts of one standard deviation data surprises. The indices also
employ a time decay function to replicate the limited memory of markets.
  12 While news surprises likely drive capital flows and returns, it is unlikely that the risk shock drives news sur-

prises or vice versa on any given date.


                                                         13
3       Results

3.1         Baseline Specification

With risk indicators in hand, we regress weekly EPFR country-level flows and daily returns

onto our risk appetite measures using the panel quantile regression approach of Machado and

Santos Silva (2019) with country and time fixed effects, controlling for the “push” and “pull”

factors described previously. Country level flows enter as a percent of the previous week’s al-

location, while total returns are expressed as a daily percentage change. As stated in the data

description, in the EPFR flow regressions, changes in the risk measures are aggregated by a

moving average.


                     (q)             (q)   (q)   (q)           (q)         (q)
                    Rit      = αi + δt + β i RAt + γ1 PUSHtR + γ2 PULLitR + ei,t                                 (1)
                     (q)             (q)   (q)    (q)    (q)         (q)            (q)
                    k it     = αi + δt + ρk it−1 + β i RAt + γ1 PUSHtk + γ2 PULLitk + ei,t                       (2)

                                       
              (q)           Kit
where k it =               Hit−1   ∗ 100 . Rit is the EMBI, LC Bond index, MSCI LC or MSCI USD daily total
return. RAt is one of (i) the RORO Index or (ii) the risk/risk aversion measures from Bekaert

et al (2020).13 k it is either equity or debt flows (Kit ) scaled by holdings of the same, Hit−1 . We

cluster bootstrapped standard errors by country to account for serially correlated error terms.

        In general, risk-on, risk-off shocks have important implications not only for the median

of emerging market flows and returns, but also for the tails of the distribution. In each case,

a risk-off shock decreases flows and returns across the distribution. Further, in nearly every

case we consider, the “worst” realizations (in the left tail) change more than the median real-

ization, and the “best” (right tail) realizations change less than the median, lengthening the

tails of the distribution (| β(.05) | > | β(.5) | > | β(.95) |). We summarize the results in Figures 3a

- 4d, while Tables 2a - 3.2d isolate the risk-off regression coefficients for each case. As a re-

minder, each regression includes controls and various fixed effects; full results with all control

variable coefficients are available in the Internet Appendix (Tables 4 - 6).
    13 In
      order to better understand the role for the various subcomponents that constitute our first RORO measure,
we also consider a version of the panel quantile regression where Risk t is a vector of the constituent subindices.




                                                               14
3.2    Risk-off Shocks and RORO

First, we consider the case where we measure risk off shocks, RAt , using our statistical RORO

index. Figure 3a summarizes the impact of a one standard deviation risk-off shock (measured

in this way) on the distribution of our EPFR flow measures and offers an object lesson in the

importance of measuring the impact across the distribution. While the risk-off shock affects

the median of the distribution in a similar manner across asset classes, the tails behave dif-

ferently. We observe that the risk-off shock decreases bond outflow realizations in the left tail

more than it decreases the median realization, and in turn decreases the highest inflow re-

alizations less then the median. The net result is a leftward shift in the distribution, with a

lengthening of the tails. Notably, as we will see in a later exercise, the lengthening in the left

tail causes “large” outflow realizations in the unconditional distribution to appear more com-

mon in the post-shock distribution. Second, the equity flow distribution also shifts to the left

in the face of a risk-off shock; however, the largest outflow realizations change less than the

median, while the largest inflow realizations change more than the median. The net result is

a leftward shift in the distribution, with a modest shortening of the tails. This is an important

exception to the more general findings.

      Figure 3b summarizes the the impact of a one standard deviation risk-off shock ( on the

distribution of fixed income and equity returns. Across all return types, a risk-off shock shifts

the distribution to the left and lengthens the tails, worsening the most negative return real-

izations more than the median. The magnitude and dispersion of the impact, however, dif-

fers between fixed income and equity, and between local currency and USD denominated

indices. In particular, a risk-off shock impacts the total return on the equity indices at a rate

more than five times the impact on fixed income returns. Within each asset class, dollar re-

turns react more than local currency returns. Fixed income bears this relationship out strik-

ingly, decreasing three to six times the rate of the local currency index in the face of the risk

off shock.14 MSCI USD total returns decrease 28 - 32% more than the local currency equity

returns in the face of a risk-off shock.
  14 While the impact on the local currency index is statistically insignificant, the comparison is still a useful one
given that USD denominated bonds do react in a statistically significant manner.




                                                           15
3.3    Risk-off Shocks and BEX (2020)

Given the aforementioned limitations of measuring risk-off shocks with a statistical measure,

we next turn to a structural decomposition that facilitates a separation of risk aversion from

physical risk. Figures 4a and 4b summarize the changes in the capital flow distributions when

we employ Bekaert et al’s (2020) risk aversion. Specifically, RAt is measured as the change in

the risk aversion component from that model (note that we also include the model’s impli-

cation for variation in the quantity of risk as a control). This approach reveals an interesting

pattern underlying the heterogeneous reactions of the equity and fixed income distributions.

      The impact of risk aversion (and risk itself) on the distribution of fixed income flows fol-

lows the same pattern as with our first RORO measure; that is, a risk-off shock measured in

this alternative way again shifts the distribution to the left and lengthens the tails relative to

the median. Interestingly, variation in the quantity of risk has a larger impact across the dis-

tribution and puts more weight in the left tail compared to risk aversion itself; this is the case

across asset classes. Where bonds and equity funds (and returns) differ in their reactions in

the dispersive impact of risk aversion shocks. This distinction offers a window into the work-

ings of our statistical measure and enables us to consider risk measurement and co-movement

more generally.

      In particular, equity flows react to variation in both risk and risk aversion in a manner

which sheds light on the distribution’s reaction to our first statistical risk-off measures. In

the face of a physical risk shock, the distribution of equity flows reacts in step with the dis-

tribution of bond flows in that we observe a leftward shift, with tails lengthening relative to

the median. In contrast, a risk-off shock (the change in risk aversion) causes the equity flow

distribution to behave as it does with our first RORO measure, with the range of the distribu-

tion shrinking as it shifts left. This suggests that the distributional reaction that we observe

with a RORO shock based on our first measure emanates from a sensitivity to changing risk

aversion, which causes a convergence of realizations relative to the unconditional distribution

(and to the distribution conditional on risk-off shocks to physical risk).

      Figures 4c and 4d depict the changes in the return distributions when we replace our sta-

tistical measures of risk with Bekaert et al’s (2020) risk and risk aversion indices. Here we ob-



                                                 16
serve that a risk-off shock (to risk aversion), as well as a shock to physical risk, shift the distri-

bution of returns to the left. However, changes in the level of risk dramatically lengthen the

tails of the return distribution, while changes in risk aversion shrink the tails. From the per-

spective of understanding the drivers of tail risk in particular, it is notable that in both asset

classes, a risk-off shock to physical risk or uncertainty weighs heavily on negative tail events

in a manner which would clearly be masked by the conditional mean and variance.

      The relative impact of the two components on returns differs between asset classes. Be-

tween the two, risk aversion plays a larger role in driving equity returns relative to the influ-

ence of risk, and the opposite holds (albeit less systematically) for fixed income returns. Given

the relative magnitude of the two effects, the joint impact of a combined and equal-magnitude

shock in each of the components would net out to a leftward shift and a lengthening in the

tails.


3.4      Risk-on Risk-off Constituents

Figures 5a and 5b provide a more nuanced picture of our RORO index using a nested panel

regression that includes the constituent sub-components.15 Including the constituent mea-

sures together suggests that much of the baseline’s “shifting” impetus emanates in large part

from corporate spreads for both equity and bond funds. The nested model also reveals fund-

ing liquidity as a prime source of the bond funds’ “tails-out” behavior relative to equity funds.

Interestingly, once we include credit risk in the model with the advanced economy equity and

volatility factor, the latter evinces less impact on equity funds and even moves median-plus

realizations to the right, reflecting the risk-off behavior of rotating out of equities and into

bonds. We see this reflected in equity funds’ reaction to Bekaert et al’s (2020) measure of risk

aversion.

      Figure 5c again shows how emerging market returns react to the various elements of our

RORO index, considered together. Here, advanced economy returns and volatilities, along

with corporate spreads, drive the much of the overall magnitude of the distributional shift.

This is more so the case for equity returns compared to fixed income returns, reflecting co-

movements in global equity returns documented elsewhere in the literature. However, asset
  15 The   full regression results for each case are available in the Internet Appendix (Table 6).


                                                            17
classes and currencies all share increased distributional dispersion emanating primarily from

credit risk as measured by corporate spreads. In the case of equity returns, the “tails-out” im-

petus from a risk-off credit risk shock counteracts the “tails-in” impetus from advanced econ-

omy equity return shocks. Here again we see a mapping to our chosen structural measures—

Figure 4d suggests that risk shocks lengthen the tails enough to outweigh risk aversion’s dis-

tributional compression. The net result of both the structural and statistical measures, then, is

to increase the incidence of extreme realizations.

      Comparatively smaller reactions stem from the other two component indices. Currency

risk acts as a shift factor which, while always smaller in size than returns or spreads, con-

tributes more to risk-off reactions in dollar denominated returns. Finally, across asset classes

and currency denominations, the impact of funding liquidity barely registers, contributing

little in the way of shifts or dispersion and almost always statistically insignificant.


3.5    Flight to Safety

A question that naturally arises when examining the relationship between risk appetite and

the allocation to or pricing of risky assets relates to the complementary implication for so-

called “safe” assets. A safe asset is a simple debt instrument that is expected to preserve its

value across various states of the world including adverse, possibly systemic events. Under

this definition, the categorization of what assets exactly are to be considered “safe” remains a

point of discussion (see Gorton (2016) and Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2017) as exam-

ples among many, many others). However, U.S. Treasury bonds are generally considered to

be safe under this definition, and we will focus here.

      Accordingly, we test the degree to which our various risk aversion measures reflect a

flight-to-safety by repeating the above exercise replacing EPFR emerging market (risky as-

set) flows with the growth rate of assets held in U.S. money market mutual funds. These data

are published by the Investment Company Institute, which reports money market fund assets

to the Federal Reserve each week. To isolate safe assets, we focus on the subset of funds that

invest in U.S. government debt.

      In this exercise, we retain most of our global “push” variables: advanced economy mar-

ket returns, advanced economy GDP growth, and the average advanced economy monetary

                                                18
stance as measured by the shadow rate. We also retain year fixed effects. We run the follow-

ing regression:


                           (q)             (q)             (q)
                          gt     = α(q) + δt + β(q) RAt + γ1 PUSHtk + et                          (3)


         (q)
Where gt       is the weekly growth rate of government money market assets in quantile q, and

RAt , exactly as above, is either our RORO index or the risk/risk aversion decomposition from

Bekaert et al. (2020).

    Table 4 summarizes the results. In columns (1)-(4), we observe that risk-off RORO shocks

drive inflows into Treasury-focused money market funds across the distribution of fund flows;

this appear to be particularly true for the right tail, where larger inflows becomes more likely

in the face of a risk-off shock. In columns (5)-(8), we show complementary results for the

BEX decomposition. A shock to physical risk has some positive effect on government money

market fund flows (although this effect is not consistent across the distribution). Risk aver-

sion (risk-off) shocks drive the left tail of the distribution toward the median, but we do not

observe statistically significant impacts elsewhere in the distribution. To examine these ef-

fects further, we separate these fund flows (in Internet Appendix Table 7) into two subsets

of government money market funds, those available to institutions vs. those available to re-

tail investors. We find that the largest effects documented in Table 4 are associated with in-

stitutional money market fund flows. Retail flows are considerably less sensitive to risk-off

shocks. Taken together, we do detect across our various specifications some reaction to risk-

off shocks in the allocation to safe assets in a manner that complements what we observe for

risky assets.



4   Quantitative Exercise: An Application to the COVID-19 Crisis

The market turmoil surrounding the global transmission of COVID-19 in early 2020 gener-

ated movements in both emerging market portfolio assets and measures of risk that match

or exceed the magnitude of other widely recognized risk-off events. Our approach allows us

to quantify how the distribution of capital flow realizations changed in the face of COVID-



                                                 19
19 shocks and how the sources of risk therein generated patterns distinct from other risk-off

events. To quantify the impact of COVID-19 and other large risk-off periods, we undertake

two exercises using fitted values from our analysis. First, we show counterfactual quantiles

of the post-shock distribution of flows and compare them to the recent history of the data as

follows. We define predicted capital flows k̂q as


                                   k̂q = kq + β̂q ∗ shock ∗ H                                   (4)


where k̂q is the estimated flow calculated from fitted values, kq is the qth percentile observed

country flow per week in the data since Jan. 2020, H is the average assets under management,

and shock is the 10th percentile shock realization in the COVID era (3.1 units). Table 5 reveals

the economic magnitudes underlying the parameter values reported in the results.

    Starting with bond flows, in the face of a unit shock, the median reallocation is an out-

flow of $14.09 million, compared to a pre-shock 2020 median weekly inflow of $3.7 million.

This size shock increases outflow realizations in the 5th quantile by $22 million per week,

compared to $17.8 million per week at the median. Inflow realizations at the 95th quantile de-

crease by $14.8 million. A one standard deviation shock, 3.1 units, increases outflow realiza-

tion by $68.03 million, compared to a change of $55.2 million at the median and $43.5 million

at the 95th quantile. In the peak observation of the COVID-19 crisis, the index reached 11.56

standard deviations, suggesting that Q5, Q50 and Q95 would fall by $256.7 million, $205.9

million, and $162.14 million respectively. A shock of this size pulls the tail realizations apart

by $92 million.

    As aforementioned, equity flows show a shrinking of the tails in the event of a risk-off

shock. After a one unit shock, the median reallocation is an outflow of $18.84, compared to a

pre-shock 2020 median outflow of $5.8 million. This size shock increases outflow realizations

in the 5th quantile by $16.28 million per week, compared to $18.8 million per week at the me-

dian. Inflow realizations at the 95th quantile decrease by $21.4 million. A one standard de-

viation shock, 3.1 units, increases outflow realization by $50.5 million, compared to a change

of $58.4 million at the median and $66.3 million at the 95th quantile. In the peak observation

of the COVID-19 crisis, the index reached 11.56 standard deviations, suggesting that Q5, Q50


                                                 20
and Q95 would fall by $188.2 million, $217.7 million, and $247.3 million respectively. A shock

of this size pulls the tail realizations in by $59 million. Under the peak shock, even the “best”

realizations manifest as equity fund outflows.

    Second, we fit a kernel density to the predicted values to visualize changes in the flow or

return distribution from a 3-unit risk-off shock, displayed in Figure 7. We show 3-unit shocks

because this magnitude represents the threshold of the 10th percentile among risk-off shocks

in 2020. The fitted distribution of fixed income flows has longer tails and is more highly skewed

toward outflows compared to the unconditional distribution (-.61 vs. -1.01). In terms of mag-

nitude, in the face of a 3-unit shock, what would be a tail event in the unconditional distri-

bution looks more like a 10th quantile shock, and therefore more probable. The post-shock

median now falls in the bottom 25% of pre-shock realizations. The equity flow distribution

appears unchanged in terms of skewness, although here as well the post-shock median falls

in the bottom 25% of pre-shock realizations.

    The return distributions show more dramatic changes still, although the skewness of the

distributions show little change. What the unconditional equity distribution would label a tail

outcome lay near the median in the post-shock distribution. While our RORO shock affects

EMBI returns to a comparatively smaller degree, the pre-shock tail event still falls within the

interquartile range of the unconditional distribution.

    Figure 8 repeats this exercise for the subcomponents of Bekaert et al (2020). The condi-

tional distributions attributed to each subcomponent in these figures represents the response

of the distribution to a three standard deviation shock to one factor, controlling for the other.

We see that, for bond flows, risk aversion and risk contribute in roughly equal measure to the

increased mass of value under the left tail, while risk represents the greater force in pushing

equity outcomes past the 5th quantile of the unconditional equity flow distribution. In con-

trast, risk aversion plays a larger role in worsening negative return distributions, particularly

in bond returns.




                                                 21
5   Conclusion and Future Directions

Risk-on/risk-off shocks have important distributional implications for emerging market port-

folio flows and returns. In particular, we find that the effects associated with the worst real-

izations are often disproportionately affected by risk-off shocks. Specifically, while there are

some differences in the effects across bond vs. equity markets and flows vs. asset returns, the

effects associated with the left tail are generally larger than that on the median realization. We

conclude that the focus in the literature on measures of central tendency is incomplete.

    A natural next question for our research agenda: do the implications of a RORO shock

differ across recipient countries? Given that the mutual fund business exhibits significant

variation in manager discretion, the heterogeneity question has two dimensions. The first is

country-level heterogeneity, meaning are the effects of an external RORO shock dispropor-

tionately experienced across countries along important dimensions. Gelos et al. (2019) show

that variation in recipient country economic policy and business fundamentals affect capital

flows. In the context of our setting, the question arises whether recipient country conditions

impact fund reallocation in the face of risk-off shocks. In particular, we want to be able to

address the extent to which fund managers view emerging markets as a single asset class or

whether country fundamentals matter for fund allocations.

    An important caveat, however, is that the level of discretion fund managers possess varies

considerably across fund type. Representing about half of the emerging market fund space

towards the end of the sample, passive index funds and ETFs have very little manager dis-

cretion. As a consequence, passive index fund and ETF re-allocation in the face of a risk-off

shock may induce elevated correlations among countries and minimize the effect of cross-

country heterogeneity. Actively managed mutual funds, however, enjoy considerable discre-

tion. Country fundamentals may be central to their allocation decision. Going forward, we

will assess the complete effect of tail events on capital flows by closely examining the actual

vehicles that investors use to access emerging markets.




                                                22
References
Adrian, T., Boyarchenko, N., & Giannone, D. (2019). Vulnerable Growth. American Economic
     Review, 109(4), 1263-1289.
Avdjiev, S., Du, W., Koch, C., & Shin, H. S. (2019). The Dollar, Bank Leverage, and Deviations
     from Covered Interest Parity. American Economic Review: Insights, 1(2), 193-208.
Bekaert, G., Engstrom, E. C., & Xu, N. R. (2019). The time variation in risk appetite and uncer-
     tainty (Vol. No. 25673).
Bekaert, G., Harvey, C. R., & Lundblad, C. (2005). Does financial liberalization spur growth?
     Journal of Financial economics, 77(1), 3–55.
Caballero, R. J., Farhi, E., & Gourinchas, P.-O. (2017). The safe assets shortage conundrum.
     Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31(3), 29–46.
Calvo, G. A. (1998). Capital flows and capital-market crises: The simple economics of sudden
     stops. Journal of Applied Economics, 1, 35–54.
Chari, A., & Henry, P. B. (2004). Risk sharing and asset prices: evidence from a natural experi-
     ment. The Journal of Finance, 59(3), 1295–1324.
Chari, A., & Henry, P. B. (2008). Firm-specific information and the efficiency of investment.
     Journal of Financial Economics, 87(3), 636–655.
Chari, A., Stedman, K. D., & Lundblad, C. (2020). Taper Tantrums: Quantitative Easing, its
     Aftermath and Emerging Market Capital Flows. Review of Financial Studies, Forthcoming.
Eguren-Martin, F., O’Neill, C., Sokol, A., & von dem Berge, L. (2020). Capital flows-at-risk:
     Push, pull and the role of policy. Bank of England Staff Working Paper, No. 881.
Erik, B., Lombardi, M. J., Mihaljek, D., & Shin, H. S. (2020). The Dollar, Bank Leverage, and
      Real Economic Activity: An Evolving Relationship. AEA Papers and Proceedings, 110,
      529-534.
Forbes, K., & Warnock, F. (2019). Capital flow waves—or ripples? extreme capital flow move-
     ments in an era of easy monetary and tight macroprudential policy. NBER Working Pa-
     per, No. 26851.
Forbes, K. J. (2020). Do Sounder Banks Make Calmer Waters? The Link between Bank Regula-
     tions and Capital Flow Waves. AEA Papers and Proceedings, 110, 516-522.
Forbes, K. J., & Warnock, F. E. (2012). Capital flow waves: Surges, stops, flight, and retrench-
     ment. Journal of International Economics, 88(2), 235–251.
Fratzscher, M. (2012). Capital flows, push versus pull factors and the global financial crisis.
      Journal of International Economics, 88(2), 341-356.
Gelos, G., Gornicka, L., Koepke, R., Sahay, R., & Sgherri, S. (2019). Capital flows at risk: Tam-
     ing the ebbs and flows.
Gorton, G. (2017). The history and economics of safe assets. Annual Review of Economics, 9,
     547–586.
Gourinchas, P.-O., & Obstfeld, M. (2012, January). Stories of the Twentieth Century for the
     Twenty-First. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(1), 226-265.

                                                23
Henry, P. B. (2007). Capital account liberalization: Theory, evidence, and speculation. Journal
    of economic Literature, 45(4), 887–935.
Jotikasthira, C., Lundblad, C., & Ramadorai, T. (2012). Asset fire sales and purchases and the
      international transmission of funding shocks. The Journal of Finance, 67(6), 2015–2050.
Machado, J. A., & Silva, J. S. (2019). Quantiles via moments. Journal of Econometrics, 213(1),
    145–173.
Mendoza, E. G., & Terrones, M. E. (2008, May). An Anatomy Of Credit Booms: Evidence From
    Macro Aggregates And Micro Data (NBER Working Papers No. 14049). National Bureau
    of Economic Research, Inc. Retrieved from https://ideas.repec.org/p/nbr/nberwo/
    14049.html
Miranda-Agrippino, S., & Helene, R. (2020). Us monetary policy and the global financial
     cycle. Review of Financial Studies, Forthcoming.
Miranda-Agrippino, S., & Rey, H. (2020). The Global Financial Cycle after Lehman. AEA
     Papers and Proceedings, 110, 523-528.
Rey, H. (2013). Dilemma not trilemma: The global financial cycle and monetary policy inde-
     pendence. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy Symposium.




                                               24
                                                                                                                                          1/                       Variance risk premium (log diff, z-scores)                                                     1/                                   Risk-on, risk-off Index (z-scores)
                                                                                                                                               1/               -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6                                                                               1/             -8   -6    -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
                                                                                                                                                    20                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                             04




        al 2020)
                                                                                                                                          1/                                                                                                                      1/
                                                                                                                                               1/                                                                                                                             1/
                                                                                                                                                    20                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                         04                                                                                                                             06
                                                                                                                                          1/
                                                                                                                                               1/                                                                                                                 1/
                                                                                                                                                    20                                                                                                                        1/
                                                                                                                                                         06                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        08
                                                                                                                                          1/
                                                                                                                                               1/
                                                                                                                                                    20                                                                                                            1/
                                                                                                                                                         08                                                                                                                   1/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                          1/                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                               1/
                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                         10                                                                                                       1/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                          1/                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                               1/
                                                                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                                  Date
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Date
                                                                                                                                                         12                                                                                                       1/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1/
                                                                                                                                          1/                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                               1/                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                         14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1/


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (a) Time series: RORO
                                                                                                                                          1/                                                                                                                                  1/
                                                                                                                                               1/                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                    20                                                                                                                                  16
                                                                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1/
                                                                                                                                          1/                                                                                                                                  1/
                                                                                                                                               1/                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                    20                                                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                                                                         18
                                                                                                                                          1/                                                                                                                      1/
                                                                                                                                               1/                                                                                                                             1/
                                                                                                                                                    20                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                         20                                                                                                                             20




                                                             (c) Time Series (log difference): Risk Aversion (Bekaert et




25
                                                                                                                                    1/                               Uncertainty (log diff, z-scores)                                                                                                          Density
                                                                                                                                         1/                   -1 -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6             .8   1                                                                 0                  .1           .2        .3        .4
                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                   02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -8




                                                                                                                                    1/
                                                                                                                                         1/
                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                   04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -6




                                                                                                                                    1/
                                                                                                                                         1/
                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                   06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -4




                                                                                                                                    1/
                                                                                                                                         1/
                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -2




                                                                                                                                                   08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 1: Risk-on/Risk-off Measures




                                                                                                                                    1/
                                                                                                                                         1/
                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                                                    1/
                                                                                                                                         1/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2




                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                           Date
                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                    1/
                                                                                                                                         1/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4




                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (b) Histogram: RORO




                                                                                                                                    1/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Risk-on, risk-off Index (z-scores)




                                                                                                                                         1/
                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           8




                                                                                                                                    1/
                                                                                                                                         1/
                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                   18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10




                                                                                                                                    1/
                                                                                                                                         1/
                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12




     (d) Time Series (log difference): Risk (Bekaert et al 2020)
                                                                                      Index                                                                    01                           Equity Flow: Percent of Lagged Allocation
                                                  1/                                                                                                                ja
                                                       1/              0      2000            4000    6000                                                               n2            -5                0             5             10
                                                            20                                                                                                                00
                                                                 04                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                               01
                                                  1/                                                                                                                ja
                                                       1/                                                                                                                n2
                                                            20                                                                                                                00
                                                                 06                                                                                                                6
                                                                                                                                                               01
                                                  1/                                                                                                                ja
                                                       1/                                                                                                                n2
                                                            20                                                                                                                00
                                                                 08                                                                                                                8
                                                                                                                                                               01
                                                  1/                                                                                                                ja
                                                       1/                                                                                                                n2
                                                            20                                                                                                                01
                                                                 10                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                               01
                                                  1/                                                                                                                ja
                                                       1/                                                                                                                n2




                                MSCI LC
                                                            20                                                                                                                01
                                                                 12                                                                                                                2




                                           Date
                                                                                                                                                        Date
                                                                                                                                                               01
                                                  1/                                                                                                                ja
                                                       1/                                                                                                                n2
                                                            20                                                                                                                01
                                                                 14                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                               01
                                                  1/                                                                                                                ja
                                                       1/                                                                                                                n2
                                                            20                                                                                                                01
                                                                 16                                                                                                                6
                                                                                                                                                               01




                                MSCI USD
                                                  1/                                                                                                                ja
                                                       1/                                                                                                                n2
                                                            20                                                                                                                01
                                                                 18                                                                                                                8
                                                                                                                                                               01
                                                  1/                                                                                                                ja
                                                       1/                                                                                                                n2
                                                            20                                                                                                                02
                                                                                                                                                                                                   -2sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                            +2sd




                                                                 20                                                                                                                0




26
                                                                                      EMBI                                                                     01                        Bond Flow: Percent of Lagged Allocation
                                                  1/                                                                                                                ja
                                                       1/             200   300       400      500   600                                                                 n2            -10       -5         0         5          10
                                                            20                                                                                                                00
                                                                 04                                                                                                                4




     (b) Total Return Indices
                                                  1/                                                                                                           01
                                                       1/                                                                                                           ja
                                                            20                                                                                                           n2
                                                                 06                                                                                                           00
                                                                                                                                                                                   6
                                                  1/                                                                                                           01
                                                       1/                                                                                                           ja
                                                            20                                                                                                           n2
                                                                 08                                                                                                           00
                                                                                                                                                                                   8
                                                  1/
                                                       1/                                                                                                      01
                                                                                                             (a) EPFR Country Flows (% of Lagged AUM)




                                                            20                                                                                                      ja
                                                                 10                                                                                                      n2
                                                                                                                                                                              01
                                                  1/                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 2: Emerging Market Flows and Returns




                                EMBI
                                                       1/                                                                                                      01
                                                            20                                                                                                      ja
                                                                 12                                                                                                      n2
                                                                                                                                                                              01
                                           Date




                                                  1/                                                                                                                               2
                                                       1/
                                                                                                                                                        Date




                                                            20                                                                                                 01
                                                                 14                                                                                                 ja
                                                                                                                                                                         n2
                                                  1/                                                                                                                          01
                                                       1/                                                                                                                          4
                                                            20                                                                                                 01
                                                                 16                                                                                                 ja
                                                                                                                                                                         n2
                                LC Bonds




                                                  1/                                                                                                                          01
                                                       1/
                                                            20                                                                                                                     6
                                                                 18                                                                                            01
                                                                                                                                                                    ja
                                                  1/                                                                                                                     n2
                                                       1/                                                                                                                     01
                                                            20                                                                                                                     8
                                                                 20                                                                                            01
                                                                                                                                                                    ja
                                                                                                                                                                         n2
                                                                                                                                                                              02
                                                                                                                                                                                                            -2sd




                                                                      100         150        200      250
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   +2sd




                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                     LC Bonds
                                                                                      -.08
                                                                           Equity




                                                                                      -.1
                                                                                      -.12
                                                                                      -.14
                                                                           Bonds




                                                                                      -.16
                                                                                                          0                      20         40               60              80     100
                                                                                                                                                  Quantile
   -0.2           -0.15             -0.1               -0.05           0                                                                                Bonds
                                                                                                                                                        Equities
                                  Q95      Q50    Q5


Figure 3a: A one standard deviation risk-off (RORO) shock & the distribution of EPFR flows
(% of AUM)
Notes: This figure summarizes the impact of a one-standard deviation risk-off shock as mea-
sured by our RORO Index. Error bars represent 90% confidence intervals.




                                                                                                            0
                                                                           MSCI USD




                                                                                                                       -.2
                                                                                                Point estimate: Returns
                                                                                                               -.4
                                                                           MSCI
                                                                                                      -.6



                                                                           EMBI
                                                                                             -.8            -1




                                                                           LC Bonds
                                                                                                                             0        20         40                60          80   100
                                                                                                                                                      Quantile

  -1.10   -0.90           -0.70          -0.50         -0.30   -0.10                                                                       MSCI LC                  MSCI USD
                                                                                                                                           EMBI                     LC Bond Index
                                   Q95     Q50   Q5



Figure 3b: Impact of a one standard deviation risk-off (RORO) shock on the distribution of
returns
Notes: This figure summarizes the impact of a one-standard deviation risk-off shock as mea-
sured by our RORO Index. Error bars represent 90% confidence intervals.




                                                                           27
                                                                                                                                     -.02
                                                                                                                                     -.03
                                                                                            Diff. log(RA)




                                                                                                                                -.04
                                                                                                                             Bond flows
                                                                                                                                     -.05
                                                                                            Diff. log(Uncertainty)




                                                                                                                                     -.06
                                                                                                                                                0   20   40              60        80   100
                                                                                                                                                              Quantile

                                                                                                                                                          Log Diff Risk Aversion
      -0.09   -0.08   -0.07   -0.06   -0.05   -0.04    -0.03   -0.02        -0.01       0
                                                                                                                                                          Log Diff Uncertainty
                                              Q95      Q50     Q5

                                                                                                      (a) Bond flows (% of AUMt−1 )




                                                                                                                                     .05




28
                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                        Diff. log(RA)
                                                                                                                               Equity flows
                                                                                                                             -.05    -.1




                                                                                        Diff. log(Uncertainty)

                                                                                                                                                0   20   40              60        80   100
                                                                                                                                                              Quantile

                                                                                                                                                          Log Diff Risk Aversion
      -0.12       -0.1        -0.08     -0.06         -0.04         -0.02           0
                                                                                                                                                          Log Diff Uncertainty
                                              Q95      Q50     Q5

                                                                                                     (b) Equity flows (% of AUMt−1 )

     Figure 4a: Impact of a one standard deviation risk-off (BEX) shock on the distribution of EPFR flows (% of AUM)
     Notes: This figure summarizes the impact of a one-standard deviation risk-off shock as measured by Bekaert et al (2020). Error bars
     represent 90% confidence intervals.
                                                                         Q95                                                                                 Q95




                                                                         Q50                                                                                 Q50




                                                                         Q5                                                                                  Q5



 -0.1    -0.08      -0.06                 -0.04              -0.02   0         -0.12   -0.1   -0.08    -0.06        -0.04      -0.02           0   0.02   0.04
                 Diff. log(Uncertainty)      Diff. log(RA)                                            Diff. log(Uncertainty)   Diff. log(RA)


                         (a) Bonds                                                                             (b) Equity

Figure 4b: A one standard deviation constituent risk-off (BEX) shock & the distribution of
EPFR flows (% of AUM)
Notes: This figure summarizes the impact of a one-standard deviation risk-off shock as mea-
sured by Bekaert et al (2020).




                                                                              29
                                                                                                                 .04
                                                                                                                                                                          .1




                                                                                                                 .02
                                                                                                                                                                          .05
                                                                     USD, Q95




                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                     USD, Q50




                                                                                                                                                                      USD Return




                                                                                                       -.02
                                                                     USD, Q5




                                                                                                                                                                   -.05




                                                                                                    Local Currency Return
                                                                     LC, Q95


                                                                                                                                                                          -.1




                                                                                                                 -.04
                                                                     LC, Q50
                                                                                                                                                                          -.15




                                                                                                                 -.06
                                                                     LC, Q5                                                     0   20   40      60   80     100                   0   20   40      60   80   100
                                                                                                                                          Quantile                                           Quantile

      -0.25       -0.15            -0.05            0.05          0.15
                                                                                                                                                           Log Diff Risk Aversion
                          logdiff(RA)      logdiff(Uncertainty)                                                                                            Log Diff Uncertainty


                                                                                (a) Bond Returns




                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                          0




30
                                                                                                                                                                          -.1




                                                                                                                          -.1
                                                                     USD, Q95
                                                                                                                                                                            -.2




                                                                     USD, Q50
                                                                                                             -.2
                                                                                                                                                                    USD Return
                                                                                                                                                                   -.3




                                                                     USD, Q5
                                                                                                    Local Currency Return
                                                                                                                 -.3




                                                                     LC, Q95
                                                                                                                                                                          -.4




                                                                     LC, Q50
                                                                                                                 -.4
                                                                                                                                                                          -.5




                                                                     LC, Q5                                                     0   20   40      60   80     100                   0   20   40      60   80   100
                                                                                                                                          Quantile                                           Quantile

      -0.75       -0.55            -0.35            -0.15         0.05
                                                                                                                                                           Log Diff Risk Aversion
                          logdiff(RA)      logdiff(Uncertainty)                                                                                            Log Diff Uncertainty


                                                                               (b) Equity Returns

     Figure 4c: Impact of a one standard deviation risk-off shock on the distribution of EPFR flows (% of AUM)
     Notes: This figure summarizes the impact of a one-standard deviation risk-off shock as measured by Bekaert et al (2020). Error bars
     represent 90% confidence intervals.
                                                                 USD, Q95                                                               USD, Q95

                                                                 USD, Q50                                                               USD, Q50

                                                                 USD, Q5                                                                USD, Q5

                                                                 LC, Q95                                                                LC, Q95

                                                                 LC, Q50                                                                LC, Q50

                                                                 LC, Q5                                                                 LC, Q5

  -0.2   -0.15   -0.1   -0.05      0       0.05     0.1   0.15                  -0.79   -0.59            -0.39         -0.19         0.01
                    logdiff(Uncertainty)    logdiff(RA)                                         logdiff(Uncertainty)   logdiff(RA)


                            (a) Bonds                                                                   (b) Equity

Figure 4d: A one standard deviation constituent risk-off (BEX) shock & the distribution of
returns
Notes: This figure summarizes the impact of a one-standard deviation risk-off shock as mea-
sured by by Bekaert et al (2020).




                                                                           31
                                                                                                            .05
                                                 Bonds


                                                                                 Funding liquidity




                                                                                                            0
                                                                                 Currency & gold




                                                                                                           -.05
                                                                                                          Bonds
                                                                                                            -.1
                                                                                 AE Equity & volatility




                                                                                                            -.15
                                                                                 Corporate spreads                 0       20              40              60            80             100
                                                                                                                                                Quantile

          -0.22   -0.17      -0.12     -0.07   -0.02         0.03      0.08   0.13                                     Funding Liquidity            Corporate Spreads
                                                                                                                       Gold and Currency            Adv. Econ. Equity Returns and Volatility
                                               Q95     Q50     Q5



                                                 Equity


                                                                                                            0




32
                                                                                 Funding liquidity



                                                                                 Currency & gold
                                                                                                           -.05
                                                                                                          Equity




                                                                                 AE Equity & volatility
                                                                                                            -.1




                                                                                 Corporate spreads                 0       20              40              60            80             100
                                                                                                                                                Quantile

          -0.18      -0.13           -0.08       -0.03              0.02      0.07                                     Funding Liquidity            Corporate Spreads
                                                                                                                       Gold and Currency            Adv. Econ. Equity Returns and Volatility
                                               Q95     Q50     Q5


     Figure 5a: Impact of a one standard deviation risk-off shock on the distribution of EPFR flows (% of AUM)
     Notes: This figure summarizes the impact of a one-standard deviation risk-off shock as measured by our constituent sub-indices index.
     Error bars represent 90% confidence intervals.
                                                                                                    Q95                                                                                                    Q95




                                                                                                    Q50                                                                                                    Q50




                                                                                                    Q5                                                                                                     Q5



 -0.35     -0.3    -0.25     -0.2     -0.15       -0.1      -0.05          0       0.05       0.1         -0.16    -0.14    -0.12     -0.1     -0.08      -0.06      -0.04     -0.02        0        0.02
         Corporate spreads   AE Equity & volatility      Currency & gold       Funding liquidity                  Corporate spreads   AE Equity & volatility      Currency & gold      Funding liquidity


                                      (a) Bonds                                                                                               (b) Equity

Figure 5b: A one standard deviation constituent risk-off (RORO) shock & the distribution of
EPFR flows (% of AUM)
Notes: This figure summarizes the impact of a one-standard deviation risk-off shock as mea-
sured by our RORO subindices.




                                                                                                         33
                            MSCI USD                                                     MSCI LC




                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                         Gold and Currency




                                                                                                                                  -.1
                                                                                                   Gold and Currency
                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.2




                                                                                                                                     -.2
                                         AE Equity Returns and                                     AE Equity Returns and
                                               Volatility                                                Volatility




                                                                                                                            -.3
                                                                                                                           MSCI LC Return
                                                                                                                                                                                   MSCI USD Return
                                                                                                                                                                                  -.4




                                         Corporate Spreads                                         Corporate Spreads




                                                                                                                                  -.4
                                                                                                   Funding Liquidity
                                                                                                                                                                                           -.6




                                                                                                                                  -.5
                                         Funding Liquidity
                                                                                                                                            0    20     40      60   80     100                        0   20   40      60   80   100
                                                                                                                                                         Quantile                                                Quantile
                                                                 -0.95 -0.75 -0.55 -0.35 -0.15 0.05
       -0.95 -0.75 -0.55 -0.35 -0.15 0.05
                                                                                                                                                Funding Liquidity                                                 Corporate Spreads
                           Q95     Q50    Q5                                        Q95     Q50    Q5                                           Adv. Econ. Equity Returns and Volatility                          Gold and Currency




                                EMBI                                                  LC Bonds
                                                                                                                                                                                           .02




                                                                                                                                  0




34
                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                        Gold and Currency                                          Gold and Currency
                                                                                                                                  -.05
                                                                                                                                                                                            -.02




                                        AE Equity Returns and                                      AE Equity Returns and
                                                                                                                              -.1




                                              Volatility                                                 Volatility
                                                                                                                           EMBI Return
                                                                                                                                                                                  -.04
                                                                                                                                                                                  LC Bond Return




                                        Corporate Spreads                                          Corporate Spreads
                                                                                                                                  -.15
                                                                                                                                                                                           -.06




                                                                                                   Funding Liquidity
                                                                                                                                  -.2




                                        Funding Liquidity
                                                                                                                                                                                           -.08




                                                                                                                                            0    20     40      60   80     100                        0   20   40      60   80   100
                                                                                                                                                         Quantile                                                Quantile
        -0.30   -0.20   -0.10    0.00                            -0.30   -0.20   -0.10     0.00
                                                                                                                                                Funding Liquidity                                                 Corporate Spreads
                          Q95     Q50   Q5                                          Q95     Q50    Q5                                           Adv. Econ. Equity Returns and Volatility                          Gold and Currency




     Figure 5c: Impact of a one standard deviation risk-off shock on the distribution of returns
     Notes: This figure summarizes the impact of a one-standard deviation risk-off shock as measured by our constituent sub-indices. Error
     bars represent 90% confidence intervals.
                                                                    USD, Q95                                                                         USD, Q95

                                                                    USD, Q50                                                                         USD, Q50

                                                                    USD, Q5                                                                          USD, Q5

                                                                    LC, Q95                                                                          LC, Q95

                                                                    LC, Q50                                                                          LC, Q50

                                                                    LC, Q5                                                                           LC, Q5

  -0.45         -0.35         -0.25      -0.15      -0.05        0.05              -1.45                 -0.95                -0.45               0.05
          Funding Liquidity                  Corporate Spreads                             Funding Liquidity                  Corporate Spreads
          AE Equity Returns and Volatility   Gold and Currency                             AE Equity Returns and Volatility   Gold and Currency


                                      (a) Bonds                                                                   (b) Equity

Figure 5d: A one standard deviation constituent risk-off (RORO) shock & the distribution of
returns
Notes: This figure summarizes the impact of a one-standard deviation risk-off shock as mea-
sured by our RORO subindices.




                                                                              35
          Figure 6: Emerging market capital flows and returns in recent risk-off episodes

      0                                                     10
              t+7




           t+105
           t+112
           t+119
           t+126
           t+133
                t

            t+14
            t+21
            t+28
            t+35
            t+42
            t+49
            t+56
            t+63
            t+70
            t+77
            t+84
            t+91
            t+98
  -5
                                                              0




                                                                     t+7
                                                                    t+14
                                                                    t+21
                                                                    t+28
                                                                    t+35
                                                                    t+42
                                                                    t+49
                                                                    t+56
                                                                    t+63
                                                                    t+70
                                                                    t+77
                                                                    t+84
                                                                    t+91
                                                                    t+98
                                                                  t+105
                                                                  t+112
                                                                  t+119
                                                                  t+126
                                                                  t+133
                                                                       t
 -10
                                                            -10
 -15
 -20                                                        -20

 -25                                                        -30
 -30          GFC
                                                            -40
 -35          Taper tantrum
                                                                  GFC
              China scare                                   -50   Taper tantrum
 -40
              COVID-19                                            China scare
 -45                                                        -60   COVID-19

                   (a) Equity flows (USD Billions)                   (b) Bond flows (USD Billions)


110                                                        110

100                                                        105
                                                           100
 90
                                                             95
 80
                                                             90
 70
                                                             85
             GFC                                                   GFC
 60
             Taper tantrum                                   80    Taper tantrum
 50          China scare                                     75    China scare
             COVID-19                                              COVID-19
 40                                                          70
           t+4
           t+8
          t+12
          t+16
          t+20
          t+24
          t+28
          t+32
          t+36
          t+40
          t+44
          t+48
          t+52
          t+56
          t+60
          t+64
          t+68
          t+72
          t+76
          t+80
          t+84
          t+88




                                                                   t+4
                                                                   t+8
                                                                  t+12
                                                                  t+16
                                                                  t+20
                                                                  t+24
                                                                  t+28
                                                                  t+32
                                                                  t+36
                                                                  t+40
                                                                  t+44
                                                                  t+48
                                                                  t+52
                                                                  t+56
                                                                  t+60
                                                                  t+64
                                                                  t+68
                                                                  t+72
                                                                  t+76
                                                                  t+80
                                                                  t+84
                                                                  t+88
             t




                                                                     t




                             (c) MSCI USD                                          (d) EMBI


110                                                       100.8

100                                                       100.6
                                                          100.4
90
                                                          100.2
80                                                         100
70                                                         99.8
            GFC                                            99.6    GFC
60                                                                 Taper tantrum
            Taper tantrum                                  99.4
50          China scare                                            China scare
                                                           99.2
            COVID-19                                               COVID-19
40                                                          99
       t+4
       t+8
      t+12
      t+16
      t+20
      t+24
      t+28
      t+32
      t+36
      t+40
      t+44
      t+48
      t+52
      t+56
      t+60
      t+64
      t+68
      t+72
      t+76
      t+80
      t+84
      t+88




                                                                   t+4
                                                                   t+8
                                                                  t+12
                                                                  t+16
                                                                  t+20
                                                                  t+24
                                                                  t+28
                                                                  t+32
                                                                  t+36
                                                                  t+40
                                                                  t+44
                                                                  t+48
                                                                  t+52
                                                                  t+56
                                                                  t+60
                                                                  t+64
                                                                  t+68
                                                                  t+72
                                                                  t+76
                                                                  t+80
                                                                  t+84
                                                                  t+88
         t




                                                                     t




                             (e) MSCI LC                              (f) Local currency Bond Index




                                                     36
Figure 7: Effect of a three standard deviation risk-off shock on the distribution of returns and
EPFR flows

                            Q5                                                                                    Q5




                                                                                       1.5
    .8
    .6




                                                                                       1
    .4




                                                                                       .5
    .2
    0




                                                                                       0
          -2           -1                     0                1              2              -2              -1                  0                  1                  2
                                      Flows (% of AUM)                                                                   Flows (% of AUM)

                      Unconditional               3 St. Dev. Risk-off Shock                                 Unconditional              3 St. Dev. Risk-off Shock



                                 (a) Bond flows                                                                   (b) Equity flows


                                 Q5                                                                                       Q5
                                                                                       .5
    2




                                                                                       .4
    1.5




                                                                                       .3
    1




                                                                                       .2
    .5




                                                                                       .1
    0




                                                                                       0




          -2   -1.5    -1         -.5        0        .5       1        1.5   2              -8   -7   -6   -5    -4     -3    -2    -1   0    1        2   3      4   5
                                     Daily Returns (%)                                                                    Daily Returns (%)

                      Unconditional               3 St. Dev. Risk-Off Shock                                 Unconditional              3 St. Dev. Risk-off Shock



                                      (c) EMBI                                                                         (d) MSCI USD


                                      Q5                                                                                    Q5
                                                                                       .6
    2.5
    2




                                                                                       .4
    1.5
    1




                                                                                       .2
    .5
    0




                                                                                       0




          -2   -1.5    -1         -.5        0        .5       1        1.5   2              -8   -7   -6   -5    -4     -3    -2    -1   0    1        2   3      4   5
                                     Daily Returns (%)                                                                    Daily Returns (%)

                      Unconditional               3 St. Dev. Risk-Off Shock                                 Unconditional              3 St. Dev. Risk-off Shock



                            (e) LC Bond Index                                                                          (f) MSCI LC




                                                                                  37
Figure 8: Effect of a three standard deviation risk-off BEX shock on the distribution of returns
and EPFR flows

                              Q5                                                                                      Q5




                                                                                         1.5
    .8
    .6




                                                                                         1
    .4




                                                                                         .5
    .2
    0




                                                                                         0
          -2             -1                     0               1               2              -2                -1                  0                 1               2
                                        Flows (% of AUM)                                                                     Flows (% of AUM)

                      Unconditional                  3 SD Risk Aversion Shock                                 Unconditional                 3 SD Risk Aversion Shock
                      3 SD Risk Shock                                                                         3 SD Risk Shock



                                   (a) Bond flows                                                                     (b) Equity flows


                                   Q5                                                                                         Q5
                                                                                         .5
    2




                                                                                         .4
    1.5




                                                                                         .3
    1




                                                                                         .2
    .5




                                                                                         .1
    0




                                                                                         0




          -2   -1.5      -1         -.5        0        .5      1       1.5     2              -8   -7   -6     -5    -4     -3    -2    -1   0    1       2   3   4   5
                                       Daily Returns (%)                                                                      Daily Returns (%)

                      Unconditional                  3 SD Risk Aversion Shock                                 Unconditional                 3 SD Risk Aversion Shock
                      3 SD Risk Shock                                                                         3 SD Risk Shock



                                        (c) EMBI                                                                           (d) MSCI USD


                                        Q5                                                                                      Q5
                                                                                         .6
    2.5
    2




                                                                                         .4
    1.5
    1




                                                                                         .2
    .5
    0




                                                                                         0




          -2   -1.5      -1         -.5        0        .5      1       1.5     2              -8   -7   -6     -5    -4     -3    -2    -1   0    1       2   3   4   5
                                       Daily Returns (%)                                                                      Daily Returns (%)

                      Unconditional                  3 SD Risk Aversion Shock                                 Unconditional                 3 SD Risk Aversion Shock
                      3 SD Risk Shock                                                                         3 SD Risk Shock



                              (e) LC Bond Index                                                                            (f) MSCI LC




                                                                                    38
                    Table 1.1: Risk-on/Risk-off Summary Statistics


                                        Q5        Q50     Q95    Skewness     Kurtosis
       RORO Index                      -1.32      -0.08   1.54     1.91         22.84
       Funding Liquidity               -0.90      0.01    0.86     1.15        80.71
       AE Equity Returns/Volatility    -1.36      -0.07   1.55     1.25        20.03
       Gold and Currencies             -1.70      -0.01   1.77     0.14          5.77
       Corporate Spreads               -1.30      -0.07   1.31     2.43         34.93
       Log Diff. Risk Aversion         -0.72      -0.00   0.74     0.03        112.09
       Log Diff. Uncertainty           -1.12      -0.06   1.27     1.36        30.86
       Observations                    4517


                    Table 1.2: Emerging Market Summary Statistics

                                 (a) EPFR Country Flows


                               Mean    St. Dev.       Q5     Q50     Q95     Skewness    Kurtosis
Equity Flow: % of Lagged AUM    0.05     0.49        -0.71   0.04    0.81        0.76     21.93
Equity Flows (Millions USD)     6.52    117.79     -124.53   1.19   161.34       0.22     38.56
Equity AUM (Billions USD)      18.64    27.13        0.39    6.42    82.84       2.23      7.88
Bond Flow: % of Lagged AUM      0.14     0.69        -0.85   0.18    1.08       -1.01     20.39
Bonds Flows (Millions USD)      6.37    85.76       -63.06   1.98    93.64     -18.46     862.13
Bonds AUM (Billions USD)        8.15    10.75        0.08    3.91    35.14       2.03      7.04
Observations                   18474


                                       (b) Returns


                       Mean     St. Dev.    Q5        Q50    Q95    Skewness     Kurtosis
    MSCI LC Return      0.04      1.53     -2.23      0.00   2.26     -0.39       21.07
    MSCI USD Return     0.04      1.79     -2.68      0.00   2.63     -0.37       17.81
    EMBI Return         0.02      0.62     -0.62      0.02   0.66     -5.11       316.02
    LC Bond Return      0.03      0.57     -0.39      0.02   0.47      0.55      1389.67
    Observations       92202




                                            39
              Table 2: Impact of a one standard deviation risk-off (RORO) shock

                                                (a) Bond flows

                                 (1)              (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)
                                 Q5              Q25           Q50         Q75           Q95
            RORO Index       -0.159∗∗∗        -0.131∗∗∗     -0.117∗∗∗   -0.104∗∗∗     -0.0785∗∗∗
                              (-13.41)         (-16.63)      (-18.97)    (-18.72)      (-11.45)
            Observations: 16917

                                                (b) Equity flows
            RORO Index        -0.105∗∗∗        -0.109∗∗∗    -0.111∗∗∗     -0.113∗∗∗     -0.117∗∗∗
                               (-18.17)         (-35.81)     (-38.53)      (-30.16)      (-17.46)
            Observations: 16967

                                             (c) USD equity returns
            RORO Index        -0.926∗∗∗        -0.853∗∗∗    -0.814∗∗∗     -0.774∗∗∗     -0.701∗∗∗
                               (-11.78)         (-10.20)     (-9.52)       (-8.77)       (-7.35)
            Observations: 85033

                                     (d) Local currency equity returns
            RORO Index        -0.926∗∗∗        -0.853∗∗∗    -0.814∗∗∗     -0.774∗∗∗     -0.701∗∗∗
                               (-11.78)         (-10.20)     (-9.52)       (-8.77)       (-7.35)
            Observations: 85033

                                             (e) USD bond returns
             RORO Index          -0.255∗∗∗     -0.187∗∗∗    -0.160∗∗∗     -0.133∗∗∗     -0.0742∗
                                  (-5.58)       (-4.87)      (-4.40)       (-3.89)       (-2.42)
             Observations: 72451

                                      (f) Local currency bond returns
           RORO Index       -0.0734∗∗∗         -0.0484∗∗∗    -0.0408∗∗∗     -0.0321∗∗     -0.00940
                              (-4.35)            (-4.15)       (-3.86)        (-3.15)      (-0.80)
           Observations: 49266
Table 2 summarizes the results of quantile regressions of a) bond flows, b) equity flows, c)
USD MSCI equity returns, d) local currency MSCI equity returns, e) EMBI USD bond returns,
and f) local currency daily total returns on our headline RORO index. Specification includes
the full set of control variables, country fixed effects, and year fixed effects. Full results can
be found in the Internet Appendix. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country.
t-statistics are shown in parentheses. *, **, and *** signify a statistically significant difference
in the effect of RORO at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                       40
Table 3.1: Impact of a one standard deviation risk-off (BEX) shock on EPFR flows (% of AUM)

                                             (a) Bond flows

                                    Q5            Q25             Q50         Q75          Q95
    Log Diff. Risk Aversion      -0.0331∗      -0.0286∗∗       -0.0264∗∗   -0.0244∗∗∗   -0.0203∗∗∗
                                  (-1.99)        (-2.65)         (-3.17)     (-3.77)      (-3.38)

    Log Diff. Risk              -0.0574∗∗∗     -0.0486∗∗∗     -0.0443∗∗∗   -0.0403∗∗∗   -0.0323∗∗∗
                                  (-3.95)        (-4.58)        (-4.96)      (-5.31)      (-5.46)
    Observations: 17508

                                            (b) Equity flows
    Log Diff. Risk Aversion     0.0186∗∗∗      0.00130        -0.00715∗∗   -0.0153∗∗∗   -0.0315∗∗∗
                                  (3.60)        (0.42)          (-2.72)      (-5.19)      (-6.27)

    Log Diff. Risk              -0.109∗∗∗     -0.0770∗∗∗      -0.0612∗∗∗   -0.0460∗∗∗   -0.0158∗∗
                                 (-13.71)      (-17.06)        (-19.48)     (-15.86)      (-2.91)
    Observations: 17559
Table 3.1 summarizes the results of quantile regressions of a) bond flows and b) equity flows
on our chosen structural shocks from Bekaert et al 2019. Specification includes the full set
of control variables, country fixed effects, and year fixed effects. Full results can be found in
the Internet Appendix. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country. t-statistics are
shown in parentheses. *, **, and *** signify a statistically significant difference in the effect of
RORO at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                  41
         Table 3.2: Impact of a one standard deviation risk-off (BEX) shock on returns

                                           (a) MSCI USD

                                      Q5           Q25          Q50         Q75         Q95
       Log Diff. Risk Aversion     -0.246∗∗∗    -0.317∗∗∗    -0.351∗∗∗   -0.385∗∗∗   -0.452∗∗∗
                                    (-5.90)      (-7.46)      (-7.59)     (-7.54)     (-7.33)

       Log Diff. Risk              -0.395∗∗∗    -0.262∗∗∗    -0.198∗∗∗   -0.133∗∗∗    -0.00816
                                    (-9.38)      (-7.79)      (-7.00)     (-5.53)      (-0.37)
       Observations: 85033

                                      (b) MSCI Local currency
       Log Diff. Risk Aversion     -0.194∗∗∗    -0.262∗∗∗    -0.294∗∗∗   -0.328∗∗∗   -0.393∗∗∗
                                    (-5.84)      (-7.56)      (-7.61)     (-7.52)     (-7.30)

       Log Diff. Risk              -0.316∗∗∗    -0.206∗∗∗    -0.155∗∗∗   -0.102∗∗∗    0.00257
                                    (-7.68)      (-6.63)      (-6.12)     (-4.88)      (0.13)
       Observations: 85054

                                               (c) EMBI
      Log Diff. Risk Aversion     -0.0554∗∗     -0.0921∗∗∗   -0.105∗∗∗   -0.118∗∗∗    -0.151∗∗∗
                                    (-3.22)       (-6.07)     (-5.81)     (-5.39)      (-4.54)

      Log Diff. Risk              -0.116∗∗∗      -0.0280      0.00310     0.0348∗      0.114∗∗∗
                                   (-3.39)        (-1.33)      (0.16)      (1.98)       (7.07)
      Observations: 72390

                                   (d) Local currency bond index
         Log Diff. Risk Aversion      0.00500     -0.00685    -0.0102    -0.0142     -0.0248
                                       (0.14)      (-0.42)     (-0.74)    (-1.23)     (-1.38)

         Log Diff. Risk              -0.0565∗     -0.0195     -0.00902   0.00333     0.0364∗
                                      (-2.24)      (-1.79)     (-0.87)    (0.35)      (2.47)
         Observations: 85054
Table 3.2 summarizes the results of quantile regressions of a) USD MSCI equity returns, b) lo-
cal currency MSCI equity returns, c) EMBI USD bond returns, and d) local currency daily total
returns on our chosen structural shocks from Bekaert et al 2019. Specification includes the full
set of control variables, country fixed effects, and year fixed effects. Full results can be found
in the Internet Appendix. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country. t-statistics
are shown in parentheses. *, **, and *** signify a statistically significant difference in the effect
of RORO at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                  42
      Table 4: A one standard deviation risk-off shock & the distribution of government money market fund assets

                                               (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)
                                              Q5        Q50         OLS        Q95          Q5         Q50         OLS        Q95
 RORO Index                                 0.167∗∗   0.217∗∗∗    0.275∗∗     0.432∗
                                             (2.87)    (5.43)      (2.88)     (2.14)

 AE Mkt. Return                        0.0914∗∗∗      0.0658∗∗∗   0.100∗∗∗    0.110∗∗∗   0.0946∗∗∗   0.0621∗∗∗   0.0965∗∗∗   0.104∗∗
                                         (6.95)         (6.67)     (6.74)      (3.85)      (6.53)      (6.75)      (6.71)     (2.62)

 AE Real GDP Growth (t-1)                   -10.36     0.749       -8.561     -41.37      -5.779      -4.893      -9.549     -28.84
                                            (-1.76)    (0.09)      (-0.96)    (-1.35)     (-0.79)     (-0.83)     (-1.10)    (-0.85)

 AE Monetary Stance (t-1)               0.494∗∗∗       0.360∗     0.812∗∗∗    1.112∗∗     0.533∗      0.387∗∗     0.773∗∗    0.754
                                         (3.59)        (2.42)      (3.33)      (2.75)     (2.49)       (2.90)      (3.26)    (1.34)

 Risk Aversion                                                                            0.182∗      -0.0821     -0.0979    -0.346
                                                                                          (2.33)       (-1.36)     (-0.62)   (-0.92)

 Risk                                                                                     -0.0160    0.309∗∗∗     0.298      0.410
                                                                                           (-0.19)    (5.46)      (1.91)     (1.45)

 Constant                              -15.69∗∗∗      -10.51∗∗∗   -16.47∗∗∗   -16.41∗    -16.38∗∗∗   -10.02∗∗∗   -15.74∗∗∗   -14.93
                                        (-8.58)        (-5.96)     (-5.74)    (-2.51)     (-6.59)     (-5.88)     (-5.74)    (-1.69)
 Observations                             628            628         628        628         656         656         656        656
 t statistics in parentheses
 ∗   p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001
 Table 4 summarizes the results of quantile regressions of changes in government money market funds on our RORO and BEX
indices. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country.




                                                                      43
  Table 5: Effect of a COVID-era risk-off shock on the distribution of country EPFR flows

                                                 (a) RORO Index
                    Panel A: Bonds      Q5         Q50            Q95     Panel B: Equity      Q5        Q50        Q95

                    Observed flows    -473.56      3.73          178.13   Observed flows     -258.62     -5.79     109.69
β (unconditional)
      σ=1           % of AUM/week      -0.16        -0.12         -0.08   % of AUM/week       -0.11      -0.11     -0.12
                    Millions USD      -502.64      -17.67        163.78   Millions USD       -277.83    -26.09     88.30
β*Covid1Stdev
    σ = 3.1         % of AUM/week      -0.49        -0.36         -0.24   % of AUM/week       -0.33      -0.34     -0.36
                    Millions USD      -563.70      -62.60        133.63   Millions USD       -318.15    -68.72     43.36
β*CovidPeak
   σ = 11.56        % of AUM/week      -1.84       -1.35         -0.91    % of AUM/week       -1.21      -1.28      -1.35
                    Millions USD      -809.69     -243.61        12.18    Millions USD       -480.60    -240.44    -137.65



                                       (b) Risk Aversion (BEX 2020)
                     Panel A: Bonds      Q5          Q50          Q95      Panel B: Equity       Q5        Q50       Q95
                    Observed flows     -473.56       3.73        178.13   Observed flows      -258.62     -5.79    109.69
β (unconditional)
      σ=1           % of AUM/week       -0.05       -0.05         -0.04   % of AUM/week        -0.02       -0.03    -0.05
                    Millions USD       -482.61      -4.65        170.36   Millions USD        -262.03     -11.88   101.12
β*Covid1Stdev
    σ = 3.1         % of AUM/week       -0.15        -0.14        -0.13   % of AUM/week        -0.06       -0.10    -0.15
                    Millions USD       -501.62      -22.24       154.04   Millions USD        -269.17     -24.67    83.10
β*CovidPeak
   σ = 11.56        % of AUM/week       -0.57        -0.53        -0.49   % of AUM/week        -0.22       -0.38    -0.54
                    Millions USD       -578.20      -93.10        88.29   Millions USD        -297.95     -76.19    10.55



                                                (c) Risk (BEX 2020)
                    Panel A: Bonds      Q5          Q50           Q95      Panel B: Equity      Q5        Q50        Q95
                    Observed flows    -473.56       3.73         178.13   Observed flows      -258.62     -5.79     109.69
β (unconditional)
      σ=1           % of AUM/week      -0.09        -0.06         -0.04   % of AUM/week        -0.10      -0.07      -0.03
                    Millions USD      -489.27       -7.34        171.33   Millions USD        -276.91    -17.80     103.57
β*Covid1Stdev
    σ = 3.1         % of AUM/week      -0.27        -0.19         -0.12   % of AUM/week        -0.31      -0.20     -0.10
                    Millions USD      -522.26      -30.57        157.04   Millions USD        -315.32    -43.03     90.70
β*CovidPeak
   σ = 11.56        % of AUM/week      -0.99        -0.70         -0.43   % of AUM/week        -1.16      -0.76     -0.39
                    Millions USD      -655.15      -124.17        99.49   Millions USD        -470.03    -144.68    38.87




                                                            44
       Capital Flows in Risky Times: Risk-on/Risk-off and
                               Emerging Market Tail Risk
             Anusha Chari*            Karlye Dilts Stedman†               Christian Lundblad‡

                                     This Version: October 2, 2020



                                     SUPPLEMENTAL APPENDIX




   * Professorof Economics, Department of Economics & Professor of Finance, Kenan-Flagler Business School,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill & NBER. Email: achari@unc.edu.
  † Economist, Research Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. Email: karlye.stedman@kc.frb.org.

The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City or the Federal Reserve System.
  ‡ Richard ”Dick” Levin Distinguished Professor of Finance, Kenan-Flagler Business School, University of North

Carolina at Chapel Hill. Email:Christian Lundblad@kenan-flagler.unc.edu.


                                                       1
1   References from Footnote #1.

[1] Alfaro, L., S. Kalemli-Ozcan, and V. Volosovych (2008). Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from
Rich to Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation. The Review of Economics and Statistics
90(2), 347–368.

[2] Alfaro, L., S. Kalemli-Ozcan, and V. Volosovych (2014). Sovereigns, Upstream Capital
Flows, and Global Imbalances. Journal of the European Economic Association 12(5), 1240–1284.

[3] Avdjiev S, Gambacorta L, Goldberg LS, Schiaffi S. 2019. The shifting drivers of global
liquidity. NBER Working Paper No. 23565.
[4] Ammer, J., M. De Pooter, C. J. Erceg, and S. B. Kamin (2016). International Spillovers of
Monetary Policy. IFDP Notes, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

[5] Baskaya, Y. S., J. di Giovanni, S. Kalemli-Ozcan, J.-L. Peydro, and M. F. Ulu (2017). Cap-
ital Flows and the International Credit Channel. Journal of International Economics 108(1),
S15–S22.

[6] Bauer, M. D., and C. J. Neely. 2014. International channels of the Fed’s unconventional
monetary policy. Journal of International Money and Finance 44:24–46.

[7] Broner, F., T. Didier, A. Erce, and S. L. Schmukler. 2013. Gross capital flows: Dynamics
and crises. Journal of Monetary Economics 60(1):113–33.

[8] Bruning, F. and V. Ivashina (2019). U.S. Monetary Policy and Emerging Market Credit
Cycles. Journal of Monetary Economics.

[9] Bruno, V. and H. S. Shin (2014). Cross-Border Banking and Global Liquidity. The Review
of Economic Studies 82(2), 535–564.

[10] Bruno, V. and H. S. Shin (2015). Capital Flows and the Risk-taking Channel of Mone-
tary Policy. Journal of Monetary Economics 71, 119 – 132.

[11] Calvo, G. A., L. Leiderman, and C. M. Reinhart (1993). Capital Inflows and Real Ex-
change Rate Appreciation in Latin America: the Role of External Factors. IMF Staff Papers
40 (1), 108–151.

[12] Calvo, G. A., L. Leiderman, and C. M. Reinhart (1996). Inflows of Capital to Develop-
ing Countries in the 1990s. Journal of Economic Perspectives 10(2), 123–139.

[13] Cerutti, E., S. Claessens, and D. Puy (2019). Push Factors and Capital Flows to Emerg-
ing Markets: Why Knowing Your Lender Matters more than Fundamentals. Journal of Inter-
national Economics 119, 133 – 149.

[14] Chen, J., T. Mancini Griffoli, and R. Sahay. 2014. Spillovers from United States mone-
tary policy on emerging markets: Different this time? IMF WorkingPaper No. 14/240.




                                               2
[15] Clark, J., N. Converse, B. Coulibaly, and S. Kamin. 2016. Emerging Market Capital
Flows and U.S. Monetary Policy. IFDP Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Fed-
eral Reserve System, October 18.

[16] Dedola, L., G. Rivolta, and L. Stracca (2017). If the Fed Sneezes, Who Catches a Cold?
Journal of International Economics 108, S23 – S41.

[17] Dilts Stedman, K. 2019. Unconventional Monetary Policy, (A)Synchronicity and the
Yield Curve. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Research Working Paper No. 19-09.

[18] Eichengreen, B., and P. Gupta. 2014. Tapering talk: The impact of expectations of re-
duced Federal Reserve security purchases on emerging markets. World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper No. 6754.

[19] Fratzscher,M.,M. Lo Duca, and R. Straub. 2016. ECB unconventional monetary policy:
Market impact and international spillovers. IMF Economic Review 64(1):36–74.

[20] Fratzscher,M.,M. Lo Duca, and R. Straub. 2018. On the international spillovers of US
quantitative easing. Economic Journal 128(608):330–77.

[21] Georgiadis, G., and J. Gr¨ab. 2015. Global financial market impact of the announcement
of the ECB’s extended asset purchase programme. Globalization and Monetary Policy Insti-
tute Working Paper 232.

[22] Ghosh, A. R., M. S. Qureshi, J. I. Kim, and J. Zalduendo (2014). Surges. Journal of Inter-
national Economics 92(2), 266 – 285.

[23] Karolyi, G. A., and K. J. McLaren. 2016. Racing to the Exits: International Transmis-
sions of Funding Shocks During the Federal Reserve’s Taper Experiment. Emerging Markets
Review 32.

[24] Kim, S. 2001. International transmission of US monetary policy shocks: Evidence from
VARs. Journal of Monetary Economics 48(2):339–72.

[25] Kroencke, T. A., M. Schmeling, and A. Schrimpf. 2015. Global asset allocation shifts.
BIS Working Paper.

[26] McCauley, R. N., P. McGuire, and V. Sushko. 2015. Global dollar credit: Links to US
monetary policy and leverage. Economic Policy 30(82):187–229.

[27] Milesi-Ferretti, G., and C. Tille. 2011. The great retrenchment: International capital
flows during the global financial crisis. Economic Policy 26(66):289–346.

[28] Mishra, P., K. Moriyama, P. M. B. N’Diaye, and L. Nguyen. 2014. Impact of Fed taper-
ing announcements on emerging markets. IMF Working Paper No. 14-109.

[29] Moore, J., S. Nam, M. Suh, and A. Tepper. 2013. Estimating the impacts of US LSAPs
on emerging market economies’ local currency bond markets. Federal Reserve Bank of New
York Staff Report 595.

                                                3
[30] Neely, C. 2010. The large-asset purchases had large international effects. Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis Working Paper Series WP2010-018C.

[31] Obstfeld, M. (2015). Trilemmas and Trade-Offs: Living with Financial Globalisation.
BIS Working Paper.

[32] Obstfeld, M., J. D. Ostry, and M. S. Qureshi (2018). Global Financial Cycles and the Ex-
change Rate Regime: A Perspective from Emerging Markets. AEA Papers and Proceedings
108, 499–504.

[33] Rogers, J. H., C. Scotti, and J. H. Wright. 2014. Evaluating asset-market effects of un-
conventional monetary policy: A multi-country review. Economic Policy 29(80):749–99.

[34] Reinhart, C. and V. Reinhart (2009). Capital Flow Bonanzas: An Encompassing View of
the Past and Present. NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2008, 9–62.




                                               4
2   Figures




              5
                                                                                                                0
                                                  Bonds


                                                                                 Funding liquidity




                                                                                                           -.1  -.05
                                                                                 Currency & gold




                                                                                                          Bonds
                                                                                                                -.15
                                                                                 AE Equity & volatility




                                                                                                                -.2
                                                                                 Corporate spreads                        0       20              40              60            80             100
                                                                                                                                                       Quantile

         -0.22           -0.17        -0.12          -0.07           -0.02                                                    Funding Liquidity            Corporate Spreads
                                                                                                                              Gold and Currency            Adv. Econ. Equity Returns and Volatility
                                              Q95     Q50     Q5




                                                                                                                -.02
                                                  Equity




6
                                                                                                                -.04
                                                                                 Funding liquidity
                                                                                                                   -.06



                                                                                 Currency & gold
                                                                                                            Equity
                                                                                                          -.08  -.1




                                                                                 AE Equity & volatility
                                                                                                                -.12




                                                                                 Corporate spreads                        0       20              40              60            80             100
                                                                                                                                                       Quantile

         -0.16   -0.14     -0.12   -0.1   -0.08     -0.06    -0.04   -0.02   0                                                Funding Liquidity            Corporate Spreads
                                                                                                                              Gold and Currency            Adv. Econ. Equity Returns and Volatility
                                              Q95     Q50    Q5


    Figure 1: Impact of a one standard deviation risk-off shock on the distribution of EPFR flows (% of AUM)
    Notes: This figure summarizes the impact of a one-standard deviation risk-off shock as measured by our constituent sub-indices index
    estimated one at a time. Error bars represent 90% confidence intervals.
                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                           MSCI USD                                                     MSCI LC

                                        Gold and Currency
                                                                                                                                                                                         -.2
                                                                                                  Gold and Currency




                                                                                                                                 -.2
                                        AE Equity Returns and                                     AE Equity Returns and
                                                                                                                                                                                        -.4




                                                                                                                                -.4
                                              Volatility                                                Volatility




                                                                                                                          MSCI LC Return
                                                                                                                                                                                 MSCI USD Return




                                                                                                  Corporate Spreads
                                                                                                                                                                                         -.6




                                        Corporate Spreads




                                                                                                                                 -.6
                                                                                                  Funding Liquidity
                                                                                                                                                                                         -.8




                                        Funding Liquidity



                                                                                                                                 -.8
                                                                                                                                           0    20     40      60   80     100                     0   20   40      60   80   100
                                                                                                                                                        Quantile                                             Quantile
                                                                -0.95 -0.75 -0.55 -0.35 -0.15 0.05
      -0.95 -0.75 -0.55 -0.35 -0.15 0.05
                                                                                                                                               Funding Liquidity                                              Corporate Spreads
                          Q95     Q50    Q5                                        Q95     Q50    Q5                             0             Adv. Econ. Equity Returns and Volatility                       Gold and Currency




                               EMBI                                                  LC Bonds
                                                                                                                                                                                         0




7
                                                                                                                                 -.05




                                       Gold and Currency                                          Gold and Currency
                                                                                                                                                                                         -.02




                                                                                                                                    -.1




                                       AE Equity Returns and                                      AE Equity Returns and
                                                                                                                                                                                       -.04




                                             Volatility                                                 Volatility
                                                                                                                           -.15
                                                                                                                          EMBI Return
                                                                                                                                                                                 LC Bond Return
                                                                                                                                                                                         -.06




                                       Corporate Spreads                                          Corporate Spreads
                                                                                                                                 -.2
                                                                                                                                                                                         -.08




                                                                                                  Funding Liquidity
                                                                                                                                 -.25




                                       Funding Liquidity
                                                                                                                                           0    20     40      60   80     100                     0   20   40      60   80   100
                                                                                                                                                        Quantile                                             Quantile
       -0.30   -0.20   -0.10    0.00                            -0.30   -0.20   -0.10     0.00
                                                                                                                                               Funding Liquidity                                              Corporate Spreads
                         Q95     Q50   Q5                                          Q95     Q50    Q5                                           Adv. Econ. Equity Returns and Volatility                       Gold and Currency




    Figure 2: Impact of a one standard deviation risk-off shock on the distribution of returns
    Notes: This figure summarizes the impact of a one-standard deviation risk-off shock as measured by our constituent sub-indices. Error
    bars represent 90% confidence intervals.
3   Tables

                                   Table 1: Sample Countries

                          Argentina          Mexico
                          Brazil             Pakistan
                          Chile              Peru
                          China              Philippines
                          Colombia           Poland
                          Czech Republic     Qatar
                          Egypt              Russia
                          Greece             South Africa
                          Hungary            Taiwan
                          India              Thailand*
                          Indonesia          Turkey
                          Malaysia           United Arab Emirates

                         * Indicates eventual exclusion from EMBI,
                         returns extended using S&P Bond Index.


                       Table 2: Control Variables Summary Statistics



                                          Mean      St. Dev.   Q5      Q50    Q95
             BIS Policy Rate (t-1)         6.39      6.12      1.00    5.00   15.00
             Adv. Market Return            0.02      0.31      -0.51   0.02   0.49
             Avg. RGDP Growth (8Q)         0.04      0.03      -0.00   0.04   0.09
             Emerging Mkt. News           -0.01      2.81      -4.10   0.00   4.10
             Exchange rate return         -0.00      1.53      -0.87   0.00   0.93
             REER Growth                   0.05      2.12      -3.09   0.14   2.87
             Observations                 92998




                                              8
                                                          Table 3: Risk-on/Risk-off Correlations Matrix

                         RORO   AE Equity and Vol.   Corporate spreads   Funding liquidity   Currency and gold   log(RA)   log(Uncertainty)   ∆ log(RA)   ∆ log(Uncertainty)
    RORO                 1.00
    AE Equity and Vol.   0.95         1.00
    Corporate spreads    0.83         0.63                 1.00




9
    Funding liquidity    0.29         0.26                 0.22                 1.00
    Currency and gold    0.32         0.30                 0.15                -0.12               1.00
    log(RA)              0.28         0.17                 0.40                 0.00               0.02           1.00
    log(Uncertainty)     0.03         -0.01                0.11                -0.06               -0.04          0.72           1.00
    ∆ log(RA)            0.70         0.80                 0.38                 0.28               0.24           -0.01         -0.12           1.00
    ∆ log(Uncertainty)   0.70         0.68                 0.60                 0.19               0.11           0.22           0.07           0.55             1.00
Table 4a: A one standard deviation risk-off (RORO) shock & the distribution of bond flows

                                            (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
                                            Q5             Q25          Q50          Q75          Q95
 RORO Index                             -0.159∗∗∗       -0.131∗∗∗    -0.117∗∗∗    -0.104∗∗∗    -0.0785∗∗∗
                                         (-13.41)        (-16.63)     (-18.97)     (-18.72)     (-11.45)

 Policy Rate (t-1)                      -0.00157       -0.000832     -0.000469    -0.000117    0.000558
                                         (-0.13)         (-0.17)       (-0.20)      (-0.04)      (0.06)

 REER (t-1)                             -0.00187       -0.000738     -0.000182    0.000357      0.00139
                                         (-0.75)         (-0.77)       (-0.32)      (0.36)       (0.59)

 Avg. RGDP Growth (8Q)                    0.102          0.253         0.326        0.398        0.535
                                          (0.12)         (0.64)        (1.16)       (1.20)       (0.78)

 Emerging Mkt. News                     -0.00604       -0.0219∗∗∗    -0.0297∗∗∗   -0.0372∗∗∗   -0.0517∗∗∗
                                         (-1.23)         (-8.78)      (-14.19)     (-14.87)     (-11.06)

 Adv. Mkt. Index (t-1)                 -0.00401∗∗      -0.00860∗∗∗   -0.0108∗∗∗   -0.0130∗∗∗   -0.0172∗∗∗
                                         (-2.31)         (-11.86)     (-12.21)      (-9.84)      (-7.18)

 AE Real GDP Growth (t-1)                 1.713         -2.658∗∗∗    -4.797∗∗∗    -6.874∗∗∗    -10.85∗∗∗
                                          (1.23)         (-3.74)      (-10.29)     (-15.83)     (-11.23)

 AE Monetary Stance (t-1)               0.0613∗∗∗      -0.0504∗∗∗    -0.105∗∗∗    -0.158∗∗∗    -0.260∗∗∗
                                          (4.03)         (-5.24)      (-7.90)      (-8.82)      (-9.22)

 AR(1)                                  0.623∗∗∗        0.540∗∗∗     0.500∗∗∗     0.460∗∗∗     0.385∗∗∗
                                         (16.90)         (20.79)      (21.04)      (19.53)      (12.76)
 Observations                             16917           16917        16917        16917        16917
 t statistics in parentheses
 +   p < 0.15, ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
 Notes: This table summarizes the results of quantile regressions of EPFR country bond flows on our
headline RORO index. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country. *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                         10
Table 4b: A one standard deviation risk-off (RORO) shock & the distribution of equity flows

                                            (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)
                                            Q5            Q25          Q50          Q75           Q95
 RORO Index                             -0.105∗∗∗      -0.109∗∗∗    -0.111∗∗∗    -0.113∗∗∗     -0.117∗∗∗
                                         (-18.17)       (-35.81)     (-38.53)     (-30.16)      (-17.46)

 Policy Rate (t-1)                      -0.00106       0.0000958    0.000666      0.00121      0.00228
                                         (-0.38)         (0.06)       (0.48)       (0.78)       (0.89)

 REER (t-1)                            -0.000456       -0.000559+   -0.000609∗   -0.000657     -0.000751
                                         (-0.57)          (-1.57)     (-1.77)      (-1.29)       (-0.77)

 Avg. RGDP Growth (8Q)                   -0.882          0.0375      0.489∗∗      0.922∗∗       1.766∗
                                         (-1.33)         (0.22)       (2.42)       (2.14)       (1.91)

 Emerging Mkt. News                    -0.0270∗∗∗      -0.0228∗∗∗   -0.0208∗∗∗   -0.0188∗∗∗   -0.0150∗∗∗
                                        (-11.29)        (-18.06)     (-17.22)     (-12.14)      (-5.47)

 Adv. Mkt. Index (t-1)                   0.00130        0.000847    0.000625     0.000411     -0.00000494
                                          (1.12)          (0.89)      (0.57)       (0.30)        (-0.00)

 AE Real GDP Growth (t-1)                -1.709∗        -0.00564     0.831+       1.632∗∗       3.194∗∗
                                         (-1.72)         (-0.01)     (1.47)        (2.03)        (2.22)

 AE Monetary Stance (t-1)               0.0926∗∗∗      -0.0300∗∗∗   -0.0903∗∗∗   -0.148∗∗∗     -0.260∗∗∗
                                          (4.38)         (-2.62)      (-8.91)     (-11.35)      (-11.09)

 AR(1)                                  0.342∗∗∗        0.366∗∗∗     0.378∗∗∗    0.389∗∗∗      0.411∗∗∗
                                         (5.86)          (10.81)      (13.76)     (13.61)       (8.77)
 Observations                            16967            16967        16967       16967        16967
 t statistics in parentheses
 +   p < 0.15, ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
 Notes: This table summarizes the results of quantile regressions of EPFR country equity flows on our
headline RORO index. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country. *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                         11
Table 4c: A one standard deviation risk-off (RORO) shock & the distribution of USD equity
returns

                                            (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
                                            Q5            Q25           Q50          Q75          Q95
 RORO Index                             -0.926∗∗∗      -0.853∗∗∗     -0.814∗∗∗    -0.774∗∗∗    -0.701∗∗∗
                                         (-11.78)       (-10.20)      (-9.52)      (-8.77)      (-7.35)

 REER (t-1)                              0.00403       0.000196     -0.00180∗∗∗   -0.00388∗∗   -0.00772+
                                          (0.97)         (0.15)        (-3.24)      (-2.01)      (-1.62)

 BIS Policy Rate (t-1)                  -0.0290∗∗      -0.0101∗∗∗   -0.000217      0.0101       0.0290+
                                          (-2.04)        (-2.83)      (-0.06)      (1.11)        (1.45)

 Avg. RGDP Growth (8Q)                    1.122          0.401        0.0249       -0.368       -1.091
                                          (0.55)         (0.47)       (0.08)       (-0.64)      (-0.63)

 Emerging Mkt. News                     0.0119∗∗∗      0.00495∗∗∗    0.00132       -0.00247    -0.00945∗∗
                                          (4.15)          (2.94)      (0.71)        (-0.95)      (-2.12)

 Adv. market index (t-1)               -0.0287∗∗∗      -0.0104∗∗∗   -0.000876     0.00911∗∗∗   0.0275∗∗∗
                                         (-5.59)         (-4.04)      (-0.50)        (5.19)      (7.42)

 AE Real GDP Growth (t-1)               16.55∗∗∗        5.742∗∗∗      0.113       -5.776∗∗∗    -16.60∗∗∗
                                         (6.88)          (5.20)       (0.15)       (-5.57)      (-7.21)

 AE Monetary Stance (t-1)               -0.130∗∗        -0.0114     0.0505∗∗∗      0.115∗∗∗     0.234∗∗∗
                                         (-2.11)         (-0.37)      (2.76)        (8.87)       (6.48)
 Observations                            85097           85097        85097         85097        85097
 t statistics in parentheses
 +   p < 0.15, ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
Notes: This table summarizes the results of quantile regressions of MSCI USD daily total returns
on our headline RORO index. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country. *, **, and ***
denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                         12
Table 4d: A one standard deviation risk-off (RORO) shock & the distribution of local cur-
rency equity returns

                                            (1)             (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)
                                            Q5             Q25          Q50         Q75          Q95
 RORO Index                             -0.728∗∗∗       -0.663∗∗∗    -0.630∗∗∗   -0.595∗∗∗    -0.529∗∗∗
                                         (-12.78)        (-10.89)     (-10.07)    (-9.18)      (-7.37)

 REER (t-1)                              0.00171       0.0000832     -0.000740    -0.00160    -0.00324
                                          (0.48)         (0.07)        (-1.18)     (-0.96)     (-0.79)

 BIS Policy Rate (t-1)                 -0.0280∗∗∗      -0.00972∗∗    -0.000461   0.00925∗∗    0.0276∗∗∗
                                         (-2.73)         (-2.27)       (-0.20)     (2.44)       (2.82)

 Avg. RGDP Growth (8Q)                   -0.233          -0.0161      0.0933       0.208        0.425
                                         (-0.12)          (-0.02)     (0.37)       (0.33)       (0.23)

 Emerging Mkt. News                     0.0103∗∗∗      0.00374∗∗     0.000436     -0.00302    -0.00957∗∗
                                          (3.86)         (2.39)        (0.27)      (-1.36)      (-2.47)

 Adv. market index (t-1)               -0.0233∗∗∗      -0.00778∗∗∗   0.0000977   0.00836∗∗∗   0.0240∗∗∗
                                         (-5.52)          (-3.49)      (0.06)       (4.74)      (7.61)

 AE Real GDP Growth (t-1)               14.32∗∗∗        4.716∗∗∗      -0.143     -5.239∗∗∗    -14.88∗∗∗
                                         (5.15)          (4.09)       (-0.20)     (-4.58)      (-5.41)

 AE Monetary Stance (t-1)               -0.134∗∗         -0.0197     0.0382∗∗    0.0990∗∗∗     0.214∗∗∗
                                         (-2.52)          (-0.77)     (2.52)       (8.28)       (6.38)
 Observations                            85118            85118       85118        85118        85118
 t statistics in parentheses
 +   p < 0.15, ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
Notes: This table summarizes the results of quantile regressions of MSCI LC daily total returns
on our headline RORO index. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country. *, **, and ***
denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                         13
Table 4e: A one standard deviation risk-off (RORO) shock & the distribution of USD bond
returns

                                           (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)
                                           Q5              Q25          Q50          Q75          Q95
 RORO Index                             -0.255∗∗∗       -0.187∗∗∗    -0.160∗∗∗    -0.133∗∗∗    -0.0742∗∗
                                         (-5.58)         (-4.87)      (-4.40)      (-3.89)       (-2.42)

 REER (t-1)                              0.00298        0.000591     -0.000371+    -0.00130    -0.00337
                                          (0.99)          (0.71)        (-1.48)     (-1.32)     (-1.17)

 BIS Policy Rate (t-1)                   -0.0112       -0.00405∗      -0.00119     0.00158      0.00774
                                          (-0.98)        (-1.76)       (-0.59)      (0.29)       (0.57)

 Avg. RGDP Growth (8Q)                    2.489          0.674        -0.0559      -0.761       -2.332
                                          (1.41)         (1.44)        (-0.30)     (-1.28)      (-1.36)

 Emerging Mkt. News                    0.00803∗∗∗      0.00281∗∗∗     0.000702     -0.00133    -0.00586∗∗
                                          (6.69)          (4.16)        (0.74)      (-0.97)      (-2.47)

 Adv. market index (t-1)               -0.0129∗∗∗      -0.00368∗∗∗   0.0000428    0.00364∗∗∗   0.0117∗∗∗
                                         (-2.82)          (-2.84)      (0.08)        (2.78)      (2.78)

 AE Real GDP Growth (t-1)                9.564∗∗∗       2.169∗∗∗     -0.805∗∗∗    -3.679∗∗∗    -10.08∗∗∗
                                          (3.47)         (3.06)       (-4.58)      (-4.90)      (-3.97)

 AE Monetary Stance (t-1)               0.0708∗∗∗      0.0472∗∗∗     0.0378∗∗∗    0.0286∗∗∗     0.00825
                                          (2.82)         (4.63)        (6.61)       (4.08)       (0.44)
 Observations                             72451          72451         72451        72451        72451
 t statistics in parentheses
 +   p < 0.15, ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
 Notes: This table summarizes the results of quantile regressions of EMBI daily total returns on our
headline RORO index. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country. *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                         14
Table 4f: A one standard deviation risk-off (RORO) shock & the distribution of local cur-
rency bond returns

                                           (1)             (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)
                                           Q5             Q25          Q50           Q75          Q95
 RORO Index                            -0.0734∗∗∗      -0.0484∗∗∗   -0.0408∗∗∗    -0.0321∗∗∗    -0.00940
                                         (-4.35)         (-4.15)      (-3.86)       (-3.15)      (-0.80)

 REER (t-1)                             -0.00458       -0.00128     -0.000272      0.000868      0.00386
                                         (-0.43)        (-0.62)       (-0.60)        (0.49)       (0.38)

 BIS Policy Rate (t-1)                 -0.0447∗∗∗      -0.0121∗∗∗    -0.00207      0.00920∗     0.0388∗∗∗
                                         (-2.77)         (-3.18)      (-0.61)        (1.91)       (2.66)

 Avg. RGDP Growth (8Q)                    -0.286        -0.621       -0.724∗∗∗      -0.839       -1.144
                                          (-0.11)       (-1.05)       (-3.73)       (-1.41)      (-0.43)

 Emerging Mkt. News                     0.000428       -0.00245∗∗   -0.00334∗∗∗   -0.00433∗∗∗   -0.00695∗∗
                                          (0.24)         (-1.96)       (-2.66)       (-3.02)      (-2.42)

 Adv. market index (t-1)               -0.00960∗∗      -0.00222∗    0.0000356     0.00259∗∗∗    0.00929∗∗
                                         (-1.97)         (-1.78)      (0.05)         (5.61)       (2.51)

 AE Real GDP Growth (t-1)                 1.977         -0.0349      -0.651∗∗      -1.347∗∗∗     -3.176∗
                                          (1.10)         (-0.08)      (-2.54)       (-3.29)      (-1.91)

 AE Monetary Stance (t-1)                0.00256        0.00131      0.000923      0.000490     -0.000649
                                          (0.10)         (0.12)        (0.07)        (0.03)       (-0.02)
 Observations                             49232          49232         49232         49232        49232
 t statistics in parentheses
 +   p < 0.15, ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
Notes: This table summarizes the results of quantile regressions of local currency daily total returns
on our headline RORO index. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country. *, **, and ***
denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                         15
     Table 5a: A one standard deviation risk-off (BEX) shock & the distribution of bond flows

                                            (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)
                                            Q5            Q25           Q50           Q75          Q95
 Log Diff. Risk Aversion                -0.0331∗∗      -0.0286∗∗∗    -0.0264∗∗∗    -0.0244∗∗∗   -0.0203∗∗∗
                                          (-1.99)        (-2.65)       (-3.17)       (-3.77)      (-3.38)

 Log Diff. Risk                         -0.0574∗∗∗     -0.0486∗∗∗    -0.0443∗∗∗    -0.0403∗∗∗   -0.0323∗∗∗
                                          (-3.95)        (-4.58)       (-4.96)       (-5.31)      (-5.46)

 Policy Rate (t-1)                       -0.00179      -0.000831     -0.000372     0.0000651    0.000937
                                          (-0.15)        (-0.18)       (-0.18)       (0.02)       (0.10)

 REER (t-1)                              -0.00190      -0.000759     -0.000216     0.000301      0.00133
                                          (-0.79)        (-0.86)       (-0.41)       (0.32)       (0.58)

 Avg. RGDP Growth (8Q)                     0.229         0.332         0.381         0.428        0.521
                                           (0.27)        (0.81)        (1.31)        (1.30)       (0.77)

 Emerging Mkt. News                      0.00326       -0.0144∗∗∗    -0.0229∗∗∗    -0.0309∗∗∗   -0.0469∗∗∗
                                          (0.78)         (-6.62)      (-12.30)      (-14.30)     (-12.43)

 Adv. Mkt. Index (t-1)                 -0.00477∗∗∗     -0.00793∗∗∗   -0.00943∗∗∗   -0.0109∗∗∗   -0.0137∗∗∗
                                          (-2.94)        (-10.76)      (-10.33)      (-8.07)      (-5.69)

 AE Real GDP Growth (t-1)                3.658∗∗∗       -1.748∗∗∗     -4.325∗∗∗    -6.778∗∗∗    -11.67∗∗∗
                                          (2.89)         (-2.85)       (-10.32)     (-15.08)     (-12.03)

 AE Monetary Stance (t-1)               0.0415∗∗∗      -0.0620∗∗∗     -0.111∗∗∗    -0.158∗∗∗    -0.252∗∗∗
                                          (3.19)         (-5.76)       (-7.64)      (-8.36)      (-8.75)

 AR(1)                                   0.661∗∗∗       0.555∗∗∗      0.504∗∗∗     0.456∗∗∗     0.361∗∗∗
                                          (17.60)        (21.60)       (21.91)      (19.64)      (11.88)
 Observations                              17508          17508         17508        17508        17508
 t statistics in parentheses
 +   p < 0.15, ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
 Notes: This table summarizes the results of quantile regressions of EPFR country bond flows on our
BEX constituent indices. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country. *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                         16
 Table 5b: A one standard deviation risk-off (BEX) shock & the distribution of equity flows

                                            (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)
                                           Q5             Q25           Q50          Q75          Q95
 Log Diff. Risk Aversion                0.0186∗∗∗       0.00130     -0.00715∗∗∗   -0.0153∗∗∗   -0.0315∗∗∗
                                          (3.60)         (0.42)        (-2.72)      (-5.19)      (-6.27)

 Log Diff. Risk                         -0.109∗∗∗      -0.0770∗∗∗   -0.0612∗∗∗    -0.0460∗∗∗   -0.0158∗∗∗
                                         (-13.71)       (-17.06)     (-19.48)      (-15.86)      (-2.91)

 Policy Rate (t-1)                     -0.000778       0.000106      0.000537      0.000953     0.00178
                                         (-0.30)         (0.07)        (0.40)        (0.60)      (0.68)

 REER (t-1)                            -0.000286       -0.000633∗   -0.000802∗∗   -0.000965+   -0.00129
                                         (-0.33)         (-1.78)       (-2.15)       (-1.62)    (-1.10)

 Avg. RGDP Growth (8Q)                   -0.904         0.0573       0.526∗∗∗      0.979∗∗∗     1.878∗∗
                                         (-1.40)        (0.31)        (3.09)        (2.64)       (2.26)

 Emerging Mkt. News                    -0.0195∗∗∗      -0.0185∗∗∗   -0.0180∗∗∗    -0.0175∗∗∗   -0.0166∗∗∗
                                         (-7.23)        (-14.37)     (-12.01)       (-7.99)      (-4.13)

 Adv. Mkt. Index (t-1)                 0.00342∗∗       0.00164+      0.000777     -0.0000610   -0.00172
                                         (2.56)          (1.48)        (0.65)       (-0.04)     (-0.90)

 AE Real GDP Growth (t-1)                -2.017∗         0.267        1.379∗       2.455∗∗      4.590∗∗
                                         (-1.86)         (0.49)       (1.90)        (2.33)       (2.45)

 AE Monetary Stance (t-1)               0.0779∗∗∗      -0.0302∗∗    -0.0828∗∗∗    -0.134∗∗∗    -0.235∗∗∗
                                          (2.79)         (-2.38)      (-9.29)      (-10.07)     (-8.09)

 AR(1)                                  0.349∗∗∗        0.372∗∗∗     0.383∗∗∗      0.394∗∗∗    0.415∗∗∗
                                         (5.83)          (11.50)      (15.06)       (14.21)     (8.25)
 Observations                            17559            17559        17559         17559      17559
 t statistics in parentheses
 +   p < 0.15, ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
 Notes: This table summarizes the results of quantile regressions of EPFR country equity flows on our
BEX constituent indices. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country. *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                         17
Table 5c: A one standard deviation risk-off (BEX) shock & the distribution of USD equity
returns

                                           (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)
                                           Q5             Q25           Q50           Q75          Q95
 Log Diff. Risk Aversion                -0.246∗∗∗      -0.317∗∗∗     -0.351∗∗∗     -0.385∗∗∗    -0.452∗∗∗
                                         (-5.90)        (-7.46)       (-7.59)       (-7.54)      (-7.33)

 Log Diff. Risk                         -0.395∗∗∗      -0.262∗∗∗     -0.198∗∗∗     -0.133∗∗∗    -0.00816
                                         (-9.38)        (-7.79)       (-7.00)       (-5.53)      (-0.37)

 REER (t-1)                              0.00262       -0.000642    -0.00221∗∗∗   -0.00382∗     -0.00687
                                          (0.58)         (-0.47)       (-3.77)      (-1.92)      (-1.39)

 BIS Policy Rate (t-1)                  -0.0314∗       -0.0104∗∗    -0.000321       0.0100       0.0297
                                         (-1.81)         (-2.53)      (-0.10)       (1.06)       (1.35)

 Avg. RGDP Growth (8Q)                    2.783          1.064        0.239         -0.609       -2.219
                                          (1.28)         (1.23)       (0.59)        (-0.87)      (-1.16)

 Emerging Mkt. News                     0.00456+       -0.00217+    -0.00540∗∗∗   -0.00872∗∗∗   -0.0150∗∗∗
                                          (1.57)         (-1.46)       (-3.21)       (-3.61)      (-3.51)

 Adv. market index (t-1)               -0.0332∗∗∗      -0.0106∗∗∗    0.000308     0.0115∗∗∗     0.0327∗∗∗
                                         (-6.12)         (-4.18)       (0.16)       (5.08)        (7.52)

 AE Real GDP Growth (t-1)               20.63∗∗∗       7.095∗∗∗       0.590        -6.088∗∗∗    -18.77∗∗∗
                                         (7.85)         (6.22)        (0.80)        (-5.89)      (-7.80)

 AE Monetary Stance (t-1)               -0.252∗∗∗      -0.0901∗∗∗     -0.0125     0.0671∗∗∗     0.218∗∗∗
                                         (-4.21)         (-3.41)       (-0.83)      (5.10)       (5.71)
 Observations                             85033          85033         85033        85033        85033
 t statistics in parentheses
 +   p < 0.15, ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
Notes: This table summarizes the results of quantile regressions of MSCI USD daily total returns
on our BEX constituent indices. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country. *, **, and ***
denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                         18
Table 5d: A one standard deviation risk-off (BEX) shock & the distribution of local currency
equity returns

                                           (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)
                                           Q5              Q25           Q50           Q75          Q95
 Log Diff. Risk Aversion                -0.194∗∗∗       -0.262∗∗∗     -0.294∗∗∗     -0.328∗∗∗    -0.393∗∗∗
                                         (-5.84)         (-7.56)       (-7.61)       (-7.52)      (-7.30)

 Log Diff. Risk                         -0.316∗∗∗       -0.206∗∗∗     -0.155∗∗∗     -0.102∗∗∗     0.00257
                                         (-7.68)         (-6.63)       (-6.12)       (-4.88)       (0.13)

 REER (t-1)                             0.000634       -0.000501     -0.00102∗      -0.00157     -0.00265
                                          (0.16)         (-0.41)       (-1.71)       (-0.93)      (-0.62)

 BIS Policy Rate (t-1)                 -0.0299∗∗∗      -0.00982∗∗∗   -0.000566     0.00921∗∗     0.0284∗∗∗
                                         (-3.28)          (-2.88)      (-0.28)       (2.42)        (3.02)

 Avg. RGDP Growth (8Q)                    0.694          0.418         0.291         0.157        -0.106
                                          (0.34)         (0.58)        (0.98)        (0.21)       (-0.05)

 Emerging Mkt. News                      0.00374        -0.00182     -0.00438∗∗∗   -0.00708∗∗∗   -0.0124∗∗∗
                                          (1.31)         (-1.36)        (-3.02)       (-3.28)      (-3.06)

 Adv. market index (t-1)               -0.0260∗∗∗      -0.00768∗∗∗    0.000716     0.00959∗∗∗    0.0270∗∗∗
                                         (-5.92)          (-3.44)       (0.38)        (4.83)       (8.11)

 AE Real GDP Growth (t-1)               16.50∗∗∗        5.401∗∗∗       0.302        -5.088∗∗∗    -15.65∗∗∗
                                         (5.42)          (4.61)        (0.44)        (-4.38)      (-5.40)

 AE Monetary Stance (t-1)               -0.226∗∗∗      -0.0785∗∗∗      -0.0107     0.0609∗∗∗     0.201∗∗∗
                                         (-4.46)         (-3.55)       (-0.74)       (4.40)       (5.91)
 Observations                             85054          85054          85054        85054        85054
 t statistics in parentheses
 +   p < 0.15, ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
 Notes: This table summarizes the results of quantile regressions of MSCI LC daily total returns on our
BEX constituent indices. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country. *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                          19
Table 5e: A one standard deviation risk-off (BEX) shock & the distribution of USD bond
returns

                                           (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)
                                           Q5             Q25           Q50          Q75           Q95
 Log Diff. Risk Aversion               -0.0554∗∗∗      -0.0921∗∗∗    -0.105∗∗∗    -0.118∗∗∗     -0.151∗∗∗
                                         (-3.22)         (-6.07)      (-5.81)      (-5.39)       (-4.54)

 Log Diff. Risk                         -0.116∗∗∗        -0.0280      0.00310      0.0348∗∗     0.114∗∗∗
                                         (-3.39)          (-1.33)      (0.16)       (1.98)       (7.07)

 REER (t-1)                              0.00322        0.000467     -0.000504∗    -0.00149     -0.00397
                                          (0.98)          (0.56)       (-1.78)      (-1.42)      (-1.24)

 BIS Policy Rate (t-1)                   -0.0106       -0.00365+      -0.00119     0.00132      0.00762
                                          (-0.77)        (-1.45)       (-0.57)      (0.22)       (0.47)

 Avg. RGDP Growth (8Q)                    3.033∗         0.777∗       -0.0199      -0.833       -2.869+
                                          (1.70)         (1.86)        (-0.10)     (-1.42)       (-1.62)

 Emerging Mkt. News                    0.00757∗∗∗      0.00173∗∗∗    -0.000334    -0.00244∗∗   -0.00771∗∗∗
                                          (5.92)          (2.68)       (-0.40)      (-2.05)       (-3.46)

 Adv. market index (t-1)               -0.0136∗∗∗      -0.00352∗∗∗   0.0000515    0.00369∗∗∗   0.0128∗∗∗
                                         (-2.97)          (-3.18)      (0.09)        (2.71)      (2.87)

 AE Real GDP Growth (t-1)                10.49∗∗∗       2.370∗∗∗     -0.498∗∗∗    -3.423∗∗∗     -10.75∗∗∗
                                          (3.57)         (3.41)       (-2.63)      (-5.19)       (-4.01)

 AE Monetary Stance (t-1)               0.0657∗∗∗      0.0342∗∗∗     0.0231∗∗∗     0.0118∗       -0.0166
                                          (2.75)         (3.85)        (4.43)       (1.66)        (-0.86)
 Observations                             72390          72390         72390        72390         72390
 t statistics in parentheses
 +   p < 0.15, ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
 Notes: This table summarizes the results of quantile regressions of EMBI daily total returns on our
BEX constituent indices. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country. *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                          20
Table 5f: A one standard deviation risk-off (BEX) shock & the distribution of local currency
bond returns

                                            (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)
                                           Q5            Q25            Q50           Q75          Q95
 Log Diff. Risk Aversion                 0.00500       -0.00685       -0.0102       -0.0142      -0.0248
                                          (0.14)        (-0.42)        (-0.74)       (-1.23)      (-1.38)

 Log Diff. Risk                         -0.0565∗∗       -0.0195∗     -0.00902      0.00333      0.0364∗∗
                                          (-2.24)        (-1.79)      (-0.87)       (0.35)       (2.47)

 REER (t-1)                             -0.00502       -0.00133      -0.000278     0.000957      0.00427
                                         (-0.47)        (-0.67)        (-0.64)       (0.52)       (0.41)

 BIS Policy Rate (t-1)                 -0.0459∗∗∗      -0.0119∗∗∗    -0.00220      0.00919∗     0.0397∗∗∗
                                         (-2.85)         (-3.17)      (-0.64)        (1.88)       (2.69)

 Avg. RGDP Growth (8Q)                   -0.0696        -0.591       -0.739∗∗∗     -0.914+       -1.381
                                          (-0.03)       (-0.99)       (-3.41)       (-1.52)      (-0.51)

 Emerging Mkt. News                     -0.000248      -0.00305∗∗   -0.00385∗∗∗   -0.00478∗∗∗   -0.00729∗∗
                                          (-0.14)        (-2.44)       (-2.98)       (-3.18)      (-2.39)

 Adv. market index (t-1)               -0.00915∗∗      -0.00202∗    0.000000305   0.00238∗∗∗    0.00876∗∗
                                         (-2.06)         (-1.85)       (0.00)        (5.29)       (2.52)

 AE Real GDP Growth (t-1)                 1.437         -0.255       -0.735∗∗∗     -1.301∗∗∗     -2.815∗
                                          (0.80)        (-0.57)       (-2.92)       (-3.13)      (-1.66)

 AE Monetary Stance (t-1)                0.00627       -0.00234      -0.00479      -0.00766      -0.0154
                                          (0.22)        (-0.25)       (-0.41)       (-0.45)       (-0.35)
 Observations                             49266         49266         49266         49266         49266
 t statistics in parentheses
 +   p < 0.15, ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
Notes: This table summarizes the results of quantile regressions of local currency daily total returns
on our BEX constituent indices. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country. *, **, and ***
denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                          21
     Table 6a: A one standard deviation risk-off (RORO) shock & the distribution of bond flows

                                                 (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)
                                                 Q5          Q25           Q50           Q75          Q95
 Funding Liquidity                           -0.123∗∗∗    -0.0724∗∗∗    -0.0461∗∗∗    -0.0217∗∗∗   0.0253∗∗∗
                                              (-12.88)     (-13.70)      (-13.09)       (-7.87)      (5.49)

 AE Equity Returns & Volatility                0.0117     0.0256∗∗∗     0.0328∗∗∗     0.0396∗∗∗    0.0525∗∗∗
                                               (1.06)       (4.79)        (9.88)        (9.70)       (5.65)

 Corporate Spreads                           -0.146∗∗∗     -0.143∗∗∗     -0.141∗∗∗    -0.140∗∗∗    -0.137∗∗∗
                                              (-10.35)      (-15.14)      (-18.13)     (-19.44)     (-15.28)

 Gold and Currency                           -0.0381∗∗∗   -0.0396∗∗∗    -0.0404∗∗∗    -0.0412∗∗∗   -0.0426∗∗∗
                                               (-6.52)     (-12.22)      (-15.34)      (-13.75)      (-8.12)

 Policy Rate (t-1)                            -0.00246     -0.00126     -0.000635     -0.0000532    0.00107
                                               (-0.20)      (-0.24)       (-0.25)       (-0.02)      (0.12)

 REER (t-1)                                   -0.00187    -0.000730     -0.000135     0.000416      0.00148
                                               (-0.76)      (-0.74)       (-0.22)       (0.42)       (0.63)

 Avg. RGDP Growth (8Q)                        -0.00425      0.186         0.285         0.377        0.555
                                               (-0.01)      (0.47)        (1.02)        (1.09)       (0.78)

 Emerging Mkt. News                          0.000500     -0.0203∗∗∗    -0.0312∗∗∗    -0.0412∗∗∗   -0.0607∗∗∗
                                               (0.09)       (-7.70)      (-15.03)      (-16.75)     (-12.67)

 Adv. Mkt. Index (t-1)                        -0.00242    -0.00704∗∗∗   -0.00946∗∗∗   -0.0117∗∗∗   -0.0160∗∗∗
                                               (-1.38)      (-10.22)      (-10.59)      (-8.40)      (-6.27)

 AE Real GDP Growth (t-1)                      0.410       -3.341∗∗∗     -5.307∗∗∗    -7.126∗∗∗    -10.63∗∗∗
                                               (0.27)       (-4.40)       (-10.95)     (-15.63)     (-10.38)

 AE Monetary Stance (t-1)                     0.107∗∗∗     -0.0186∗∗    -0.0842∗∗∗    -0.145∗∗∗    -0.262∗∗∗
                                               (6.47)        (-2.05)      (-6.30)      (-7.62)      (-8.43)

 AR(1)                                        0.577∗∗∗     0.510∗∗∗      0.476∗∗∗      0.444∗∗∗    0.381∗∗∗
                                               (14.65)      (18.22)       (19.00)       (17.93)     (12.40)
 Observations                                   16917        16917         16917         16917       16917
 t statistics in parentheses
 +   p < 0.15, ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
 Notes: This table summarizes the results of quantile regressions of EPFR country bond flows on our
RORO constituent indices. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country. *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                          22
  Table 6b: A one standard deviation risk-off (RORO) shock & the distribution of equity flows

                                                 (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
                                                Q5            Q25          Q50          Q75          Q95
 Funding Liquidity                           0.0119∗∗∗     0.000985      -0.00431    -0.00951∗∗   -0.0196∗∗∗
                                               (2.91)        (0.36)       (-1.28)      (-2.07)      (-2.61)

 AE Equity Returns & Volatility              -0.0285∗∗∗   -0.0249∗∗∗    -0.0231∗∗∗   -0.0213∗∗∗   -0.0179∗∗∗
                                               (-5.29)      (-6.10)       (-6.37)      (-6.32)      (-5.02)

 Corporate Spreads                           -0.110∗∗∗     -0.105∗∗∗    -0.103∗∗∗    -0.101∗∗∗    -0.0968∗∗∗
                                              (-15.23)      (-23.36)     (-26.90)     (-25.59)     (-16.40)

 Gold and Currency                           -0.00842∗    -0.00957∗∗∗   -0.0101∗∗∗   -0.0107∗∗∗   -0.0117∗∗
                                               (-1.74)       (-4.14)      (-5.16)      (-4.02)      (-2.28)

 Policy Rate (t-1)                            -0.00101    0.0000933     0.000626      0.00115      0.00217
                                               (-0.33)      (0.05)        (0.45)       (0.77)       (0.86)

 REER (t-1)                                  -0.000541    -0.000586∗    -0.000608∗   -0.000629    -0.000671
                                               (-0.70)      (-1.68)       (-1.74)      (-1.21)      (-0.68)

 Avg. RGDP Growth (8Q)                         -0.872       0.0259       0.460∗∗      0.887∗        1.718∗
                                               (-1.32)      (0.16)        (2.13)      (1.95)        (1.77)

 Emerging Mkt. News                          -0.0207∗∗∗   -0.0210∗∗∗    -0.0211∗∗∗   -0.0213∗∗∗   -0.0215∗∗∗
                                               (-8.56)     (-15.57)      (-17.01)     (-13.88)      (-8.12)

 Adv. Mkt. Index (t-1)                       0.00201+      0.00129      0.000939     0.000598     -0.0000677
                                               (1.64)       (1.29)        (0.82)       (0.43)       (-0.03)

 AE Real GDP Growth (t-1)                      -1.262       0.0433        0.675       1.295+        2.504∗
                                               (-1.19)      (0.09)        (1.18)      (1.57)        (1.67)

 AE Monetary Stance (t-1)                     0.106∗∗∗     -0.0217∗     -0.0835∗∗∗   -0.144∗∗∗    -0.262∗∗∗
                                               (5.18)       (-1.89)       (-8.18)     (-10.79)     (-10.88)

 AR(1)                                        0.319∗∗∗     0.349∗∗∗      0.363∗∗∗     0.377∗∗∗     0.404∗∗∗
                                               (5.72)       (10.47)       (12.91)      (12.60)      (8.42)
 Observations                                  16967         16967         16967        16967       16967
 t statistics in parentheses
 +   p < 0.15, ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
 Notes: This table summarizes the results of quantile regressions of EPFR country equity flows on our
RORO constituent indices. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country. *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                          23
Table 6c: A one standard deviation risk-off (RORO) shock & the distribution of USD equity
returns

                                                 (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)
                                                 Q5          Q25          Q50          Q75           Q95
 Funding Liquidity                             0.0191      0.0148+      0.0126+       0.0102       0.00591
                                               (1.06)       (1.45)       (1.60)       (1.22)        (0.39)

 AE Equity Returns & Volatility              -0.529∗∗∗    -0.561∗∗∗     -0.578∗∗∗    -0.595∗∗∗    -0.627∗∗∗
                                              (-6.59)      (-6.46)       (-6.36)      (-6.25)      (-6.06)

 Corporate Spreads                           -0.506∗∗∗    -0.356∗∗∗     -0.278∗∗∗    -0.197∗∗∗    -0.0463+
                                              (-14.89)     (-13.80)      (-11.43)     (-7.99)      (-1.49)

 Gold and Currency                           -0.237∗∗∗    -0.236∗∗∗     -0.236∗∗∗    -0.236∗∗∗    -0.235∗∗∗
                                              (-5.60)      (-5.86)       (-5.95)      (-5.97)      (-5.87)

 REER (t-1)                                   0.00407     0.000191     -0.00182∗∗∗   -0.00392∗∗   -0.00781+
                                               (0.96)       (0.14)        (-3.37)      (-2.02)      (-1.62)

 BIS Policy Rate (t-1)                       -0.0305∗∗    -0.0106∗∗∗   -0.000250      0.0106       0.0305+
                                               (-2.16)      (-3.03)      (-0.07)      (1.16)        (1.51)

 Avg. RGDP Growth (8Q)                         1.248        0.439        0.0195       -0.419       -1.230
                                               (0.59)       (0.50)       (0.06)       (-0.72)      (-0.68)

 Emerging Mkt. News                          0.0136∗∗∗    0.00440∗∗∗   -0.000341     -0.00530∗∗   -0.0145∗∗∗
                                               (4.45)        (2.91)      (-0.22)       (-2.36)      (-3.47)

 Adv. market index (t-1)                     -0.0285∗∗∗   -0.0102∗∗∗   -0.000685     0.00927∗∗∗   0.0277∗∗∗
                                               (-5.64)      (-4.10)      (-0.44)        (5.73)      (7.53)

 AE Real GDP Growth (t-1)                     15.97∗∗∗     4.806∗∗∗      -0.977      -7.031∗∗∗    -18.22∗∗∗
                                               (6.50)       (4.24)       (-1.22)      (-6.57)      (-7.83)

 AE Monetary Stance (t-1)                     -0.143∗∗     -0.0250     0.0361∗∗∗      0.100∗∗∗    0.218∗∗∗
                                               (-2.55)      (-0.93)      (2.59)        (9.56)      (6.09)
 Observations                                  85097        85097        85097         85097       85097
 t statistics in parentheses
 +   p < 0.15, ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
 Notes: This table summarizes the results of quantile regressions of MSCI USD daily total returns on our
RORO constituent indices. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country. *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                          24
Table 6d: A one standard deviation risk-off (RORO) shock & the distribution of local currency
equity returns

                                                 (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)
                                                Q5           Q25           Q50          Q75          Q95
 Funding Liquidity                            0.00687      0.00719       0.00735      0.00752      0.00784
                                               (0.46)       (0.84)        (1.07)       (1.01)       (0.60)

 AE Equity Returns & Volatility              -0.407∗∗∗     -0.441∗∗∗    -0.458∗∗∗    -0.476∗∗∗    -0.510∗∗∗
                                              (-6.38)       (-6.34)      (-6.26)      (-6.18)      (-6.07)

 Corporate Spreads                           -0.433∗∗∗     -0.298∗∗∗    -0.229∗∗∗    -0.157∗∗∗     -0.0218
                                              (-13.50)      (-11.93)     (-9.26)      (-6.10)       (-0.68)

 Gold and Currency                           -0.110∗∗∗     -0.103∗∗∗    -0.1000∗∗∗   -0.0965∗∗∗   -0.0901∗∗∗
                                              (-3.98)       (-4.31)       (-4.48)      (-4.62)      (-4.69)

 REER (t-1)                                   0.00151     0.00000625    -0.000763     -0.00157    -0.00309
                                               (0.42)        (0.01)       (-1.24)      (-0.95)     (-0.76)

 BIS Policy Rate (t-1)                       -0.0289∗∗∗    -0.0101∗∗    -0.000478    0.00959∗∗    0.0285∗∗∗
                                               (-2.81)       (-2.34)      (-0.20)      (2.50)       (2.90)

 Avg. RGDP Growth (8Q)                         -0.254       -0.0287      0.0861        0.206        0.433
                                               (-0.13)       (-0.04)     (0.36)        (0.32)       (0.24)

 Emerging Mkt. News                          0.0121∗∗∗    0.00393∗∗∗    -0.000248    -0.00463∗∗   -0.0129∗∗∗
                                               (4.52)        (2.93)       (-0.19)      (-2.40)      (-3.54)

 Adv. market index (t-1)                     -0.0223∗∗∗   -0.00750∗∗∗   0.0000278    0.00792∗∗∗   0.0228∗∗∗
                                               (-5.44)       (-3.58)      (0.02)        (5.01)      (7.47)

 AE Real GDP Growth (t-1)                     13.65∗∗∗     4.129∗∗∗      -0.729      -5.824∗∗∗    -15.40∗∗∗
                                               (4.86)       (3.58)       (-1.04)      (-5.13)      (-5.60)

 AE Monetary Stance (t-1)                    -0.127∗∗∗      -0.0239     0.0287∗∗     0.0840∗∗∗    0.188∗∗∗
                                              (-2.60)        (-1.09)     (2.44)        (8.14)      (5.61)
 Observations                                  85118         85118       85118         85118       85118
 t statistics in parentheses
 +   p < 0.15, ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
 Notes: This table summarizes the results of quantile regressions of MSCI LC daily total returns on our
RORO constituent indices. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country. *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                          25
Table 6e: A one standard deviation risk-off (RORO) shock & the distribution of USD bond re-
turns

                                                 (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)
                                                 Q5          Q25          Q50          Q75           Q95
 Funding Liquidity                             0.0184      0.00507     -0.000257     -0.00539      -0.0165
                                               (1.31)       (0.83)       (-0.05)      (-0.86)       (-1.26)

 AE Equity Returns & Volatility               -0.100∗∗∗   -0.0876∗∗∗   -0.0824∗∗∗   -0.0775∗∗∗   -0.0667∗∗∗
                                               (-3.58)      (-3.44)      (-3.31)      (-3.16)      (-2.72)

 Corporate Spreads                            -0.211∗∗∗   -0.123∗∗∗    -0.0881∗∗∗   -0.0544∗∗∗     0.0188
                                               (-6.23)     (-5.54)       (-4.53)      (-3.11)      (1.13)

 Gold and Currency                           -0.0920∗∗∗   -0.0802∗∗∗   -0.0755∗∗∗   -0.0709∗∗∗   -0.0611∗∗∗
                                               (-9.12)      (-8.93)      (-8.71)      (-8.35)      (-7.06)

 REER (t-1)                                   0.00320     0.000660     -0.000353+    -0.00133     -0.00345
                                               (1.04)       (0.78)        (-1.47)     (-1.35)      (-1.22)

 BIS Policy Rate (t-1)                         -0.0117    -0.00420∗     -0.00119     0.00170      0.00799
                                                (-1.03)     (-1.87)      (-0.58)      (0.31)       (0.61)

 Avg. RGDP Growth (8Q)                          2.423       0.632       -0.0833      -0.772        -2.270
                                                (1.39)      (1.39)       (-0.44)     (-1.31)       (-1.37)

 Emerging Mkt. News                          0.00874∗∗∗   0.00281∗∗∗    0.000443     -0.00184    -0.00679∗∗∗
                                                (7.59)       (4.31)       (0.48)      (-1.41)       (-3.10)

 Adv. market index (t-1)                     -0.0115∗∗    -0.00289∗∗    0.000550    0.00386∗∗∗   0.0111∗∗∗
                                               (-2.53)      (-2.26)       (0.90)       (2.89)      (2.71)

 AE Real GDP Growth (t-1)                     9.586∗∗∗     1.876∗∗∗    -1.204∗∗∗    -4.170∗∗∗     -10.62∗∗∗
                                               (3.40)       (2.74)      (-6.66)      (-5.21)       (-4.06)

 AE Monetary Stance (t-1)                    0.0849∗∗∗    0.0531∗∗∗    0.0404∗∗∗    0.0282∗∗∗     0.00168
                                               (3.55)       (5.27)       (6.09)       (3.41)       (0.09)
 Observations                                  72451        72451        72451        72451        72451
 t statistics in parentheses
 +   p < 0.15, ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
 Notes: This table summarizes the results of quantile regressions of EMBI daily total returns on our RORO
constituent indices. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country. *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                          26
Table 6f: A one standard deviation risk-off (RORO) shock & the distribution of local currency
bond returns

                                                 (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)
                                                 Q5         Q25           Q50           Q75           Q95
 Funding Liquidity                            0.0119+     -0.00251     -0.00702∗     -0.0120∗∗∗    -0.0252∗∗∗
                                               (1.50)      (-0.59)       (-1.87)       (-2.90)       (-2.74)

 AE Equity Returns & Volatility               -0.0149      -0.0114       -0.0103      -0.00908     -0.00586
                                               (-0.96)      (-0.98)       (-0.90)      (-0.75)      (-0.33)

 Corporate Spreads                           -0.0792∗∗∗   -0.0428∗∗∗    -0.0314∗∗      -0.0188      0.0144
                                               (-4.37)      (-3.34)       (-2.14)       (-1.10)     (0.61)

 Gold and Currency                           -0.0295∗∗∗   -0.0255∗∗∗   -0.0243∗∗∗    -0.0229∗∗∗     -0.0192∗
                                               (-2.76)      (-4.90)      (-4.93)       (-4.12)       (-1.74)

 REER (t-1)                                   -0.00436    -0.00121     -0.000221      0.000872      0.00375
                                               (-0.42)     (-0.58)       (-0.50)        (0.49)       (0.38)

 BIS Policy Rate (t-1)                       -0.0447∗∗∗   -0.0123∗∗∗    -0.00209      0.00919∗     0.0389∗∗∗
                                               (-2.77)      (-3.16)      (-0.62)        (1.91)       (2.65)

 Avg. RGDP Growth (8Q)                         -0.322      -0.636       -0.735∗∗∗      -0.844       -1.132
                                               (-0.12)     (-1.07)       (-3.65)       (-1.41)      (-0.44)

 Emerging Mkt. News                           0.00101     -0.00226∗∗   -0.00329∗∗∗   -0.00443∗∗∗   -0.00742∗∗
                                               (0.52)       (-1.97)       (-2.83)       (-3.23)      (-2.48)

 Adv. market index (t-1)                     -0.00915∗    -0.00196∗     0.000295     0.00279∗∗∗    0.00937∗∗
                                               (-1.91)      (-1.65)       (0.44)        (6.42)       (2.43)

 AE Real GDP Growth (t-1)                      2.073       0.00968      -0.638∗∗      -1.354∗∗∗     -3.241∗
                                               (1.11)       (0.02)       (-2.27)       (-3.26)      (-1.93)

 AE Monetary Stance (t-1)                     0.00927      0.00574      0.00464       0.00341      0.000189
                                               (0.37)       (0.62)       (0.43)        (0.22)        (0.00)
 Observations                                  49232        49232        49232         49232         49232
 t statistics in parentheses
 +   p < 0.15, ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
 Notes: This table summarizes the results of quantile regressions of local currency daily total returns on
our RORO constituent indices. Bootstrapped standard errors are clustered by country. *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                          27
Table 7: A one standard deviation risk-off shock & the distribution of government money
market fund assets

                                                                     (a) Retail
                                           (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)
                                           Q5           Q50            OLS          Q95          Q5         Q50         OLS         Q95
 RORO Index                             0.179∗∗∗      0.0889∗         0.154        0.244
                                         (7.38)        (2.39)         (1.91)       (1.82)

 AE Mkt. Return                         0.0144∗       0.0370∗∗∗     0.0522∗∗∗     0.0582∗∗∗    0.00897    0.0296∗∗∗   0.0482∗∗∗   0.0366∗∗
                                         (2.24)         (5.73)        (3.87)        (5.58)      (1.04)      (5.07)      (3.55)     (2.97)

 AE Real GDP Growth (t-1)                   6.908      10.41∗         -5.446       -19.01       7.428∗     8.213∗      -5.660     -43.69
                                            (0.98)     (2.22)         (-0.79)      (-0.70)      (2.10)     (2.06)      (-0.81)    (-1.60)

 AE Monetary Stance (t-1)                   0.230∗     0.234∗        0.557∗∗       0.552∗∗     0.0249      0.153       0.489∗      0.242
                                            (2.35)     (2.48)         (2.59)        (3.02)     (0.22)      (1.73)      (2.33)      (0.98)

 Risk Aversion                                                                                 -0.0199     -0.0817     -0.122     -0.161
                                                                                                (-0.38)     (-1.63)    (-0.96)    (-0.77)

 Risk                                                                                          0.0549      0.105∗∗     0.184      0.235∗∗
                                                                                               (0.98)       (2.75)     (1.68)      (2.65)

 Constant                              -4.058∗∗∗      -6.411∗∗∗     -9.173∗∗∗     -8.327∗∗∗    -2.486     -4.931∗∗∗   -8.333∗∗    -3.567
                                        (-3.77)        (-5.48)       (-3.45)       (-3.39)     (-1.74)     (-4.70)     (-3.16)    (-1.31)
 Observations                             628            628           628           628         656         656         656        656
 t statistics in parentheses
 ∗   p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001




                                                                  (b) Institutional
                                               (1)        (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)
                                              Q5         Q50            OLS         Q95          Q5         Q50         OLS         Q95
 RORO Index                                 0.267∗∗    0.225∗∗∗       0.321∗∗     0.506∗∗
                                             (2.90)     (3.98)         (2.93)      (3.09)

 AE Mkt. Return                         0.117∗∗∗      0.0763∗∗∗      0.116∗∗∗     0.118∗∗     0.115∗∗∗    0.0738∗∗∗   0.112∗∗∗    0.143∗∗∗
                                         (7.06)         (5.66)        (6.90)       (3.07)      (6.23)       (6.00)     (6.91)      (3.42)

 AE Real GDP Growth (t-1)                   -9.389      -1.085        -10.68      -22.17       -9.788      -1.984      -11.84      20.72
                                            (-1.36)     (-0.11)       (-0.99)     (-0.66)      (-1.19)     (-0.20)     (-1.14)     (0.26)

 AE Monetary Stance (t-1)                   0.418∗      0.490∗        0.904∗∗      1.239∗      0.404       0.516∗∗     0.878∗∗    1.181∗
                                            (2.04)      (2.49)         (3.23)      (2.02)      (1.55)       (2.89)      (3.21)    (2.16)

 Risk Aversion                                                                                0.248∗∗      -0.0123     -0.0903    -0.419
                                                                                               (2.81)       (-0.18)     (-0.51)   (-1.21)

 Risk                                                                                         -0.00334    0.332∗∗∗     0.342       0.465
                                                                                               (-0.04)     (5.25)      (1.93)      (1.79)

 Constant                               -19.49∗∗∗     -12.38∗∗∗      -18.73∗∗∗    -17.92      -19.24∗∗∗   -12.05∗∗∗   -18.09∗∗∗   -22.34∗
                                         (-7.56)       (-5.16)        (-5.80)     (-1.95)      (-6.03)     (-5.42)     (-5.85)    (-2.18)
 Observations                              628           628            628         628          656         656         656        656
 t statistics in parentheses
 ∗   p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001
This table summarizes the results of quantile regressions of changes in retail and institutional
government money market funds on our RORO and BEX indices. Bootstrapped standard
errors are clustered by country.

                                                                         28
