                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  MEDICAL RESEARCH AND HEALTH CARE FINANCE:
                   EVIDENCE FROM ACADEMIC MEDICAL CENTERS

                                       Pierre Azoulay
                                      Misty L. Heggeness
                                       Jennifer L. Kao

                                      Working Paper 27943
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27943


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




The authors thank participants at the 2020 ASSA Annual Meeting (San Diego), the NBER-IFS
International Network on the Value of Medical Research Meeting, the NBER Productivity Lunch,
the 2020 NBER Summer Institute, and UCLA. This project was supported by the National
Institute on Aging under Award Number R24AG048059 to the National Bureau of Economic
Research. Soomi Kim provided excellent research assistance. Any opinions and conclusions
expressed are those of the authors and do not represent the views of the US Census Bureau or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. All errors are our own. Address all correspondence to
jennifer.kao@anderson.ucla.edu.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Pierre Azoulay, Misty L. Heggeness, and Jennifer L. Kao. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Medical Research and Health Care Finance: Evidence from Academic Medical Centers
Pierre Azoulay, Misty L. Heggeness, and Jennifer L. Kao
NBER Working Paper No. 27943
October 2020
JEL No. I13,I18,I23,O30

                                         ABSTRACT

Academic Medical Centers (AMCs)—comprising medical schools, teaching hospitals, and
research laboratories)—play an important role in US biomedical innovation. The Balanced
Budget Act of 1997 (BBA) changed the formula used to reimburse Medicare inpatient claims and
subsidies for medical residents. We study the effect of changes in the generosity of clinical care
reimbursements on the rate and direction of research performed within these institutions. We
compare AMCs’ relative exposure to the reform and how these differences affect their
researchers’ ability to attract NIH grant funding, as well as the quantity, impact, and content of
their publications. We find that in response to the BBA, research activity increased by 10%
among the average teaching hospital and 20% among major teaching hospitals, with larger effects
observed for “translational” and clinical research. We find little evidence of concurrent changes
in clinical outcomes.

Pierre Azoulay                                  Jennifer L. Kao
MIT Sloan School of Management                  University of California, Los Angeles
100 Main Street, E62-487                        Anderson School of Management
Cambridge, MA 02142                             110 Westwood Plaza—D510
and NBER                                        Los Angeles, CA 90095
pazoulay@mit.edu                                jennifer.kao@anderson.ucla.edu

Misty L. Heggeness
U.S. Census Bureau
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
misty.l.heggeness@census.gov
1       Introduction
Research dating back at least to Solow (1956) has highlighted the role that innovation plays
in driving economic growth. But the production of novel ideas is ultimately filtered through
institutions that provide the incentive structure for knowledge accumulation (Dasgupta and
David 1994; Mokyr 2002; Rosenberg 1963). The belief that basic research ultimately gener-
ates practical insights is perhaps the central assumption in post-war science policy, and that
belief appears particularly well-founded in the health care industry (Gelijns and Rosenberg
1995; Cutler and McClellan 2001; Azoulay, Greenblatt, and Heggeness 2020). Yet in that
setting and beyond, we have scant systematic understanding of the ways in which institu-
tions—both in their formal (i.e., funding models, peer review) and informal (i.e., authorship
and collaboration norms, tenure systems) aspects—support the transformation of scientific
ideas into technological advances.1

       In this paper, we crack open the institutional black box of Academic Medical Centers
(AMCs), which, together with the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the biophar-
maceutical industry, play a central role in biomedical innovation. In the United States,
thirty percent of health-related research is performed inside these institutions (Common-
wealth Fund 1999), which bring together in one place a medical school, an owned or closely
affiliated hospital, and basic research laboratories with an explicit triple mission of patient
care, teaching, and research. Within the innovation system, AMCs are uniquely able to
bring together the “ideas sector” of the health care economy (i.e., biomedical research) with
its “production sector” (i.e., clinical care). This, in turn, facilitates the bidirectional flow of
knowledge between the laboratory bench and the patient bedside (Rosenberg 2009).

     We examine how research within AMCs is shaped by the impact of an external financing
shock. Traditionally, financial support for their research mission comes from three different
sources: grants from the NIH and private foundations, contracts with the pharmaceutical
industry, and importantly, cross-subsidies from patient care activities (Jones and Sanderson
1996).2 Building on recent empirical work that examines resource allocation within organi-
zations (e.g., Giroud and Mueller 2019), we examine how a sudden decrease in institutional
funding influences the rate, impact, and direction of research within AMCs.
    1
      An important exception is Furman and Stern (2011), which examines the impact of biological resource
centers on cumulative scientific discovery.
    2
      Other funders include other federal agencies (e.g., the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality) and state and local governments.




                                                     1
      Health care financing cuts have ambiguous effects on the level of subsequent research
within AMCs. Cuts in reimbursement levels may encourage hospitals and physicians to
substitute effort towards patient care activities and away from research. Low levels of cross-
subsidies may also make it harder for the hospital to attract productive investigators, re-
sulting in a net decrease in subsequent research levels. On the other hand, hospitals and
physicians may reduce the level of patient care activities in response to a price reduction.
Instead of providing patient care, hospitals and physicians may increase time spent on re-
search, leading to a net increase in subsequent research intensity. The implications for the
subsequent quality and direction of research are similarly ambiguous. For example, financing
cuts may cause researchers to decrease both high- and low-risk projects, or alternatively to
focus their attention towards research activities with greater impact.

      We exploit quasi-experimental variation in cuts to clinical care revenues induced by the
Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (BBA). The BBA was a major reform that led to considerable
reductions in the level of Medicare reimbursements to hospitals (Seshamani, Schwartz, and
Volpp 2006). Following a period of growth after the introduction of Medicare and Medicaid,
the growth of clinical revenues slowed in the 1990s (Smith et al. 2005; Chen and Goldman
2016). This slowdown was partially due to increased federal efforts aimed at containing rising
US health care expenditures, but also to other forces, such as the diffusion of managed care
delivery models (Hellerstein 1998). Our analysis exploits the fact that the BBA decreased
add-on payments made to support graduate medical education, suggesting that teaching
hospitals were disproportionately affected by the reform. Among teaching hospitals, some
institutions were harder hit by the reform than others because of differences in their reliance
on Medicare patients as well as specific subsidies that increased the price they received from
Medicare for the typical discharge (MedPAC 2003).

     Our empirical analysis focuses on two samples of hospitals—one that includes all teach-
ing hospitals and one that focuses on a research-intensive set of hospitals. We assemble a
rich dataset that includes, for each hospital over the period 1992-2007, grant applications,
funded grants, publications, and patient outcomes.

      Using a difference-in-differences model that takes advantage of cross-hospital variation
in the exposure to the reform, we find that cuts to hospital financing meaningfully increased
subsequent research output. We show that hospitals most affected by the BBA experienced
a 10 percent increase in subsequent grant applications and funded grants. In particular,
these effects are more pronounced for research activity conducted by “novice” investigators,
relative to “incumbents”—those already ensconced in the peer review funding system. These


                                              2
findings stand in contrast with previous empirical work suggesting that restrictions to the
funding environment can dampen subsequent research efforts (Furman, Murray, and Stern
2012; Tabakovic and Wollmann 2019), as well as with the pronouncements of academic
medical leaders at the time of the reform (Iglehart 1999).

      To further characterize the impact of these cuts, we examine the consequences of the
BBA on the importance and composition of subsequent research activities. Measuring the
impact of research is always fraught, and we analyze disparate effects of the reform along the
“quality spectrum” using three separate measures: quantiles of the vintage-adjusted, article-
level citation distribution, whether publications are cited in patent documents, and whether
publications “disrupt” (or conversely consolidate) the prevailing scientific understanding and
assumptions within a research subfield. In each case, we do not find evidence of heterogeneity
along these dimensions, with the reform increasing low- and high-impact publication rates
in a symmetric fashion.

      However, we do find that these increases are not evenly distributed across the vertical
chain of biomedical research. Laboratory-based research articles appear largely unaffected,
whereas “translational” research—which is geared towards bridging the gap between ba-
sic science discoveries and clinical applications, and difficult to perform outside the AMC
setting—and clinical research—including clinical trials, which tend to be supported by in-
dustry funding—increase markedly in more exposed institutions, relative to less exposed
ones. These results do not accord with practitioners’ accounts (Meador 2015) and survey
evidence (Weissman et al. 1999) pointing to the greater reliance of clinical investigators
on institutional funds to support their research activities. On the contrary, our results are
consistent with the view that researchers (or at least their employers) can “induce demand”
in a manner similar to physicians shifting their practices’ emphasis away from Medicare
beneficiaries onto patients covered by private insurance (He and Mellor 2012).

     Finally, to better understand the overall consequences of the financing shock, we explore
whether the BBA led physicians to substitute towards research, away from improving patient
care activities. Looking at 30-day risk-adjusted survival rates across four conditions at
the hospital level, we do not find any systematic association between BBA-exposure and
subsequent clinical outcomes, suggesting that the positive impact of the BBA on subsequent
research was not offset by worsening patient outcomes.

   Our empirical analysis falls short of evaluating the overall welfare consequences of the
BBA. Nonetheless, the positive impact on research investments in the medium term suggests



                                              3
that policy efforts aiming to decrease rents captured by health care providers do not unwit-
tingly upset the delicate fabric of the biomedical research funding ecosystem. Of course, our
results might also reflect the specific time period we study, during which the budget of the
NIH approximately doubled.

     The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background informa-
tion about AMCs and health care financing shocks. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4
analyzes the effect of health care financing cuts on the rate, impact, and composition of
subsequent research. Finally, Section 5 provides a discussion and concludes.

2     Background and Conceptual Framework
2.1    Academic Medical Centers and Biomedical Research

In the prototypical view of biomedical research, potential treatment discoveries undergo
a sequential development process. First, researchers trained in the “basic” life sciences
discover a new molecule and show that it inhibits a particular disease pathway in vitro.
Then, they develop animal models and gather initial data on the molecule’s safety and
efficacy. The new molecule is subsequently turned over to physicians, who clinically test the
purported treatment in randomized controlled trials. This stylized view underlies a broad-
based congressional support for the continuous public funding of biomedical research and
drives most of the policy discussion.

      However, this linear model of innovation, “however flattering to the scientist and the
academic, is economically naı̈ve and simplistic in the extreme” (Rosenberg 1994: 139). In-
deed, a closer examination of major treatment discoveries reveals a significantly more com-
plex picture. In numerous cases, the first biological insight is acquired in a clinical setting,
and only subsequently do bench scientists make sense of the mechanisms by which treatment
is effective (Gershon 1998). For example, scientists discovered the first antidepressant drug,
iproniazid, because a related compound used to treat tuberculosis made patients so euphoric
that they stopped taking it. Subsequent research on iproniazid led to the chemical theories
of depression that have generated all later antidepressant agents (Wurtman and Bettiker
1995).

     In general, academic physicians have played an essential role in the development of
various new medical technologies that rely on alternative development pathways. In some
cases, such as the development of AIDS triple therapies, successful treatments resulted from



                                               4
the ongoing dialog between bench and bedside scientists (Wurtman 1997). Other times, new
clinical uses are discovered for therapies already introduced into clinical practice (Gelijns and
Rosenberg 1995; DeMonaco, Ali, and von Hippel 2012). Similarly, medical device users have
also been instrumental in the invention of new products, from the identification of unmet
clinical needs to builders of prototypes or initial field testing—a classic case of user-innovation
(Gelijns and Rosenberg 1995). An extensive set of case studies lend credence to the belief that
researchers within AMCs play an essential function in enabling these alternative pathways
for treatment discovery, a belief strongly echoed by the academic medical establishment
(Crowley and Gusella 2009).

     For the past thirty years, research activities that focus on the bench-to-bedside interface
have been labeled “translational.”3 Typically, translational research requires expertise in
molecular biology, genetics, and a clinical subspecialty. As a result, it is often performed
by physician-scientists who split their time between clinical care and research activities.
Within that category of researchers, the relationship between patient care and research varies,
ranging from individuals that are “interested in a disease mechanism and even occasionally
interested in seeing patients,” but “almost never interact in their research with an intact
patient” to individuals that “actively search for patients who may enable them to uncover
the secrets of complex diseases, care for those patients, and. . . undertake to explore new
diagnoses and therapeutic approaches to treating their disease” (Nathan 2005).

     Rather than sitting midpoint on a continuum stretching from fundamental research
in biology all the way to the testing of novel therapeutics in large scale clinical trials, it
is more appropriate to view translational research as belonging to “Pasteur’s Quadrant,”
that is, in a class of investigations bringing forth ideas that are simultaneously valuable
scientifically and a useful input into the treatment discovery process (Stokes 1997; Murray
2002). A well-known example is the work of Joseph Goldstein and Michael Brown, recipi-
ents of the 1985 Nobel Prize for Medicine and Physiology. Their initial investigations were
inspired by observations of their own patients suffering from familial hypercholesterolemia
(Goldstein and Brown 1997). Through patient-inspired basic investigations performed at the
laboratory bench, they identified the underlying root case of this disease as a lack of low-
density lipoprotein receptors. These discoveries in turn informed drug development efforts,
ultimately leading to the market introduction of statins.
   3
     The Institute of Medicine’s Clinical Research Roundtable defines translational research as the “transfer
of new understandings of disease mechanisms gained in the laboratory into the development of new methods
for diagnosis, therapy, and prevention and their first testing in humans” (Sung et al. 2003) though this
definition does not appear to be widely agreed upon (Butler 2008; Woolf 2008).



                                                     5
      Distinguishing translational research from other types of biomedical research activi-
ties is not only more descriptively accurate, but also necessary to understand how wider
changes in the health care system might affect the rate and direction of research efforts.
First, translational research—which often focuses on uncovering the pathophysiologic mech-
anisms of disease (Ahrens 1992)—is very hard to appropriate, e.g., through patenting. As a
result, its conduct is likely to be underfunded by private biopharmaceutical firms. Second,
uniquely among the various types of biomedical research, translational activities are exceed-
ingly difficult to perform outside of the AMC setting. In this respect they differ sharply
from bench laboratory research, which often takes place in universities not affiliated with a
medical school (e.g., MIT or UC Berkeley), independent research organizations (such as the
Salk Institute) or pharmaceutical firms (Henderson 1994; Flier 2019). It also differs from
clinical trial activities, which over the past three decades, have steadily migrated away from
AMCs into a burgeoning ecosystem of for-profit experimental centers (Azoulay and Fishman
2020).

      Consisting of a hospital, research laboratories, and a closely-affiliated medical school,
AMCs bring together the wide range of resources, expertise, and personnel necessary to en-
able treatment discovery.4 They employ laboratory scientists, clinicians, physician-scientists,
physicians-in-training, and graduate students. In addition, they attract a large number of
patients with diverse phenotypes. This rare confluence entails that these institutions occupy
a unique position in the biomedical research ecosystem, with a unique potential to facilitate
the flow of knowledge from the laboratory bench to the patient’s bedside (Rosenberg 2009;
Ali and Gittelman 2016).

2.2     Research Funding within Academic Medical Centers

To support their research activities, AMCs primarily rely on three alternative sources of
funding: grants (mostly from the National Institutes of Health, but also from other federal
agencies, philanthropic foundations), contracts from biotechnology and pharmaceutical firms
(including but not limited to the conduct of clinical trials), and “unsponsored” expenditures
(i.e., lacking sponsorship from external sources, often a euphemism for cross-subsidies from
clinical care).
    4
      One strategy for identifying whether a hospital is “affiliated with a medical school” is if it reports a
medical school affiliation to the American Medical Association. The American Hospital Association (AHA)
Annual Survey indicates that more than 600 US hospitals were affiliated with a medical school in 2007, the
last year of our analysis. For a subset of the analyses that follow, we employ this definition to analyze the
impact of the BBA on hospitals with high research and teaching intensity.




                                                      6
     NIH grants account for the largest share of research funding within AMCs—close to
70%, or $7.4 billion in 1997 (Commonwealth Fund 1999)—and AMCs capture more than
two thirds of NIH extramural grant expenditures in a typical year.5 However, beginning
in the 1980s, the mix of research supported by NIH steadily shifted towards laboratory
investigations mostly conducted by scientists holding a PhD.6 The perceived lack of balance
has led to perennial calls by the academic medical establishment to protect funding for
physician-scientists because they constitute an “endangered species” (Wyngaarden 1979;
Rosenberg 1999; Jain et al. 2019). Over the past 25 years, task forces and blue ribbon
commissions have suggested various avenues to reform peer review practices at NIH so as to
avert a “crisis in clinical research” (Ahrens 1992; Nathan and Wilson 2003).

      A second source of funding are contracts from industrial sponsors, typically (but not
exclusively) for the conduct of clinical trials.7 Historically, AMCs’ infrastructure, proximity
to patients, and clinical expertise meant that they were the natural locus for the great bulk
of clinical trials sponsored by industry. This began to change in the 1990s as a new crop of
for-profit experimental centers started to compete with AMCs to provide biopharmaceutical
sponsors with a more streamlined and lower-cost alternative (Azoulay and Fishman 2020).
Private non-academic clinical trial sites came to partly replace their academic counterparts
because the academic incentive system sometimes struggles to reward the conduct of re-
search sponsored by firms. First, fellow academics sometimes view investigators with ties
to industry as “tainted” (Prasad 2020); these perceptions have become heightened following
a number of scandals involving human subjects protection and conflicts of interest (Stelfox
et al. 1998; Baird, Downie, and Thompson 2002; Nathan and Weatherall 2002). Second,
whereas investigator-initiated research makes unique demands on the creative and scientific
potential of an academic, clinical trials involve a substantial relinquishing of intellectual
autonomy since the investigator must adhere to an agreed-upon plan of research designed
by others. As a result, participation in this activity does not produce career benefits com-
mensurate with those generated by NIH-sponsored research—except, perhaps, for the “key
opinion leader” recruited by industry to write the trial’s clinical protocol.
   5
      Authors’ tabulations using NIH’s Compound Grant Applicant File.
   6
      In 1995, PhD grantees outnumbered their MD counterparts by a ratio of 3:1, though application success
rates for the two groups were similar (Nathan 1998). Furthermore, it is often suspected that successful MD
applicants share the scientific interests and basic research training of PhD-holding grantees, and do not
necessarily interact directly with patients for research purposes (Ahrens 1992).
    7
      Industry support accounted for 14% of research expenditures within AMCs in 1997 (Commonwealth
Fund 1999).




                                                    7
     The last substantial source of funding for research within AMCs falls under the nebu-
lous umbrella of “unsponsored research.” This funding includes expenditures by institutions
or group practices, using rents from clinical care activities, endowment income, or insti-
tutional reserves, and by individual faculty members who devote their own resources to
conduct research, drawing from discretionary funds or working additional uncompensated
hours. These cross-subsidies are not systematically quantifiable, but survey evidence sug-
gest that they play a non-negligible role in supporting AMCs’ research mission.8 While
much less important quantitatively than sponsored research expenditures, unsponsored ex-
penditures might support the careers of young investigators struggling to establish their own
independent program of research, or those of established scientists whose traditional sources
of funding have temporarily ran out. Because faculty clinical practice plans are typically
a major source of these expenditures, one might expect clinical researchers (which can in-
clude PhD-holding scientists working in clinical departments such as Internal Medicine or
Pediatrics) to disproportionately benefit from this source of support.

     In contrast with sponsored research, where proposals undergo stringent peer review (in
the case of NIH grants) or must pass a market test (in the case of clinical trials), the welfare
impact of unsponsored research activities is ambiguous. First, the existence of cross-subsidies
means that AMCs earn rents from their clinical care activities, so that the same quality of
care might have been delivered to patients at a lower cost (Nicholson and Song 2001). Second,
the lack of transparency in the disbursement of institutional funds makes it susceptible to
capture by entrenched interests, potentially resulting in low-quality or wasteful research
by “hobby doctors.” Our evidence will indirectly speak to this question, by examining
the quantity, impact, and composition of research by institutions differentially exposed to
financial stress.

2.3     Medicare Payments and Financing Cuts

To provide plausibly exogenous variation in the extent of financial slack faced by AMCs and
teaching hospitals, we rely on a measure of exposure to the Medicare reimbursement cuts
triggered by the Balanced Budget Act of 1997.9
   8
      A survey conduced by the Association of American Medical Colleges found that 10 percent of the
faculty-practice plan revenues were used to support research (Jones and Sanderson 1996); 43% of AMC
faculty members have reported receiving institutional funding for research (Weissman et al. 1999); and, in
1997, 9% of AMC research funding corresponded to support from faculty group practices.
    9
      In the typical hospital, Medicare typically accounts for 30 percent of patient care revenues (Reinhardt
2006).




                                                     8
     Under a system known as the Prospective Payment System, Medicare reimburses most
hospitals on a per-admission basis (See Appendix A for a detailed discussion). In turn, each
admission payment is a function of three types of adjustments: indirect medical education
(IME) subsidies, disproportionate share hospital (DSH) payments, and outliers payments
(Nicholson 2002). IME payments are meant to compensate teaching hospitals for indirect
expenses stemming for example from use of diagnostic services by clinically inexperienced
residents or decreased productivity of nurses and support staff involved in the teaching of
residents. DSH payments correspond to payments received by hospitals for the additional
cost of treating poor patients. Finally, outlier adjustments are reimbursements to compensate
providers for patients with exceptionally costly stays (Keeler, Carter, and Trude 1988).

      The BBA reduced the scale of all three adjustments and slowed the growth of payments
for all diagnosis-related groups (See Appendix A for details). As a result, Medicare inpatient
payments decreased by approximately five percent between 1998 and 2000 and many hospi-
tals saw their financial status deteriorate significantly (Iglehart 1999; Dickler and Shaw 2000;
Seshamani, Schwartz, and Volpp 2006; Shen and Wu 2013). Importantly, the reform was
not anticipated, as its passage depended on the delicate balance of power between a reduced
Republican majority in Congress and the Clinton administration following the November
1996 Federal election (Kahn and Kuttner 1999).10

      As 30 percent of inpatient visits are funded by Medicare, cuts to Medicare reimburse-
ments can represent a significant financial strain on hospitals. The effect of financial cuts on
hospital activities has been widely studied in the realm of clinical care, with inconclusive re-
sults. In theory, hospitals may respond to reduced Medicare payments by cost-shifting—i.e.,
increasing prices for privately-insured patients—or cost-cutting—i.e., lowering hospital costs,
decreasing support for unprofitable services (Cutler 1998, David et al. 2014). The empirical
evidence to date has shown that, in response to adverse financial shocks, hospitals cut costs
by limiting growth in hospital staff (Bazzoli et al. 2004) and lowering the quality of care
(Lindrooth, Bazzoli, and Clement 2007). In contrast, Wu (2010) finds that in response to
the BBA, hospitals are limited in their ability to shift costs to private payers (mostly due to
the rise in influence of managed care delivery models during this period).

     The consequences of financial stress for AMCs in particular are less well-understood,
with no evidence to date regarding the impact on the research mission of these institutions.
  10
     After the passage of the reform, however, lobbying efforts by Medicare providers—with teaching hos-
pitals in the frontline—proved successful in watering down some of its provisions: the Balanced Budget
Refinement Act (BBRA) of 1998 slowed down the transition set by the BBA, a process continued by the
Benefits Improvement and Protection Act (BIPA) of 2000 and the Medicare Modernization Act of 2003.


                                                   9
Financing cuts may shift research levels by influencing AMCs’ hiring practices or exit rates
among incumbent researchers. For example, hospitals may decrease the rate at which they
hire faculty members or replace those that have left the institution; alternatively, hospitals
may redirect their hiring efforts towards individuals that can more easily obtain funding from
the government (i.e., laboratory bench researchers) or the private sector (i.e., trialists).

      In addition to shaping research activity along the extensive margin, the BBA may shift
research activity within individuals. For existing researchers, the net effect of financing
cuts on research levels theoretically hinges on the relative strength of the substitution and
income effects (McGuire and Pauly 1991; Yip 1998; Jacobson et al. 2010). If the former effect
dominates, physician-investigators may substitute other career-advancing or other revenue-
generating activities—such industry-funded clinical trials—for clinical care. In this scenario,
financing cuts would cause more easily-funded research activities to increase. If the income
effect dominates, however, researchers may instead direct more effort towards patient care
activities. In this setting, financing cuts may lower subsequent research levels, or alter
the composition of the research portfolio, for individual researchers or the institution as a
whole.

      Qualitative accounts from physicians contemplating integrating a research component
into their clinical practice often highlight the lumpy adjustment costs that need to be incurred
in this process, with most expressing skepticism that their institutions could adequately
support these efforts using the dwindling rents from clinical care activities. Because of the
lack of fungibility between research and clinical care effort outside of the narrow context
of clinical trials, our prior is that the extensive margin is likely to dominate and that any
intensive margin (i.e., within-physician) substitution effects are likely to involve substitution
of patient care or research activity towards “bedside” research—i.e., clinical trials.

     Along both the extensive and intensive margins, however, our presumption is that
the cuts induced by the BBA will disproportionately affect translational research—these
investigations whose fundamental goal is to bridge the gap between the laboratory bench
and the patient bedside.




                                               10
3        Data
3.1      Data Construction and Sources

Our analysis combines data from several primary sources (i) hospital characteristics from
the Healthcare Cost Report Information System (HCRIS) and the Inpatient Prospective
Payment System (IPPS) Payment Impact Files; (ii) administrative data on NIH grants from
the NIH IMPAC II database; (iii) publication and citation data from PubMed and the Web
of Science, respectively; (iv) patent-to-publication citation linkages (from the USPTO and
PubMed combined); and (v) hospital-level clinical outcomes data. Figure 1 describes how
these data sources fit together and how we construct the variables used in this analysis.

     We leverage information from HCRIS, which contains administrative data covering the
universe of Medicare-certified hospitals. We identify hospitals with information from 1992
to 2007. For each hospital record, we observe hospital characteristics data, such as the total
number of patient discharges, inpatient days, IME payments, and DSH payments (cf. Section
2.3). Medicare pricing information from the 1995 IPPS Payment Impact Files are used to
calculate hospitals’ average PPS revenue per discharge.

     We supplement this hospital-level dataset with several measures of research activity.
First, we link the hospital dataset to grants data from the NIH IMPAC II database.11
For each grant, we obtain information on investigators, their institutions, and a number
of project characteristics. Next, we collect data on publications from PubMed, the public-
access database which indexes the scientific literature, and we obtain publication citation
data from the Web of Science (up to 2015).

      A key challenge for estimating the causal impact of the BBA is that the level of the
shock (changes to Medicare funding due to the BBA) and the measures of research outcomes
(NIH grants and publications) do not coincide. An analysis that examines how Medicare
payments at the individual hospital-level affects NIH grants allocated at the medical-school
level is likely to produce estimates that suffer from measurement error. We overcome these
challenges by employing an outcome assignment mechanism that uses principal investigator
(or author) addresses to allocate each grant (or publication) to the “correct” hospital.
    11
    To construct the set of relevant grants, we limit our analysis to research project awards (NIH activity
code R), research career awards (NIH activity code K), program projects and centers (NIH activity codes
M and P), cooperative agreements between NIH and a group of investigators (typically, NIH activity code
U01), and R&D contracts to evaluate a product or device (NIH activity code N01).




                                                    11
     As an example, the University of California, San Francisco medical center includes
the Parnassus Heights Campus, Mt. Zion Hospital and Medical Center, and San Francisco
General Hospital (see Appendix Figure B1). Each of these locations has a unique Medicare
provider number and therefore receives their own specific Medicare payments. However, the
three campuses share a single, common NIH institutional code. Our strategy for matching
hospitals to grants consists of looking at each of the PI addresses affiliated with the UCSF
NIH institutional code and allocating each PI (and grant) to one of the three hospitals.

     We execute a similar strategy to match hospitals to publications: for each publication,
we use the Web of Science to determine its authors’ institutional affiliation and address.
This allows us to match a publication to a hospital by matching on both hospital name and
address.12

      The final sample consists of all hospitals that show evidence of teaching and research
activity. To identify the set of research intensive hospitals, we make several restrictions.
First, we start with a list of 1,195 unique hospitals (as captured by unique Medicare provider
numbers in the HCRIS data between 1992 and 2007).13 We drop 210 specialty hospitals as
they are not paid under Medicare’s Prospective Payment System.14 Next, we exclude any
hospitals that close during the 4 year period between 1992 and 1995 (the focal pre-BBA year
in our analysis) by restricting our hospital sample to those with all observations between
1992 and 1995.15 Finally, to focus on a subset of hospitals for which the BBA is most
likely to induce a meaningful shift in hospital outcomes, we restrict our sample to hospitals
that receive (1) at least one indirect medical education payment and (2) produce at least
one publication or submit at least one NIH grant application between 1992 and 2007. This
results in a final sample consisting of 780 teaching hospitals (hereafter the “teaching hospital
sample”).
  12
      Notably, the Web of Science was launched in 1997. While the database contains records of articles
published before 1997, the occurrence of missing author addresses is higher prior to 1998 (Liu, Hu, and Tang
2018). This does not threaten the validity of our estimates, since our regression specifications will include a
full suite of calendar year effects.
   13
      We address mergers and acquisitions over this time period by creating “super-hospitals” which inherit
the Medicare patients, publication, and grants from their constituent units over the entire time period.
Dropping these observations does not change our results.
   14
      Specifically, “specialty hospitals” include: long term care, rehabilitation, psychiatric, pediatric, and
cancer hospitals.
   15
      Note that in the event that this subset of hospitals contains institutions whose closures were induced by
the BBA, excluding this subset of hospitals may lead to an underestimate of the BBA’s impact on hospital
outcomes.




                                                      12
     In addition to our primary hospital sample, we also consider a second, more research-
focused subset of the teaching hospital sample (the “AMC sample”). To create this second
hospital sample, we follow the definition of a “major teaching hospital” used by Burke et al.
(2017). Major teaching hospitals are members of the Council of Teaching Hospitals (COTH)
and have a medical school affiliation reported to the American Medical Association.16 This
results in a sample of 274 hospitals.

      The primary outcomes of interest are the total number of grant applications, grant
awards, and publications that accrued to the researchers affiliated with a particular hospital
in a given year. In addition, we characterize grants by grant cycle and principal investigator
type. To assess how the BBA shapes research activity across principal investigators with
varying levels of “grantsmanship” experience, we designate an application as an “incumbent”
(respectively “novice”) grant application if it comes from an applicants whose first application
occurred at least three years (respectively within a window of three years) before the year
of the focal application.17 When breaking down the number of funded applications for
incumbents and novices, we measure whether their first award (not counting fellowship
grants) occurred within a window of three years (for novices) or dates back from an even
earlier period (for incumbents).

     Further, we go beyond these raw counts by investigating how health care financing cuts
shape the impact and composition of subsequent research. We rely on three measures of
research impact. For our first measure of research impact, we assign each article to one of six
mutually exclusive bins: those that fall in the bottom quartile of the article-level distribution
of long-run citations, those that fall in the second quartile, in the third quartile, in the top
quartile but not in the top ventile, in the top ventile but not the top percentile, and finally
publications in the top percentile of the citation distribution. The percentile rankings are
vintage-adjusted, which allows us to compare the citation impact of publications published in
  16
      Hospital COTH status and AMA medical school affiliations are obtained from the American Hospital
Association Annual Surveys from 1992 to 2007.
   17
      In particular, we do not make use of NIH’s “new” or “early-stage” investigator designations which
aim to give scientists not yet ensconced in the peer review system a leg up. The reason is that
these designations did not come into wide practice until the tail end of our observation period (cf.
https://grants.nih.gov/policy/early-investigators/history.htm).




                                                  13
different years.18 Our second measure of research impact comes from identifying the number
of publications that were subsequently cited by a patent (Marx and Fuegi 2020).

      Finally, our third measure of research impact comes from identifying each publications’
“disruptive” impact using an index recently proposed by Funk and Owen-Smith (2017).
Their citation-based measure captures the degree to which the ideas embodied in a paper
consolidate or destabilize the scientific status quo. An article is considered “consolidating”
if it tends to reference the same publications as the articles that will cite it in the future.
Conversely, “disruptive” research draws on articles that will not be acknowledged by its own
citing papers. For each hospital in the sample, we compute in every year the number of
articles published that fall above the 95th percentile of their index.

      To investigate how the BBA shifts the allocation of research along the bench-to-bedside
continuum, we construct measures of basic laboratory research (hereafter characterized as
“laboratory” research), translational research, and clinical research. To partition the re-
search space in this way, we take advantage of Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms, a
hierarchical controlled vocabulary maintained by the National Library of Medicine. Most
publications listed in PubMed are tagged with a set of MeSH terms, which characterize their
scientific content. Using the MeSH-based definitions outlined in Azoulay, Greenblatt, and
Heggeness (2020), we designate articles as bench research if they fulfill three criteria: (i)
they are not disease-oriented (i.e., contain no disease MeSH terms); (ii) they do not re-
port the results of a clinical trial (which we ascertain by examining the publication type
field in PubMed ); and (iii) they are tagged by MeSH terms denoting either the use of a
molecular biology technique, the use a model organism, the study of cellular structures and
macromolecules, or the study of biochemical and cellular processes.

       We next identify the set of publications that can plausibly be deemed to be translational
in nature. Following Azoulay, Greenblatt, and Heggeness (2020), we generate three MeSH-
based measures related to translational research. First, we label a publication translational if
it is (i) disease-oriented; (ii) not a clinical trial; and (iii) also tagged by a basic science keyword
used to describe bench research. Next, we denote a publication as “inspiring translational
research” if it is translational and is cited by at least one clinical trial publication. Finally,
  18
     A vintage is comprised of all the articles published in a given year. To compute the quantiles of the
vintage-specific, article-level distribution of citations, the relevant universe is not limited to the articles
produced by researchers with addresses corresponding to the hospitals in our sample. Rather, the relevant
universe includes the entire set of 17,312,059 articles that can be cross-linked between PubMed and the Web
of Science.




                                                      14
we identify work that “builds on translational research,” i.e., those that report the results of
a clinical trial and list a translational publication in the reference list.

      Our final measure of research outcomes is meant to capture research investments directly
relevant for the bedside—i.e., clinical research. We focus on two measures: (i) clinical trial
articles (identified using MeSH terms corresponding to clinical trials or the publication type
field in PubMed ) and (ii) “other” clinical articles, which are disease-oriented, not clinical
trials, and not tagged by any bench MeSH keywords.

3.2     Financial Pressure from the BBA

To evaluate the impact of the BBA on subsequent research activity, we exploit the fact that
some hospitals were more exposed to the reform than others. Following Shen (2003), we con-
struct a “BBA Bite” variable that is the BBA-induced change in PPS revenue per discharge
weighted by the share of Medicare patients in a base, pre-BBA year. As discussed in Sec-
tion 2.3, the BBA changed the formula for Medicare subsidy payments, which are a function
of teaching load and the disproportionate share of poor patients. This suggests that cross-
hospital variation in the BBA’s impact comes from differences in (i) hospital characteristics
(e.g. the number of residents) and (ii) the hospital’s reliance on Medicare.

      To identify the effect of the BBA on PPS revenue per discharge, we rely on a simulated
revenue approach. In particular, we use pre-BBA data to simulate the revenue that hospitals
would have lost under the BBA, had the reform been in effect earlier. Using pre-BBA data
isolates the mechanical effect of the policy from hospitals’ endogenous responses. We simulate
the average PPS revenue per discharge that hospitals would have received from Medicare had
the BBA occurred in 1995, two years prior to its actual implementation.19 The mechanical
effect of the BBA is estimated as the difference between the simulated revenue per discharge
and actual PPS revenue per discharge in 1995:

                           Sim∆Revh,1995 = Revh,1995 − SimRevh,1995

where Revh,1995 is the log of true PPS revenue per discharge in 1995 and SimRevh,1995 is the
log of simulated PPS revenue per discharge in 1995. Both revenue measures are averages
across all Medicare discharges. Figure A1 shows that hospitals with a larger Sim∆Revh are
more research-intensive in the pre-BBA era—a finding consistent with the expectation that
  19
    Specifically, we compute total IME and DSH payments keeping hospital inputs fixed at the 1995 level
and using the 2001 IME and DSH payment formula.




                                                  15
research-intensive, teaching hospitals are more likely to be disproportionately impacted by
the BBA.

     Finally, we weigh this measure by the share of a hospital’s discharges that are reimbursed
by Medicare in 1995. This follows previous literature which measures the financial impact
of Medicare payment changes by using the hospital’s base year Medicare discharge share
(Acemoglu and Finkelstein 2008; Kaestner and Guardado 2008; Wu and Shen 2014). The
overall BBA Bite is calculated as:
                                                      
                                M edicareDischarges
               BBA Biteh =                                      × Sim∆Revh,1995             (1)
                                 T otalDischarges        h,1995


      The distribution of BBA Bite among hospitals in the teaching hospital sample is de-
picted in Figure 2. The figure shows that there is substantial variation in BBA Bite: the
average BBA Bite is 0.0045 with a standard deviation of 0.0035. Looking to the extremes
of the distribution provide some illustrative examples: on the far left is South Bay Medical
Center. In addition to having a low BBA Bite (0.00003), the California-based hospital has
relatively low teaching and research intensity: the institution had three residents and pro-
duced one publication in 1997. In contrast, the St. Louis University Hospital—a similarly
sized institution with a BBA Bite of 0.0184—had more then 200 residents and produced 122
publications in the same year.

3.3    Summary Statistics

Table 1 provides hospital-level summary statistics for the teaching hospital sample. As can
be seen in Panel A, the mean hospital has around 16,000 patient discharges, contains 400
beds, has 100 residents and interns, and reported roughly $10 million in combined IME
and DSH payments. Approximately a third of patient discharges correspond to Medicare
patients. The average Medicare revenue per discharge is $8,000.

     Looking next to Panel B, the distributions of both the number of grant applications and
the number of awarded grants are highly skewed (see Appendix Figure C1). For example, the
mean number of grants awarded is roughly three, while one hospital (Massachusetts General
Hospital) has nearly 150 grants funded during the period considered in our study. The
majority of grant applications and awards correspond to new research proposals, as opposed
to competitive renewals of already-funded grants. Splitting the grants by the degree of
the principal investigator (MD, PhD, or MD/PhD) reveals that most grant applicants hold
PhDs.


                                              16
      Panel C shows that the average hospital had 46 publications in a year, but that this
average also masks substantial variation—ranging from a minimum of 0 publications to a
maximum of roughly 1,700 (see Appendix Figure C1). Among the publications produced,
4 percent were considered disruptive (as opposed to consolidating), there were similar rates
(25 percent) of bench and translational research, and nearly 38 percent were considered
clinical.

      Across all hospitals, there is a marked increase in the level of grant applications (Fig-
ure 3) and grants funded (Figure 4) over our study period. The BBA occurred shortly before
a sustained increase in the NIH budget, which concluded in 2003 (Korn et al. 2002; Free-
man and Van Reenen 2009). Consequently, most of the teaching hospitals in our sample
experienced an absolute increase in the grant funding awarded to their investigators, at least
in the immediate aftermath of the shock. Our regression specifications will flexibly control
for this secular increase through the inclusion of calendar year effects, making it possible to
examine whether more exposed hospitals experience a relative decrease in research activity
following the reform, relative to less exposed hospitals.

      Figure 5 shows a similar upward trends for total publications. There is a discrete
shift in 1998, which is likely explained by the use of the Web of Science in constructing
the publication dataset, as discussed above. A more pronounced upward trend is observed
for translational research and “other” clinical research articles, whereas the trajectories for
laboratory research and clinical trails are relatively flat.20

      Appendix Table D1 provides summary statistics for hospitals in the AMC sample. A
comparison of the analysis hospital sample and the AMC sample can be found in Appendix
Table D2. Relative to hospitals in the analysis hospital file, AMC sample hospitals produce
significantly more grant applications and publications.

     For a subset of the empirical exercises that follow, we examine the impact of hospital
financing cuts on clinical outcomes in hospitals. Our main measures of clinical outcomes
stem from Chandra et al.’s (2016) analysis of the relationship between hospital quality and
market size. In particular, these authors construct hospital-level measures of 30-day risk-
adjusted survival for four frequent conditions: acute myocardial infarction (AMI), congestive
heart failure, pneumonia, and hip/knee replacements (a common pair of surgical procedures).
Specifically, they construct condition-specific measures using claims and survival outcomes
  20
     For clinical trials, this likely reflects a general exodus of industry-sponsored activity away from academia
during the period considered (Azoulay and Fishman 2020).




                                                       17
in three-year rolling windows.21 Since the time period in the Chandra et al. (2016) study
spans the pre- and post-BBA, periods, for each hospital we use the observation in 1996
(corresponding to an average over the pre-BBA years 1994, 1995, and 1996) and the obser-
vations (corresponding to an average over the post-BBA years 2000 through 2005). Of the
780 hospitals in the teaching hospital sample, we successfully match 700 hospitals to the
clinical outcomes dataset. Table 1, Panel D provides summary statistics for these survival
outcomes, while Appendix Figure C2 presents histograms for the distribution of the survival
rates for each of the conditions.

4        Empirical Strategy and Results
Our empirical strategy thus consists of comparing research outputs, before and after the
implementation of the BBA, between hospitals that faced a potentially large decrease in the
level of Medicare reimbursements (and have a relatively higher BBA Bite) to those that were
minimally impacted by the reform (with a smaller BBA Bite).

         With h indexing hospitals and t indexing years, we estimate

                         yht = βBBA Biteh × Af terBBAt + δh + ζt + εht                                  (2)

where yht is a measure of research outcome, Af terBBAt is an indicator equal to 1 after
1997, δh are hospital fixed effects, and ζt are year fixed effects.22 To ease interpretation
of the results, we also estimate regressions where BBA Biteh is an indicator for whether
hospital h’s BBA Bite is above the median (0.0035).

      As is traditionally the case for difference-in-differences research designs, a threat to iden-
tification could arise if the treatment variable (BBA Biteh ) is correlated with unobserved
trends in the outcome. The context of the NIH doubling provides the backdrop for one spe-
cific variant of this threat. If the research funding allocated towards research that primarily
affect the elderly (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease) increased relatively more post-BBA, it might
benefit disproportionately hospitals with a relatively higher share of elderly patients—those
with a high Medicare discharge share. We address this concern directly in Appendix C, by
examining whether NIH funding changes appear “age-biased” or “age-neutral.”
    21
      For example, the, 30-day risk-adjusted survival for 1996 is calculated using patient claims during the
years 1994, 1995, and 1996.
   22
      In most
         √ cases we transform the outcome using the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation—asinh(x) =
log(x + x2 + 1)—to accommodate the large number of zero observations, while maintaining the ability to
interpret the magnitude of coefficient estimates as elasticities (Burbidge, Magee and Robb 1988; Bellemare
and Wichman 2020).



                                                    18
4.1    Effects on Research Levels

Table 2 presents the estimates of the impact of the BBA on the number of grant applications.
Panel A reports estimates of equation (2) where BBA Biteh is the BBA Bite in hospital h.
In addition, Panel B reports estimates of equation (2) where BBA Biteh is an indicator for
whether hospital h is a High BBA Bite hospital (i.e., a hospital with a BBA Bite > 0.0035).
To ease interpretation of the magnitudes, we present elasticities in the third and seventh
rows.

     The first column of Table 2 shows that the BBA has a positive effect on the subsequent
number of grant applications. Column 1 shows that an increase in a hospital’s BBA Bite
translates into an increase in the total number of subsequent grant applications. Following
the BBA, the total number of grant applications increases by 0.053 percent for each percent
increase in BBA Bite and rises by roughly 11 percent among High BBA Bite hospitals.

      In subsequent columns, we examine the impact of cuts in Medicare reimbursement on
different types of grants (by grant cycle and principal investigator type). The estimates pre-
sented in Column 2 suggest that the positive response in total grant applications is driven
by an increase in applications for new proposals. In contrast, there is no statistically signif-
icant effect on the number of “competing continuations,” which correspond to applications
seeking to extend previously awarded grants for an additional funding cycle. Columns 4
and 5 show that the effect on total grant applications is driven primarily by an increase in
those proposed by novices (rather than incumbents). Taken together, these estimates signal
that AMCs may respond to cuts to Medicare payments by turning to external grants as
an additional source of funding. This can occur through two mechanisms: by encouraging
existing researchers to seek additional grants and by hiring additional researchers who may
“bring” grant funds with them.

      Estimates in Columns 6 through 8 explore the effects of the financing cuts on research
conducted by MDs, PhDs, and MD/PhDs. In all cases, we estimate a strong, positive, and
statistically significant effect of the BBA Bite on the level of subsequent grant applications.
The PhD and MD/PhD results are slightly larger in magnitude than the MD results: a one
percent increase in BBA Bite yields a 0.082 percent increase in research conducted by PhD-
holding principal investigators. In contrast, research conducted by MDs increases by 0.054
percent (though the difference between PhD and MD coefficients are not statistically signif-
icant). This accords with our priors: PhD-holding investigators are more likely to engage
in research at the laboratory bench and MDs are traditionally associated with clinical and


                                              19
translational research. The finding that research conducted by MDs significantly increases
can be explained by the fact that NIH grantees holding MD or MD/PhD degrees increas-
ingly share similar scientific interests and methodological approaches with investigators who
received traditional PhDs in the various disciplines within the life sciences domain (Ali and
Gittelman 2016).

     To explore the timing of these estimated effects, we estimate:
                                X
                    Yht = α +       βz × 1(z) × BBA Biteh + δh + τt + ht                   (3)
                                z

where δh and τt represent hospital and year fixed effects, respectively, for hospital t and year
t. z represents the “lag,” or the years relative 1997, which is the year in which the BBA is
implemented. Figure 6 plots the estimates of βz from equation (3) for total grant applications
and corresponds to a dynamic version of Table 2, Panel A, Column 1. The figure also displays
95-percent confidence intervals and a dashed gray line that represents the year in which the
BBA was enacted. The estimated coefficients illustrate that hospitals with high BBA Bites
exhibit trends in grant applications similar to hospitals with low BBA Bites in years prior to
the BBA. However, the level of grant applications increases differentially in the wake of the
BBA and continues to increase afterward. The increase in total grant applications is gradual,
further providing evidence that these aggregate effects may mask significant heterogeneity in
the response across different types of grants. Our principal investigator results corroborate
this view: Figure 8 shows that grant applications rises more quickly and strongly among
novices. This pattern provides additional evidence that firms respond to Medicare payment
cuts through changes in their hiring practices.

      Next, we examine the impact on the number of grants funded and total publications.
We find similar results. Table 3 and Figure 7 show that following the BBA, a percent
increase in a hospital’s BBA Bite is associated with an approximate 0.05 percent increase in
the number of grants funded. The similar patterns for grant applications and grants funded
persist when looking across grant cycle (new applications versus competing continuations)
and principal investigator degree type. Turning to the effect on total publications, Column 1
of Table 4 shows that the total number of subsequent publications increases by 0.017 percent
for each percent increase in BBA Bite (Panel A) and rises by nearly eight percent among
High BBA Bite (Panel B) hospitals, though the coefficient in Panel A is not statistically
significant. The onset of the BBA effect (Figure 9) appears immediate, suggesting that one




                                              20
consequence of allocating time towards more research is that existing AMC researchers may
turn to publications that were previously “waiting” in the file drawer.23

4.2     Effects on Research Impact

A challenge of only examining research aggregates is that AMCs and researchers may alter
the nature of their research projects in response to financial strain, in which case examining
hospital-level grant and publications total counts may mask how institutions and individu-
als reallocate their efforts among research projects with differing levels of impact. Table 4
report the effects of the shock on publication rates adjusted for three measures of impact:
publication-to-publication citation impact (Columns 2-7), patent-to-publication citation im-
pact (Columns 8-9), and “disruptiveness” (Columns 10-11).

     Turning first to the effect on publication-to-publication citation impact and patent-to-
publication citation impact, much of the scholarship in the economics of innovation implicitly
treats citation impact as a proxy for impact or “importance” (Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg
2005; Azoulay, Graff Zivin, and Manso 2011), although this assumption has come under
scrutiny (Funk and Owen-Smith 2017). If the decrease in publication volume documented
above was driven by articles which do not make much of a ripple, leaving the impact on
highly-cited articles unchanged, we might be tempted to conclude that the effect of the
reform on research activities are at most second-order, relative to the effects on the cost and
quality of health care delivery in these same institutions.

      As described in Section 3, publications are assigned to six mutually exclusive citation-
based bins. We run the regression specified in equation (2) using each bin as a separate
outcome. Looking across Columns 2 through 7, we cannot reject that the implied elasticities
are essentially identical. We next examine the effect of the BBA on the number of publica-
tions that are subsequently cited by a patent, which we view as a proxy for the extent to
which the work of AMC scientists shape biopharmaceutical firms’ R&D efforts. Columns 8
and 9 reveal similar effects across the number of publications that are and are not, respec-
tively, cited by a patent. Overall, the evidence in Table 4 indicates that the effect of the
reform are relatively homogeneous along the “citation as quality” dimension.
  23
      One limited window into the quantitative importance of the results is to calculate the extent to which
institutions benefit from this increase in a narrow financial sense, through the channel of indirect cost
recovery, or “overhead” rates. In Appendix Table C1, we show that the elasticity of indirect costs with
respect to the BBA bite is a statistically significant 0.086—a modest increase.




                                                    21
     The remaining columns of Table 4 assess the extent to which the BBA disproportion-
ately affects “disruptive” research. Using the d index proposed by Funk and Owen-Smith
(2017) to partition the set of articles for each hospital into “disruptive” publications (d in
the top ventile) and “consolidating” publications (d ≤ 95th percentile). We find a slightly
larger positive effect on disruptive research (Column 11) relative to consolidating research
(Column 10), though the difference between the coefficients are not statistically significant.
Taken together, the results suggest that the BBA ushers in an uniform increase in the level
of both low- and high-impact scientific projects.

4.3     Effects on the Composition of the Research Portfolio

We now turn to a more detailed investigation into how a hospital’s research mix shifts in
response to the BBA. In Table 5, we explore the possibility of compositional changes by
examining the effect on laboratory research, translational, and clinical research.

      The results indicate that basic laboratory research is largely unaffected by the BBA:
while a one percent increase in BBA Bite is associated with a 0.012 percent decrease in
publications of this type. However, the estimates are statistically indistinguishable from 0,
likely due to the fact that our analysis is focused on hospitals that are primarily focused on
translational and clinical research. Consistent with this view, we observe a strong positive
response for the level of translational research: the BBA causes translational research pub-
lications to increase by 0.043 percent for each percent increase in BBA Bite. Event study
estimates echo these findings (Figure 11). This amplifying effect also extends to publica-
tions that “build on translational research” (Column 3) or “inspire translational research”
(Column 4).

      Looking next to clinical research publications, we find that the level of clinical re-
search—as measured using the clinical trial definition (Column 5) and “other” clinical MeSH-
based (Column 6) definition—increases substantially: a one percent increase in BBA Bite
is associated with a 0.098 percent increase in clinical trial publications and 0.048 percent
increase in “other” clinical research. Event study figures (Figure 12, Panels A and B) cor-
roborate these findings.24
  24
     Panel A of Figure 12 exhibits a pronounced upward trend before the BBA shock. This is not altogether
surprising: some of the more exposed institutions created offices dedicated to the running of clinical trials
in the early 1990s as part of an effort to stem the exodus of industry-sponsored trial activity away from
academic institutions towards “for profit” independent clinical testing sites (Azoulay and Fishman 2020).




                                                     22
      In sum, the results presented in Table 5 paint a nuanced picture of compositional change
in response to the health care financing cuts. The financing reform leaves bench research
relatively unchanged, while triggering a sizeable increase in investigations that can plausi-
bly be labeled “translational” or “clinical.” This runs counter to the qualitative accounts
we gathered in interviews with academic leaders as well as “rank and file” clinical faculty
members, which surmised that investigators who split their time between patient care and
research activities would experience the effects of a reduction in cross-subsidies from their
hospital’s clinical care revenues more keenly.

4.4     Countervailing Impact on Clinical Care

Our results so far are consistent with the view that financial pressures might lead these
scientists to allocate their time and effort away from patient care activities, towards research.
As a result, the increase in subsequent research activity may be countered by declines in the
quality of clinical care. A handful of previous studies have found that AMCs are associated
with better outcomes (Keeler et al. 1992; Taylor, Whellan, and Sloan 1999; Ayanian and
Weissman, 2002; Burke et al. 2017). In this section, we explore whether the BBA dampened
these clinical care advantages through impacting patient outcomes within the hospitals in
our sample.

     We estimate the impact of the BBA on risk-adjusted survival rates in the “long differ-
ence” dimension of the data:

                             ∆Yhc = βBBA Biteh + Dischargesh + εh                                      (4)

where ∆Yhc corresponds to the change in the risk-adjusted 30-day mortality rate in hospital h
for condition c. Acting as a proxy for hospital size, Dischargesh is the log total number of
patient discharges in 1995.

      Table 6 reports the results. We find that, within this sample, the passage of the BBA
does not adversely impact mortality outcomes following AMIs or heart failure episodes. Sur-
vival at 30-days is of course only a crude measure of care quality and the models have rela-
tively low explanatory power, but it seems notable that we were unable to detect consistent
declines in patient outcomes concurrently with the increase in research activity experienced
by hospitals more exposed to the reform.25
  25
    Most previous studies using samples not limited to teaching- and research-intensive hospitals find null
to minimal impacts of the BBA on patient outcomes (Volpp et al. 2005; Seshamani, Schwartz, and Volpp




                                                    23
4.5     Robustness checks

4.5.1    AMC Sample Analyses

In Appendix D, we perform our analysis on the AMC sample, a subset of hospitals with
high research and teaching intensity. This analysis reveals results that are fully consistent
with our main results. In many cases, the estimated magnitudes are even greater than
those found in the main teaching hospital sample. Among research-intensive hospitals, a one
percent increase in a hospital’s BBA Bite translates into a 0.079 percent increase in the total
number of subsequent grant applications (Appendix Table D3) and a 0.082 percent increase
in the total number of grants funded (Appendix Table D4). We find a similar increase in the
number of translational and clinical research publications, though the results for translational
publications and “other” clinical research is significant, likely due to the smaller sample size
(Appendix Table D6). One notable difference is that AMC hospitals experience significant
increase in the number of highly cited publications (i.e., publications in the top ventile of the
citation distribution, Appendix Table D5), suggesting that following the BBA, researchers
may have been able to dedicate ample effort towards research projects with long-term impact
in environments that already contained the necessary research infrastructure and resources.
As a robustness check, we confirmed that our results in the primary teaching hospital sample
are not being driven by hospitals not found in the AMC sample.

4.5.2    Subsidy BBA Bite Analysis

In Appendix E, we examine the robustness of the core results presented in Sections 4.1
through 4.3 to an alternative measure of BBA Bite. Recall that hospital-level variation
is driven by differences in the hospitals’ reliance on Medicare payments and in particular,
Medicare subsidy payments. In this robustness check, we measure of the BBA Bite as the
share of 1995 hospital patient revenues that come from IME and DSH payments (Appendix
Figure E1 graphs the distribution of this version of the BBA Bite). The regression results
in Appendix Figures E1 through E4 are quite similar to those in Tables 2 through 5, both
in terms of magnitude and statistical significance. The corresponding event-study graphs,
displayed in Appendix Figures E2 through E7 are fully consistent with those observed in
our core set of results. As described in Section 3.2, we prefer measuring BBA Bite as the
difference in simulated revenue per discharge and actual PPS revenue per discharge, weighed
2006; Seshamani, Zhu, and Volpp, 2006). An exception is Wu and Shen (2014) who find that hospitals facing
greater payment cuts experienced worse patient outcomes in the long-run.




                                                   24
by the Medicare share of total discharges, as it allows us to more directly estimate the average
hospital income loss as result of the BBA.

4.5.3   Alternative Functional Forms

In Appendix F, we examine the sensitivity of our benchmark results to the choice of functional
form. Recall that the outcome variables are highly skewed (Figure C1). As a result, we
transform outcome variables with the inverse hyperbolic sine function. In this robustness
check, we use the “raw” number of grant applications, grants funded, and publications as
the outcome. The grant results in Tables F1 and F2 are quite similar to those reported in
Tables 2 and 3, though larger in magnitude. The effect on publications in Tables F3 and F4
are also similar to the main publication results, except there is a disproportionate increase
in publications that are not subsequently cited by a patent (relative to publications that
are subsequently cited by a patent) and in disruptive publications (relative to consolidating
publications).

4.5.4   Instrumental Variables Estimation

Appendix G considers an alternative strategy for capturing the exogenous variation in the
PPS reimbursement formula. Following Shen (2003), we construct a simulated post-BBA
revenue per discharge change that we use to instrument the actual post-BBA revenue per
discharge change in a series of “long-difference” regressions. The difference in simulated and
actual post-BBA revenue per discharge changes is documented in Figure G1. Table reports
the two-stage least square regression results for our primary research outcomes. The results
are consistent with our core results: hospitals that experience a larger financial loss as a
result of the BBA experience an increase in research outcomes. The effects are both seen
in the short-run (Panel A) and long-run (Panel B), though the effects are only statistically
significant for publications in the long-run.

4.5.5   Intended Effects of the BBA

Our primary analysis focuses on simulating the revenue per discharge that hospitals would
have lost under the BBA, had the implemented changes been in effect in 1995. Notably, we
focus on implemented changes to the Medicare payments, not the intended effects. However,
as noted above, several post-BBA reforms were enacted to provide relief to hospitals, ulti-
mately creating a wedge between the intended and implemented Medicare payment changes.
To illustrate, DSH payments were reduced by 2 percent in 2001, rather than the 4 percent



                                              25
reduction as outlined in the BBA. We probe the robustness of our main results by simulating
the revenue that hospitals would have lost under the BBA, had the intended effects of the
reform been in effect earlier. The results in Appendix H are similar to the main results, both
in terms of magnitude and statistical significance.

4.5.6     NIH Budget Doubling

As discussed previously, our empirical strategy relies on the maintained assumption that any
concurrent changes in hospitals’ research outcomes are not correlated with their exposure to
the reform. The doubling on the NIH budget from 1998 to 2003 may violate this assumption.
Congress increased the NIH budget from $13.7 billion to $27.2 billion over this five-year
period (Congressional Research Service 2020). If the NIH budget doubling disproportionately
increased funding for the type of research conducted by more exposed hospitals, this could
lead us to overstate the true impact of the BBA on research outcomes. Indeed, Figure C3
suggests that research-intensive teaching hospitals are driving our main research effects.
To assess the extent to which our results are driven by the doubling of the NIH budget
doubling, we conduct two additional empirical tests in Appendix I. First, we explore whether
the doubling of the NIH budget was “age-biased.” Empirically, we examine whether NIH
budget increases disproportionately benefited research on health conditions affecting elderly
populations.26 Funding appears to have flown slightly more towards research on diseases
that targeted the elderly, but the differences are small in magnitude and not statistically
significant. Second, we investigate how research outcomes respond to changes to the Medicare
payment formula, holding teaching intensity fixed. Specifically, we examine how changes to
DSH payments (and not IME payments) shape subsequent research outcomes. Relative to
the main level results, the estimates in Appendix Table I2, though smaller in magnitude as
expected, and are similar both in terms of direction and statistical significance.

5        Conclusion
We investigate how Medicare financing cuts shape institutions that play a central role in the
biomedical research ecosystem: Academic Medical Centers. Using a differences-in-difference
approach, we find that research activities, measured using a variety of metrics, increase
in response to a reform that decreases clinical care margins. Importantly, we document
evidence that these effects do not cut evenly along the vertical chain of biomedical research.
    26
     Medicare-eligible individuals are almost exclusively above 65 years old. Age-bias in the NIH research
portfolio could advantage high-BBA Bite hospitals since their investigators have privileged access to patient
populations relevant for the study of these conditions.


                                                     26
Laboratory-based “bench” research appears relatively unaffected. On the opposite end of
the spectrum, clinical research activity (including industry-sponsored clinical trials) increases
markedly in more exposed institutions, relative to less exposed ones. This is also the case
for translational research, a type of “basic patient-oriented research” (Ahrens 1992) that
is both hard to appropriate and difficult to perform outside of the AMC setting. Notably,
we fail to find much evidence of countervailing impacts on the quality of care within these
institutions.

     For the past 30 years, McGuire and Pauly’s (1991) model of physician behavior has pro-
vided health economists with a conceptual framework to analyze the effect of price changes
for medical care in the presence of multiple payers. Our results can be interpreted through
that lens: they are consistent with the substitution effect dominating the income effect, lead-
ing researchers to increase their research activities even though the rewards for research—in
the form of federal grants—have stayed relatively constant. However, this interpretation
does not do justice to the subtleties of the academic medical setting. For example, in a
competitive grant system (even one with rising paylines as in the immediate aftermath of
the BBA passage), it is difficult for researchers to “induce demand” in a manner similar to a
doctor treating Medicare patients or those covered by private insurance. Research activities
are subject to lumpy adjustment costs and make the allocation of time less fractional than
in the clinical care setting: a physician who stepped off the research funding treadmill might
find herself unable to “prime the pump” of preliminary research results necessary to make
her NIH grant proposals viable. An additional friction in the substitution process, and one
regularly emphasized by academic medical leaders, is that lower Medicare reimbursements
hampered AMCs’ ability to cross-subsidize research activities. And yet, the combination
of soft money appointments and relatively generous indirect cost recovery rates creates a
channel for teaching hospitals and AMCs to quickly adjust to the financing shock—through
the creation of new academic positions.

      Our research design and data suffers from two principal limitations. First, we analyze
the effect of the BBA at the level of the teaching and research hospital. This is sensible given
the hospital-level nature of the financing shock, but leaves us unable to distinguish between
impacts at the intensive-margin—e.g., within-individual substitution towards certain types
of research activities—and impacts at the extensive margin—e.g., changes in AMC hiring
practices or patterns of exit which favor clinical and translational researchers at the expense
of scientists with a “basic” orientation.




                                               27
      Second, we can only speculate on how the BBA shock might differ from other types
of financing shocks, such as a large philanthropic donation or endowment losses driven by
the 2008 stock market collapse (Dranove, Garthwaite, and Ody 2017). Our sense is that
“generic” shocks might well induce hospitals to increase or decrease research activities as
a whole, but would not necessarily lead to the uneven effects we uncover. Because the
BBA decreased slack financial resources on which a specific constituency—academic clinical
departments—typically laid claim, the reform ended up shaping not simply the rate, but
also the direction of research effort.

     Our results inform the debate regarding the continued existence of Medicare price sur-
charges that favor teaching hospitals relative to other medical institutions (Nicholson 2002).
Economists have typically been skeptical of the rationales offered in defense of these subsidies
(Newhouse and Wilensky 2001; Grischkan, Friedman, and Chandra 2020), but a second-best
argument in their favor is that the financial slack they create for AMCs could enable them to
better support their social mission, including (but not limited to) research. The fact that the
bottom did not fall out of translational research in the wake of the BBA, contrary to the dire
pronouncements of academic medical leaders (Kassirer 1994) should lead us to regard with
more skepticism self-interested claims that these subsidies must continue lest the delicate
fabric of the biomedical research funding ecosystem gets torn apart.

      Our empirical evidence on the effects of Medicare financing cuts demonstrate the im-
portance of providing a more comprehensive and systematic analysis of the trade-offs in an
institutional environment where seemingly disparate activities are tightly linked. As gov-
ernments endeavor to reduce inefficiencies within the health care system, cost-containment
initiatives may have positive or negative implications for institutions that occupy a central
role in the biomedical research ecosystem. Attending to the innovation impacts of well-
intentioned reform efforts is essential to ensure that new policies will in fact improve patient
and societal welfare.




                                              28
References
Acemoglu, Daron and Amy Finkelstein. 2008. “Input and Technology Choices in Regulated
    Industries: Evidence from the Health Care Sector.” Journal of Political Economy 116(5):
    837-880.
Ahrens, Edward H. 1992. The Crisis in Clinical Research: Overcoming Institutional Obstacles.
     New York: Oxford University Press.
Ali, Ayfer and Michelle Gittelman. 2016. “Research Paradigms and Useful Inventions in Medicine:
      Patents and Licensing by Teams of Clinical and Basic Scientists in Academic Medical
      Centers.” Research Policy 45(8): 1499-1511.
Ayanian, John Z. and Joel S. Weissman. 2002. “Teaching Hospitals and Quality of Care: A Review
    of the Literature.” Milbank Quarterly 80(3): 569-593.
Azoulay, Pierre and Ariel Fishman. 2020. “Doctors, $$ and Drug Development: The Rise of For-
     Profit Experimental Medicine.” NBER Working Paper #26892.
Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua S. Graff Zivin, and Gustavo Manso. 2011. “Incentive and Creativity:
     Evidence from the Academic Life Sciences.” RAND Journal of Economics 42(3): 527-554.
Azoulay, Pierre, Wesley H. Greenblatt, and Misty L. Heggeness. 2020. “Long-term Effects from
     Early Exposure to Research: Evidence from the NIH ‘Yellow Berets.’ NBER Working Paper
     #26069.
Baird, Patricia, Jocelyn Downie, and Jon Thompson. 2002. “Clinical Trials and Industry.” Science
     297(5590): 2211.
Bazzoli, Gloria J., Richard C. Lindrooth, Romana Hasnain-Wynia, and Jack Needleman. 2004.
     “The Balanced Budget Act of 1997 and US Hospital Operations.” Inquiry 41(4): 401-417.
Bellemare, Marc F. and Casey J. Wichman. 2020. “Elasticities and the Inverse Hyperbolic Sine
     Transformation” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 82(1): 50-61.
Burbidge, John B., Lonnie Magee, and A. Leslie Robb. 1988. “Alternative Transformations to
     Handle Extreme Values of the Dependent Variable,” Journal of the American Statistical
     Association 83(401): 123–127.
Burke, Laura G., Austin B. Frakt, Dhruv Khullar, E. John Orav, and Ashish K. Jha. 2017.
     “Association Between Teaching Status and Mortality in US Hospitals.” Journal of the
     American Medical Association 317(2):2105-2113.
Butler, Declan. 2008. “Translational Research: Crossing the Valley of Death.” Nature 453(7197):
     840-842.
Chandra, Amitabh, Amy Finkelstein, Adam Sacarny, and Chad Syverson. 2016. “Health Care
    Exceptionalism? Performance and Allocation in the US Health Care Sector.” American
    Economic Review 106(8): 2110-2144.
Chen, Alice and Dana Goldman. 2016. “Health Care Spending: Historical Trends and New
     Directions.” Annual Review of Economics 8: 291-319.
Commonwealth Fund Task Force on Academic Health Centers. 1999. From Bench to Bedside:
   Preserving the Research Mission of Academic Health Centers. New York.: The
   Commonwealth Fund.




                                              29
Congressional Research Service. 2020. National Institutes of Health (NIH) Funding: FY1994-
    FY2020. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office.
Cromwell, Jerry, Walter Adamache and Edward Drozd. 2006. “BBA Impacts on Hospital
    Residents, Finances, and Medicare Subsidies.” Health Care Financing Review 28(1): 117-
    129.
Crowley, William F., Jr., and James F. Gusella. 2009. “Changing Models of Biomedical Research.”
    Translational Research 1(1): 1-4.
Cutler, David M. and Mark McClellan. 2001. “Is Technological Change in Medicine Worth It?”
     Health Affairs 20(5): 11-29.
Cutler, David M. 1998. “Cost Shifting or Cost Cutting? The Incidence of Reductions in Medicare
     Payments.” Tax Policy and the Economy 12: 1-27.
Dasgupta, Partha, and Paul A. David. 1994. “Toward a New Economics of Science.” Research
     Policy 23(5): 487–521.
David, Guy, Richard C. Lindrooth, Lorens A. Helmchen, and Lawton R. Burns. 2014. “Do
     Hospitals Cross-Subsidize?” Journal of Health Economics 37: 198-218.
DeMonaco, Harold, Ayfer Ali, and von Hippel, Eric. 2012. “The Major Role of Clinicians in the
    Discovery of Off-Label Drug Therapies.” Pharmacotherapy 26(3): 323-332.
Dickler, Robert and Gina Shaw. 2000. “The Balanced Budget Act of 1997: Its Impact on US
     Teaching Hospitals.” Annals of Internal Medicine 132(10): 820-824.
Dranove, David, Craig Garthwaite, and Christopher Ody. 2017. “How Do Nonprofits Respond to
    Negative Wealth Shocks? The Impact of the 2008 Stock Market Collapse on Hospitals.”
    RAND Journal of Economics 48(2): 485-525.
Flier, Jeffrey S. 2019. “Academia and Industry: Allocating Credit for Discovery and Development
      of New Therapies.” Journal of Clinical Investigation 129(6): 2172-2174.
Freeman, Richard and John Van Reenen. 2009. “What if Congress Doubled R&D Spending on
     the Physical Sciences?” In Innovation Policy and the Economy, edited by Josh Lerner and
     Scott Stern, 1-38. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Funk, Russell J. and Jason Owen-Smith. 2017. “A Dynamic Network Measure of Technological
     Change.” Management Science 63(3): 791-817.
Furman, Jeffrey L. and Scott Stern. 2011. “Climbing atop the Shoulders of Giants: The Impact of
    Institutions on Cumulative Research.” American Economic Review 101(5): 1933-1963.
Furman, Jeffrey L., Fiona Murray, and Scott Stern. 2012. “Growing Stem Cells: the Impact of
    Federal Funding Policy on the US Scientific Frontier.” Journal of Policy Analysis and
    Management 31(3): 661-705.
Gelijns, Annetine C. and Nathan Rosenberg. 1995. “The Changing Nature of Technological
      Development.” In Source of Medical Technology: University and Industry, edited by Nathan
      Rosenberg, Annetine C. Gelijns, and Holly Dawkins, 3-14. Washington, DC: The National
      Academies Press.
Gershon, Elliot S. 1998. “Making Progress: Does Clinical Research Lead to Breakthroughs in Basic
     Biomedical Sciences.” Academic Medicine 42(1): 95-102.
Giroud, Xavier and Holger M. Mueller. 2019. “Firms’ Internal Networks and Local Economic
     Shocks.” American Economic Review 109(10): 3617-3649.


                                              30
Goldstein, Joseph L., and Michael S. Brown. 1997. “The Clinical Investigator: Bewitched,
     Bothered, and Bewildered—But Still Beloved.” Journal of Clinical Investigation 99(12):
     2803-2812.
Grischkan, Justin A., Ari B. Friedman, and Amitabh Chandra. 2020. “Moving the Financing of
     Graduate Medical Education Into the 21st Century.” Journal of American Medical
     Association 324(11): 1035-1036.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg. 2005. “Market Value and Patent
      Citations.” The RAND Journal of Economics 36(1): 16-38.
He, Daifeng and Jennifer M. Mellor. 2012. “Hospital Volume Responses to Medicare’s Outpatient
     Prospective Payment System: Evidence from Florida.” Journal of Health Economics 31(5):
     730-743.
Hellerstein, Judith. 1998. “Public Funds, Private Funds, and Medical Innovation: How Managed
      Care Affects Public Funds for Clinical Research.” The American Economic Review 88(2):
      112-116.
Henderson, Rebecca. 1994. “The Evolution of Integrative Capability: Innovation in Cardiovascular
    Drug Discovery.” Industrial and Corporate Change 3(3): 607-630.
Iglehart, John K. 1999. “Support for Academic Medical Centers: Revisiting the 1997 Balanced
      Budget Act.” New England Journal of Medicine 341(4): 299-304.
Jacobson, Mireille, Craig C. Earle, Mary Price, and Joseph P. Newhouse. 2010. “How Medicare’s
     Payment Cuts for Cancer Chemotherapy Drugs Changed Patterns of Treatment.” Health
     Affairs 29(7): 1391-1399.
Jain, Mukesh K., Vivian C. Cheung, Paul J. Utz, Brian K. Kobilka, Tadataka Yamada, and
      Robert Lefkowitz. 2019. “Saving the Endangered Physician-Scientist—A Plan for
      Accelerating Medical Breakthroughs.” New England Journal of Medicine 381(5): 399-403.
Jones, Robert and Susan Sanderson. 1996. “Clinical Revenues Used to Support the Academic
     Mission of Medical Schools, 1992-93.” Academic Medicine 71(3): 300-307.
Kaestner, Robert and Jose Guardado. 2008. “Medicare Reimbursement, Nurse Satffing, and
     Patient Outcomes.” Journal of Health Economics 27(2): 339-361.
Kahn, Charles N., III., and Hanns Kuttner. 1999. Budget Bills and Medicare Policy: the Politics
    of the BBA. Health Affairs 18(1): 37-47.
Kassirer, Jerome P. 1994. “Academic Medical Centers Under Siege.” New England Journal of
     Medicine 331(20): 1370-1371.
Keeler, Emmett B., Grace M. Carter, and Sally Trude. 1988. “Insurance Aspect of DRG Outlier
     Payments.” Journal of Health Economics 7(3): 193-214.
Keeler, Emmett B., Lisa V. Rubenstein, Katherine L. Kahn, David Draper, Ellen R. Harrison,
     Michael J. McGinty, William H. Rogers, Robert H. Brook. 1992. “Hospital Characteristics
     and Quality of Care.” Journal of the American Medical Association 268(13): 1709-1714.
Korn, David, Rich, Robert R., Garrison, Howard H., Golub, Sidney H., Hendrix, Mary J.C.,
     Heinig, Stephen J., Masters, Bettie Sue, Turman, Richard J. 2002. “Science Policy : The
     NIH Budget in the ‘Postdoubling’ Era.” Science 296(5572): 1401-1402.
Li, Danielle, Pierre Azoulay, and Bhaven N. Sampat. 2017. “The Applied Value of Public
     Investments in Biomedical Research.” Science 356(6333): 78-81.


                                              31
Lindrooth, Richard C., Gloria J. Bazzoli, and Jan Clement. 2007. “The Effect of Reimbursement
     on the Intensity of Hospital Services.” Southern Economic Journal 73(3): 575-87.
Liu, Weishu, Guangyuan Hu, and Li Tang. 2018. “Missing Author Address Information in Web
     of Science—An Explorative Study.” Journal of Infometrics 12(3): 985-997.
Marx, Matt and Aaron Fuegi. 2020. “Reliance on Science: Worldwide Front-Page Patent Citations
      to Scientific Articles.” Strategic Management Journal 41(): 1-23. Available at
      https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.3145.
McGuire, Thomas G. and Mark V. Pauly. 1991. “Physician Response to Fee Changes with
    Multiple Payers.” Journal of Health Economics 10(4): 385-410.
Meador, Kimford J. 2015. “Decline of Clinical Research in Academic Medical Centers.” Neurology
    85(13): 1171-1176.
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission. 2003. Report to Congress: Medicare Payment Policy.
     Washington, DC: Medicare Payment Advisory Commission
Mokyr, Joel. 2002. The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy. Princeton:
    Princeton University Press.
Murray, Fiona. 2002. “Innovation as Co-evolution of Scientific and Technological Networks:
    Exploring Tissue Engineering.” Research Policy 31(8-9): 1389-1403.
Nathan, David G. 1998. “Clinical Research: Perceptions, Reality, and Proposed Solutions.”
     Journal of the American Medical Association 280(16): 1427-1431.
Nathan, David G. 2005. “The Several Cs of Translational Clinical Research.” Journal of Clinical
     Investigation 115(4): 795-797.
Nathan, David G. and David J. Weatherall. 2002. “Academic Freedom in Clinical Research.” New
     England Journal of Medicine 347(17): 1368-1371.
Nathan, David G. and Jean D. Wilson. 2003. “Clinical Research and the NIH—A Report Card.”
     New England Journal of Medicine 349(19): 1860-1865.
Newhouse, Joseph P. and Gail R. Wilensky. 2001. “Paying For Graduate Medical Education: The
    Debate Goes On.” Health Affairs 20(2): 136-147.
Nicholson, Sean. 2002. Medicare Hospital Subsidies. Washington, DC: The AEI Press.
Nicholson, Sean and David Song. 2001. “The Incentive Effects of the Medicare Indirect Medical
     Education Policy.” Journal of Health Economics 20(6): 909-933.
Prasad, Vinayak K. 2020. How Bad Policy and Bad Evidence Harm People with Cancer. Baltimore,
     MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Reinhardt, Uwe E. 2006. “The Pricing of US Hospital Services: Chaos Behind a Veil of Secrecy.”
     Health Affairs 25(1): 57-69.
Rosenberg, Leon E. 1999. “Physician-Scientists—Endangered and Essential.” Science 283(5400):
     331-332.
Rosenberg, Nathan. 1963. Technological Change in the Machine Tool Industry, 1840-1910. Journal
     of Economic History. 23(4): 414-443.
Rosenberg, Nathan. 1994. Exploring the Black Box. New York: Cambridge University Press.




                                              32
Rosenberg, Nathan. 2009. “Some Critical Episodes in the Progress of Medical Innovation: An
     Anglo-American Perspective.” Research Policy 38(2): 234-242.
Seshamani, Meena, J. Sanford Schwartz, and Kevin G. Volpp. 2006. “The Effect of Cuts in
     Medicare Reimbursement on Hospital Mortality.” Health Services Research 41(3 Pt 1): 683–
     700.
Seshamani, Meena, Jingsan Zhu, and Kevin G. Volpp. 2006. “Did Postoperative Mortality Increase
     after the Implementation of the Medicare Balanced Budget Act?” Medical Care 44(6): 527–
     533.
Shen, Yu-Chu. 2003. “The Effect of Financial Pressure on the Quality of Care in Hospitals.”
     Journal of Health Economics 22(2): 243-269.
Shen, Yu-Chu and Vivian Y. Wu. 2013. “Reductions in Medicare Payments and Patient
     Outcomes: An Analysis of 5 Leading Medicare Conditions.” Medical Care 51(11): 970-977.
Smith, Cynthia, Cathy Cowan, Art Sensenig, Aaron Caitlin, and the Health Accounts Team.
     2005. “Health Spending Growth Slows in 2003.” Health Affairs 24(1): 185-194.
Solow, Robert M. 1956. “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth.” Quarterly Journal
     of Economics 70(1): 65-94.
Stelfox, Henry Thomas, Grace Chua, Keith O’Rourke, and Allan Detsky. 1998. “Conflict of
      Interest in the Debate Over Calcium-Channel Antagonists.” New England Journal of
      Medicine 338(2): 101-106.
Stokes, Donald E. 1997. Pasteur’s Quadrant: Basic Science and Technological Innovation.
     Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Sung, Nancy S., William F. Crowley, Jr., Myron Genel, et al. 2003. “Central Challenges Facing
     the National Clinical Research Enterprise.” Journal of the American Medical Association
     289(10): 1278-1287.
Taylor, Donald H., David J. Whellan, and Frank A. Sloan. 1999. “Effects of Admission to a
     Teaching Hospital on the Cost and Quality of Care for Medicare Beneficiaries.” New England
     Journal of Medicine 340(4): 293-299.
Tabakovic, Haris and Thomas Wollmann. 2019. “The Impact of Money on Science: Evidence from
    Unexpected NCAA Football Outcomes.” Journal of Public Economics 178: 104066
Trajtenberg, Manuel, Rebecca Henderson, and Adam Jaffe. 1997. “University vs. Corporate
     Patents: A Window on the Basicness of Innovations.” Economics of Innovation and New
     Technology 5(1): 19-50.
Volpp, Kevin G., R. Tamara Konetzka, Jingsan Zhu, Lori Parsons, and Eric Peterson. 2005.
     “Effect of Cuts in Medicare Reimbursement on Process and Outcome of Care for Acute
     Myocardial Infarction Patients?” Circulation 112(15): 2268–2275.
Weissman, Joel S., Demet Saglam, Eric G. Campbell, Nancyanne Causino, and David Blumenthal.
     1999. Journal of American Medical Association 281(12): 1093-1098.
Woolf, Steven H. 2008. “The Meaning of Translational Research and Why It Matters.” Journal of
    American Medical Association 299(2): 211-2013.
Wu, Vivian. 2010. “Hospital Cost-shifting Revisited: New Evidence from the Balanced Budget
    Act of 1997.” International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics 28(2): 350-360.




                                              33
Wu, Vivian Y. and Yu-Chu Shen. 2014. “Long-Term Impact of Medicare Payment Reductions on
    Patient Outcomes.” Health Services Research 49(5):1596-1615.
Wurtman, Richard J., and Robert L. Bettiker. 1995. “The Slowing of Treatment Discovery.”
    Nature Medicine 1(11): 1122-1125.
Wurtman, Richard J. 1997. “What Went Right: Why is HIV a Treatable Infection?” Nature
    Medicine 3(7): 714-717.
Wyngaarden, James B. 1979. “The Clinical Investigator as an Endangered Species.” New England
    Journal of Medicine 301(23): 1254-1259.
Yip, Winnie C. 1998. “Physician Response to Medicare Fee Reductions: Changes in the Volume
     of CABG Surgeries in the Medicare and Private Sectors.” Journal of Health Economics
     17(6): 675-699.




                                            34
                            Figure 1: Data Sources and Variable Construction


                                                                    Healthcare Provider
                                                               Cost Reporting System Data
                                               1. Hospital names and addresses
                                               2. Data on patient discharges
                                                 à Link to AHA Annual Surveys to identify hospital COTH
                                                 status and AMA medical school affiliations
                                                 à Link to Impact Files to generate counterfactual and true
                                                 Medicare revenue payments




                    PubMed/Web of Science Publication                                                            NIH Administrative
                              Database                                                                             Data on Grants
               1. Database on publications                                                      1.   Applicant names and addresses
               2. Author names and addresses                                                    2.   Funding outcome
               3. Citation information for publications                                         3.   Applicant degrees
               4. MeSH terms




                                                                              # Clinical trial
                                           # Publications with               publications and
# Publications with Bench                 translational research                                                   # Grant applications and
                                                                         publications with other
  research MeSH terms                         MeSH terms                                                                funded grants
                                                                         clinical research MeSH
                                                                                   terms
  Laboratory Research                   Translational Research              Clinical Research




                                                                              35
                                                   Figure 2: Distribution of BBA Bite

                                   100



                                    80
             Number of Hospitals




                                    60



                                    40



                                    20



                                     0
                                         0.000          0.005             0.010          0.015              0.020

                                             [Ln(Actual Rev.) - Ln(Sim. Rev.)] x Medicare Discharge Share

Notes: This figure shows a histogram of the BBA Bite for the teaching hospital sample, where BBA Bite
is the product of (i) the difference between the (log) simulated price per discharge and actual (log) PPS
price per discharge in 1995; and (ii) the Medicare share of discharges averaged over 1992-1995. The solid
line indicates the mean (0.0045) of this variable and the dotted lines indicates the median (0.0035). Sources:
Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment
Impact Files.




                                                                     36
                                                  Figure 3: Change in NIH Grant Applications, 1992-2007

                                                  15




                   Number of Grant Applications   10




                                                      5




                                                      0
                                                      1992   1994   1996   1998        2000   2002     2004   2006

                                                                                   Year
                                                                            Total                New
                                                                            Renewal


Notes: This figure plots the annual number of grant applications, averaged across all hospitals in the teaching
hospital sample. The dashed line indicates the year in which the BBA came into effect. Source: NIH IMPAC
II.


                                                      Figure 4: Change in NIH Grants Funded, 1992-2007

                                                  4
                   Number of Grants Funded




                                                  3



                                                  2



                                                  1



                                                  0
                                                   1992      1994   1996   1998        2000   2002     2004   2006

                                                                                   Year
                                                                            Total               New
                                                                            Renewal


Notes: This figure plots the annual number of grants funded, averaged across all hospitals in the teaching
hospital sample. The dashed line indicates the year in which the BBA came into effect. Source: NIH IMPAC
II.



                                                                                  37
                                                 Figure 5: Change in Publications, 1992-2007

                                            60




                   Number of Publications
                                            50

                                            40

                                            30

                                            20

                                            10

                                             0
                                             1992   1994   1996        1998          2000   2002        2004        2006

                                                                                Year
                                                           All                                Laboratory Research
                                                           Translational Research             Clinical Trials
                                                           Other Clinical Research



Notes: This figure plots the annual number of publications, averaged across all hospitals in the teaching
hospital sample. The dashed vertical line indicates the year in which the BBA came into effect. “Laboratory
Research” refers to publications that are not disease-oriented, are not clinical trial publications, and rely
on either a molecular biology technique, a model organism, cellular structures and macromolecules, or
biochemical and cellular processes (based on MeSH terms). “Translational Research” refers to publications
that are disease-oriented, are not clinical trial publications, and rely on either a molecular biology technique,
a model organism, cellular structures and macromolecules, or biochemical and cellular processes (based
on MeSH terms). “Clinical Trials” refers to publications are indicated as clinical trials based on MeSH
terms or the publication type field in PubMed. “Other Clinical Research” refers to publications that are
disease-oriented, not clinical trials, and not tagged by any bench MeSH keywords. The discrete shift in total
publications in 1998 is likely explained by our strategy for constructing the publication dataset, as discussed
in Section 3. Sources: Azoulay, Greenblatt, and Heggeness (2020); PubMed; Web of Science.




                                                                             38
                                      Figure 6: Effect on the Number of Grant Applications


                        50


                        40


                        30
  β̂z from Equation 3




                        20


                        10


                         0


                        -10


                        -20

                              1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                     Year

Notes: This figure plots the response in grants funded in the teaching hospital sample. Each dot corresponds
to coefficient estimates stemming from the event study specification described in Section 4.1, in which
asinh(number of grant applications) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as interaction
terms between a hospital’s BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA. Coefficient
estimates correspond to a dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table 2, Panel A, Column 1
and are from OLS models. The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered
around hospital) around these estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information
System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II.




                                                                39
                                         Figure 7: Effect on the Number of Grants Funded


                        30




                        20
  β̂z from Equation 3




                        10




                         0




                        -10




                        -20

                              1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                     Year

Notes: This figure plots the response in grants funded in the teaching hospital sample. Each dot corre-
sponds to coefficient estimates stemming from the event study specification described in Section 4.1, in
which asinh(number of grants funded) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as interaction
terms between a hospital’s BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA. Coefficient
estimates correspond to a dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table 3, Panel A, Column 1
and are from OLS models. The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered
around hospital) around these estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information
System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II.




                                                                40
                                      Figure 8: Effect on the Number of Grant Applications
                                         Across Newly Hired and Seasoned Researchers


                        100
  β̂z from Equation 3




                         50




                          0




                        -50

                              1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                     Year

                                                          Novice               Incumbent

Notes: This figure plots the response in grants applications across newly hired and seasoned researchers.
Each dot corresponds to coefficient estimates stemming from the event study specification described in
Section 4.1, in which asinh(number of grant applications) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as
well as interaction terms between a hospital’s BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after
the BBA. Coefficient estimates correspond to a dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table 3,
Panel A, Columns 4 and 5, and are from OLS models. The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust
standard errors, clustered around hospital) around these estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider
Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH
IMPAC II.




                                                                41
                                          Figure 9: Effect on the Number of Publications


                        30




                        20
  β̂z from Equation 3




                        10




                         0




                        -10




                        -20


                              1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                     Year

Notes: This figure plots the response in publications in the teaching hospital sample. Each dot corre-
sponds to coefficient estimates stemming from the event study specification described in Section 4.1, in
which asinh(number of publications) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as interaction
terms between a hospital’s BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA. Coefficient
estimates correspond to a dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table 4, Panel A, Column 1
and are from OLS models. The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered
around hospital) around these estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information
System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; PubMed, Web of Science.




                                                                42
                                         Figure 10: Effect on Bench Research Publications


                        20




                        10
  β̂z from Equation 3




                         0




                        -10




                        -20




                        -30

                              1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                     Year

Notes: This figure plots the response in bench research publications in the teaching hospital sample. Each
dot corresponds to coefficient estimates stemming from the event study specification described in Section 4.1,
in which asinh(number of publications) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as interaction
terms between a hospital’s BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA. Coefficient
estimates correspond to a dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table 5, Panel A, Column 1
and are from OLS models. The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered
around hospital) around these estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information
System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; Azoulay, Greenblatt, and Heggeness
(2020); PubMed; Web of Science.




                                                                43
                                     Figure 11: Effect on Translational Research Publications


                        40



                        30
  β̂z from Equation 3




                        20



                        10



                         0



                        -10



                        -20

                              1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                     Year

Notes: This figure plots the response in translational research publications in the teaching hospital sample.
Each dot corresponds to coefficient estimates stemming from the event study specification described in
Section 4.1, in which asinh(number of publications) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as
interaction terms between a hospital’s BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA.
Coefficient estimates correspond to a dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table 5, Panel A,
Column 2 and are from OLS models. The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors,
clustered around hospital) around these estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting
Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; Azoulay, Greenblatt,
and Heggeness (2020); PubMed; Web of Science.




                                                                44
                        Figure 12: Effect on Clinical Research Publications

                                                                                  A. Clinical Trials
                                             40



                                             20




                       β̂z from Equation 3    0



                                             -20



                                             -40



                                             -60

                                                   1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                                        Year


                                                                             B. Other Clinical Research
                                             40


                                             30


                                             20
                       β̂z from Equation 3




                                             10


                                              0


                                             -10


                                             -20


                                             -30

                                                   1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                                        Year


Notes: This figure plots the response in clinical research publications in the teaching hospital sample. Each
dot corresponds to coefficient estimates stemming from the event study specification described in Section 4.1,
in which asinh(number of publications) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as interaction
terms between a hospital’s BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA. Coefficient
estimates correspond to a dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table 5, Panel A, Columns 5
and 6 and are from OLS models. The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors,
clustered around hospital) around these estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting
Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; Azoulay, Greenblatt,
and Heggeness (2020); PubMed; Web of Science.




                                                                                    45
                                                  Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                                                  Count   Mean     Median    SD      Min     Max
            Panel A. Hospital Characteristics
            Discharges (1,000s)                                                    780    16.82    14.91    10.39 0.34    62.79
            Inpatient Days (1,000s)                                                780     89.84   76.03     60.25 0.96   439.06
            Medicare Teaching Payment ($1,000,000s)                                780      5.45     2.26     7.91  0.00   59.81
            Medicare Disproportionate Share Payment ($1,000,000s)                  780      3.97     2.38    4.54   0.00   36.21
            Total Revenue ($1,000,000s)                                            765    486.94   374.24   410.95 14.43 3,182.46
            Beds                                                                   780    360.54   319.41   202.23 29.12 1,397.62
            Residents and Interns                                                  767    101.92    41.82   139.35 0.06 1,097.72
            BBA Bite (x100)                                                        780     0.45     0.35     0.35   0.00   1.84
            Medicare Share of Discharges in 1995                                   780     0.34     0.34     0.13   0.02   0.71
            Medicare Share of Inpatient Days in 1995                               780      0.43     0.46    0.15   0.03   0.79
            Medicare Revenue Per Discharge in 1995 ($1,000s)                       780     8.30     7.48     2.85  3.67   27.48

            Panel B. Grants
            Number of Grant Applications
            Total                                                                  780     8.82     0.00    32.97    0.00   444.00
            New                                                                    780     7.15     0.00    26.43    0.00   355.75
            Competitive Renewal                                                    780     1.67     0.00     6.60    0.00    88.25
            Novice Investigators                                                   780     4.55     0.00    17.07    0.00   208.81
            Incumbent Investigators                                                780     4.10     0.00    15.44    0.00   227.25
            MD Principal Investigators                                             780     3.08     0.00    11.87    0.00   158.62
            PhD Principal Investigators                                            780     4.26     0.00    16.22    0.00   193.38
            MD-PhD Principal Investigators                                         780     1.36     0.00     5.81    0.00    87.75

            Number of Grants Funded
            Total                                                                  780     2.55     0.00    10.42    0.00   147.75
            New                                                                    780     1.82     0.00    7.40     0.00   106.38
            Competitive Renewal                                                    780     0.73     0.00     3.05    0.00    41.38
            Novice Investigators                                                   780     1.40     0.00    5.74     0.00    74.06
            Incumbent Investigators                                                780     1.11     0.00    4.62     0.00   72.44
            MD Principal Investigators                                             780     0.96     0.00    4.05     0.00    55.00
            PhD Principal Investigators                                            780     1.16     0.00    4.77     0.00    61.00
            MD-PhD Principal Investigators                                         780     0.40     0.00    1.92     0.00    30.88

            Panel C. Publications
            Total                                                                  780    45.40     2.06    148.55   0.00   1,683.62
            Citation Ranking: ≤25                                                  780    11.19     0.81     31.02   0.00    306.12
            Citation Ranking: 26-50                                                780    10.41     0.44     32.00   0.00    333.38
            Citation Ranking: 51-75                                                780    11.03     0.38     37.19   0.00    413.19
            Citation Ranking: 76-95                                                780     9.84     0.25     37.25   0.00    456.62
            Citation Ranking: 96-99                                                780     2.27     0.06      9.98   0.00    130.56
            Citation Ranking: >99                                                  780     0.67     0.00     3.18    0.00     45.12
            Cited In a Patent                                                      780    11.34     0.25     43.40   0.00    547.31
            Not Cited In a Patent                                                  780    34.07     1.75    106.05   0.00   1,136.31
            Disruptive                                                             780     1.69     0.12     4.86    0.00     51.00
            Consolidating                                                          780    40.72     1.75    135.60   0.00   1,551.44
            Laboratory Research: Pub. with Bench MeSH                              780    12.41     0.06    47.18    0.00    487.50
            Translational Research: Pub. with Translational MeSH                   780    12.34     0.25    42.86    0.00    516.00
            Builds on Translational MeSH                                           780     3.83     0.25     11.94   0.00    122.25
            Inspires Translational MeSH                                            780     6.40     0.12     23.48   0.00    297.81
            Clinical Research: Clinical Trial Pub.                                 780     5.43     0.38     16.94   0.00    179.69
            Clinical Research: Pub. with Other Clinical MeSH                       780    11.54     0.94     34.80   0.00    402.31

            Panel D. Clinical Outcomes (Risk-Adjusted Survival Rates [30 Days])
            Heart Attack                                                           700     0.90     0.91     0.03    0.73    1.00
            Heart failure                                                          700     0.96     0.96     0.02    0.89    1.01
            Pneumonia                                                              700     0.98     0.98     0.02    0.89    1.04
            Hip/knee                                                               700     0.95     0.95     0.02    0.86    1.04
Notes: This table shows hospital characteristics for the hospitals in the teaching hospital sample between 1992-2007. All
variables are measured yearly. For example, “Discharges (1000s)” is the average number of patients a hospital receives in
a year. “Medicare Teaching Payment,” “Medicare Disproportionate Share Payment,” and “Total Revenue” are adjusted for
inflation using the CPI and are measured in 1997 dollars. All hospital characteristics, grant, and publication variables have 780
observations, except for “Total Revenue” and “Residents and Interns,” because of missing data from the Healthcare Provider
Cost Reporting Information System. Similarly, clinical outcomes data is only available for the subset of hospitals in the teaching
hospital sample that matched to the clinical outcomes data. Clinical outcomes are measured in three-year bins–e.g., hospital-
level survival rates in 2005 are estimated over patient claims in 2003, 2004, and 2005. For each hospital, we use three-year
bins for four years (1996, 2002, 2005, and 2008). Each publication’s disruptiveness is measured by using the Funk and Owen-
Smith (2017) disruptiveness index, denoted by d. “Disruptive” publications refer to publications with d ≤ 95th percentile
and “Consolidating” publications refers to publications with d > 95th percentile. See Section 3 for detailed data descriptions.
Sources: Azoulay, Greenblatt, and Heggeness (2020); Chandra et al. (2016); Funk and Owen-Smith (2017); Healthcare Provider
Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II; Marx and
Fuegi (2020); PubMed; Web of Science.



                                                                    46
                           Table 2: Effect on the Number of Grant Applications
                                                                    Principal Investigator      Principal Investigator
                                                 Grant Cycle
                                                                         Experience                    Degree
                                     Total        New       Renewal Novice Incumbent            MD      PhD     MD-PhD
                                      (1)          (2)         (3)      (4)          (5)        (6)      (7)        (8)
        A. BBA Bite × Post          19.07∗∗∗    24.53∗∗∗      3.314  39.36∗∗∗      11.63∗∗   16.40∗∗∗ 22.75∗∗∗ 28.53∗∗∗
                                    (4.284)      (4.421)    (2.754)  (4.290)       (3.943)   (4.298)  (4.032)    (4.070)
        Elasticity                   0.053        0.069       0.011   0.112         0.033      0.048    0.065     0.099
        Adjusted R2                  0.023        0.034       0.005   0.106         0.011      0.021    0.039     0.056
        Diff. Wald test p-value                         0.000                 0.000                     0.151     0.010
        B. High BBA Bite × Post 0.105∗∗∗ 0.136∗∗∗ 0.00913 0.205∗∗∗               0.0779∗∗∗  0.0944∗∗∗ 0.122∗∗∗ 0.145∗∗∗
                                       (0.0247) (0.0249) (0.0152) (0.0250)        (0.0217)  (0.0216) (0.0213) (0.0219)
        Elasticity                       0.110    0.146       0.009   0.228         0.081      0.099    0.129     0.155
        Adjusted R2                      0.019    0.028       0.005   0.088         0.011      0.018    0.032     0.043
        Diff. Wald test p-value                         0.000                 0.000                     0.211     0.038
        Mean of Outcome                  0.751    0.705       0.372   0.541         0.587     0.519     0.533     0.328
        Nb. Observations                12,480   12,480      12,480   12,480       12,480     12,480   12,480    12,480
        Nb. Hospitals                     780      780         780     780           780        780      780       780
Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on the number of grant applications, in the
teaching hospital sample. Observations are at the hospital-year level. Outcomes are transformed with the inverse hyperbolic
sine function. Column 1 presents results from OLS regressions. Columns 2-8 present estimates from seemingly unrelated
regressions. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. The elasticity of 0.053 in Panel A implies that a one percentage
increase in BBA Bite is associated on average with a 0.053 percent yearly increase in grant applications following the BBA’s
enactment. A Panel B elasticity of 0.110 implies that High BBA Share hospitals experience on average a 11 percent yearly
increase in grant applications in the post-BBA time period. The fourth row and eighth row show p-values from Wald tests that
compare coefficients on BBA Bite × After (Panel A) or High BBA Bite × After (Panel B) across different columns (Column 2
vs. Column 3; Column 4 vs. Column 5; Column 6 vs. Column 7; Column 6 vs. Column 8). Robust standard errors (clustered at
the hospital level) are in parentheses. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective
Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II.
∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.




                                                               47
                             Table 3: Effect on the Number of Grants Funded
                                                                   Principal Investigator    Principal Investigator
                                                Grant Cycle
                                                                        Experience                  Degree
                                   Total         New       Renewal Novice Incumbent           MD      PhD     MD-PhD
                                    (1)           (2)         (3)     (4)          (5)        (6)      (7)        (8)
       A. BBA Bite × Post         15.54∗∗∗     20.93∗∗∗ 7.571∗∗ 30.67∗∗∗         6.904∗∗   13.34∗∗∗ 18.15∗∗∗   21.95∗∗∗
                                  (3.325)       (3.447)    (2.571) (3.501)       (2.891)   (3.239)   (3.216)    (3.022)
       Elasticity                  0.047         0.067       0.036   0.105        0.026      0.054    0.067      0.166
       Adjusted R2                 0.018         0.030       0.005  0.073         0.008     0.015     0.027      0.041
       Diff. Wald test p-value                         0.000                0.000                     0.138      0.013
       B. High BBA Bite × Post 0.0759∗∗∗ 0.105∗∗∗ 0.0341∗∗ 0.151∗∗∗             0.0415∗∗  0.0685∗∗∗ 0.0919∗∗∗ 0.103∗∗∗
                                      (0.0181) (0.0190) (0.0120) (0.0185)       (0.0155)  (0.0152) (0.0169) (0.0155)
       Elasticity                       0.079    0.111       0.035   0.163        0.042      0.071    0.096      0.108
       Adjusted R2                     0.013     0.022       0.003  0.052         0.008     0.011     0.020      0.026
       Diff. Wald test p-value                         0.000                0.000                     0.138      0.025
       Mean of Outcome                 0.439     0.382       0.246  0.325         0.312     0.285     0.300      0.159
       Nb. Observations                12,480   12,480      12,480  12,480       12,480     12,480   12,480     12,480
       Nb. Hospitals                     780      780         780     780          780        780      780        780
Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on the number of grants funded, in the
teaching hospital sample. Observations are at the hospital-year level. Outcomes are transformed with the inverse hyperbolic
sine function. Column 1 presents results from OLS regressions. Columns 2-8 present estimates from seemingly unrelated
regressions. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. The elasticity of 0.047 in Panel A implies that a one percentage
increase in BBA Bite is associated on average with a 0.047 percent yearly increase in grant applications following the BBA’s
enactment. A Panel B elasticity of 0.079 implies that High BBA Share hospitals experience on average a 7.9 percent yearly
increase in grant applications in the post-BBA time period. The fourth row and eighth row show p-values from Wald tests that
compare coefficients on BBA Bite × After (Panel A) or High BBA Bite × After (Panel B) across different columns (Column 2
vs. Column 3; Column 4 vs. Column 5; Column 6 vs. Column 7; Column 6 vs. Column 8). Standard errors are in parentheses,
and are clustered at the hospital level. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective
Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II.
∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.




                                                              48
                                                                Table 4: Effect on Publication Impact
                                    Total                                  By Citation Percentile                                 Cited in a Patent               By Disruption
                                                                                                                                                            Consolidating Disruptive
                                                 ≤25          26-50        51-75           76-95      96-99         >99          Yes                No
                                                                                                                                                             Research        Research
                                     (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)               (9)         (10)           (11)
                                                                                                                                                                     ∗
       A. BBA Bite × Post           6.148       12.884∗∗     12.721∗∗     14.155∗∗∗      16.925∗∗∗   20.612∗∗∗    19.501∗∗∗     8.646∗            9.295∗       9.478         14.332∗∗∗
                                   (5.376)      (4.488)      (4.334)       (4.261)        (4.590)     (4.012)      (3.197)      (4.433)           (5.239)     (5.315)         (3.768)
       Elasticity                   0.017         0.036        0.036         0.040         0.047        0.063       0.098        0.024             0.026        0.026          0.046
       Adjusted R2                  0.029         0.029       0.022         0.019          0.028        0.034       0.032        0.013             0.034       0.027           0.012
       Diff. Wald test p-value        -           0.019       0.021          0.018         0.002       0.002        0.009                 0.874                        0.270
       B. High BBA Bite × Post     0.075∗       0.110∗∗∗     0.093∗∗       0.103∗∗∗      0.109∗∗∗     0.123∗∗∗    0.108∗∗∗      0.074∗∗           0.091∗∗     0.084∗∗        0.099∗∗∗
                                   (0.039)      (0.031)      (0.029)       (0.028)        (0.029)     (0.020)      (0.016)      (0.029)           (0.038)     (0.040)         (0.026)
       Elasticity                   0.078         0.117        0.097         0.108         0.115        0.130       0.114        0.077             0.095        0.087          0.104
       Adjusted R2                  0.030         0.030       0.022         0.019          0.027        0.031       0.027        0.013             0.035       0.028           0.012
       Diff. Wald test p-value        -           0.112       0.457          0.281         0.240       0.189        0.389                 0.596                        0.647
       Mean of Outcome              1.991        1.347        1.153          1.089         0.962        0.469       0.232       0.976             1.876        1.822           0.800
       Nb. Observations            12,480        12,480       12,480        12,480        12,480       12,480      12,480       12,480            12,480       12,480         12,480
       Nb. Hospitals                 780           780          780           780           780          780         780         780               780           780            780
     Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on the number of publications, by impact, in the teaching hospital sample. Observations
     are at the hospital-year level. Outcomes are transformed with the inverse hyperbolic sine function. Estimates are from seemingly unrelated regressions and each coefficient
     is from a separate regression. Each publication’s disruptiveness is measured by using the Funk and Owen-Smith (2017) disruptiveness index, denoted by d. Column 8 refers
     to publications with d≤95th percentile and Column 9 refers to publications with d > 95th percentile. The elasticity of 0.017 in Panel A implies that a one percentage
     increase in BBA Bite is associated on average with a 0.017 percent yearly increase in publications following the BBA’s enactment. An elasticity of 0.078 in Panel B implies
     that High BBA Bite hospitals experience on average a 7.8 percent yearly increase in publications in the post-BBA time period. The fourth row and eighth row show




49
     p-values from Wald tests that compare coefficients on BBA Bite × After (Panel A) or High BBA Bite × After (Panel B) across different columns. For Columns 2 to 7, the
     fourth and eight row compare estimates in Column 1 vs. estimates in the focal column. For Columns 8 and 9, the fourth and eight row show p-values from Wald tests that
     compare Column 8 and 9 estimates. For Columns 10 and 11, the fourth and eight row show p-values from Wald tests that compare Column 10 and Column 11. Standard
     errors are in parentheses, and are clustered at the hospital level. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System
     Payment Impact Files; Funk and Owen-Smith (2017); PubMed, Web of Science.
     ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.
                                 Table 5: Effect on Publication Composition
                                 Laboratory
                                                            Translational Research                     Clinical Research
                                  Research
                                                                   Builds on        Inspiring
                                    Bench        Translational
                                                                 Translational Translational Clinical Trials          Other
                                    MeSH            MeSH
                                                                     MeSH             MeSH
                                          (1)          (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)
    A. BBA Bite × Post                  -4.277      15.509∗∗∗      33.239∗∗∗        20.858∗∗∗       34.604∗∗∗       17.051∗∗∗
                                       (4.840)       (4.430)        (4.285)          (4.203)         (4.481)         (4.690)
    Elasticity                          -0.012        0.043          0.096             0.059           0.098           0.048
    Adjusted R2                          0.001        0.015          0.069             0.025          0.089            0.023
    B. High BBA Bite × Post             -0.038       0.093∗∗        0.201∗∗∗         0.124∗∗∗        0.236∗∗∗        0.137∗∗∗
                                       (0.029)       (0.030)        (0.028)          (0.027)         (0.030)         (0.032)
    Elasticity                          -0.038        0.097          0.222             0.131           0.266           0.146
    Adjusted R2                          0.001        0.014          0.065             0.023          0.089            0.024
    Mean of Outcome                      0.826        1.062          0.798            0.804           0.950            1.398
    Nb. Observations                   12,480        12,480          12,480           12,480          12,480          12,480
    Nb. Hospitals                         780          780            780               780             780             780
Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on bench, translational, and clinical trial
research in hospitals, in the teaching hospital sample. Observations are at the hospital-year level. Outcomes are transformed
with the inverse hyperbolic sine function. Estimates are from OLS regressions, and each coefficient is from a separate regression.
Column 1 refers to publications that are not disease-oriented, are not clinical trial publications, and rely on either a molecular
biology technique, a model organism, cellular structures and macromolecules, or biochemical and cellular processes (based on
MeSH terms). Column 2 refers to publications that are disease-oriented, are not clinical trial publications, and rely on either a
molecular biology technique, a model organism, cellular structures and macromolecules, or biochemical and cellular processes
(based on MeSH terms). Column 3 refers to publications that report the results of a clinical trials, or are tagged by a human
MeSH term and also cite a translational publication. Column 4 refers to publications that are translational and is cited by
a clinical trial publication (or one that contains a human MeSH term). Column 5 refers to publications that are indicated as
clinical trials based on MeSH terms or the publication type field in PubMed. Finally, Column 6 refers to publications that
are disease-oriented, not clinical trials, and not tagged by any bench MeSH keywords. The elasticity of -0.012 in Panel A
implies that a one percentage increase in BBA Bite is associated on average with a 0.012 percent yearly decrease in publications
following the BBA’s enactment. An elasticity of -0.038 in Panel B implies that High BBA Bite hospitals experience on average
a 3.8 percent yearly decrease in publications in the post-BBA time period. Standard errors are in parentheses, and are clustered
at the hospital level. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System
Payment Impact Files; Azoulay, Greenblatt, and Heggeness (2020); Marx and Fuegi (2020); PubMed; Web of Science.
∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.




                                                                 50
       Table 6: Effect on Clinical Outcomes (Changes in Risk-adjusted Survival Rates)
                                                  Heart Attack   Heart Failure   Hip/Knee    Pneumonia
                                                       (1)            (2)            (3)         (4)
                         A. BBA Bite                 -0.4286        -0.4028        0.4099      -0.0743
                                                    (0.4227)       (0.2537)       (0.2783)    (0.3146)

                         Ln(Discharges in 1995)      0.0016           0.0018      -0.0003     0.0046∗∗
                                                    (0.0025)        (0.0015)     (0.0014)     (0.0019)
                         Adjusted R2                 -0.0012         0.0016        0.0004      0.0076
                         B. High BBA Bite            -0.0044         -0.0018      0.0029       0.0004
                                                    (0.0033)        (0.0020)     (0.0020)     (0.0023)

                         Ln(Discharges in 1995)       0.0018          0.0016       -0.0004    0.0045∗∗
                                                     (0.0025)       (0.0015)      (0.0014)    (0.0019)
                           Adjusted R2                0.0003         -0.0004        0.0004     0.0076
                           Mean of Outcome            0.0270          0.0106       -0.0005     0.0147
                           Nb. Observations             700             700           700        700
Notes: This table displays the effect on changes in risk-adjusted survival rates among hospitals in the teaching hospital sample.
The hospital sample used is the subset of the teaching hospital sample that is matched to the clinical outcomes dataset from
Chandra et al. (2016). Observations are at the hospital-level. Outcomes are the difference in average survival rates between
the post-BBA time period and the pre-BBA time period. Estimates are from OLS regressions and each coefficient is from a
separate regression. Standard errors are in parentheses and robust. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information
System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; Chandra et al. (2016).
∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.




                                                               51
                                            Appendix A:
                         Medicare Inpatient Reimbursement

Overview of Medicare Payments. This section provides an overview of how Medicare reimburses hospi-
tals for care provided to beneficiaries, which will be useful to understand the impact of the reform analyzed
in this paper.

       Since 1984, payments have been under the Prospective Payment System (PPS). Under the PPS,
hospitals receive a fixed payment for a given medical diagnosis (called a “Diagnosis Related Group (DRG)”),
regardless of hospital expenditures. Each DRG payment consists of three components: (i) a DRG weight,
(ii) a base payment, and (iii) adjustments. Put differently, the PPS payment received by hospital h for an
admission in DRG d in year t is given by:

                                P P Sh,d,t = f (DRGd,t , ph,t , adjustmentsh,t )                           (1)

where DRGd,t is a weight and reflects hospitals’ aggregate historical costs of treating patients in DRG d.
The average DRG weight in a hospital, or the Medicare case-mix, reflects the severity of treatment for the
average patient. The base payment (ph,t ) is a factor that converts the DRG weight to dollars. The base
payment is updated annually and is set nationally, but is adjusted based on local market conditions, such as
prices for labor. Finally, three types of adjustments are provided: indirect medical education (IME) subsidies
are payments received by hospitals for training physicians, disproportionate share hospital (DSH) payments
are additional payments for treating poor patients, and outlier payments are made to compensate providers
for patients with exceptionally costly stays (Keeler, Carter, and Trude 1988).

      The BBA changed the formula for these three adjustments. In this paper, our payment calculations
are centered around changes to the IME and DSH payments, as data limitations do not allow us to calculate
simulated outlier payments. We now describe IME and DSH payments in further detail.


Indirect Medical Education Subsidies. Teaching hospitals receive two supplemental payments from
Medicare: direct medical education (DME) and indirect medical education (IME) payments. DME pay-
ments reimburse a teaching hospital for Medicare’s share of the direct costs of training residents, such as
salaries paid to interns, residents, and teaching physicians. The IME adjustment is a percentage add-on
payment to the hospital’s basic DRG payment (Fishman 1993). IME payments are meant to compensate
teaching hospitals for indirect expenses stemming for example from use of diagnostic services by clinically in-
experienced residents or decreased productivity of nurses and support staff involved in teaching of residents.
Since 1989, the DRG payment a hospital receives for admitting a Medicare patient increases non-linearly
with the hospital’s resident-to-bed ratio and a multiplier.
                                                "                     .405        #
                                                        residentsh,t
                                imeh,t = αt ×        1+                        −1                          (2)
                                                          bedsh,t




                                                         i
where α is a multiplier set at 1.89 in the pre-reform period. This correspond to a price increase of approxi-
mately 7.65% for every 10% increase in a hospital’s resident-to-bed ratio.


Disproportionate Share Hospital Subsidies The Medicare DSH adjustment was enacted by the Consol-
idated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 and became effective in 1986. Like the IME adjustment,
the DSH adjustment is a percentage add-on to the hospital’s basic DRG payment. The key determinant of
whether a hospital is eligible for this subsidy is the fraction of total patient-days allocated to poor patients.
Above a certain threshold, hospitals become eligible for a DSH payment adjustment, which varies according
to whether the hospital is urban or rural, is a sole community hospital, and the number of beds.i


The Balanced Budget Act. The BBA reduced both IME payments: beginning in FY1998, there were
planned reductions in the IME multiplier (α in Appendix equation (2)). Similarly, the BBA reduced DSH
payments through imposing an overall percentage reduction in DSH payments from FY1998 to FY2002 (e.g.,
the BBA reduced DSH payments by 1% in FY1998, 2% in FY1999, etc.). Subsequent reforms (BBRA and
BIPA) somewhat dampened the negative effect of the BBA on IME and DSH payments. For a detailed
explanation of how the BBA changed DRG payment adjustments, see Wu (2010).

Relationship Between Pre-BBA Research and the Simulated Revenue Per Discharge Change
The bin scatter plot in Appendix Figure A1 describes how a hospital’s average pre-BBA research levels
relate to the simulated revenue per discharge change described in Section 3.2. Each hospital’s annual grant
applications (Panel A), grants funded (Panel B), and publications (Panel C) are averaged over 1992-1995
and plotted against the simulated revenue per discharge change.




    i
    For more details, see https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/
AcuteInpatientPPS/dsh.html.


                                                       ii
                                   Figure A1: Pre-BBA Research and Simulated Revenue Change

                                                    A. Grant Applications                                                          B. Grants Funded
                                   4                                                                          15
              Grant Applications




                                                                                              Grants Funded
                                   3                                                                          10
                                   2
                                                                                                               5
                                   1
                                                                                                               0
                                   0

                                   -1                                                                         -5
                                        0.00     0.01       0.02          0.03   0.04                              0.00     0.01        0.02     0.03       0.04
                                               Ln(Actual Rev.) - Ln(Sim. Rev.)                                            Ln(Actual Rev.) - Ln(Sim. Rev.)


                                                        C. Publications
                                   6
              Publications




                                   4


                                   2


                                   0
                                       0.00     0.01        0.02          0.03   0.04
                                               Ln(Actual Rev.) - Ln(Sim. Rev.)


Notes: This figure plots the relationship between pre-BBA research levels (averaged over 1992-1995) and the
simulated PPS revenue change. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient
Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II; PubMed; Web of Science.




                                                                                        iii
                Appendix B: Mapping Outcomes to Hospitals

Figure B1 provides an example of how NIH grant IDs and Medicare provider IDs are allocated to hospitals
and medical centers. The University of California, San Francisco medical center includes the Parnassus
Heights Campus, Mt. Zion Hospital and Medical Center, and San Francisco General Hospital. Each of these
locations has a unique Medicare provider number and therefore receive an independent Medicare payment.
However, the three campuses share a single, common NIH institutional code. Our strategy consists of looking
at each of the PI addresses affiliated with the UCSF NIH institutional code and allocating each PI (and
grant) to one of the three hospitals.




                                                    iv
                          Figure B1: Mapping Research Activity to Hospitals




                                                                      2




                                                            1

                                                                                              3




              1   University of California San Francisco Parnassus Campus, Medicare Provider Number #50454
                                                                                                             University of California at San Francisco,
              2   UCSF Medical Center at Mount Zion, Medicare Provider Number #50033                              NIH Institution Code #577508

              3   San Francisco General Hospital, Medicare Provider Number #50228


Notes: This figure shows how NIH grant IDs and Medicare provider IDs are allocated within University of
California, San Francisco. Sources: Google Maps; Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System;
NIH IMPAC II.




                                                                       v
                     Appendix C: Extra Figures and Tables
This Appendix contains additional figures and tables.




                                                    vi
                                                  Figure C1: Distribution of Research Outcomes


                                                  600




                            Number of Hospitals
                                                  400




                                                  200




                                                    0
                                                        0                      5                       10                  15               20

                                                                                   Number of Grant Applications
                                                        N = 780 hospitals. 73 observations with more than 20 grant applications excluded.




                                                  500
                            Number of Hospitals




                                                  400


                                                  300


                                                  200


                                                  100


                                                    0
                                                        0                 1                  2                 3                 4           5

                                                                                    Number of Grants Funded
                                                        N = 780 hospitals. 75 observations with more than 5 grants funded excluded.




                                                  400
                            Number of Hospitals




                                                  300



                                                  200



                                                  100



                                                    0
                                                         0                            50                           100                      150

                                                                                      Number of Publications
                                                        N = 780 hospitals. 73 observations with more than 120 publications excluded.


Notes: These figure shows histograms of the research outcomes across hospitals in the teaching hospital sample. Sources: NIH
IMPAC II; PubMed; Web of Science.


                                                                                                 vii
                                             Figure C2: Risk-Adjusted 30-Day Survival Rates

                          125                                                                   125
    Number of Hospitals




                                                                          Number of Hospitals
                          100                                                                   100

                           75                                                                    75

                           50                                                                    50

                           25                                                                    25

                            0                                                                     0
                                0.70       0.80        0.90     1.00                                     0.90   0.92    0.94   0.96    0.98   1.00

                                             Heart Attack                                                              Heart Failure

                          125                                                                   125
    Number of Hospitals




                                                                          Number of Hospitals
                          100                                                                   100

                           75                                                                    75

                           50                                                                    50

                           25                                                                    25

                            0                                                                     0
                                  0.90       0.95      1.00     1.05                                  0.85      0.90       0.95        1.00      1.05

                                         Hip/Knee Replacement                                                          Pneumonia


Notes: These figure shows histograms of the average risk-adjusted 30 day survival rates across hospitals in
the teaching hospital sample. The clinical outcomes data characterize patient outcomes following a heart
attack, heart failure, hip/knee replacement, and pneumonia. Source: Chandra et al. (2016).




                                                                   viii
                                 Figure C3: Effect on the Number of Grant Applications
                                            By Hospital Research Intensity


                       20




                       10
  β̂ from Equation 2




                        0




                       -10




                       -20

                             1                                  2                                        3
                                                  Hospital Publication Tercile

                                                Coefficient         Percent Impact

Notes: This figure reports difference-in-differences coefficient estimates of the effect of the BBA on grant
applications, for hospitals with varying levels of research intensity, in the teaching hospital sample. Hospital
research intensity is based on the number of total publications produced between in the three years prior to
our period of study: 1989-1991. The sample of hospitals is then split based on whether they are in the bottom
tercile, the middle tercile, or the top tercile of research intensity. Observations are at the hospital-year level.
Outcomes are transformed with the inverse hyperbolic sine functions and estimates are from OLS models.
The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered around hospital) around
these estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient
Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II.




                                                           ix
                       Table C1: Effect on the Amount of Grant Funds Awarded

                                         Total Costs                Direct Costs       Indirect Costs
                                             (1)                         (2)                 (3)
                        BBA Bite × Post    11.271                      11.209             30.741∗
                                          (19.360)                    (18.985)            (17.461)
                        1 SD Increase       0.039                       0.039               0.107
                        Elasticity          0.031                       0.031               0.086
                        Adjusted R2         0.001                       0.001               0.003
                        Mean of Outcome     2.571                       2.518               2.281
                        Nb. Observations   12,480                      12,480              12,480
                        Nb. Hospitals        780                         780                 780
Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on the amount of grant funds awarded, in the
teaching hospital sample. Observations are at the hospital-year level. Outcomes are transformed with the inverse hyperbolic sine
function. Estimates are from OLS regressions, and each coefficient is from a separate regression. “1 SD Increase” corresponds
to the increase in inverse hyperbolic sine-transformed costs that is associated with a 1 SD increase in BBA Bite. The elasticity
of 0.031 implies that a one percentage increase in BBA Bite is associated on average with a 0.031 percent yearly increase in the
total amount of grant funds awarded following the BBA’s enactment. Standard errors are in parentheses, and are clustered at
the hospital level. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System
Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II.
∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.




                                                                x
        Appendix D: Academic Medical Center Sample Results
This section provides summary statistics and regression results for the Academic Medical Center sample of
hospitals. See Section 3 for a description of how hospitals in this sample were identified.




                                                   xi
                                                    Figure D1: Distribution of BBA Bite

                                50



                                40
          Number of Hospitals




                                30



                                20



                                10



                                 0
                                     0.000              0.005           0.010            0.015              0.020

                                             [Ln(Actual Rev.) - Ln(Sim. Rev.)] x Medicare Discharge Share

Notes: This figure shows a histogram of the BBA Bite, where BBA Bite is the difference between the
simulated price per discharge and actual PPS price per discharge in 1995 in weighted by the Medicare share
of discharges averaged over 1992-1995. The hospital sample used is the AMC sample. The solid line indicates
the mean (0.0068) and the dotted lines indicates the median (0.0064). Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost
Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files.




                                                                      xii
                                      Figure D2: Effect on the Number of Grant Applications


                        60

                        50

                        40
  β̂z from Equation 3




                        30

                        20

                        10

                         0

                        -10

                        -20

                        -30

                              1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                       Year

Notes: This figure plots the response in grants funded in the AMC sample. Each dot corresponds to coefficient
estimates stemming from the event study specification described in Section 4.1, in which asinh(number
of grant applications) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as interaction terms between
a hospital’s BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA. Coefficient estimates
correspond to a dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table D3 and are from OLS models. The
95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered around hospital) around these
estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective
Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II.




                                                                xiii
                                        Figure D3: Effect on the Number of Grants Funded


                        50


                        40


                        30
  β̂z from Equation 3




                        20


                        10


                         0


                        -10


                        -20


                        -30


                        -40

                              1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                      Year

Notes: This figure plots the response in grants funded in the AMC sample. Each dot corresponds to coefficient
estimates stemming from the event study specification described in Section 4.1, in which asinh(number of
grants funded) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as interaction terms between a hospital’s
BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA. Coefficient estimates correspond to a
dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table D4 and are from OLS models. The 95% confidence
interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered around hospital) around these estimates is shown.
Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System
Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II.




                                                                xiv
                                         Figure D4: Effect on the Number of Publications


                        40


                        30


                        20
  β̂z from Equation 3




                        10


                         0


                        -10


                        -20


                        -30


                        -40

                              1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                     Year

Notes: This figure plots the response in publications in the AMC sample. Each dot corresponds to coefficient
estimates stemming from the event study specification described in Section 4.1, in which asinh(number of
publications) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as interaction terms between a hospital’s
BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA. Coefficient estimates correspond to a
dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table D5 and are from OLS models. The 95% confidence
interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered around hospital) around these estimates is shown.
Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System
Payment Impact Files; PubMed, Web of Science.




                                                                xv
                                          Figure D5: Effect on Bench Research Research


                        40

                        30

                        20

                        10
  β̂z from Equation 3




                         0

                        -10

                        -20

                        -30

                        -40

                        -50

                        -60

                              1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                      Year

Notes: This figure plots the response in bench research publications in the AMC sample. Each dot cor-
responds to coefficient estimates stemming from the event study specification described in Section 4.1, in
which asinh(number of publications) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as interaction
terms between a hospital’s BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA. Coefficient
estimates correspond to a dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table D6, Panel A, Column 1
and are from OLS models. The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered
around hospital) around these estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information
System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; Azoulay, Greenblatt, and Heggeness
(2020); PubMed; Web of Science.




                                                                xvi
                                     Figure D6: Effect on Translational Research Publications


                        60


                        50


                        40
  β̂z from Equation 3




                        30


                        20


                        10


                         0


                        -10


                        -20


                        -30

                              1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                   Year

Notes: This figure plots the response in translational research publications in the AMC sample. Each dot
corresponds to coefficient estimates stemming from the event study specification described in Section 4.1,
in which asinh(number of publications) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as interaction
terms between a hospital’s BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA. Coefficient
estimates correspond to a dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table D6, Panel A, Column 2
and are from OLS models. The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered
around hospital) around these estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information
System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; Azoulay, Greenblatt, and Heggeness
(2020); PubMed; Web of Science.




                                                                xvii
                         Figure D7: Effect on Clinical Research Publications

                                                                                  A. Clinical Trials
                                             60

                                             50

                                             40

                                             30



                       β̂z from Equation 3
                                             20

                                             10

                                              0

                                             -10

                                             -20

                                             -30

                                             -40

                                             -50

                                             -60


                                                   1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                                        Year


                                                                             B. Other Clinical Research
                                             50

                                             40

                                             30

                                             20
                       β̂z from Equation 3




                                             10

                                              0

                                             -10

                                             -20

                                             -30

                                             -40

                                             -50

                                                   1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                                        Year


Notes: This figure plots the response in clinical research publications in the AMC sample. Each dot cor-
responds to coefficient estimates stemming from the event study specification described in Section 4.1, in
which asinh(number of publications) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as interaction
terms between a hospital’s BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA. Coefficient
estimates correspond to a dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table D6, Panel A, Columns 5
and 6 and are from OLS models. The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors,
clustered around hospital) around these estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting
Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; Azoulay, Greenblatt,
and Heggeness (2020); PubMed; Web of Science.




                                                                                   xviii
                                                 Table D1: Summary Statistics

                                                                                  Count   Mean     Median    SD      Min     Max
            Panel A. Hospital Characteristics
            Discharges (1,000s)                                                    274    24.08    22.48    10.94   4.82     62.79
            Inpatient Days (1,000s)                                                274    134.10   124.25    64.64 30.31     439.06
            Medicare Teaching Payment ($1,000,000s)                                274     11.71    8.74     10.14  0.13      59.81
            Medicare Disproportionate Share Payment ($1,000,000s)                  274     6.62     5.88     5.49   0.00      36.21
            Total Revenue ($1,000,000s)                                            274    759.20   646.60   498.32 83.34    3,182.46
            Beds                                                                   274    497.32   470.16   216.19 129.94   1,397.62
            Residents and Interns                                                  274    213.45   168.05   168.61 6.77     1,097.72
            BBA Bite (x100)                                                        274     0.68     0.64     0.34   0.03      1.84
            Medicare Share of Discharges in 1995                                   274     0.30     0.30     0.11   0.02      0.59
            Medicare Share of Inpatient Days in 1995                               274     0.39     0.39     0.14   0.03       0.68
            Medicare Revenue Per Discharge in 1995 ($1,000s)                       274    10.09     9.56     3.11   5.66     27.48

            Panel B. Grants
            Number of Grant Applications
            Total                                                                  274    23.00     1.06    50.83    0.00   444.00
            New                                                                    274    18.63     0.88    40.72    0.00   355.75
            Competitive Renewal                                                    274     4.37     0.12    10.23    0.00    88.25
            Novice Investigators                                                   274    11.86     0.31    26.24    0.00   208.81
            Incumbent Investigators                                                274    10.66     0.62    23.85    0.00   227.25
            MD Principal Investigators                                             274     7.91     0.59    18.21    0.00   158.62
            PhD Principal Investigators                                            274    11.25     0.31    25.30    0.00   193.38
            MD-PhD Principal Investigators                                         274     3.55     0.12     9.07    0.00    87.75

            Number of Grants Funded
            Total                                                                  274     6.65     0.19    16.26    0.00   147.75
            New                                                                    274     4.74     0.19    11.55    0.00   106.38
            Competitive Renewal                                                    274     1.90     0.00     4.75    0.00    41.38
            Novice Investigators                                                   274     3.66     0.06    8.93     0.00    74.06
            Incumbent Investigators                                                274     2.90     0.12    7.24     0.00    72.44
            MD Principal Investigators                                             274     2.49     0.09    6.30     0.00    55.00
            PhD Principal Investigators                                            274     3.06     0.06    7.50     0.00    61.00
            MD-PhD Principal Investigators                                         274     1.03     0.00    3.05     0.00    30.88

            Panel C. Publications
            Total                                                                  274    116.32   20.56    227.74   0.31   1,683.62
            Citation Ranking: ≤25                                                  274    28.29    7.56      46.17   0.19    306.12
            Citation Ranking: 26-50                                                274     26.65    5.03     48.56   0.00    333.38
            Citation Ranking: 51-75                                                274     28.39    4.16     57.28   0.00    413.19
            Citation Ranking: 76-95                                                274     25.39    3.50     58.20   0.00    456.62
            Citation Ranking: 96-99                                                274     5.88     0.69     15.84   0.00    130.56
            Citation Ranking: >99                                                  274     1.74    0.19      5.11    0.00     45.12
            Cited in a Patent                                                      274     29.46    2.97     68.03   0.00    547.31
            Not Cited In a Patent                                                  274    86.87    17.03    161.22   0.31   1,136.31
            Disruptive                                                             274     4.26    1.22      7.34    0.00     51.00
            Consolidating                                                          274    104.36   17.62    208.26   0.25   1,551.44
            Laboratory Research: Pub. with Bench MeSH                              274    32.43     1.81    73.46    0.00    487.50
            Translational Research: Pub. with Translational MeSH                   274    32.08    4.38     66.29    0.00    516.00
            Builds on Translational MeSH                                           274     9.67     2.66    18.28    0.00    122.25
            Inspires Translational MeSH                                            274    16.64     2.03    36.68    0.00    297.81
            Clinical Research: Clinical Trial Pub.                                 274    13.66     4.06    25.93    0.00    179.69
            Clinical Research: Pub. with Other Clinical MeSH                       274    28.89     8.72    52.96    0.19    402.31

            Panel D. Clinical Outcomes (Risk-Adjusted Survival Rates [30 Days])
            Heart Attack                                                           264     0.91     0.91     0.04    0.74    1.00
            Heart failure                                                          264     0.97     0.97     0.02    0.90    1.00
            Pneumonia                                                              264     0.98     0.99     0.02    0.90    1.03
            Hip/knee                                                               264     0.95     0.95     0.02    0.86    1.04
Notes: This table shows hospital characteristics for the hospitals in the AMC sample between 1992-2007. All variables are
measured yearly. For example, “Discharges (1000s)” is the average number of patients a hospital receives in a year. “Medicare
Teaching Payment,” “Medicare Disproportionate Share Payment,” and “Total Revenue” are adjusted for inflation using the
CPI and are measured in 1997 dollars. All hospital characteristics, grant, and publication variables have 274 observations.
Clinical outcomes data is only available for the subset of hospitals in the teaching hospital sample that matched to the clinical
outcomes data. Clinical outcomes are measured in three-year bins–e.g., hospital-level survival rates in 2005 are estimated over
patient claims in 2003, 2004, and 2005. For each hospital, we use three-year bins for four years (1996, 2002, 2005, and 2008).
Each publication’s disruptiveness is measured by using the Funk and Owen-Smith (2017) disruptiveness index, denoted by d.
“Disruptive” publications refer to publications with d ≤ 95th percentile and “Consolidating” publications refers to publications
with d > 95th percentile. See Section 3 for detailed data descriptions. Sources: Azoulay, Greenblatt, and Heggeness (2020);
Chandra et al. (2016); Funk and Owen-Smith (2017); Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient
Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II; Marx and Fuegi (2020); PubMed; Web of Science.




                                                                    xix
                      Table D2: Comparing the Teaching Hospital and AMC Sample
                                                                           Teaching Hospital Sample          AMC Sample        P-value from
                                                                                                                                  T-test
                                                                           Count   Mean      SD       Count    Mean       SD   Diff. of Meant
     Panel A. Hospital Characteristics
     Discharges (1,000s)                                                    780     16.82   10.39      274     24.08 10.94       0.000***
     Inpatient Days (1,000s)                                                780     89.84    60.25     274      134.1 64.64      0.000***
     Medicare Teaching Payment ($1,000,000s)                                780      5.45     7.91     274      11.71 10.14      0.000***
     Medicare Disproportionate Share Payment ($1,000,000s)                  780      3.97    4.54      274      6.62   5.49      0.000***
     Total Revenue ($1,000,000s)                                            765    486.94   410.95     274     759.2 498.32      0.000***
     Beds                                                                   780    360.54   202.23     274     497.32 216.19     0.000***
     Residents and Interns                                                  767    101.92   139.35     274     213.45 168.61     0.000***
     BBA Bite (x100)                                                        780        0       0       274       .01     0       0.000***
     Medicare Share of Discharges in 1995 ($1,000s)                         780       .34     .13      274        .3    .11      0.000***
     Medicare Share of Inpatient Days in 1995                               780       .43     .15      274       .39    .14      0.000***
     Medicare Revenue Per Discharge in 1995 ($1,000s)                       780       8.3    2.85      274     10.09   3.11      0.000***

     Panel B. Grants
     Number of Grant Applications
     Total                                                                  780     8.82    32.97      274       23    50.83     0.000***
     New                                                                    780     7.15    26.43      274     18.63   40.72     0.000***
     Competitive Renewal                                                    780     1.67     6.60      274      4.37   10.23     0.000***
     Novice Investigators                                                   780     4.55    17.07      274     11.86   26.24     0.000***
     Incumbent Investigators                                                780     4.10    15.44      274     10.66   23.85     0.000***
     MD Principal Investigators                                             780     3.08    11.87      274      7.91   18.21     0.000***
     PhD Principal Investigators                                            780     4.26    16.22      274     11.25    25.3     0.000***
     MD-PhD Principal Investigators                                         780     1.36     5.81      274      3.55    9.07     0.000***

     Number of Grants Funded
     Total                                                                  780     2.55    10.42      274      6.65   16.26     0.000***
     New                                                                    780     1.82     7.40      274      4.74   11.55     0.000***
     Competitive Renewal                                                    780     0.73     3.05      274      1.90    4.75     0.000***
     Novice Investigators                                                   780     1.40     5.74      274      3.66    8.93     0.000***
     Incumbent Investigators                                                780     1.11    4.62       274      2.90    7.24     0.000***
     MD Principal Investigators                                             780     0.96     4.05      274      2.49    6.30     0.000***
     PhD Principal Investigators                                            780     1.16     4.77      274      3.06    7.50     0.000***
     MD-PhD Principal Investigators                                         780     0.40     1.92      274      1.03    3.05     0.000***

     Panel C. Publications
     Total                                                                  780     45.4    148.55     274     116.32 227.74     0.000***
     Citation Percentile: ≤25                                               780    11.19     31.02     274      28.29 46.17      0.000***
     Citation Percentile: 26-50                                             780    10.41       32      274      26.65 48.56      0.000***
     Citation Percentile: 51-75                                             780    11.03     37.19     274      28.39 57.28      0.000***
     Citation Percentile: 76-95                                             780     9.84    37.25      274      25.39  58.2      0.000***
     Citation Percentile: 96-99                                             780     2.27     9.98      274       5.88  15.84     0.000***
     Citation Percentile: >99                                               780     0.67     3.18      274       1.74   5.11     0.000***
     Cited in a Patent                                                      780    11.34      43.4     274      29.46 68.03      0.000***
     Not Cited in a Patent                                                  780    34.07    106.05     274      86.87 161.22     0.000***
     Consolidating: Disruption Index Percentile ¡ 95                        780     1.69     4.86      274       4.26  7.34      0.000***
     Disruptive: Disruption Index Percentile ¿ 95                           780    40.72    135.6      274     104.36 208.26     0.000***
     Laboratory Research: Pub. with Bench MeSH                              780    12.41     47.18     274      32.43 73.46      0.000***
     Translational                                                          780    12.34     42.86     274      32.08 66.29      0.000***
     Inspiring Translational                                                780     3.83     11.94     274       9.67  18.28     0.000***
     Builds on Translational                                                780     6.40     23.48     274      16.64 36.68      0.000***
     Clinical Research: Clinical Trial Pub                                  780     5.43    16.94      274      13.66 25.93      0.000***
     Clinical Research: Pub. with Other Clinical MeSH                       780    11.54      34.8     274      28.89 52.96      0.000***

     Panel D. Clinical Outcomes (Risk-Adjusted Survival Rates [30 Days])
     Heart Attack                                                           700     0.90     0.03      264      0.91   0.04        0.147
     Heart Failure                                                          700     0.96     0.02      264      0.97   0.02      0.001***
     Pneumonia                                                              700     0.98     0.02      264      0.98   0.02        0.106
     Hip/knee                                                               700     0.95     0.02      264      0.95   0.02        0.428
Notes: This table compares the teaching hospital sample and the AMC sample between 1992-2007. All variables are measured
yearly. For example, “Discharges (1000s)” is the average number of patients a hospital receives in a year. See Section 3
for detailed variable descriptions. Sources: Azoulay, Greenblatt, and Heggeness (2020); Chandra et al. (2016); Funk and
Owen-Smith (2017); Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment
Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II; Marx and Fuegi (2020); PubMed; Web of Science.




                                                                  xx
                        Table D3: Effect on the Number of Grant Applications
                                                                    Principal Investigator   Principal Investigator
                                                Grant Cycle
                                                                         Experience                 Degree
                                    Total       New       Renewal Novice Incumbent          MD      PhD     MD-PhD
                                     (1)         (2)         (3)     (4)          (5)       (6)      (7)       (8)
         A. BBA Bite × Post        18.55∗∗     23.16∗∗      9.349 46.23∗∗∗       2.903    20.22∗∗  22.11∗∗   35.10∗∗∗
                                   (8.569)     (8.788)    (5.955)  (8.126)      (8.491)   (9.192) (8.065)    (7.786)
         Elasticity                 0.079       0.099       0.041   0.198        0.012     0.087    0.095     0.156
         Adjusted R2                0.042       0.063       0.014   0.187        0.023     0.038    0.071     0.100
         Diff. Wald test p-value                      0.088                0.000                    0.841     0.148
         B. High BBA Bite × Post 0.139∗∗       0.167∗∗     0.0521 0.304∗∗∗      0.0497    0.112∗∗ 0.193∗∗∗ 0.260∗∗∗
                                     (0.0597) (0.0598) (0.0398) (0.0585)       (0.0543)  (0.0545) (0.0511) (0.0557)
         Elasticity                   0.148     0.182       0.053   0.355        0.051     0.118    0.213     0.297
         Adjusted R2                  0.043     0.064       0.014   0.185        0.024     0.036    0.076     0.103
         Diff. Wald test p-value                      0.031                0.000                    0.119     0.013
         Mean of Outcome              1.831     1.725       0.957   1.369        1.453     1.290    1.348     0.842
         Nb. Observations             4,384     4,384       4,384   4,384        4,384     4,384    4,384     4,384
         Nb. Hospitals                 274       274         274     274          274       274      274       274
Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on the number of grant applications,
in the AMC sample. Observations are at the hospital-year level. Outcomes are transformed with the inverse hyperbolic sine
function. Column 1 presents results from OLS regressions. Columns 2-8 present estimates from seemingly unrelated regressions.
Each coefficient is from a separate regression. A Panel A elasticity of 0.079 implies that a one percentage increase in BBA
Bite is associated on average with a 0.079 percent yearly increase in grant applications following the BBA’s enactment. A
Panel B elasticity of 0.148 implies that High BBA Share hospitals experience on average a 14.8 percent yearly increase in
grant applications in the post-BBA time period. The fourth row and eighth row show p-values from Wald tests that compare
coefficients on BBA Bite × After (Panel A) or High BBA Bite × After (Panel B) across different columns (Column 2 vs.
Column 3; Column 4 vs. Column 5; Column 6 vs. Column 7; Column 6 vs. Column 8). Standard errors are in parentheses, and
are clustered at the hospital level. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective
Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II.
*p<0.01, **p<0.05, ***p<0.001.




                                                              xxi
                           Table D4: Effect on the Number of Grants Funded
                                                                     Principal Investigator   Principal Investigator
                                                Grant Cycle
                                                                          Experience                 Degree
                                    Total       New       Renewal Novice Incumbent          MD      PhD     MD-PhD
                                     (1)         (2)         (3)      (4)          (5)      (6)      (7)        (8)
         A. BBA Bite × Post        18.85∗∗     25.01∗∗∗ 13.42∗∗ 40.51∗∗∗          6.960   18.22∗∗ 23.21∗∗∗ 32.49∗∗∗
                                   (7.012)     (7.017)    (5.475)   (6.726)      (6.123)  (6.981) (6.487)    (5.685)
         Elasticity                 0.082       0.109       0.065    0.180        0.031    0.084    0.104     0.193
         Adjusted R2                0.028       0.044       0.008    0.112        0.017    0.021    0.040     0.062
         Diff. Wald test p-value                      0.046                 0.000                   0.439     0.060
         B. High BBA Bite × Post 0.131∗∗ 0.177∗∗∗ 0.0752∗∗ 0.272∗∗∗              0.0488   0.110∗∗ 0.189∗∗∗ 0.197∗∗∗
                                     (0.0467) (0.0486) (0.0323) (0.0451)        (0.0416) (0.0406) (0.0426) (0.0401)
         Elasticity                   0.138     0.194       0.078    0.312        0.050    0.116    0.208     0.218
         Adjusted R2                  0.028     0.045       0.007    0.112        0.017    0.020    0.045     0.058
         Diff. Wald test p-value                      0.009                 0.000                   0.046     0.032
         Mean of Outcome              1.117     0.973       0.637    0.838        0.799    0.731    0.770     0.411
         Nb. Observations             4,384     4,384       4,384    4,384        4,384    4,384    4,384     4,384
         Nb. Hospitals                 274       274         274      274          274      274      274       274
Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on the number of grants funded, in the
AMC sample. Observations are at the hospital-year level. Outcomes are transformed with the inverse hyperbolic sine function.
Column 1 presents results from OLS regressions. Columns 2-8 present estimates from seemingly unrelated regressions. Each
coefficient is from a separate regression. A Panel A elasticity of 0.082 implies that a one percentage increase in BBA Bite
is associated on average with a 0.082 percent yearly increase in grant applications following the BBA’s enactment. A Panel
B elasticity of 0.138 implies that High BBA Share hospitals experience on average a 13.8 percent yearly increase in grant
applications in the post-BBA time period. The fourth row and eighth row show p-values from Wald tests that compare
coefficients on BBA Bite × After (Panel A) or High BBA Bite × After (Panel B) across different columns (Column 2 vs.
Column 3; Column 4 vs. Column 5; Column 6 vs. Column 7; Column 6 vs. Column 8). Standard errors are in parentheses, and
are clustered at the hospital level. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective
Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II.
*p<0.01, **p<0.05, ***p<0.001.




                                                              xxii
                                                                  Table D5: Effect on Publication Impact
                                      Total                                  By Citation Percentile                                 Cited in a Patent              By Disruption
                                                                                                                                                             Consolidating Disruptive
                                                    ≤25          26-50        51-75          76-95      96-99         >99          Yes               No
                                                                                                                                                              Research        Research
                                         (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)            (5)        (6)          (7)           (8)               (9)        (10)           (11)
          A. BBA Bite × Post           -4.293       -3.997       2.650        4.109          8.793     15.572∗      18.672∗∗      -3.090            -0.786       2.436          6.166
                                      (9.166)      (8.251)      (8.191)      (8.208)        (8.875)    (8.139)      (6.615)      (9.239)           (8.838)     (10.822)        (8.305)
          Elasticity                   -0.018       -0.017       0.011        0.018          0.038      0.068        0.092        -0.013            -0.003       0.010          0.027
          Adjusted R2                  0.081         0.070       0.056        0.051          0.064      0.062        0.051        0.033              0.093       0.067          0.026
          Diff. Wald test p-value         -          0.944       0.127        0.132          0.029      0.015        0.009                 0.742                        0.632
          B. High BBA Bite × Post      -0.030       -0.025       0.059        0.058          0.088     0.144∗∗      0.127∗∗       -0.013            -0.003       0.005          0.089
                                      (0.070)      (0.064)      (0.063)      (0.061)        (0.064)    (0.049)      (0.040)      (0.068)           (0.068)      (0.081)        (0.059)
          Elasticity                   -0.030       -0.026       0.060        0.059          0.091      0.155        0.135        -0.013            -0.004       0.005          0.092
          Adjusted R2                  0.081         0.070       0.057        0.051          0.065      0.064        0.051        0.032              0.093       0.067          0.028
          Diff. Wald test p-value         -          0.887       0.014        0.024          0.011      0.005        0.023                 0.856                        0.146
          Mean of Outcome              3.826        2.787        2.505        2.396          2.162      1.130        0.579        2.217            3.640         3.603          1.786
          Nb. Observations              4,384        4,384       4,384        4,384          4,384      4,384        4,384        4,384            4,384         4,384          4,384
          Nb. Hospitals                  274          274         274          274            274        274          274          274              274           274            274
        Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on the number of publications, by impact, in the AMC sample. Observations are at
        the hospital-year level. Outcomes are transformed with the inverse hyperbolic sine function. Estimates are from seemingly unrelated regressions and each coefficient is from
        a separate regression. Each publication’s disruptiveness is measured by using the Funk and Owen-Smith (2017) disruptiveness index, denoted by d. Column 8 refers to
        publications with d≤95th percentile and Column 9 refers to publications with d>95th percentile. The elasticity of -0.018 in Panel A implies that a one percentage increase
        in BBA Bite is associated on average with a 0.018 percent yearly decrease in publications following the BBA’s enactment. An elasticity of -0.030 in Panel B implies that
        High BBA Bite hospitals experience on average a three percent yearly decrease in publications in the post-BBA time period. The fourth row and eighth row show p-values




xxiii
        from Wald tests that compare coefficients on BBA Bite × After (Panel A) or High BBA Bite × After (Panel B) across different columns. For Columns 2 to 7, the fourth
        and eight row compare estimates in Column 1 vs. estimates in the focal column. For Columns 8 and 9, the fourth and eight row show p-values from Wald tests that
        compare Column 8 and 9 estimates. For Columns 10 and 11, the fourth and eight row show p-values from Wald tests that compare Column 10 and Column 11. Standard
        errors are in parentheses, and are clustered at the hospital level. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System
        Payment Impact Files; Funk and Owen-Smith (2017); PubMed, Web of Science.
        *p<0.01, **p<0.05, ***p<0.001.
                                Table D6: Effect on Publication Composition
                                 Laboratory
                                                            Translational Research                     Clinical Research
                                  Research
                                                                  Builds on         Inspiring
                                    Bench        Translational
                                                                Translational Translational Clinical Trials           Other
                                    MeSH            MeSH
                                                                    MeSH              MeSH
                                        (1)            (2)           (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)
   A. BBA Bite × Post                 -7.791          6.955       29.981∗∗∗         17.025∗∗         27.155∗∗         3.670
                                     (9.733)         (8.800)       (8.349)           (8.122)         (8.437)         (8.846)
   Elasticity                         -0.033          0.030         0.129             0.073            0.116          0.016
   Adjusted R2                         0.001          0.041         0.148             0.057            0.193          0.071
   B. High BBA Bite × Post            -0.052          0.069        0.184∗∗           0.140∗∗          0.182∗∗         0.050
                                     (0.074)         (0.070)       (0.059)           (0.062)         (0.062)         (0.064)
   Elasticity                         -0.053          0.069         0.200             0.148            0.197          0.049
   Adjusted R2                         0.001          0.042         0.147             0.058            0.192          0.071
   Mean of Outcome                     2.005          2.400         1.781             1.874            2.061          2.829
   Nb. Observations                    4,384          4,384         4,384             4,384            4,384          4,384
   Nb. Hospitals                        274            274           274               274              274            274
Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on bench, translational, and clinical
trial research in hospitals, in the AMC sample. Observations are at the hospital-year level. Outcomes are transformed with
the inverse hyperbolic sine function. Estimates are from OLS regressions, and each coefficient is from a separate regression.
Column 1 refers to publications that are not disease-oriented, are not clinical trial publications, and rely on either a molecular
biology technique, a model organism, cellular structures and macromolecules, or biochemical and cellular processes (based on
MeSH terms). Column 2 refers to publications that are disease-oriented, are not clinical trial publications, and rely on either a
molecular biology technique, a model organism, cellular structures and macromolecules, or biochemical and cellular processes
(based on MeSH terms). Column 3 refers to publications that report the results of a clinical trials, or are tagged by a human
MeSH term and also cite a translational publication. Column 4 refers to publications that are translational and is cited by
a clinical trial publication (or one that contains a human MeSH term). Column 5 refers to publications that are indicated as
clinical trials based on MeSH terms or the publication type field in PubMed. Finally, Column 6 refers to publications that
are disease-oriented, not clinical trials, and not tagged by any bench MeSH keywords. The elasticity of -0.033 in Panel A
implies that a one percentage increase in BBA Bite is associated on average with a 0.033 percent yearly decrease in publications
following the BBA’s enactment. An elasticity of -0.053 in Panel B implies that High BBA Bite hospitals experience on average
a 5.3 percent yearly decrease in publications in the post-BBA time period. Standard errors are in parentheses, and are clustered
at the hospital level. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System
Payment Impact Files; Azoulay, Greenblatt, and Heggeness (2020); Marx and Fuegi (2020); PubMed; Web of Science.
*p<0.01, **p<0.05, ***p<0.001.




                                                                 xxiv
      Table D7: Effect on Clinical Outcomes (Changes in Risk-adjusted Survival Rates)
                                                 Heart Attack    Heart Failure   Hip/Knee    Pneumonia
                                                      (1)             (2)            (3)         (4)
                        A. BBA Bite                 -0.0903         -0.1854        0.3631      -0.3402
                                                   (0.8047)        (0.4799)       (0.4726)    (0.5631)

                        Ln(Discharges in 1995)       0.0064          0.0086∗∗      0.0016     0.0108∗∗
                                                    (0.0053)         (0.0033)    (0.0036)     (0.0038)
                        Adjusted R2                  -0.0025          0.0214      -0.0049       0.0232
                        B. High BBA Bite             0.0029           -0.0047      0.0022      -0.0016
                                                    (0.0055)         (0.0031)    (0.0032)     (0.0038)

                        Ln(Discharges in 1995)         0.0067        0.0084∗∗        0.0015     0.0109∗∗
                                                      (0.0053)       (0.0033)      (0.0036)     (0.0038)
                         Adjusted R2                   -0.0015        0.0296        -0.0053      0.0225
                         Mean of Outcome               0.0268         0.0103        0.0010       0.0175
                         Nb. Observations                264            264           264          264
Notes: This table displays the effect on changes in risk-adjusted survival rates among hospitals in the AMC sample. The hospital
sample used is the subset of the teaching hospital sample that is matched to the clinical outcomes dataset from Chandra et al.
(2016). Observations are at the hospital-level. Outcomes are the difference in average survival rates between the post-BBA time
period and the pre-BBA time period. Estimates are from OLS regressions and each coefficient is from a separate regression.
Standard errors are in parentheses and robust. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient
Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; Chandra et al. (2016).
*p<0.01, **p<0.05, ***p<0.001.




                                                               xxv
                     Appendix E: Subsidy BBA Bite Results
This section provides summary statistics and regression results for the subsidy BBA Bite analysis. In this
analysis, BBA Bite is calculated as:

                                                  IM Eh,1995 + DSHh,1995
                                   BBA Biteh =
                                                   T otalRevenueh,1995

where IM Eh,1995 is total indirect medical education payments for hospital h, DSHh,1995 is disproportionate
share payments for hospital h, and T otalRevenueh,1995 is the total patient revenues for hospital h. All values
correspond to payments in 1995.




                                                     xxvi
                                                Figure E1: Distribution of BBA Bite

                                   80




                                   60
             Number of Hospitals




                                   40




                                   20




                                    0
                                        0.000    0.020      0.040      0.060      0.080   0.100


Notes: This figure shows a histogram of the BBA Bite for the teaching hospital sample, where BBA Bite
is the share of 1995 patient revenues that come from IME and DSH payments. The solid line indicates
the mean (0.0267) of this variable and the dotted lines indicates the median (0.0229). Sources: Healthcare
Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files.




                                                               xxvii
                                      Figure E2: Effect on the Number of Grant Applications



                        8




                        6
  β̂z from Equation 3




                        4




                        2




                        0




                        -2

                             1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                  Year

Notes: This figure plots the response in grants funded in the teaching hospital sample, where BBA Bite
is the share of 1995 patient revenues that come from IME and DSH payments. Each dot corresponds
to coefficient estimates stemming from the event study specification described in Section 4.1, in which
asinh(number of grant applications) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as interaction
terms between a hospital’s BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA. Coefficient
estimates correspond to a dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table E1, Panel A, Column 1
and are from OLS models. The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered
around hospital) around these estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information
System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II.




                                                              xxviii
                                        Figure E3: Effect on the Number of Grants Funded


                        6




                        4
  β̂z from Equation 3




                        2




                        0




                        -2




                        -4

                             1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                  Year

Notes: This figure plots the response in grants funded in the teaching hospital sample, where BBA Bite is the
share of 1995 patient revenues that come from IME and DSH payments. Each dot corresponds to coefficient
estimates stemming from the event study specification described in Section 4.1, in which asinh(number of
grants funded) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as interaction terms between a hospital’s
BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA. Coefficient estimates correspond to a
dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table E2, Panel A, Column 1 and are from OLS models.
The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered around hospital) around
these estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient
Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II.




                                                               xxix
                                         Figure E4: Effect on the Number of Publications


                        5
  β̂z from Equation 3




                        0




                        -5

                             1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                  Year

Notes: This figure plots the response in publications in the teaching hospital sample, where BBA Bite is the
share of 1995 patient revenues that come from IME and DSH payments. Each dot corresponds to coefficient
estimates stemming from the event study specification described in Section 4.1, in which asinh(number of
publications) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as interaction terms between a hospital’s
BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA. Coefficient estimates correspond to a
dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table E3, Panel A, Column 1 and are from OLS models.
The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered around hospital) around
these estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient
Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; PubMed, Web of Science.




                                                               xxx
                                        Figure E5: Effect on Bench Research Publications


                        4




                        2
  β̂z from Equation 3




                        0




                        -2




                        -4

                             1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                  Year

Notes: This figure plots the response in bench research publications in the teaching hospital sample, where
BBA Bite is the share of 1995 patient revenues that come from IME and DSH payments. Each dot cor-
responds to coefficient estimates stemming from the event study specification described in Section 4.1, in
which asinh(number of publications) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as interaction
terms between a hospital’s BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA. Coefficient
estimates correspond to a dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table E4, Panel A, Column 1
and are from OLS models. The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered
around hospital) around these estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information
System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; Azoulay, Greenblatt, and Heggeness
(2020); PubMed; Web of Science.




                                                               xxxi
                                     Figure E6: Effect on Translational Research Publications



                        6



                        4
  β̂z from Equation 3




                        2



                        0



                        -2



                        -4

                             1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                  Year

Notes: This figure plots the response in translational research publications in the teaching hospital sample,
where BBA Bite is the share of 1995 patient revenues that come from IME and DSH payments. Each dot
corresponds to coefficient estimates stemming from the event study specification described in Section 4.1,
in which asinh(number of publications) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as interaction
terms between a hospital’s BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA. Coefficient
estimates correspond to a dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table E4, Panel A, Column 2
and are from OLS models. The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered
around hospital) around these estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information
System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; Azoulay, Greenblatt, and Heggeness
(2020); PubMed; Web of Science.




                                                               xxxii
                       Figure E7: Effect on Clinical Research Publications

                                                                                     A. Clinical Trials
                                             10




                                                  5



                       β̂z from Equation 3
                                                  0




                                              -5




                                             -10

                                                      1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                                           Year


                                                                               B. Other Clinical Research

                                             6



                                             4
                       β̂z from Equation 3




                                             2



                                             0



                                             -2



                                             -4

                                                  1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                                          Year


Notes: This figure plots the response in clinical research publications in the teaching hospital sample,
where BBA Bite is the share of 1995 patient revenues that come from IME and DSH payments. Each dot
corresponds to coefficient estimates stemming from the event study specification described in Section 4.1,
in which asinh(number of publications) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as interaction
terms between a hospital’s BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA. Coefficient
estimates correspond to a dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table E4, Panel A, Columns 5
and 6 and are from OLS models. The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors,
clustered around hospital) around these estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting
Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; Azoulay, Greenblatt,
and Heggeness (2020); PubMed; Web of Science.




                                                                                     xxxiii
                         Table E1: Effect on the Number of Grant Applications
                                                                   Principal Investigator       Principal Investigator
                                                 Grant Cycle
                                                                        Experience                     Degree
                                     Total        New       Renewal Novice Incumbent            MD      PhD     MD-PhD
                                       (1)         (2)         (3)      (4)          (5)        (6)      (7)        (8)
        A. BBA Bite × Post          3.394∗∗∗    4.075∗∗∗     0.820∗  5.957∗∗∗     2.622∗∗∗   2.732∗∗∗ 3.577∗∗∗ 4.624∗∗∗
                                    (0.651)      (0.670)    (0.449)  (0.759)       (0.624)   (0.653)  (0.571)    (0.731)
        Elasticity                   0.057        0.069       0.016   0.102         0.045      0.048    0.061     0.096
        Adjusted R2                  0.023        0.032       0.006   0.096         0.013      0.020    0.036     0.052
        Diff. Wald test p-value                         0.000                 0.000                     0.230     0.013
        B. High BBA Bite × Post 0.118∗∗∗ 0.141∗∗∗ 0.0328∗∗ 0.197∗∗∗              0.0984∗∗∗  0.0860∗∗∗ 0.137∗∗∗ 0.159∗∗∗
                                       (0.0252) (0.0255) (0.0155) (0.0256)        (0.0220)  (0.0221) (0.0217) (0.0223)
        Elasticity                       0.125    0.151       0.033   0.218         0.103      0.090    0.147     0.172
        Adjusted R2                      0.021    0.029       0.006   0.087         0.013      0.018    0.035     0.046
        Diff. Wald test p-value                         0.000                 0.000                     0.021     0.003
        Mean of Outcome                  0.751    0.705       0.372   0.541         0.587     0.519     0.533     0.328
        Nb. Observations                12,192   12,192      12,192   12,192       12,192     12,192   12,192    12,192
        Nb. Hospitals                     762      762         762     762           762        762      762       762
Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on the number of grant applications, in the
teaching hospital sample. BBA Bite is the share of 1995 patient revenues that come from IME and DSH payments. Observations
are at the hospital-year level. Outcomes are transformed with the inverse hyperbolic sine function. Column 1 presents results
from OLS regressions. Columns 2-8 present estimates from seemingly unrelated regressions. Each coefficient is from a separate
regression. The elasticity of 0.057 in Panel A implies that a one percentage increase in BBA Bite is associated on average with
a 0.057 percent yearly increase in grant applications following the BBA’s enactment. A Panel B elasticity of 0.125 implies that
High BBA Share hospitals experience on average a 12.5 percent yearly increase in grant applications in the post-BBA time
period. The fourth row and eighth row show p-values from Wald tests that compare coefficients on BBA Bite × After (Panel
A) or High BBA Bite × After (Panel B) across different columns (Column 2 vs. Column 3; Column 4 vs. Column 5; Column 6
vs. Column 7; Column 6 vs. Column 8). Robust standard errors (clustered at the hospital level) are in parentheses. Sources:
Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH
IMPAC II.
∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.




                                                             xxxiv
                            Table E2: Effect on the Number of Grants Funded
                                                                   Principal Investigator     Principal Investigator
                                                 Grant Cycle
                                                                        Experience                   Degree
                                    Total         New       Renewal Novice Incumbent         MD       PhD      MD-PhD
                                      (1)          (2)         (3)     (4)          (5)      (6)       (7)        (8)
        A. BBA Bite × Post         2.641∗∗∗     3.552∗∗∗    0.952∗∗ 4.392∗∗∗     1.595∗∗∗ 1.972∗∗∗ 2.818∗∗∗ 3.219∗∗∗
                                   (0.531)       (0.592)    (0.377)  (0.620)      (0.460)  (0.499)  (0.547)     (0.513)
        Elasticity                  0.047         0.068       0.027   0.090        0.036    0.047     0.062      0.146
        Adjusted R2                 0.017         0.029       0.003   0.059        0.010    0.012    0.024       0.033
        Diff. Wald test p-value                         0.000                0.000                   0.155       0.013
        B. High BBA Bite × Post 0.0926∗∗∗ 0.115∗∗∗ 0.0435∗∗∗ 0.151∗∗∗           0.0537∗∗∗ 0.0629∗∗∗ 0.108∗∗∗ 0.105∗∗∗
                                       (0.0184) (0.0193) (0.0123) (0.0188)       (0.0158) (0.0156) (0.0172) (0.0158)
        Elasticity                       0.097    0.122       0.044   0.163        0.055    0.065     0.114      0.111
        Adjusted R2                     0.015     0.023       0.004   0.052        0.009    0.010    0.023       0.027
        Diff. Wald test p-value                         0.000                0.000                   0.005       0.006
        Mean of Outcome                 0.439     0.382       0.246   0.325        0.312    0.285    0.300       0.159
        Nb. Observations                12,192   12,192      12,192  12,192       12,192   12,192    12,192     12,192
        Nb. Hospitals                     762      762         762     762          762      762       762        762
Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on the number of grants funded, in the
teaching hospital sample. BBA Bite is the share of 1995 patient revenues that come from IME and DSH payments. Observations
are at the hospital-year level. Outcomes are transformed with the inverse hyperbolic sine function. Column 1 presents results
from OLS regressions. Columns 2-8 present estimates from seemingly unrelated regressions. Each coefficient is from a separate
regression. The elasticity of 0.047 in Panel A implies that a one percentage increase in BBA Bite is associated on average
with a 0.047 percent yearly increase in grant applications following the BBA’s enactment. A Panel B elasticity of 0.097 implies
that High BBA Share hospitals experience on average a 9.7 percent yearly increase in grant applications in the post-BBA time
period. The fourth row and eighth row show p-values from Wald tests that compare coefficients on BBA Bite × After (Panel
A) or High BBA Bite × After (Panel B) across different columns (Column 2 vs. Column 3; Column 4 vs. Column 5; Column
6 vs. Column 7; Column 6 vs. Column 8). Standard errors are in parentheses, and are clustered at the hospital level. Sources:
Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH
IMPAC II.
∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.




                                                            xxxv
                                                                  Table E3: Effect on Publication Impact
                                       Total                                 By Citation Percentile                                 Cited in a Patent           By Disruption
                                                                                                                                                          Consolidating   Disruptive
                                                    ≤25          26-50        51-75          76-95      96-99         >99           Yes           No
                                                                                                                                                           Research       Research
                                        (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)           (9)         (10)           (11)
          A. BBA Bite × Post          1.905∗       2.460∗∗      1.920∗∗      3.141∗∗∗      2.980∗∗∗    2.934∗∗∗      2.523∗∗∗     1.578∗∗       2.146∗∗     2.030∗∗        2.645∗∗∗
                                      (1.021)      (0.859)      (0.732)      (0.747)       (0.760)     (0.618)       (0.517)      (0.730)       (0.999)     (0.963)        (0.642)
          Elasticity                   0.032        0.041        0.032         0.053        0.050        0.053         0.076       0.026         0.036        0.034         0.051
          Adjusted R2                  0.031        0.030        0.023        0.022         0.028        0.031         0.026       0.014         0.036       0.029          0.013
          Diff. Wald test p-value        -          0.250        0.982         0.090        0.170       0.284          0.554       0.488                     0.436
          B. High BBA Bite × Post      0.023       0.070∗∗      0.068∗∗      0.084∗∗       0.083∗∗     0.107∗∗∗      0.096∗∗∗     0.057∗∗        0.034        0.024        0.065∗∗
                                      (0.040)      (0.032)      (0.029)      (0.029)       (0.029)     (0.021)       (0.016)      (0.029)       (0.038)     (0.041)        (0.026)
          Elasticity                   0.023        0.072        0.070         0.088        0.086        0.113         0.100       0.059         0.035        0.024         0.067
          Adjusted R2                  0.030        0.029        0.022        0.020         0.026        0.030         0.026       0.013         0.035       0.027          0.010
          Diff. Wald test p-value        -          0.034        0.060         0.017        0.036       0.020          0.059       0.468                     0.218
          Mean of Outcome              1.991        1.347        1.153         1.089        0.962        0.469        0.232        0.976         1.876       1.822         0.800
          Nb. Observations            12,192       12,192       12,192        12,192        12,192      12,192        12,192      12,192         12,192      12,192        12,192
          Nb. Hospitals                 762          762          762           762          762          762           762         762           762          762          762
        Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on the number of publications, by impact, in the teaching hospital sample. BBA
        Bite is the share of 1995 patient revenues that come from IME and DSH payments. Observations are at the hospital-year level. Outcomes are transformed with the
        inverse hyperbolic sine function. Estimates are from seemingly unrelated regressions and each coefficient is from a separate regression. Each publication’s disruptiveness is
        measured by using the Funk and Owen-Smith (2017) disruptiveness index, denoted by d. Column 8 refers to publications with d≤95th percentile and Column 9 refers to
        publications with d > 95th percentile. The elasticity of 0.032 in Panel A implies that a one percentage increase in BBA Bite is associated on average with a 0.032 percent
        yearly increase in publications following the BBA’s enactment. An elasticity of 0.023 in Panel B implies that High BBA Bite hospitals experience on average a 2.3 percent
        yearly increase in publications in the post-BBA time period. The fourth row and eighth row show p-values from Wald tests that compare coefficients on BBA Bite × After




xxxvi
        (Panel A) or High BBA Bite × After (Panel B) across different columns. For Columns 2 to 7, the fourth and eight row compare estimates in Column 1 vs. estimates in
        the focal column. For Columns 8 and 9, the fourth and eight row show p-values from Wald tests that compare Column 8 and 9 estimates. For Columns 10 and 11, the
        fourth and eight row show p-values from Wald tests that compare Column 10 and Column 11. Standard errors are in parentheses, and are clustered at the hospital level.
        Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; Funk and Owen-Smith (2017); PubMed,
        Web of Science.
        ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.
                                Table E4: Effect on Publication Composition
                                 Laboratory
                                                            Translational Research                     Clinical Research
                                  Research
                                                                    Builds on       Inspiring
                                    Bench        Translational
                                                                   Translational Translational Clinical Trials        Other
                                    MeSH            MeSH
                                                                       MeSH            MeSH
                                          (1)          (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
    A. BBA Bite × Post                  -0.202      3.119∗∗∗         4.767∗∗∗        3.815∗∗∗        4.927∗∗∗        3.125∗∗∗
                                       (0.796)      (0.781)           (0.802)         (0.753)         (0.822)        (0.846)
    Elasticity                          -0.003        0.052            0.082           0.064           0.084           0.052
    Adjusted R2                          0.000       0.018             0.065           0.028           0.086           0.024
    B. High BBA Bite × Post             -0.022      0.094∗∗          0.170∗∗∗        0.124∗∗∗        0.188∗∗∗        0.081∗∗
                                       (0.029)      (0.031)           (0.029)         (0.027)         (0.031)        (0.033)
    Elasticity                          -0.022        0.098            0.185           0.132           0.207           0.083
    Adjusted R2                          0.000       0.016             0.063           0.025           0.085           0.022
    Mean of Outcome                      0.826       1.062             0.798           0.804           0.950           1.398
    Nb. Observations                   12,192        12,192           12,192          12,192          12,192          12,192
    Nb. Hospitals                         762          762              762             762             762             762
Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on bench, translational, and clinical
trial research in hospitals, in the teaching hospital sample. BBA Bite is the share of 1995 patient revenues that come from
IME and DSH payments. Observations are at the hospital-year level. Outcomes are transformed with the inverse hyperbolic
sine function. Estimates are from OLS regressions, and each coefficient is from a separate regression. Column 1 refers to
publications that are not disease-oriented, are not clinical trial publications, and rely on either a molecular biology technique,
a model organism, cellular structures and macromolecules, or biochemical and cellular processes (based on MeSH terms).
Column 2 refers to publications that are disease-oriented, are not clinical trial publications, and rely on either a molecular
biology technique, a model organism, cellular structures and macromolecules, or biochemical and cellular processes (based on
MeSH terms). Column 3 refers to publications that report the results of a clinical trials, or are tagged by a human MeSH
term and also cite a translational publication. Column 4 refers to publications that are translational and is cited by a clinical
trial publication (or one that contains a human MeSH term). Column 5 refers to publications that are indicated as clinical
trials based on MeSH terms or the publication type field in PubMed. Finally, Column 6 refers to publications that are disease-
oriented, not clinical trials, and not tagged by any bench MeSH keywords. The elasticity of -0.003 in Panel A implies that a
one percentage increase in BBA Bite is associated on average with a 0.003 percent yearly decrease in publications following
the BBA’s enactment. An elasticity of -0.022 in Panel B implies that High BBA Bite hospitals experience on average a 2.2
percent yearly decrease in publications in the post-BBA time period. Standard errors are in parentheses, and are clustered at
the hospital level. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System
Payment Impact Files; Azoulay, Greenblatt, and Heggeness (2020); Marx and Fuegi (2020); PubMed; Web of Science.
∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.




                                                             xxxvii
            Appendix F: Alternative Functional Form Results
This section provides summary statistics and regression results for an alternative functional form where
outcomes are the “raw” number of grant applications, grants funded, and publications.




                                                xxxviii
                         Table F1: Effect on the Number of Grant Applications
                                                                     Principal Investigator     Principal Investigator
                                                  Grant Cycle
                                                                          Experience                   Degree
                                     Total         New      Renewal Novice Incumbent             MD      PhD    MD-PhD
                                      (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)       (6)      (7)      (8)
         A. BBA Bite × Post        1763.9∗∗∗    1637.4∗∗∗ 126.4∗∗∗ 1231.6∗∗∗        646.6∗∗∗  523.9∗∗∗ 863.6∗∗∗ 370.9∗∗∗
                                    (325.0)      (295.7)     (34.82)    (196.6)      (155.3)  (100.6) (152.1)    (85.97)
         Elasticity                  0.557        0.638       0.210      0.754        0.439     0.473    0.564    0.757
         Adjusted R2                 0.086        0.092       0.029      0.099        0.065     0.068   0.081     0.067
         Diff. Wald test p-value                        0.000                   0.000                   0.000     0.004
         B. High BBA Bite × Post 8.681∗∗∗        8.012∗∗∗ 0.669∗∗∗ 6.099∗∗∗         3.176∗∗∗  2.557∗∗∗ 4.333∗∗∗ 1.760∗∗∗
                                       (1.324)   (1.187)     (0.161)    (0.869)      (0.559)  (0.419) (0.664)    (0.312)
         Elasticity                     0.984     1.121       0.400      1.341        0.775     0.829    1.016    1.290
         Adjusted R2                    0.066     0.069       0.025      0.076        0.048     0.051   0.063     0.049
         Diff. Wald test p-value                        0.000                   0.000                   0.000     0.000
         Mean of Outcome                8.824     7.150       1.674      4.548        4.097     3.082   4.265     1.364
         Nb. Observations              12,480     12,480     12,480     12,480       12,480    12,480   12,480   12,480
         Nb. Hospitals                   780       780         780        780          780       780      780      780
Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on the “raw” number of grant applications,
in the teaching hospital sample. Observations are at the hospital-year level. Column 1 presents results from OLS regressions.
Columns 2-8 present estimates from seemingly unrelated regressions. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. The
elasticity of 0.557 in Panel A implies that a one percentage increase in BBA Bite is associated on average with a 0.557 percent
yearly increase in grant applications following the BBA’s enactment. A Panel B elasticity of 0.984 implies that High BBA Share
hospitals experience on average a 98.4 percent yearly increase in grant applications in the post-BBA time period. The fourth
row and eighth row show p-values from Wald tests that compare coefficients on BBA Bite × After (Panel A) or High BBA
Bite × After (Panel B) across different columns (Column 2 vs. Column 3; Column 4 vs. Column 5; Column 6 vs. Column
7; Column 6 vs. Column 8). Robust standard errors (clustered at the hospital level) are in parentheses. Sources: Healthcare
Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II.
∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.




                                                             xxxix
                            Table F2: Effect on the Number of Grants Funded
                                                                    Principal Investigator   Principal Investigator
                                                 Grant Cycle
                                                                         Experience                 Degree
                                     Total        New      Renewal Novice Incumbent           MD      PhD      MD-PhD
                                      (1)          (2)        (3)     (4)          (5)        (6)      (7)        (8)
          A. BBA Bite × Post        473.3∗∗∗    408.4∗∗∗ 64.92∗∗∗ 355.6∗∗∗      139.0∗∗∗   154.3∗∗∗ 210.1∗∗∗ 105.1∗∗∗
                                    (95.54)      (81.42) (16.69) (63.40)        (38.19)    (29.89) (42.30)      (26.90)
          Elasticity                 0.517        0.626      0.248   0.705        0.348      0.446   0.504       0.738
          Adjusted R2                0.079        0.087      0.018   0.091        0.038     0.051     0.062      0.053
          Diff. Wald test p-value                       0.000               0.000                     0.012      0.005
          B. High BBA Bite × Post 2.294∗∗∗ 1.951∗∗∗ 0.344∗∗∗ 1.719∗∗∗           0.689∗∗∗   0.766∗∗∗ 1.031∗∗∗ 0.477∗∗∗
                                       (0.382) (0.314) (0.0795) (0.267)         (0.135)    (0.134) (0.175) (0.0917)
          Elasticity                    0.901     1.073      0.471   1.224        0.620      0.796   0.888       1.203
          Adjusted R2                   0.053     0.057      0.013   0.062        0.026     0.035     0.043      0.033
          Diff. Wald test p-value                       0.000               0.000                     0.010      0.000
          Mean of Outcome               2.548     1.817      0.730   1.404       1.112       0.963   1.162       0.396
          Nb. Observations             12,480    12,480     12,480  12,480       12,480     12,480   12,480     12,480
          Nb. Hospitals                  780       780        780     780          780        780      780        780
Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on the “raw” number of grants funded,
in the teaching hospital sample. Observations are at the hospital-year level. Column 1 presents results from OLS regressions.
Columns 2-8 present estimates from seemingly unrelated regressions. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. The
elasticity of 0.517 in Panel A implies that a one percentage increase in BBA Bite is associated on average with a 0.517 percent
yearly increase in grant applications following the BBA’s enactment. A Panel B elasticity of 0.901 implies that High BBA Share
hospitals experience on average a 90.1 percent yearly increase in grant applications in the post-BBA time period. The fourth
row and eighth row show p-values from Wald tests that compare coefficients on BBA Bite × After (Panel A) or High BBA
Bite × After (Panel B) across different columns (Column 2 vs. Column 3; Column 4 vs. Column 5; Column 6 vs. Column
7; Column 6 vs. Column 8). Standard errors are in parentheses, and are clustered at the hospital level. Sources: Healthcare
Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II.
∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.




                                                               xl
                                                                 Table F3: Effect on Publication Impact
                                    Total                                     By Citation Percentile                                   Cited in a Patent                By Disruption
                                                                                                                                                                 Consolidating Disruptive
                                                   ≤25          26-50         51-75           76-95        96-99         >99          Yes             No
                                                                                                                                                                   Research          Research
                                      (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)             (9)          (10)              (11)
                                                                                                                                                                           ∗∗∗
        A. BBA Bite × Post        6096.601∗∗∗   1250.166∗∗∗   1342.864∗∗∗   1557.072∗∗∗    1476.787∗∗∗   353.511∗∗∗   116.201∗∗∗   1035.713∗∗∗     5060.888∗∗∗    5419.923          216.404∗∗∗
                                  (1255.635)     (256.494)     (254.425)     (320.290)      (327.773)     (92.528)     (28.784)     (271.988)       (994.506)     (1115.450)         (46.837)
        Elasticity                   0.374          0.311         0.359         0.393         0.418         0.434        0.485         0.254           0.414         0.371             0.356
        Adjusted R2                  0.110          0.100         0.110        0.100          0.093         0.062        0.046         0.062          0.115          0.100             0.062
        Diff. Wald test p-value        -              -             -             -              -            -            -                  0.000                           0.000
        B. High BBA Bite × Post    30.434∗∗∗      6.526∗∗∗      6.676∗∗∗      7.812∗∗∗       7.167∗∗∗     1.687∗∗∗     0.566∗∗∗      5.097∗∗∗       25.337∗∗∗      25.426∗∗∗         1.035∗∗∗
                                    (4.827)       (0.974)       (0.996)       (1.269)        (1.245)       (0.341)      (0.113)      (1.042)         (3.850)        (4.378)           (0.175)
        Elasticity                   0.670          0.583         0.641         0.708         0.728         0.743        0.849         0.450           0.744         0.624             0.611
        Adjusted R2                  0.080          0.078         0.079        0.072          0.065         0.043        0.032         0.043          0.085          0.069             0.042
        Diff. Wald test p-value        -              -             -             -              -            -            -                  0.000                           0.000
        Mean of Outcome             45.404         11.186        10.407        11.030         9.844         2.271        0.667        11.337         34.067         40.717             1.692
        Nb. Observations            12,480         12,480        12,480        12,480         12,480       12,480       12,480        12,480          12,480        12,480            12,480
        Nb. Hospitals                 780            780           780           780           780           780          780           780             780           780               780
      Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on the “raw” number of publications, by impact, in the teaching hospital sample.
      Observations are at the hospital-year level. Estimates are from seemingly unrelated regressions and each coefficient is from a separate regression. Each publication’s
      disruptiveness is measured by using the Funk and Owen-Smith (2017) disruptiveness index, denoted by d. Column 8 refers to publications with d≤95th percentile and
      Column 9 refers to publications with d > 95th percentile. The elasticity of 0.374 in Panel A implies that a one percentage increase in BBA Bite is associated on average
      with a 0.374 percent yearly increase in publications following the BBA’s enactment. An elasticity of 0.670 in Panel B implies that High BBA Bite hospitals experience on
      average a 67.0 percent yearly increase in publications in the post-BBA time period. The fourth row and eighth row show p-values from Wald tests that compare coefficients




xli
      on BBA Bite × After (Panel A) or High BBA Bite × After (Panel B) across different columns. For Columns 8 and 9, the fourth and eight row show p-values from Wald
      tests that compare Column 8 and 9 estimates. For Columns 10 and 11, the fourth and eight row show p-values from Wald tests that compare Column 10 and Column
      11. Standard errors are in parentheses, and are clustered at the hospital level. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective
      Payment System Payment Impact Files; Funk and Owen-Smith (2017); PubMed, Web of Science.
      ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.
                                 Table F4: Effect on Publication Composition
                                  Laboratory
                                                             Translational Research                      Clinical Research
                                   Research
                                                                     Builds on         Inspiring
                                     Bench       Translational
                                                                    Translational Translational Clinical Trials        Other
                                     MeSH           MeSH
                                                                        MeSH             MeSH
                                         (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)           (5)             (6)
    A. BBA Bite × Post               603.412∗∗      1743.066∗∗∗      790.506∗∗∗       993.187∗∗∗    1181.045∗∗∗     1754.212∗∗∗
                                     (202.160)       (348.490)        (164.228)       (202.837)      (239.737)       (374.711)
    Elasticity                          0.135           0.393           0.575             0.432         0.606           0.423
    Adjusted R2                         0.022           0.094           0.103             0.089         0.111           0.100
    B. High BBA Bite × Post           3.610∗∗∗        8.708∗∗∗         3.805∗∗∗         4.774∗∗∗      5.736∗∗∗        8.490∗∗∗
                                       (1.017)        (1.469)          (0.613)          (0.837)        (0.899)        (1.384)
    Elasticity                          0.291           0.705           0.993             0.746         1.057           0.735
    Adjusted R2                         0.019           0.068           0.073             0.061         0.080           0.071
    Mean of Outcome                    12.413          12.345           3.831            6.398          5.426          11.544
    Nb. Observations                   12,480          12,480           12,480           12,480        12,480          12,480
    Nb. Hospitals                        780             780             780               780           780             780
Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on the “raw” number of bench, translational,
and clinical trial research publications in hospitals, in the teaching hospital sample. Observations are at the hospital-year level.
Estimates are from OLS regressions, and each coefficient is from a separate regression. Column 1 refers to publications that
are not disease-oriented, are not clinical trial publications, and rely on either a molecular biology technique, a model organism,
cellular structures and macromolecules, or biochemical and cellular processes (based on MeSH terms). Column 2 refers to
publications that are disease-oriented, are not clinical trial publications, and rely on either a molecular biology technique,
a model organism, cellular structures and macromolecules, or biochemical and cellular processes (based on MeSH terms).
Column 3 refers to publications that report the results of a clinical trials, or are tagged by a human MeSH term and also cite a
translational publication. Column 4 refers to publications that are translational and is cited by a clinical trial publication (or
one that contains a human MeSH term). Column 5 refers to publications that are indicated as clinical trials based on MeSH
terms or the publication type field in PubMed. Finally, Column 6 refers to publications that are disease-oriented, not clinical
trials, and not tagged by any bench MeSH keywords. The elasticity of 0.135 in Panel A implies that a one percentage increase
in BBA Bite is associated on average with a 0.135 percent yearly increase in publications following the BBA’s enactment.
An elasticity of 0.291 in Panel B implies that High BBA Bite hospitals experience on average a 29.1 percent yearly increase
in publications in the post-BBA time period. Standard errors are in parentheses, and are clustered at the hospital level.
Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact
Files; Azoulay, Greenblatt, and Heggeness (2020); Marx and Fuegi (2020); PubMed; Web of Science.
∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.




                                                                 xlii
               Appendix G: Instrumental Variables Estimation
This section provides regression results for the instrumental variables estimation. As with the BBA Bite
specification described in Section 3.2, this empirical strategy only captures exogenous variation in the PPS
reimbursement formula.

      Following Shen (2003), we estimate hospital-level “long-difference” regressions separately for the two
periods, 1995-1999 and 1995-2007. For each period, we estimate the following equation:

         Researchh,t2 − Researchh,1995 =
                                                                          
                                                     M edicareDischarges
         β [ActualRevh,t2 − N oBBARevh,t2 ] ×                                       + δDischargesh,1995
                                                      T otalDischarges     h,1995


where Researchh,t2 denotes research in hospital h in the final year of the period t2 , and Dischargesh,1995
is the number of discharges in 1995. ActualRevh,t2 is the true PPS revenue per discharge for hospital h in
year t2 . To capture the impact of the BBA, we compute N oBBARevh,t2 , a “no BBA” PPS revenue per
discharge which is the revenue that hospital h would have received in t2 had there been no changes to the
PPS formula. We do this by multiplying the PPS revenue per discharge in 1995 by the inflation rate (i.e.,
the market basket index) for each year until t2 (Cutler 1998). As in Section 3.2, we weigh the change in PPS
revenue per discharge by the hospital’s reliance on Medicare, as measured by the share of discharges that
are covered by Medicare. To aid the interpretation of the coefficients, we multiply the weighed difference in
the true and “no BBA” PPS revenue per discharge by 1000. Figure G2, Panel A displays the distribution
of the resulting variable when t2 = 1999. If the BBA leads to an increase in subsequent research levels, we
would expect β < 0.

       One concern is that ActualRevh,t2 − N oBBARevh,t2 may not accurately capture the true financial
effect of the BBA if hospitals respond to the reform by manipulating parts of the reimbursement formula –
i.e., by changing the average patient case-mix. To identify the true financial effect of the BBA, we calculate
a simulated revenue based on the updated PPS reimbursement formula, but with inputs held fixed at the
pre-BBA (i.e., 1995) level. Figure G1 shows the relationship between the actual, simulated, and no BBA
PPS revenue per discharge and Figure G2, Panel B shows the distribution of the simulated revenue change,
weighed by the hospital’s Medicare share of discharges.

      With these revenue variables, we estimate the following equation in the first stage:
                                                                    
                                                 M edicareDischarges
           [ActualRevh,t2 − N oBBARevh,t2 ] ×                                =
                                                   T otalDischarges   h,1995
                                                                   
                                                M edicareDischarges
          γ [SimRevh,t2   − N oBBARevh,t2 ] ×                               + δDischargesh,1995
                                                 T otalDischarges    h,1995


The 2SLS estimates in Table G1 reports the two-stage least square regression results for our primary research
outcomes. The results are consistent with our core results: hospitals that experience a larger financial loss as
a result of the BBA experience an increase in research outcomes. The effects are both seen in the short-run




                                                       xliii
(Panel A) and long-run (Panel B), though the effects are only statistically significant for publications in the
long-run.




                                                     xliv
           Figure G1: Trends in Actual, Simulated, and No BBA Medicare Revenues

                                                                             Actual Revenue
                                                                             No BBA Revenue: 1995 Revenue Updated with Market Basket
                                                                             Sim. Revenue: BBA Formula, 1995 Inputs



                                                                       12


                           Median Revenue ($1,000s) Across Hospitals



                                                                       10




                                                                        8




                                                                        6
                                                                            1994        1996          1998            2000     2002    2004   2006
                                                                                                                Year


Notes: This figure plots the median level of actual, simulated, and no BBA PPS revenue per discharge, averaged across
hospitals in the teaching hospital sample. The dashed line indicates the year in which the BBA came into effect. The dashed
line indicates the year in which the BBA came into effect. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System,
Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files.




                                                                                                          xlv
                                               Figure G2: Distribution in Revenue Changes

                                                                   A. Actual Revenue Difference
                                              400




                                              300
                        Number of Hospitals


                                              200




                                              100




                                                0
                                                    -4.00      -3.00           -2.00          -1.00     0.00   1.00

                                                    (Actual Rev. - No BBA Rev.)/1000 x Medicare Discharge Share


                                                                       B. Sim. Revenue Difference
                                              500



                                              400
                        Number of Hospitals




                                              300



                                              200



                                              100



                                                0
                                                       -4.00           -2.00           0.00           2.00     4.00

                                                    (Sim. Rev. - No BBA Rev.)/1000 x Medicare Discharge Share

Notes: This figure shows a histogram of the true change (Panel A) and the simulated change (Panel B) in average PPS revenue
per discharge, weighed by the Medicare share of discharges. The sample is the teaching hospital sample. Sources: Healthcare
Provider Cost Reporting Information System, Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files.




                                                                               xlvi
                                     Table G1: Effect on Research Levels

                                     First Stage      Grant Applications         Grants Funded            Total Pubs
                                   ∆ Actual Rev.        OLS           IV         OLS          IV        OLS         IV
                                        (1)             (2)           (3)        (4)          (5)       (6)         (7)
   A. 1995 − 1999
   ∆ Sim. Rev.                         0.713∗∗∗
                                       (0.0808)

   ∆ True Rev.                                          0.237        0.202     0.0933       -0.193      -0.449     -5.784
                                                       (0.371)      (0.449)    (0.207)     (0.326)     (2.506)    (4.122)

   Discharges in 1995                 -0.000512       0.118∗∗∗      0.118∗∗∗   0.0877∗∗∗   0.0876∗∗∗   1.398∗∗∗   1.395∗∗∗
                                      (0.00125)       (0.0349)      (0.0348)   (0.0226)    (0.0225)    (0.283)    (0.282)
   Cragg-Donald Wald F-Stat                44
   Mean of Outcome                       -0.17          0.98         0.98        0.78        0.78       11.95      11.95
   Observations                           776           776          776         776         776         776        776
   B. 1995 − 2007
   ∆ Sim. Rev.                         0.857∗∗∗
                                       (0.0468)

   ∆ True Rev.                                          0.321        -1.113     0.108       -0.128      -3.619    -8.800∗
                                                       (1.035)      (1.404)    (0.185)     (0.240)     (3.651)    (4.747)

   Discharges in 1995                 -0.00382∗       0.915∗∗∗      0.897∗∗∗    0.129∗∗     0.126∗∗    2.601∗∗∗   2.534∗∗∗
                                      (0.00213)       (0.250)       (0.248)    (0.0463)    (0.0459)    (0.669)    (0.663)
   Cragg-Donald Wald F-Stat              214
   Mean of Outcome                      -0.48           8.78         8.78        1.30        1.30       25.69      25.69
   Observations                          739            739          739         739         739         739        739
Notes: This table reports “long-difference” 2SLS estimates of the effect of the BBA on the number of grant applications,
grants funded, and publications, in the teaching hospital sample. Observations are at the hospital-level. Panel A examines the
short-run effect of the BBA, by estimating the change in research outcomes between 1995 and 1999. Panel B investigates the
long-run effect of the BBA, by estimating the change in research outcomes between 1995 and 2007. For ease of interpretation,
“Discharges in 1995” are the number of discharges in 1995 divided by 1000. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Source:
Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH
IMPAC II; PubMed.
∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.




                                                            xlvii
                  Appendix H: Intended Effects of the BBA
This section provides reports the effect of the BBA on research outcomes where a hospital’s BBA Bite is
calculated by simulating the revenue per discharge that the hospital would have lost under the BBA, had
the intended effects of the reform been in effect in 1995.




                                                 xlviii
                                                  Figure H1: Distribution of BBA Bite

                                   100



                                    80
             Number of Hospitals




                                    60



                                    40



                                    20



                                     0
                                         0.000          0.010               0.020       0.030               0.040

                                             [Ln(Actual Rev.) - Ln(Sim. Rev.)] x Medicare Discharge Share

Notes: This figure shows a histogram of the BBA Bite for the teaching hospital sample, where BBA Bite
is the product of (i) the difference between the (log) simulated revenue per discharge and actual (log) PPS
revenue per discharge in 1995; and (ii) the Medicare share of discharges averaged over 1992-1995. A hospital’s
BBA Bite is calculated by simulating the revenue per discharge that the hospital would have lost under the
BBA, had the intended effects of the reform been in effect in 1995. The solid line indicates the mean
(0.0084) of this variable and the dotted lines indicates the median (0.0067). Sources: Healthcare Provider
Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files.




                                                                     xlix
                                      Figure H2: Effect on the Number of Grant Applications


                        30




                        20
  β̂z from Equation 3




                        10




                         0




                        -10

                              1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                     Year

Notes: This figure plots the response in grants funded in the teaching hospital sample. Each dot corresponds
to coefficient estimates stemming from the event study specification described in Section 4.1, in which
asinh(number of grant applications) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as interaction terms
between a hospital’s BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA. A hospital’s BBA
Bite is calculated by simulating the revenue per discharge that the hospital would have lost under the BBA,
had the intended effects of the reform been in effect in 1995. Coefficient estimates correspond to a dynamic
version of coefficient estimates found in Table H1, Panel A, Column 1 and are from OLS models. The
95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered around hospital) around these
estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective
Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II.




                                                                 l
                                        Figure H3: Effect on the Number of Grants Funded


                        15




                        10
  β̂z from Equation 3




                         5




                         0




                         -5




                        -10

                              1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                      Year

Notes: This figure plots the response in grants funded in the teaching hospital sample. Each dot corresponds
to coefficient estimates stemming from the event study specification described in Section 4.1, in which
asinh(number of grants funded) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as interaction terms
between a hospital’s BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA. A hospital’s BBA
Bite is calculated by simulating the revenue per discharge that the hospital would have lost under the BBA,
had the intended effects of the reform been in effect in 1995. Coefficient estimates correspond to a dynamic
version of coefficient estimates found in Table H2, Panel A, Column 1 and are from OLS models. The
95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered around hospital) around these
estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective
Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II.




                                                                 li
                                         Figure H4: Effect on the Number of Publications


                        15



                        10
  β̂z from Equation 3




                         5



                         0



                         -5



                        -10


                              1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                      Year

Notes: This figure plots the response in publications in the teaching hospital sample. Each dot corresponds
to coefficient estimates stemming from the event study specification described in Section 4.1, in which
asinh(number of publications) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as interaction terms
between a hospital’s BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA. A hospital’s BBA
Bite is calculated by simulating the revenue per discharge that the hospital would have lost under the BBA,
had the intended effects of the reform been in effect in 1995. Coefficient estimates correspond to a dynamic
version of coefficient estimates found in Table H3, Panel A, Column 1 and are from OLS models. The
95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered around hospital) around these
estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective
Payment System Payment Impact Files; PubMed, Web of Science.




                                                                lii
                                        Figure H5: Effect on Bench Research Publications



                        10




                         5
  β̂z from Equation 3




                         0




                         -5




                        -10




                        -15

                              1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                       Year

Notes: This figure plots the response in bench research publications in the teaching hospital sample. Each
dot corresponds to coefficient estimates stemming from the event study specification described in Section 4.1,
in which asinh(number of publications) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well as interaction
terms between a hospital’s BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the BBA. A hospital’s
BBA Bite is calculated by simulating the revenue per discharge that the hospital would have lost under the
BBA, had the intended effects of the reform been in effect in 1995. Coefficient estimates correspond to a
dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table H4, Panel A, Column 1 and are from OLS models.
The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered around hospital) around
these estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient
Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; Azoulay, Greenblatt, and Heggeness (2020); PubMed;
Web of Science.




                                                                liii
                                     Figure H6: Effect on Translational Research Publications


                        20
  β̂z from Equation 3




                        10




                         0




                        -10

                              1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                      Year

Notes: This figure plots the response in translational research publications in the teaching hospital sample.
Each dot corresponds to coefficient estimates stemming from the event study specification described in
Section 4.1, in which asinh(number of publications) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well
as interaction terms between a hospital’s BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the
BBA. A hospital’s BBA Bite is calculated by simulating the revenue per discharge that the hospital would
have lost under the BBA, had the intended effects of the reform been in effect in 1995. Coefficient estimates
correspond to a dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table H4, Panel A, Column 2 and are
from OLS models. The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered around
hospital) around these estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System;
Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; Azoulay, Greenblatt, and Heggeness (2020);
PubMed; Web of Science.




                                                                liv
                       Figure H7: Effect on Clinical Research Publications

                                                                                  A. Clinical Trials

                                             20




                       β̂z from Equation 3
                                              0




                                             -20




                                             -40

                                                   1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                                          Year


                                                                             B. Other Clinical Research
                                             20




                                             10
                       β̂z from Equation 3




                                              0




                                             -10




                                             -20

                                                   1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                                                          Year


Notes: This figure plots the response in clinical research publications in the teaching hospital sample.
Each dot corresponds to coefficient estimates stemming from the event study specification described in
Section 4.1, in which asinh(number of publications) is regressed onto year effects, hospital effects, as well
as interaction terms between a hospital’s BBA Bite interacted with the number of years before/after the
BBA. A hospital’s BBA Bite is calculated by simulating the revenue per discharge that the hospital would
have lost under the BBA, had the intended effects of the reform been in effect in 1995. Coefficient estimates
correspond to a dynamic version of coefficient estimates found in Table H4, Panel A, Columns 5 and 6
and are from OLS models. The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered
around hospital) around these estimates is shown. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information
System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; Azoulay, Greenblatt, and Heggeness
(2020); PubMed; Web of Science.




                                                                                     lv
                         Table H1: Effect on the Number of Grant Applications
                                                                     Principal Investigator     Principal Investigator
                                                 Grant Cycle
                                                                          Experience                   Degree
                                     Total        New       Renewal Novice Incumbent            MD      PhD     MD-PhD
                                      (1)          (2)         (3)      (4)          (5)        (6)      (7)        (8)
         A. BBA Bite × Post         10.16∗∗∗    13.06∗∗∗      1.774  20.91∗∗∗      6.209∗∗   8.738∗∗∗ 12.11∗∗∗ 15.21∗∗∗
                                    (2.270)      (2.343)    (1.462)  (2.270)       (2.089)   (2.282)  (2.135)    (2.159)
         Elasticity                  0.054        0.069       0.011   0.113         0.034      0.048    0.066     0.099
         Adjusted R2                 0.023        0.034       0.005   0.107         0.011      0.021    0.040     0.056
         Diff. Wald test p-value                        0.000                 0.000                     0.150     0.010
         B. High BBA Bite × Post 0.105∗∗∗ 0.137∗∗∗ 0.00839 0.204∗∗∗              0.0779∗∗∗  0.0936∗∗∗ 0.123∗∗∗ 0.145∗∗∗
                                       (0.0247) (0.0249) (0.0152) (0.0250)        (0.0217)  (0.0216) (0.0213) (0.0219)
         Elasticity                      0.110    0.147       0.008   0.227         0.081      0.098    0.131     0.156
         Adjusted R2                     0.019    0.029       0.005   0.088         0.011      0.018    0.032     0.043
         Diff. Wald test p-value                        0.000                 0.000                     0.180     0.032
         Mean of Outcome                 0.751    0.705       0.372   0.541         0.587     0.519     0.533     0.328
         Nb. Observations               12,480   12,480      12,480   12,480       12,480     12,480   12,480    12,480
         Nb. Hospitals                    780      780         780     780           780        780      780       780
Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on the number of grant applications, in the
teaching hospital sample. A hospital’s BBA Bite is calculated by simulating the revenue per discharge that the hospital would
have lost under the BBA, had the intended effects of the reform been in effect in 1995. Observations are at the hospital-year
level. Outcomes are transformed with the inverse hyperbolic sine function. Column 1 presents results from OLS regressions.
Columns 2-8 present estimates from seemingly unrelated regressions. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. The
elasticity of 0.054 in Panel A implies that a one percentage increase in BBA Bite is associated on average with a 0.054 percent
yearly increase in grant applications following the BBA’s enactment. A Panel B elasticity of 0.110 implies that High BBA Share
hospitals experience on average a 11.0 percent yearly increase in grant applications in the post-BBA time period. The fourth
row and eighth row show p-values from Wald tests that compare coefficients on BBA Bite × After (Panel A) or High BBA
Bite × After (Panel B) across different columns (Column 2 vs. Column 3; Column 4 vs. Column 5; Column 6 vs. Column
7; Column 6 vs. Column 8). Robust standard errors (clustered at the hospital level) are in parentheses. Sources: Healthcare
Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II.
∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.




                                                               lvi
                            Table H2: Effect on the Number of Grants Funded
                                                                     Principal Investigator   Principal Investigator
                                                Grant Cycle
                                                                          Experience                 Degree
                                    Total        New       Renewal Novice Incumbent           MD       PhD       MD-PhD
                                      (1)         (2)         (3)     (4)          (5)        (6)       (7)         (8)
        A. BBA Bite × Post         8.290∗∗∗    11.15∗∗∗ 4.041∗∗ 16.32∗∗∗         3.692∗∗   7.112∗∗∗  9.663∗∗∗    11.69∗∗∗
                                   (1.763)      (1.829)    (1.365)  (1.857)      (1.532)    (1.719)   (1.704)     (1.602)
        Elasticity                  0.047        0.067       0.036   0.106        0.026      0.054     0.067       0.167
        Adjusted R2                 0.018        0.030       0.005   0.073        0.008      0.015     0.028       0.041
        Diff. Wald test p-value                        0.000                0.000                      0.137       0.012
        B. High BBA Bite × Post 0.0787∗∗∗ 0.107∗∗∗ 0.0354∗∗ 0.153∗∗∗            0.0420∗∗  0.0710∗∗∗ 0.0919∗∗∗ 0.103∗∗∗
                                      (0.0181) (0.0190) (0.0120) (0.0184)       (0.0155)   (0.0152) (0.0169) (0.0155)
        Elasticity                      0.082    0.113       0.036   0.166        0.043      0.074     0.096       0.108
        Adjusted R2                    0.013     0.022       0.003   0.053        0.008      0.011     0.020       0.026
        Diff. Wald test p-value                        0.000                0.000                      0.185       0.036
        Mean of Outcome                0.439     0.382       0.246   0.325        0.312      0.285     0.300       0.159
        Nb. Observations               12,480   12,480      12,480  12,480       12,480     12,480    12,480      12,480
        Nb. Hospitals                    780      780         780     780          780        780       780         780
Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on the number of grants funded, in the
teaching hospital sample. A hospital’s BBA Bite is calculated by simulating the revenue per discharge that the hospital would
have lost under the BBA, had the intended effects of the reform been in effect in 1995. Observations are at the hospital-year
level. Outcomes are transformed with the inverse hyperbolic sine function. Column 1 presents results from OLS regressions.
Columns 2-8 present estimates from seemingly unrelated regressions. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. The
elasticity of 0.047 in Panel A implies that a one percentage increase in BBA Bite is associated on average with a 0.047 percent
yearly increase in grant applications following the BBA’s enactment. A Panel B elasticity of 0.082 implies that High BBA Share
hospitals experience on average a 8.2 percent yearly increase in grant applications in the post-BBA time period. The fourth
row and eighth row show p-values from Wald tests that compare coefficients on BBA Bite × After (Panel A) or High BBA
Bite × After (Panel B) across different columns (Column 2 vs. Column 3; Column 4 vs. Column 5; Column 6 vs. Column
7; Column 6 vs. Column 8). Standard errors are in parentheses, and are clustered at the hospital level. Sources: Healthcare
Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II.
∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.




                                                              lvii
                                                                  Table H3: Effect on Publication Impact
                                       Total                                  By Citation Percentile                                 Cited in a Patent               By Disruption
                                                                                                                                                               Consolidating Disruptive
                                                    ≤25          26-50        51-75           76-95      96-99         >99          Yes                No
                                                                                                                                                                Research        Research
                                        (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)               (9)         (10)           (11)
                                                                                                                                                                        ∗
          A. BBA Bite × Post           3.251       6.802∗∗      6.734∗∗      7.544∗∗∗       8.988∗∗∗   10.967∗∗∗     10.346∗∗∗     4.581∗            4.917∗       4.995         7.611∗∗∗
                                      (2.842)      (2.375)      (2.293)      (2.257)        (2.431)     (2.127)       (1.694)      (2.348)           (2.770)     (2.810)         (1.995)
          Elasticity                   0.017         0.036       0.036         0.040         0.048       0.063         0.098        0.024             0.026       0.026           0.047
          Adjusted R2                  0.029         0.029       0.022        0.019          0.028        0.034        0.032        0.013             0.034       0.027           0.012
          Diff. Wald test p-value        -           0.019       0.020         0.016         0.002       0.002         0.009                 0.876                        0.260
          B. High BBA Bite × Post     0.081∗∗      0.115∗∗∗     0.098∗∗∗     0.108∗∗∗       0.117∗∗∗    0.121∗∗∗     0.108∗∗∗      0.079∗∗           0.096∗∗     0.091∗∗        0.105∗∗∗
                                      (0.039)      (0.031)      (0.029)      (0.028)        (0.029)     (0.020)       (0.016)      (0.029)           (0.038)     (0.040)         (0.026)
          Elasticity                   0.084         0.122        0.103        0.114         0.124        0.129        0.114        0.082             0.101        0.095          0.110
          Adjusted R2                  0.030         0.030       0.022        0.019          0.028        0.031        0.027        0.014             0.035       0.028           0.012
          Diff. Wald test p-value        -           0.121       0.462         0.276         0.203       0.260         0.475                 0.586                        0.678
          Mean of Outcome              1.991        1.347        1.153         1.089         0.962        0.469        0.232       0.976             1.876        1.822           0.800
          Nb. Observations            12,480        12,480       12,480       12,480         12,480      12,480       12,480       12,480            12,480       12,480         12,480
          Nb. Hospitals                 780           780          780          780           780          780          780         780               780           780            780
        Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on the number of publications, by impact, in the teaching hospital sample. A hospital’s
        BBA Bite is calculated by simulating the revenue per discharge that the hospital would have lost under the BBA, had the intended effects of the reform been in effect in
        1995. Observations are at the hospital-year level. Outcomes are transformed with the inverse hyperbolic sine function. Estimates are from seemingly unrelated regressions
        and each coefficient is from a separate regression. Each publication’s disruptiveness is measured by using the Funk and Owen-Smith (2017) disruptiveness index, denoted
        by d. Column 8 refers to publications with d≤95th percentile and Column 9 refers to publications with d > 95th percentile. The elasticity of 0.017 in Panel A implies
        that a one percentage increase in BBA Bite is associated on average with a 0.017 percent yearly increase in publications following the BBA’s enactment. An elasticity of




lviii
        0.084 in Panel B implies that High BBA Bite hospitals experience on average a 8.4 percent yearly increase in publications in the post-BBA time period. The fourth row
        and eighth row show p-values from Wald tests that compare coefficients on BBA Bite × After (Panel A) or High BBA Bite × After (Panel B) across different columns.
        For Columns 2 to 7, the fourth and eight row compare estimates in Column 1 vs. estimates in the focal column. For Columns 8 and 9, the fourth and eight row show
        p-values from Wald tests that compare Column 8 and 9 estimates. For Columns 10 and 11, the fourth and eight row show p-values from Wald tests that compare Column
        10 and Column 11. Standard errors are in parentheses, and are clustered at the hospital level. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient
        Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; Funk and Owen-Smith (2017); PubMed, Web of Science.
        ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.
                                Table H4: Effect on Publication Composition
                                  Laboratory
                                                            Translational Research                      Clinical Research
                                   Research
                                                                      Builds on       Inspiring
                                    Bench        Translational
                                                                    Translational Translational Clinical Trials        Other
                                    MeSH            MeSH
                                                                        MeSH            MeSH
                                          (1)            (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)
    A. BBA Bite × Post                  -2.232        8.240∗∗∗        17.633∗∗∗       11.093∗∗∗       18.333∗∗∗       9.041∗∗∗
                                       (2.567)         (2.345)         (2.268)         (2.224)         (2.370)        (2.481)
    Elasticity                          -0.012          0.044           0.096            0.059           0.098          0.048
    Adjusted R2                          0.001          0.015           0.069            0.026          0.089           0.023
    B. High BBA Bite × Post             -0.034         0.098∗∗         0.208∗∗∗        0.127∗∗∗        0.243∗∗∗       0.141∗∗∗
                                       (0.029)         (0.030)         (0.028)         (0.027)         (0.030)        (0.032)
    Elasticity                          -0.034          0.103           0.231            0.136           0.275          0.151
    Adjusted R2                          0.001          0.015           0.066            0.024          0.089           0.025
    Mean of Outcome                      0.826          1.062           0.798           0.804           0.950           1.398
    Nb. Observations                   12,480          12,480           12,480          12,480          12,480         12,480
    Nb. Hospitals                         780            780             780              780             780            780
Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on bench, translational, and clinical trial
research in hospitals, in the teaching hospital sample. A hospital’s BBA Bite is calculated by simulating the revenue per
discharge that the hospital would have lost under the BBA, had the intended effects of the reform been in effect in 1995.
Observations are at the hospital-year level. Outcomes are transformed with the inverse hyperbolic sine function. Estimates
are from OLS regressions, and each coefficient is from a separate regression. Column 1 refers to publications that are not
disease-oriented, are not clinical trial publications, and rely on either a molecular biology technique, a model organism, cellular
structures and macromolecules, or biochemical and cellular processes (based on MeSH terms). Column 2 refers to publications
that are disease-oriented, are not clinical trial publications, and rely on either a molecular biology technique, a model organism,
cellular structures and macromolecules, or biochemical and cellular processes (based on MeSH terms). Column 3 refers to
publications that report the results of a clinical trials, or are tagged by a human MeSH term and also cite a translational
publication. Column 4 refers to publications that are translational and is cited by a clinical trial publication (or one that
contains a human MeSH term). Column 5 refers to publications that are indicated as clinical trials based on MeSH terms or the
publication type field in PubMed. Finally, Column 6 refers to publications that are disease-oriented, not clinical trials, and not
tagged by any bench MeSH keywords. The elasticity of -0.012 in Panel A implies that a one percentage increase in BBA Bite
is associated on average with a 0.012 percent yearly decrease in publications following the BBA’s enactment. An elasticity of
-0.034 in Panel B implies that High BBA Bite hospitals experience on average a 3.4 percent yearly decrease in publications in the
post-BBA time period. Standard errors are in parentheses, and are clustered at the hospital level. Sources: Healthcare Provider
Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective Payment System Payment Impact Files; Azoulay, Greenblatt, and
Heggeness (2020); Marx and Fuegi (2020); PubMed; Web of Science.
∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.




                                                                 lix
           Appendix I: Assessing the Doubling of the NIH Budget
      This Appendix explores whether the NIH budget doubling may have led to a upward bias in our
research outcome estimates.

Assessing the Age-Bias of NIH Budget Doubling. In this section, we use the number and composition
of NIH grants funded as a proxy for NIH funding supply. Appendix Figure I1 shows trends in total NIH
grants awarded to hospitals and non-hospitals by year for each year from 1980 to 2007. In Panel A, we plot
the total number of grants funded by year. In Panel B, we plot the total amount of grant dollars awarded
from hospitals by year. Looking at the data series in Panel A provides clear evidence of an increase in the
number of grants funded from 1998 to 2003. These patterns – though less distinct – also appear in Panel B.
Further, if we calculate the average amount of grant dolllars awarded, approximately $3.8 billion is awarded
each year before 1998 and $4.9 billion is allocated each year on/after 1998.

       Our next goal is to characterize NIH-related funding for research primarily conducted in conditions
disproportionately affecting children (i.e., “Medicare-Averse” research), research in diseases primarily com-
mon among the elderly (i.e., “Medicare-Friendly” research), and research that primarily that typically afflicts
individuals of all ages (i.e., “Medicare-Neutral” research). To categorize each NIH grant, we first identify
a set of Medicare-Averse, Medicare-Friendly, and Medicare-Neutral diseases as measured by ICD9 codes.
For each ICD9 code, we calculate the share of individuals diagnosed with the focal condition and covered
by Medicare using the 1996 and 1997 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS), a nationally represen-
tative survey of the U.S. civilian non-institutionalized population. We assign each ICD9 code to one of
four mutually exclusive bins, based on their “ICD9 Medicare Share”: ICD9 codes that fall in the bottom
tenth percentile of the ICD9 Medicare Share distribution; ICD9 codes that fall between the fifty-fith and
sixty-fifth percentile; ICD9 codes that fall above the ninetieth percentile; and ICD9 codes that fall in none
of the previous bins. Focusing on the first three ICD9 code bins, we keep the top 15 ICD9 codes (based on
the total number of individuals diagnosed with the focal ICD9 code in 1996 and 1997) in each ICD9 code
bin. This results in a total of 45 unique ICD9 codes (15 in each ICD9 code bin).

      For each ICD9 code, we collect related MeSH terms using the National Library of Medicine’s Medical
Text Indexer (MTI), a natural language processing tool which enables researchers to map text onto the
MeSH controlled thesaurus.i This results in 93 unique MeSH terms. Next, these unique MeSH terms are
categorized into three mutually-exclusive MeSH categories measuring different forms of age-bias: MeSH
terms that are “Medicare-Averse”; MeSH terms that are “Medicare-Neutral”; and MeSH terms that are
“Medicare-Friendly.” As expected, MeSH terms in the Medicare-Averse category correspond to diseases
that primarily afflict children, such as: Chickenpox and Measles. In contrast, MeSH terms in the Medicare-
Friendly category include Glaucoma and Parkinson’s Disease. Medicare-Neutral MeSH terms include diseases
that are less biased towards children or the elderly, such as Psoriasis and Cystitis.
    i
        See: https://ii.nlm.nih.gov/MTI/.




                                                      lx
       Using the Medicare-Averse, Medicare-Neutral, and Medicare-Friendly MeSH categories, we categorize
each grant.ii To do so, we use information from the title and full-text abstract for each grant. Specifically, we
map words in the title and abstract to terms from the MeSH thesaurus by using the MTI. Next, we categorize
a grant as being Medicare-Averse if it is tagged with at least one Medicare-Averse MeSH term . A grant is
considered Medicare-Neutral if it is not Medicare-Averse and is tagged with at least one Medicare-Neutral
MeSH term. Finally, we tag each grant that is not Medicare-Averse, not Medicare-Neutral, and contains at
least one Medicare-Friendly MeSH term. Any duplicates (i.e., grants that are allocated to a MeSH category
more than once) are dropped. This results in 2,954 distinct grants that are Medicare-Averse, 6,012 distinct
grants that are Medicare-Neutral, and 14,677 grants that are Medicare-Friendly.

      Appendix Figure I2 documents the total amount of grant dollars awarded to hospitals by year in
each year from 1992 to 2007 for the three MeSH categories. Looking to trends in the total number of
grants funded (Panel A), we see clear evidence that the NIH awards a relatively large number of grants
for Medicare-Friendly research as compared to Medicare-Averse or Medicare-Neutral research. The three
groups follow each other quite closely in trends from 1992 to 1997. Between 1998 to 2004, the trends diverge
with there being an disproportionate increase in Medicare-Friendly grants. Similar patterns occur among
the total amount of grant dollars funds awarded (Panel B).

      Notably, both graphs exhibit a significant decrease in 1996. This is likely related to the underlying
data construction: grants in 1996 were linked to fewer MeSH terms on average (4.12 vs. 9.38 across the
whole sample). As a result, grants in 1996 had a lower likelihood of being categorized as Medicare-Averse,
Medicare-Neutral, or Medicare-Friendly. Despite this data limitation, the divergence in Medicare-Friendly
grants – particularly in the total number of grants funded – is striking.

      Finally, to empirically assess whether the trends across the three types of research are similar, we
estimate year-level regressions yt = β1998to2003t + εt where yt is the total number of NIH grants funded
or the total amount of grant dollars awarded in year t, transformed with inverse hyperbolic sine function.
1998to2003t is an indicator equal to 1 for years between 1998 and 2003, inclusive. Following our main
analysis on the effect of the BBA on subsequent hospital research outcomes, we perform our estimation
over the 1992-2007 period. Appendix Table I1 presents the estimates, with results from seemingly unrelated
regressions.

      Each column denotes a different grant type (e.g., Column 1 examines the relationship between the
number of Medicare-Averse grants funded and 1998to2003t .) Looking to Panel A, Column 1, we see that
1998 to 2003 increase in the number of Medicare-Friendly grants funded is greater than the increase in
the number of Medicare-Averse or Medicare-Neutral grants funded, though the differences are not statisti-
cally significantly different. Looking to the Panel B, we see similar trends in the amount of grant dollars
funded.

     Taken together, the results in this Appendix document how research is shaped by the NIH budget
doubling. The results suggest that, during the budget doubling, the NIH did not disproportionately allocated
   ii
        Downloaded from the NIH Reporter web site at https://exporter.nih.gov/crisp_catalog.aspx.



                                                       lxi
research funds away from the type of research most likely to be conducted by High Medicare Share hospitals.
This analysis support the view that the NIH doubling was not age-biased and that the NIH doubling is
unlikely to drive our main findings.

Effect Driven By DSH-Variation. Table I2 the impact of Medicare payment changes that are driven by
BBA-induced variation in DSH payments (and not IME payments).




                                                   lxii
                                                                     Figure I1: Total NIH Grants Funded

                                                                                          A. Number of Grants Funded
                                                           22,000


                                                           20,000


                                                           18,000

                       Number of Grants Funded
                                                           16,000


                                                           14,000


                                                           12,000


                                                           10,000


                                                            8,000


                                                            6,000
                                                                   1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006
                                                                                                       Year



                                                                                           B. Grant Dollars Awarded
                                                           7,000




                                                           6,000
                       Grant Dollars Funded ($1,000,000)




                                                           5,000




                                                           4,000




                                                           3,000




                                                           2,000




                                                           1,000
                                                               1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006
                                                                                                     Year


Notes: This figure plots trends in NIH grants by year. This figure is constructed from NIH grants awarded
to hospitals and non-hospitals. Panel A plots the total number of grants funded by year. Panel B documents
the total amount of NIH grant funds awarded in millions of 1997 dollars. The hatched region from 1998 to
2003 denotes the period in which the NIH budget increased. Source: NIH IMPAC II.




                                                                                               lxiii
                                                                     Figure I2: Total NIH Grants Funded

                                                                                        A. Number of Grants Funded
                                                           1,200

                                                           1,100

                                                           1,000

                                                            900


                       Number of Grants Funded
                                                            800

                                                            700

                                                            600

                                                            500

                                                            400

                                                            300

                                                            200

                                                            100

                                                                 0
                                                                 1992    1994    1996      1998         2000   2002         2004      2006
                                                                                                      Year

                                                                                  Medicare Adverse                 Medicare Neutral
                                                                                  Medicare Friendly



                                                                                        B. Grant Dollars Awarded

                                                           400


                                                           350
                       Grant Dollars Funded ($1,000,000)




                                                           300


                                                           250


                                                           200


                                                           150


                                                           100


                                                            50


                                                             0
                                                              1992      1994    1996      1998         2000    2002         2004      2006

                                                                                                     Year
                                                                                 Medicare Adverse              Medicare Neutral
                                                                                 Medicare Friendly



Notes: This figure plots trends in NIH grants by year for three groups of grants: grants that are Medicare-
Averse, Medicare-Neutral, and Medicare-Friendly. Panel A plots the total number of NIH grants funded by
year. Panel B documents the total amount of NIH grant funds awarded in millions of 1997 dollars. The
hatched region from 1998 to 2003 denotes the period in which the NIH budget increased. This figure is
constructed from only the subset of grants that are linked to the set of MeSH terms that are denoted as
Medicare-Averse, Medicare-Neutral, or Medicare-Friendly. The sudden decrease in 1996 is related to our
data construction: grants in 1996 were linked to fewer MeSH terms on average (4.12 vs. 9.38 across the
whole sample). As a result, grants in 1996 had a lower likelihood of being categorized as Medicare-Averse,
Medicare-Neutral, or Medicare-Friendly. For details on the sample and data construction, see the text.
Sources: MEPS; NIH IMPAC II.


                                                                                              lxiv
                                Table I1: NIH Budget Increase and Age Bias
                                            Number of Grants Funded           Grant Dollars Awarded ($)
                                         Medicare Medicare Medicare Medicare Medicare Medicare
                                          Adverse     Neutral   Friendly Adverse       Neutral   Friendly
                                             (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
                      1(1998 to 2003)     0.246∗∗     0.309∗     0.416∗∗   0.362∗∗      0.328     0.475∗∗
                                          (0.122)     (0.158)    (0.195)   (0.149)     (0.215)    (0.196)
                      Mean of Outcome      5.355       6.209      7.100     5.355       6.209      7.100
                      Nb. Observations       48          48         48        48         48         48
Notes: This table reports estimates of the relationship between the NIH budget increase on age bias among NIH grants. Three
types of NIH grants are examined: grants that are Medicare-Averse, Medicare-Neutral, and Medicare-Friendly. Observations
are at the year level and estimations are performed over the 1992-2007 period. The sample of grants used in this analysis
is constructed from the subset of grants that are linked to the set of MeSH terms that are denoted as Medicare-Averse,
Medicare-Neutral, or Medicare-Friendly. Outcomes are transformed with the inverse hyperbolic sine function. Estimates are
from seemingly unrelated regressions and each coefficient is from a separate regression. Sources: MEPS; NIH IMPAC II.
*p<0.01, **p<0.05, ***p<0.001.




                     Table I2: Effect on Research Levels Driven by DSH-Variation
                                                  Grant Applications Grants Funded Total Publications
                                                           (1)               (2)                 (3)
                        A. BBA Bite × Post              50.951∗           48.351∗∗            -57.040
                                                        (26.688)          (19.945)           (42.603)
                        Elasticity                        0.013             0.013              -0.015
                        Adjusted R2                       0.014             0.010              0.029
                        Mean of Outcome                   0.751             0.439              1.991
                        B. High BBA Bite × Post           0.041            0.054∗∗             -0.041
                                                         (0.025)           (0.018)            (0.039)
                        Elasticity                        0.041             0.055              -0.041
                        Adjusted R2                       0.014             0.011              0.029
                        Mean of Outcome                   0.751             0.439              1.991
                        Nb. Observations                 12,480            12,480             12,480
                        Nb. Hospitals                      780               780                780
Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the BBA on the number of grant applications,
grants funded, and total publications, in the teaching hospital sample. A hospital’s BBA Bite is calculated by simulating the
revenue per discharge that is driven by changes to DSH payments. Observations are at the hospital-year level. Outcomes
are transformed with the inverse hyperbolic sine function and estimates are from OLS regressions. The elasticity of 0.013 in
Panel A implies that a one percentage increase in BBA Bite is associated on average with a 0.013 percent yearly increase in grant
applications following the BBA’s enactment. A Panel B elasticity of 0.041 implies that High BBA Share hospitals experience on
average a 4.1 percent yearly increase in grant applications in the post-BBA time period. Robust standard errors (clustered at
the hospital level) are in parentheses. Sources: Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Information System; Inpatient Prospective
Payment System Payment Impact Files; NIH IMPAC II; PubMed, Web of Science.
∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.




                                                              lxv
Appendix References
Cutler, David M. 1998. “Cost Shifting or Cost Cutting? The Incidence of Reductions in Medicare
     Payments.” Tax Policy and the Economy 12: 1-27.
Fishman, Linda E. 1993. How the Medicare Program Pays Hospitals for Inpatient Services: A
     Primer on the Prospective Payment System. Washington, DC: Association of American
     Medical Colleges.
Keeler, Emmett B., Grace M. Carter, and Sally Trude. 1988. “Insurance Aspect of DRG Outlier
     Payments.” Journal of Health Economics 7(3): 193-214
Shen, Yu-Chu. 2003. “The Effect of Financial Pressure on the Quality of Care in Hospitals.”
     Journal of Health Economics 22(2): 243-269.
Wu, Vivian. 2010. “Hospital Cost-shifting Revisited: New Evidence from the Balanced Budget
    Act of 1997.” International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics 28(2): 350-360.




                                             lxvi
