NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A THEORY OF VOLUNTARY TESTING AND SELF-ISOLATION IN AN ONGOING
PANDEMIC
Thomas F. Hellmann
Veikko Thiele
Working Paper 27941
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27941

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2020

I thank the Said Business School for its research support. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27941.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Thomas F. Hellmann and Veikko Thiele. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Theory of Voluntary Testing and Self-isolation in an Ongoing Pandemic
Thomas F. Hellmann and Veikko Thiele
NBER Working Paper No. 27941
October 2020
JEL No. D8,I12
ABSTRACT
Thinking beyond Covid-19, there is a growing interest in what economic structures will be
needed to face ongoing pandemics. In this paper we focus on the diagnostic problem and examine
a new paradigm of voluntary self-testing by private individuals. People without symptoms face
daily choices of either taking the risk of going out (to work and socialize), versus staying at home
in self-isolation. Our theory shows that two types of people voluntary test themselves: those who
otherwise would have self-isolated, and those who would have gone out indiscriminately. Our
central insight is that the equilibrium infection risk falls when home-based testing becomes
cheaper and easier to use, even if tests are not always accurate. Our results challenge the clinical
mainstream view that diagnostic testing is a prerogative of the medical profession, and supports
the notion that frequent self-testing is vital for an economy facing an ongoing pandemic.

Thomas F. Hellmann
Saïd Business School
University of Oxford
Park End Street
Oxford, OX1 1HP
United Kingdom
and NBER
Thomas.Hellmann@sbs.ox.ac.uk
Veikko Thiele
School of Business
Queen's University
Goodes Hall
143 Union Street
Kingston, Ontario
Canada
vthiele@business.queensu.ca

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27941

1

Introduction

While Covid-19 has generated public awareness about the economic challenges of pandemics, it is only
one of the many threats pandemics pose to the economy. Covid-19 was preceded by SARS, Ebola, and
AIDS, and is likely to be followed by mutations of the Coronavirus and/or other infectious diseases.
Hence an emerging debate about what structures will be need in the presence of on-going pandemics,
about what the "new normal" will or should look like? Much attention has been given to the development
of new vaccines and drugs. However, it remains unclear how effective they will be, and how broadly
they can be deployed. Consequently, there is an increased interest in diagnostic testing. Agrawal et al.
(2020), and Gans (2020a) argue that pandemics are essentially an information problem, especially when
infections are transmitted by people without symptoms (aka asymptomatic transmission).1 The major
disruptions to economic life occur because people lack information about who is infected, and when.
What is the economic role of diagnostic testing in the "new normal" economy?
There is considerable disagreement about the proper approach to testing. At the risk of simplifying,
there are two schools of thought that we will call the "clinical mainstream view" versus the "public health
view". The mainstream view is that diagnostic tests are a responsibility of the medical system. Testing
should be performed by medically trained staff and should occur at the point of care (e.g., hospitals),
with the help of approved labs. Diagnostic accuracy is considered extremely important, as it guides all
subsequent medical interventions. Two key measures are "sensitivity" which concerns the absence of
false negatives (where infected people are erroneously found to be free of the virus) and "specificity"
which concerns the absence of false positives (where uninfected people are erroneously found to have
the virus). The clinical mainstream view is deeply sceptical about any testing outside of clinical setting.
For example, the home page of the Federal Trade Commission provides the following warning:2 "Be
wary of ads for test kits. Most test kits being advertised have not been approved by the FDA and aren’t
necessarily accurate."
Some public health experts beg to differ. They argue that testing accuracy is not necessarily the
most important aspect. Instead what matters is to quickly identify as many infected people as early as
possible, before they further spread the disease.3 Dr. Michael Mina, from the Harvard Chan School of
Public Health, argues:4 "As long as you’re using the test on a pretty frequent basis, you will be more
likely than not to catch the person on the day they might go out and transmit. And they’ll know to stay
home." Carroll (July 28th, 2020, NYT) further argues: "These tests aren’t perfect, but that’s not the point
1
The CDC estimated in July 2020 that 40% of Covid-19 transmissions are asymptomatic; other estimates range from 25%
to 80% (Plater, 2020).
2
See https://www.ftc.gov/coronavirus/scams-consumer-advice.
3
For example, as of September 1, 2020, Health Canada is considering approving home tests to screen for Covid-19, even
though home tests are expected to be less accurate than laboratory tests; see https://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/
health-canada-covid-home-test-1.5707740.
4
Quoted by Richard Harris, NPR, July 22nd, 2020; see https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/
2020/07/22/893931848/rapid-cheap-less-accurate-coronavirus-testing-has-a-place-\
scientists-say.

1

[...] every single case we identify is better than not. We can isolate that person from the population and
prevent infections."
This debate raises some interesting questions about the economic role of testing. Is testing accuracy
the most important, or do other aspects such as ease of use and price matter more from an economic perspective? How important is testing accuracy if all people are rational and fully understand the limitations
of a test? What if some naïve consumers do not understand these imperfections?
Currently diagnostic testing is undergoing a paradigm shift. Numerous start-ups and established
companies are introducing new testing technologies that are faster and cheaper than the current standard
approach (called PCR), although they typically are not more accurate (Meyer and Madrigal, 2020; Hellmann, 2020). Most important, testing is no longer just a medical tool for diagnosis, it is also becoming
an economic decision tool. There is a new demand for testing that is administered outside of clinical settings, including self-testing at home. Unlike clinical tests which are given when patients have symptoms,
and are administered by qualified staff, home-based tests are for asymptomatic private individuals. They
self-administer them to make daily decisions about whether to "go out" and participate in public life,
or "stay at home" and self-isolate. This simple choice is at the core of the pandemic problem. People
who stay at home don’t infect others and find out in due time whether they get ill or not. By contrast,
people who go out risk getting infected, and risk infecting others. The choice of "going out" should be
interpreted broadly, to include going out to work (to generate income), going out to socialize (e.g., visit
friends, look after relatives), and going out to consume (e.g., go shopping, eat out).
In this paper we use economic theory to inquire about the private demand for self-testing. As relatively little is known about voluntary self-testing and self-isolation, we ask three sets of questions:
(i) What is the structure of the private demand for testing? What types of people are most interested
in regularly buying tests to verify their health status? How does the price and ease of use affect
this?
(ii) How important is the accuracy of the test? What are the implications of false negatives and false
positives? How do rational people respond testing inaccuracies? What if people are naïve?
(iii) What determines the equilibrium infection risk in an on-going pandemic? How does the availability of home-based tests affect this risk?
This paper develops a formal theoretical model for understanding the new paradigm of voluntary
self-testing and self-isolation. We are not interested in short-term dynamics, such as predicting peaks
in a pandemic outbreak, or "flattening the curve". Instead we focus on long-term steady state equilibria
where people make recurring decisions in the face of ongoing risks. Technically, a steady state means
a constant infection rate, also known as "R = 1". Gans (2020b) argues that most behavioral models of
pandemics converge to such R = 1 equilibria. One advantage for focussing on this steady state is that
it allows us to derive analytical solutions. Most important, conceptually we are precisely interested in
long-run equilibria where pandemics are an on-going challenge, what we call the "new normal".
2

Specifically, we consider private individuals making recurring decisions whether to go out into public
places, versus stay at home to self-isolate. Going out permits the usual economic activities and gives
people positive utility, whereas self-isolation avoids getting infected and infecting others. The formal
model uses highly stylized assumptions about the medical illness progression. Importantly, the decision
to go out versus self-isolate is made by people who show no symptoms. In the benchmark model they
make this decision without testing. In the main model we introduce voluntary self-testing. However,
tests can be inaccurate and may generate type I (false positive) and type II (false negative) errors.
We obtain three main sets of results. First, we show that there are two types of people who self-test,
those who in the absence of testing would self-isolate, and those who would always go out. The lower
the price of a test, and the easier its use, the more people of both types switch to regular self-testing.
Second, we show that tests remain economically valuable even if not perfectly accurate. The mainstream clinical view frequently warns against false negatives, where people go out erroneously thinking
they are not infectious. However, the implicit comparison in this argument is a perfect test where no false
negatives occur. Our model has a more realistic comparison, where the alternative to an imperfect test
is no test at all. Some of the people with false positives would have stayed at home, but others would
have gone out anyway. As long as an imperfect test provides some information, it helps to keep higher
risk people at home, and allows lower risk people to go out. Rational people who fully understand inaccuracies reduce their demand if tests are less accurate. However, naïve consumers may not understand
inaccuracies and put too much trust into the test. A surprising result is that having more naïve people in
the economy increases self-testing and reduces the equilibrium infection risk.
Third, self-testing plays an important roles because it affects who goes out and who self-isolates.
It changes how contagious people in public places are, and thus what the equilibrium infection risk is.
Positive test results convince high-risk people to self-isolate, and negative test results encourage lowrisk people to go out. Importantly, tests do not have to be perfectly accurate to reduce the equilibrium
infection risk. Probably the most important result is that lowering the price of testing reduces the equilibrium infection risk, and increases social welfare (as measured by the sum of utilities of all agents in
the economy).
While our paper contributes to the rapidly exploding literature on Covid-19, our focus is on understanding on-going pandemics. Our model structure is inspired by SIR/SEIR models, which are the
workhorses of mathematical epidemiologists (Brauer and Castillo-Chavez, 2012). Berger et al. (2020)
extend the SEIR model to incorporate testing. Eichenbaum et al. (2020) also incorporate testing in a SIR
model which they embed in a macro model. In all this literature, testing is introduced as an exogenous
factor. Our model differentiates itself from the prior literature by considering the endogenous adoption
of testing. We look at individual choices and derive what kind of individuals choose to purchase tests,
and under what circumstances. Our model thus captures the emerging paradigm of self-testing by private
individuals. Note also that SIR/SEIR models focus on modeling epidemic outbreaks. These models contain rich dynamics but typically do not involve any utility maximization. We use a utility-based choice
model which allows us to perform an economic welfare analysis. Our approach of focusing not on med3

ical but economic choices is in the tradition of Gersovitz and Hammer (2004). We share the inclusion of
altruistic preferences with Farboodi et al. (2020). Our interest in the micro foundations of self-isolation
build on Toxvaerd (2020) and Rachel (2020). Finally, note that our results are in line with the popular writings of Nobel laureate Paul Romer. He argues that ubiquitous testing should become a central
strategy for the Covid-19 crisis, and that people should spend more money on tests than on soda.5

2

Benchmark Individual Choice Model

In this section we introduce a simple benchmark model. We examine individuals’ choices about voluntary self-isolation and derive the resulting equilibrium infection risk of an on-going pandemic. The
benchmark model deliberately omits the possibility of self-testing, which we introduce in Section 4. All
proofs are in the online appendix, which is available on the authors’ websites.
Consider a dynamic economy with many individuals, an infinite number of dates t, and a discount
rate δ (and let δ ≡ 1 − δ). Every date people face a choice between either "self-isolating" or "going out".
Self-isolation means avoiding contact with other people, such as staying (and possibly working) at home.
We assume that anyone self-isolating cannot get infected, nor can they infect others. We normalize the
date utility of self-isolation to zero. The date utility of going out is denoted by y. This can differ across
individuals, so we assume some general distribution Ω(y).
In our model infections occur without people realizing it (aka asymptomatic transmission). We use
the following stylized disease progression. Suppose an individual who is going out gets infected at date t.
At date t + 1 this individual remains asymptomatic, i.e., s/he doesn’t know if s/he is infected (unless selftesting, see Section 4). If s/he goes out at t + 1, s/he may infect others. Further exposure to contagious
people does not change his/her infection status. At t + 2, infected people become ill and cannot go out.
Being ill is associated with a disutility z. We assume that all infected people recover at t + 3. They are
no longer contagious and can go out again. However, we assume no immunity, so that people can get
infected again.6 We denote the infection risk in the economy by φ (and let φ ≡ 1 − φ). This is defined
as the probability that someone uninfected going out and gets infected. The purpose of the model is to
derive the equilibrium properties of φ.
Infecting others is an externality that we allow people to partially internalize. If people were purely
selfish, they would never self-test. This is because the test has no medical role. We allow people to
have a social conscience and feel remorse if they realize they might have infected others. Specifically, if
someone discovers at date t + 2 that they are ill (which means they got infected at date t), and they went
out at date t + 1, then their ex-post remorse for going out is characterized by a disutility x. Rationally
anticipating this at date t+1, the expected disutility of going out is δφx. Ex-ante, think of this as people’s
sense of responsibility.
5

See https://paulromer.net/if-tests-were-sodas/ and Peto et al. (2020).
While these assumptions are not medically accurate, they help to focus on the key trade-offs. The assumptions that no one
dies, and that there is no immunity, are necessary to guarantee steady states.
6

4

In our benchmark model individuals can choose one of two possible steady-state strategies. The first
strategy is to go out whenever possible, we call this the "GO" strategy. Individuals go out even though
they know they might be contagious to others. The utility is given by





U GO = φ y + δ −x − z + δ y + δU GO
+ φ y + δU GO ,
which in steady state implies
U

GO

=


1 + φδ 2 y − φδ (x + z)
δ + φδ (1 − δ 2 )

.

The second strategy is to stay home, we call this the self-isolation ("SI") strategy. The utility is given
by U SI = 0.7
Proposition 1 There exists a critical value Y1 such that
(i) For all y < Y1 individuals self-isolate (SI).
(iii) For all y ≥ Y1 individuals always go out (GO).
The critical value Y1 is increasing in φ, x, and z.
Individuals with a high utility of going out will always try to do so; individuals with a low utility of
going out will self-isolate. Individuals switch from GO to SI (higher Y1 ) with a higher chance to get
infected (higher φ), more remorse infecting someone else (higher x), or a more severe illness (higher z).

3

Benchmark Equilibrium Model

We now examine what determines the equilibrium infection risk φ in the benchmark model. This requires the derivation of two equilibrium curves that we call the contagiousness curve (CO-curve) and the
infection curve (IN-curve). The CO-curve measures how contagious people are that go out. Specifically,
we define µ as the average contagiousness of an individual going out. We will explain how this depends
on the infection risk φ, so that the CO-curve is a function µCO (φ). The IN-curve measures how likely
it is for an uninfected individual going out, to become infected. This depends on the contagiousness of
the individuals s/he gets exposed to, so that the IN-curve is a function φIN (µ). The equilibrium is the
intersection of the CO-curve and the IN-curve – technically the fixed point of µCO (φ) and φIN (µ).
We first derive the CO-curve. We assume that people cannot observe the history of others and get
exposed to a set of people that are each contagious with probability µ. In the online appendix we show
that in the steady state, a fraction $GO|0 =

1
1+2φ

of GO people is not infected, a fraction $GO|1 =

is infected but asymptomatic, and a fraction $ILL =

φ
1+2φ

φ
1+2φ

is ill and stays home. The CO-curve is

therefore given by
µCO (φ) =
7

φ
$GO|1
=
.
1+φ
$GO|0 + $GO|1

In Section 5.3 we consider a additional "partial isolation" strategy.

5

(1)

𝜇

𝜇

𝜙
𝜇

𝜙

𝜇

𝜙∗

𝜙

𝜙

Figure 1: Benchmark Model Equilibrium
The CO-curve is increasing in φ, concave, and satisfies µCO (0) = 0.
To derive the probability of getting infected (i.e., the IN-curve), we use a simple highly stylized
infection model. If an individual goes out, s/he meets M ≥ 1 of other people, each of which may be
contagious with probability µ. M is a measure of the contact level for people going out. There also
is an imperfect shielding technology which for any encounter prevents an infection with probability λ
(e.g. wearing a face masks). The probability of getting infected by any encounter is thus (1 − λ)µ. For
simplicity we treat M and λ as exogenous, but show in Section 5.4 how M and λ can be endogenized
without changing the key insights from our model.
The probability of not getting infected by any encounter on a given day is given by [1 − (1 − λ)µ]M .
Thus the probability of getting infected on a given day is
φIN (µ) = 1 − [1 − (1 − λ) µ]M .

(2)

φIN is increasing in M and decreasing in λ. Moreover, φIN (0) = 0, and φIN (µ) is always increasing
in µ, as shown in Figure 1.8 The equilibrium is where the CO- and IN-curves intersect.
f such that for M < M
f the only stable equilibrium is φ∗ = 0.
Proposition 2 There exists a threshold M
f there exists an equilibrium with φ∗ > 0. A higher M and a lower λ shift the IN-curve
For M > M
outward, resulting in a higher equilibrium infection risk φ∗ .
Proposition 2 shows that if the contact level M is low, then φ = 0 is a stable equilibrium. However,
for higher levels of M , it is no longer stable. Whenever the µCO curve lies above the µIN curve, a
small flare-up in infections quickly raises the average contagiousness of the public pool. In this case
the only stable steady state has a positive infection risk φ∗ > 0, i.e., an ongoing pandemic. Henceforth
8
Strictly speaking, Figure 1 shows the inverse function where for each infection risk φIN on the horizontal axis, the required
contagiousness rate µ is shown on the vertical axis.

6

Person is

Testing says

Decision

Without test would have self‐isolated

Infected

Correct positive

Self isolate

Same outcome as without test

Better outcome than without test

False negative

Go out

Worse outcome than without test

Same outcome than without test

False positive

Self isolate

Same outcome than without test

Worse outcome than without test

Correct negative

Go out

Better outcome than without test

Same outcome than without test

Not infected

Without test would have gone out

Figure 2: Effect of False and Correct Tests
f. Higher contact levels (higher M ), and less
we focus on this more interesting case where M > M
effective shielding technologies (lower λ), shift the IN-curve outwards, increasing equilibrium infection
risk. Intuitively, more contact and less shielding makes going out riskier because of a higher transmission
risk.

4

Voluntary Testing

We now introduce the possibility that individuals use a test to verify whether they are infected. We are
not interested in clinical tests for symptomatic people, but tests that asymptomatic people regularly selfadminister to decide whether to go out or self-isolate. Such tests may be inaccurate, generating both false
positives (type I error) and false negatives (type II error). We ask who would purchase such tests, what
effect they have on infection rates, and what the importance of type I/II errors are.
In the model tests are only used by asymptomatic people who went out the date before . Let c be the
disutility of using a test, which depends on its price and the difficulty of administering it. Let α be the
probability of a false positive, and β of a false negative test result. There are four possible outcomes:
(i) With (1 − φ)(1 − α): person is uninfected, test correctly negative.
(ii) With (1 − φ)α: person is uninfected, test falsely positive.
(iii) With φ(1 − β): person is infected, test correctly positive.
(iv) With φβ: person is infected, test false negative.
We assume that the test is informative, i.e., α, β ∈ [0, 21 ).Testing is only useful if it generates information that affects decisions. A person who will always go out irrespective of the result would never
purchase a test; similar for someone who always self-isolates. We can therefore focus on individuals
who go out with a negative but self-isolate with a positive test outcome.
The net effect of an imperfect test should be evaluated against the alternative of no test. For example, people who would otherwise have self-isolated now go out if they get a false negative test result.
However, for people who would have gone out anyway, a false negative doesn’t actually change their
behavior. Figure 2 explains more generally how and when an imperfect test affects behavior.

7

Benchmark Model

Go out

Self‐isolation

Model with Testing

Self‐isolation

Testing

Go out

Value of going out

Figure 3: Comparison of Equilibrium Choices
Individuals are fully rational and understand these test limitations (we relax this assumption in Section 5.1). With a testing strategy (called T E) , the utility is given by



U T E = −c + φα y + δU T E + φαδ y + δU T E + φβ δ −z + δ y + δU T E
+φβ y + δ −x − z + δ y + δU T E



.

(3)
(4)

The first term measures the disutility cost of the test. The remaining four terms correspond to the
four possibly outcomes described above. In steady state the utility is given by


φ 1 − αδ + φδ 2 y − φ [β (δx − y) + δz] − c



=
.
1 − δ φ 1 − αδ + φδ 2


U

TE

The utility of testing is decreasing in its costs c. Moreover, it is decreasing in α and β, indicating that
less accurate tests are less valuable to rational people.
The next proposition identifies the optimal choices for individuals when self-testing is available. For
brevity’s sake, we focus on the more interesting case where at least some individuals test. This requires
z < z ∗ , where z ∗ is characterized in the online appendix.
Proposition 3 There exists a critical testing cost b
c such that for c ≥ b
c no one does testing. For c < b
c the
optimal choices are as follows:
(i) For all y < Yb1 individuals self-isolate (SI).
(ii) For all Yb1 ≤ y < Yb2 individuals test (T E).
(iii) For all y ≥ Yb2 individuals go out (GO).
The critical value Yb1 is increasing in c, α, and β, and Yb2 is decreasing in c, α, and β.
Figure 3 illustrates the equilibrium choices for the benchmark model, and the model with testing, for
different values of y.

8

The key insight from Proposition 3 is that testing is adopted along two margins. First, people with
higher values of going out, y, trade-off testing against going out without a test. Testing is altruistic, in
that these people would otherwise have gone out, but now self-isolate to avoid infecting others. Second,
people with lower values of y trade-off testing against self-isolation. A negative test result gives them the
required assurance that they are not contagious. The cheaper tests are the more people switch to testing,
along both margins. Moreover, the more accurate the test (lower α and/or β), the more people switch to
testing, too.
Overall, testing adds an option to individuals and therefore increases the utility of those who adopt
it. The question remains what effect testing has on the equilibrium infection risk. In the online appendix
we show that the CO-curve becomes
h
 i
1 − Ω Yb2 +
h
 i
µCO (φ) =
1+φ
Yb2 +
1
−
Ω
1+2φ
φ
1+2φ

h  
 i
Ω Yb2 − Ω Yb1
h  
 i .
1+φβ
b2 − Ω Yb1
Y
Ω
1+2φ+φα
φβ
1+2φ+φα

An important intuition (and the reason why this function looks somewhat complex) is that in addition
to the GO types, the pool of people going out in public now includes T E types. Many of them tested
negative correctly, and they help to reduce the average contagiousness of the public pool. Note that they
only enter in the denominator of the above expression. As for those who had a false negative test, they
enter both numerator and denominator, and increase the average contagiousness of the public pool.
Proposition 4 Higher values of c, α, and β shift the CO-curve outwards. The equilibrium infection risk
φ∗ is thus increasing in c, α, and β.
Voluntary testing by private individuals has an important effect on the equilibrium infection risk. The
more accurate and the cheaper tests are, the more people use them. This means that fewer of the people
who go out are contagious, and thus fewer infections occur. This is true even if tests are imperfect, i.e.,
if some of the people going out do so on the basis of a false negative.
Unlike the typical SIR/SEIR models, our model is based on utility maximization. Consequently, we
can analyze social welfare by looking at the sum of utilities across all agents in the economy.9 Specifically, we define the social welfare function as follows:
Z
W =

Yb1

U
0

SI

Z

Yb2

dΩ (y) +

U

TE

Z

∞

dΩ (y) +

U GO dΩ (y) .

Yb2

Yb1

Proposition 5 The social welfare function is decreasing in c, α, and β.
Proposition 5 is a central finding of this paper. It says that social welfare is increasing as the price
of tests comes down. Those individuals buying the test clearly prefer lower prices. Moreover, as shown
9

This is a standard economic approach for measuring social welfare. It has the benefit of being simple and transparent, but
it misses the deeper debates about inequality.

9

Naïve Testing

Rational
testing

Self‐isolation

Without test would
have self‐isolated

Go out

Without test would
have gone out

Value of going out

Figure 4: Comparison of Equilibrium Choices with Naïve Customers
in Proposition 4, the risk of infection comes down with lower test prices, which benefits everyone else
too. Maybe the most remarkable part of Proposition 5 is that this simple logic holds true irrespective of
testing inaccuracies, i.e., it holds for all values of α and β. Obviously, higher accuracy is still welcome.
Indeed, Proposition 5 finds that social welfare always increases when tests become more accurate (i.e.,
lower α and β).

5
5.1

Extensions
Naïve Customers

A natural concern is that all individuals are assumed to fully understand the accuracy of the test. One
of the concerns in the medical mainstream is that inaccurate tests can mislead the public. This argument
boils down to people not understanding the true accuracy of test results. Thus, we consider a simple
model extension where some fraction ξ of the population is naïve and believes tests to be perfect. Such
naïve people do not understand type I/II errors and thus put too much faith into test results. We ask how
this affects individual choices and the equilibrium infection risk.
Figure 4 shows the difference between naïve and rational individuals. The key insight is that two
types of naïve people buy the test, even though they wouldn’t have done so if they fully understood its
accuracy: (i) those who would have self-isolated (lower y, on the left side in Figure 4), and (ii) those
who would have gone out (higher y, on the right side in Figure 4). The first types are precisely those that
the medical community typically worries about, where a false negative test encourages them to go out
when they shouldn’t. However, our analysis shows that there is also a second type that would otherwise
have gone out. Their naïveté makes them buy the test, even though they selfishly wouldn’t have done
so if they fully understood its accuracy. Whenever they get a positive test result (correct or false), they
self-isolate, something that everyone would welcome.
Ceteris paribus it is always better to be rational than naïve from an individual utility perspective. The
interesting question is how the presence of naïve people affects the equilibrium infection risk.

10

Proposition 6 A higher fraction of naïve individuals (higher ξ) shifts the CO-curve backward. The
equilibrium infection risk is decreasing ξ.
This surprising result says that if more people are naïve, the equilibrium infection risk goes down.
Naïve people overestimate the power of the test, and use it even though their rational alter-ego wouldn’t.
This increases the number of infected people self-isolating and decreases the average contagiousness of
the people going out, thereby reducing the equilibrium infection risk.

5.2

Required Tests

Our model assumes that testing affects the decision to go out, but not the utility of doing so. In reality,
testing may change what people do, and thus may also affect the utility of going out. For example, people
may do certain things only once they had a negative test result, such as visiting a fragile relative. Access
to certain events (e.g., music concerts) might also require having a negative test result. Suppose thus that
people going out get y with a negative test, but without it they only get (1 − τ )y. A higher τ represents
greater limitations to people without tests.
Proposition 7 More individuals choose testing when τ increases. This reduces the equilibrium infection
risk. Formally, Yb2 (τ ) is increasing and φ∗ (τ ) decreasing in τ .
Facing more limitations convinces more people to test. This stops more infected people from going
out, leading to a lower equilibrium infection risk.

5.3

Partial Isolation

So far we considered three possible strategies for individuals: (i) go out indiscriminately (GO), (ii) use
test and only go out if test is negative (T E), and (iii) always self-isolate (SI). In this section we consider
an additional strategy that we call the partial isolation (P I) strategy. This combines elements of the GO
and SI strategies. Specifically, after going out at some date t, an individual stays at home at t + 1 to see
whether s/he is infected. If s/he is still heathy at t + 2, s/he is certain not to be contagious, and goes out
again without fear of remorse. The expected utility is given by



UφP I = φδ −z + δ y + δUφP I + φδ y + δUφP I ,
which in steady state implies
UφP I

=

δ





1 − φδ y − φz

.
1 − 1 − φδ δ 2

Proposition 8 There exists a threshold z 0 , with z 0 < z ∗ , such that partial isolation (P I) is chosen by
some individuals when z ≤ z 0 . The optimal choices are then as follows:
11

(i) For all y < Yb10 individuals completely self-isolate (SI).
(ii) For all Yb10 ≤ y < Yb100 individuals partially self-isolate (P I).
(iii) For all Yb100 ≤ y < Yb2 individuals test (T E).
(iv) For all y ≥ Yb2 individuals go out (GO).
The critical value Yb10 does not depend on c, α, and β, while Yb100 is increasing in c, α, and β.
Proposition 8 shows that partial isolation would only be an equilibrium choice for some individuals if
the illness is sufficiently mild (low z). Technically the model becomes much more cumbersome because
the public pool (and thus the contagiousness curve) involves additional types. Still, in the online appendix
we derive a mild sufficient condition that ensures that our key insights from Proposition 4 continue to
hold.

5.4

Endogenous Encounters and Shielding

To derive the infection curve we assumed a fixed number of encounters M , and an exogenous shielding
technology λ. In reality we might expect these to depend on the infection risk. For instance, people will
try to reduce the number of meetings they take when infection rates go up, or they may avoid some of
the most crowded places. Similarly, people might shield themselves more if infection rates rise, such as
wearing masks and keeping safe distance. In the online appendix we briefly show that allowing M or λ
to be endogenous does not change the basic insights from the model. The main effect of making them
endogenous is that the IN curve becomes steeper. This reduces the equilibrium infection risk, but has no
other effect on the model.

6

Discussion

In this section we discuss the interpretation of our results, address robustness, and explore possible
avenues for future research. The main objective of this short paper is to provide a theoretical framework
for assessing the economic role of voluntary self-testing in the context of an on-going pandemic. The
types of tests considered here are very different from the diagnostic tests used by trained staff in standard
clinical setting. Our tests are meant to be self-administered at home by private individuals.
Our theory generates three broad insights. First, the model uncovers two margins along which private
individuals opt into testing. There are those people who, in the absence of testing, would self-isolate, and
those who would always go out. Second, the price and ease of use of a test plays an important role for the
equilibrium infection risk. A positive test result convinces high-risk people to self-isolate. Moreover, a
negative test result enables low-risk people to go out, which reduces the average contagiousness in public
places. Third, the model sheds light on the role of diagnostic accuracy, showing that imperfect tests still

12

help to reduce the equilibrium infection risk. One of the more surprising results is that the presence of
naïve people actually reduces the equilibrium infection risk.
We obtain our key results in an analytically tractable steady-state model. This requires several sets of
limiting assumptions. To begin with, our steady-state model cannot capture the dynamics of a pandemic
over time, such as its peaks and troughs. However, our focus is on what the "new normal" economy
might look like, if and when pandemics become an on-going economic threat.
We use strong simplifying assumptions about the medical progression of the disease. For example, in
our model no one ever dies. Adding death to the model would negate any steady state analysis, because
the density of people in the various regions of Figure 3 would change over time. However, as long as
the death rate remains low, these density changes are slow moving, and have minimal impact on the
equilibrium. Other limiting assumptions include the absence of any immunity, and the fixed duration of
each stage of disease progression. If the purpose of the model were a realistic description of a pandemic,
then these limitations would be more serious. However, our focus here is to understand the economic
decisions of private individuals, and how they get aggregated in equilibrium. Our simplifying medical
assumptions thus allow us to focus on these economic mechanisms.
This brings us to the most important set of simplifying assumptions, about economic behaviors. Let
us discuss three such simplifications, and how future research might tackle them. First, for analytical
tractability we only model one dimension of heterogeneity, namely the utility of going out (y). This is
an important dimension because different people have different opportunity costs of self-isolating (e.g.,
some people can easily work from home, others risk losing their economic livelihood). However, there
could also be heterogeneity in other model dimensions: different people could have different levels of
remorse (x), fragility (z), or difficulties self-administering a test (c). People may also have different
beliefs about the prevalence of the disease, the risk of infection, and so on. Future research could enrich
the model along several of these dimensions.
Second, in our model there is only one way of getting tested, namely self-testing at home. In reality
there is also testing in public places (e.g., transportation hubs), testing in the workplace, and obviously
testing in clinical settings. Moreover, we are currently witnessing the development of novel testing
methods, such as group testing (e.g., collective saliva collections) and local environment testing (e.g.,
surfaces, sewage). Future research might examine the relative advantages of these alternative approaches,
and how they all interact with each other.
Third, our analysis focuses on the determinants of the equilibrium infection risk. A promising line
for future research would be to perform a more comprehensive policy analysis. Our results suggest the
possibility of government subsidies for voluntary self-testing. A more detailed policy analysis could look
at the entire social cost and benefit analysis. Clearly there are fiscal costs to government subsidies, but
there may also be additional considerations. Should all people get equal access to subsidized testing, or
should certain groups be favoured? Should subsidies go to the more fragile (e.g., older people), or to the
more outgoing (e.g., younger people)? In conclusion, we note that we are only beginning to understand
the economic structures and choices of a new normal economy with ongoing pandemics.
13

References
Agrawal, A., J. Gans, A. Goldfarb, and M. Lederman, 2020. The CEO’s Guide to Safely Reopening the
Workplace. MIT Technology Review, May 28th.
Berger, D., K. Herkenhoff, and S. Mongey, 2020. An SEIR Infectious Disease Model with Testing and
Conditional Quarantine. Mimeo, Duke University.
Brauer, F., and C. Castillo-Chavez, 2012. Mathematical Models in Population Biology and Epidemiology, vol. 2 of Texts in Applied Mathematics. Springer.
Eichenbaum, M. S., S. Rebelo, M. Trabandt, 2020. The Macroeconomics of Testing and Quarantining.
NBER Working Paper No. 27104.
Farboodi, M., G. Jarosch, and R. Shimer, 2020. Internal and External Effects of Social Distancing in a
Pandemic. NBER Working Paper No. 27059.
Gans, J. S., 2020a. Economics in the Age of COVID-19. MIT Press.
Gans, J. S., 2020b. The Economic Consequences of R̂ = 1: Towards a Workable Behavioural Epidemiological Model of Pandemics. NBER Working Paper 27632.
Gersovitz, M., and Hammer, J. S., 2004. The Economical Control of Infectious Diseases. The Economic
Journal 114(492), 1-27.
Hellmann, T., 2020. CDL Recovery - Some Lessons Learned. Mimeo, University of Oxford.
Meyer, R., and A. Madrigal, 2020. How to Test Every American for COVID-19, Every Day - The plan
that could give us our lives back. The Atlantic, August 14th 2020.
Peto J. et al., 2020. Weekly COVID-19 testing with household quarantine and contact tracing is feasible
and would probably end the epidemic. Royal Society Open Science, 7: 200915.
Plater, R., 2020. As Many as 80 Percent of People with COVID-19 Aren’t Aware They Have the Virus.
Healthline, https://www.healthline.com/health-news/50-percent-of-people-\
with-covid19-not-aware-have-virus.
Rachel, L., 2020. An Analytical Model of Covid-19 Lockdowns: Equilibrium Mitigation Flattens the
Epidemic Curve, Optimal Lockdown Does Not. Mimeo, London School of Economics and Political
Science.
Toxvaerd, F., 2020. Equilibrium Social Distancing. Cambridge-INET Working Paper Series No: 2020/08.

14

