                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    WHAT EXPLAINS TEMPORAL AND GEOGRAPHIC VARIATION IN THE EARLY
                     US CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC?

                                         Hunt Allcott
                                          Levi Boxell
                                       Jacob C. Conway
                                       Billy A. Ferguson
                                       Matthew Gentzkow
                                        Benny Goldman

                                       Working Paper 27965
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27965


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020

We thank Zane Kashner for his research assistance. We thank SafeGraph, Facteus, and Homebase
for providing access to the data. We also thank the SafeGraph and Homebase COVID-19
response communities respectively for helpful input. We also thank seminar participants at
Harvard University and Stanford University for their feedback and comments. We acknowledge
funding from the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research (SIEPR), the John S. and
James L. Knight Foundation, the Sloan Foundation, the Institute for Humane Studies, and the
National Science Foundation (grant number: DGE 1656518). Previously circulated beginning in
May 2020 as “Economic and Health Impacts of Social Distancing Policies during the
Coronavirus Pandemic.” The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27965.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Hunt Allcott, Levi Boxell, Jacob C. Conway, Billy A. Ferguson, Matthew Gentzkow,
and Benny Goldman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
What Explains Temporal and Geographic Variation in the Early US Coronavirus Pandemic?
Hunt Allcott, Levi Boxell, Jacob C. Conway, Billy A. Ferguson, Matthew Gentzkow, and
Benny Goldman
NBER Working Paper No. 27965
October 2020
JEL No. H7,H79,I1,I12

                                          ABSTRACT

We provide new evidence on the drivers of the early US coronavirus pandemic. We combine an
epidemiological model of disease transmission with quasi-random variation arising from the
timing of stay-at-home orders to estimate the causal roles of policy interventions and voluntary
social distancing. We then relate the residual variation in disease transmission rates to observable
features of cities. We estimate significant impacts of policy and social distancing responses, but
we show that the magnitude of policy effects is modest, and most social distancing is driven by
voluntary responses. Moreover, we show that neither policy nor rates of voluntary social
distancing explain a meaningful share of geographic variation. The most important predictors of
which cities were hardest hit by the pandemic are exogenous characteristics such as population
and density.

Hunt Allcott                                     Billy A. Ferguson
Department of Economics                          Graduate School of Business
New York University                              Stanford University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor                      655 Knight Way
New York, NY 10012                               Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER                                         billyf@stanford.edu
allcott@post.harvard.edu
                                                 Matthew Gentzkow
Levi Boxell                                      Department of Economics
Stanford University,                             Stanford University
Department of Economics                          579 Jane Stanford Way
579 Jane Stanford Way                            Stanford, CA 94305
Stanford, CA 94305                               and NBER
Lboxell@stanford.edu                             gentzkow@stanford.edu

Jacob C. Conway                                  Benny Goldman
Stanford University                              Harvard University
Department of Economics                          bgoldman@g.harvard.edu
579 Jane Stanford Way
Stanford, CA 94305
jcconway@stanford.edu
1       Introduction

The course of the novel coronavirus pandemic in the US has varied dramatically across space and
time. In the early months, the epicenter was primarily large cities on the west coast and in the
northeast. Slow growing outbreaks in Seattle and San Francisco were followed by rapid surges of
cases in cities such as New York and Boston. Other large cities such as Dallas, Atlanta, Phoenix,
Miami, and Denver were largely spared.
    Popular discussion and prior work have pointed to a number of plausible drivers of this vari-
ation, with policy differences as one leading explanation.1 However, evidence below and in prior
work shows clearly that substantial behavioral changes preceded the first stay-at-home orders, and
that mobility levels have remained significantly depressed even after many of these policies were
lifted—suggesting voluntary social distancing behaviors may be important. Other potential drivers
include physical characteristics of cities such as population size and density that could be expected
to affect virus transmission rates, or connections via international flights to early overseas epicen-
ters such as China and Italy. Clear empirical evidence on the roles of these factors is essential to
understanding the course of the epidemic to date and steering policy responses going forward.
    In this paper, we provide new evidence on the importance of policy relative to these factors
in the first months of the US pandemic. Our empirical strategy exploits short-run changes around
the onset of policy in event-study and difference-in-difference specifications within the context of
an SIRD (Susceptible, Infected, Recovered, Deceased) model of disease transmission. By taking
the ratio between the estimated effects of policy on disease transmission and the estimated effects
of policy on social distancing behaviors, we are able provide causal estimates for the change in
disease transmission rates per unit change in social distancing—allowing us to decompose the role
of policy and social distancing behaviors in driving the temporal and geographic variation in the
pandemic. We then relate the residual variation in disease transmission rates to observable features
of cities.
    We begin by using event-study designs to estimate the short-run effects of stay-at-home orders
on social distancing. We measure social distancing using visits to points of interest (POIs) such
as shops, parks, hospitals, and other places measured in cell phone location data aggregated by a
company called SafeGraph. We combine POI visits with data on the implementation date of stay-

1 Forexample, New York Governor Andrew Cuomo has frequently been blamed for the severity of the crisis in New
 York, with critics citing his slow response to the pandemic and his derision of Mayor De Blasio’s earlier suggestion
 of closing down New York City (Gold and Robinson 2020).


                                                         2
at-home orders and collapse by combined statistical area (CSA). Our estimates suggest that POI
visits drop by 18 percent on the day after a stay-at-home order is implemented. We complement
our GPS data with information on consumer spending and small business employment—finding
that consumer spending drops by 7 percent and employment drops by 12 percent.
   We next estimate the effects of stay-at-home orders on disease transmission in the context of an
SIRD epidemiological model (Kermack and McKendrick 1927). Infected people infect Susceptible
people at rate βt and recover at rate γ. The reproduction number R—the number of people to
whom one Infected person transmits the virus—is βt /γ. If a stay-at-home order is modeled as a
proportional effect τ on the contact rate, then we can estimate τ in a linear regression framework
with the natural log of the number of new cases on the left-hand side. We find that stay-at-home
orders reduce the contact rate by 9–14 percent for different plausible values of γ. Using simulation
models, we show that non-model-based regression frameworks used in some other recent papers
to estimate the effects of stay-at-home orders can produce biased results.
   We use these estimates to examine the share of the temporal variation in health, social distanc-
ing, and economic outcomes that can be attributed to stay-at-home orders versus voluntary and
other policy responses. Consistent with other work released around the same time as our initial
May 2020 working paper, we find that much of the reduction in POI visits pre-dates stay-at-home
orders (Brzezinski et al. 2020; Chetty et al. 2020; Gupta et al. 2020; Villas-Boas et al. 2020). We
calculate that by mid-April 2020, the short run effects of stay-at-home orders accounted for only
16 percent of observed social distancing, 16 percent of observed reductions in economic activity
(measured by small business employment), and 13 percent of the reduction in contact rate.
   Next, we use our previous estimates to compute the counterfactual transmission rates if policy,
and subsequently social distancing rates, were equalized across all CSAs. We find that neither
policy nor social distancing rates explain the geographic variation in transmission rates. Rather,
fixed differences across CSAs are the primary drivers. Using a Lasso model to select features of
the data that are highly predictive of differential transmission rates, we find that population and
population density explain nearly half of the average differences across high and low transmission
CSAs, with racial composition and partisanship explaining a smaller share. Our model accurately
predicts transmission rates in epicenters, such as New York City. These results suggest that much
of the observed variation across CSAs was not driven by different policy or voluntary behavioral
responses, but was driven by invariant characteristics of CSAs.
   Lastly, we use our estimates to examine the effect of counterfactual policies on the overall


                                                 3
prevalence of the virus in the United States. While policy explains a small proportion of the
temporal variation in case growth and an even smaller proportion of the geographic variation,
policy still has led to an important reduction in cases. Absent the observed policy response, there
would have been 494,000 more confirmed cases by April 30th and 14,800 more deaths. Moreover,
a uniform stay-at-home order implemented on March 17 would have resulted in 154,000 fewer
cases by April 30th.
   We emphasize a number of important caveats. Our GPS-based social distancing measure cap-
tures overall movement patterns without distinguishing activity with a high vs. low risk of virus
transmission. Our measures of economic cost only capture two dimensions of policies’ overall
economic impact, and these only imperfectly. Our measure of health impact relies on the assump-
tions of our SIRD model, is overall relatively imprecise, and may be biased by factors such as
endogenous reporting of coronavirus cases. In each case, we are able to capture only short-term,
on-impact effects. We provide a set of data points that speak to the benefits and costs of social
distancing policies but stop well short of a comprehensive welfare analysis. Moreover, our analy-
sis focuses on the early onset of the pandemic. Predictors and drivers of temporal or geographic
variation later in the pandemic may be different.
   Our work connects to several active research areas. First, a series of recent papers uses GPS
data from SafeGraph or similar providers to quantify social distancing and estimate the effects of
stay-at-home orders and other policies (Alexander and Karger 2020; Allcott et al. 2020; Chen et
al. 2020a; Engle et al. 2020; Goolsbee and Syverson 2020; Painter and Qui 2020; Villas-Boas
et al. 2020). Second, several recent papers have studied the effects of stay-at-home policies on
economic outcomes (Baker et al. 2020; Bartik et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020b; Chetty et al. 2020;
Kong and Prinz 2020). Third, another set of papers quantifies the effects of regulation on health
outcomes (Childs et al. 2020; Flaxman et al. 2020; Fowler et al. 2020; Friedson et al. 2020;
Greenstone and Nigam 2020; Lasry et al. 2020). In the epidemiological literature, there are a set
of what economists might call “structural” models that use Bayesian techniques to estimate the
reproduction number R; these estimates often pay less attention to identifying the causal effect of
policies on R (Cori et al. 2013; Thompson et al. 2013). In the economics literature, there are a
set of papers that use reduced form event study approaches to estimate the effects of policies on
some measure of disease transmission, but many of these papers are not closely tied to structural
models. Our paper forms a bridge between these two lines of work by deriving simple linear
estimating equations (which are useful for standard quasi-experimental analysis) from structural


                                                    4
epidemiological models and using these estimates to decompose the role of various drivers in
explaining the temporal and geographic variation of virus transmission in the early months of the
pandemic.2
      Section 2 describes the data. We present estimated effects of stay-at-home policies on social
distancing and economic outcomes in Section 3 and on health outcomes in Section 4. Section 5
analyzes the variation in COVID-19 outcomes across time within a geography as well as across
geographies.


2     Data

2.1    Policy Data

We explore both stay-at-home and business closure policies in this paper. Due to the decentral-
ized policy response of states, cities, and counties, there is no single resource documenting non-
pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) in the United States. To get the best coverage of these NPIs,
we combine data from four sources and define both our stay-at-home and business closure policies
by sequentially assigning enforcement dates by data source. We prioritize the data sources in the
following way (first to last priority): the New York Times (Mervosh et al. 2020a), Keystone Strat-
egy, a crowdsourcing effort from Stanford and University of Virginia, and Hikma Health. Once a
state enacts a policy, the counties inherit the policy of the state. In Appendix Table A1, we provide
summary statistics reporting the share of county policies from each source. The distribution of the
timing of each county’s first order is shown in Figure 1. We include reopening dates at the state
level collected by the NYT (Mervosh et al. 2020b) and curated by Rearc. Additional detail on data
construction can be found in Appendix A.1.


2.2    Social Distancing Data

The data on social distancing behaviors come from SafeGraph, a data company that aggregates
anonymized location data from about 45 million mobile devices and numerous applications in
order to provide insights about physical points of interest (POIs). POIs include restaurants, coffee
shops, grocery stores, retail outlets, hospitals and many other business establishments. For each
POI, SafeGraph reports the daily number of unique device visits along with information on the

2 Desmet and Wacziarg (2020) and Knittel and Ozaltun (2020) examine spatial variation in coronavirus cases and
deaths in the United States without employing the framework of an SIRD model.


                                                     5
POI’s industry and location.3 For each CSA, we construct the total number of visits to POIs in that
CSA for a given day.


2.3     Economic Data

Our analysis uses economic data from two sources. We incorporate spending on approximately 10
million debit cards in data from Facteus, a financial data provider that directly partners with banks.
This sample consists of traditional debit cards issued by banks, general purpose debit cards issued
by merchants, payroll cards issued by employers, and government alimony disbursement cards.
Lower- and middle-income individuals are represented more heavily in this data than in the US
population. We construct the total number of transactions and dollar amount spent by cards from
a given home CSA on a given day.4
       We also source information on employment from Homebase, a company providing scheduling
and time tracking software to over 60,000 small businesses.5 For each day, we analyze the number
of work hours and individuals employed by Homebase partner firms in a given CSA.


2.4     Health Data

We pull case and death counts by day at the county level from a continually updated repository
by the New York Times that aggregates reports from state and local health agencies. For all dates
up to the first available data, we assume no cases nor deaths. We collect state-level testing and
hospitalization data from the Covid Tracking Project.


2.5     Demographic Data

We supplement the policy and outcome data with data on CSA characteristics. For our measure
of partisanship, we use the Republican vote share in the 2016 presidential election (MIT Election
Data and Science Lab 2018). Following Allcott et al. (2020), we use the SafeGraph OpenCensus
data to assign demographic variables such as race, income, occupation, and commuting to the
various geographies analyzed. The SafeGraph OpenCensus data is derived from the 2016 5-year
ACS at the census block group level. We add the urban share of the population from the 2010
3 See https://docs.safegraph.com/v4.0/docs/weekly-patterns for additional information on the data’s construction.
4 To  protect privacy, Facteus injects a small amount of mathematical noise into key record attributes. This has
  very minimal impact on aggregate data. More information on this differential privacy procedure can be found at
  https://www.facteus.com/products/data-products/.
5 Additional information regarding Homebase’s data can be found at https://joinhomebase.com/data/.



                                                       6
Census. We also use average seasonal temperatures by geography from Wu et al. (2020), which is
ultimately sourced from gridMET (Abatzoglou 2011). To characterize potential global migration
flows for transmission, we use flight data from the OpenSky Network (Schäfer et al. 2014; Olive
2019).


3   Effects on Social Distancing and Economic Outcomes

We first present descriptive evidence of trends in mobility and health by whether a county issued
a stay-at-home order on or before March 25, issued an order after March 25, or has yet to issue an
order. Panel A of Figure 2 plots trends in the log of average daily POI visits for weeks from January
29, 2020 to May 31, 2020 normalized relative to their January 29, 2020 value. All three of these
groups experienced a rapid mobility decrease in March through early April, followed by a more
gradual recovery. Counties with an order had somewhat stronger social distancing responses. Panel
B of Figure 2 plots trends in the log of average daily new confirmed COVID-19 cases by week and
county order timing, normalized relative to the week starting March 25, 2020. Counties with an
early order saw a smaller subsequent increase in cases after this normalization week, relative to
counties with later or no stay-at-home orders.
    Figure 3 maps the geographic distribution of social distancing and public policy responses
across counties. Panel A shows the percent change in SafeGraph visits from the week beginning
January 29, 2020 to that of April 8, 2020, which is the week with the fewest number of POI visits.
Panel B visualizes variation in the effective start date of stay-at-home orders across counties. We
see a geographic correlation between stronger social distancing and earlier public orders, and both
series also correlate with other factors such as population density or virus exposure.
    Our main results are at the Combined Statistical Area (CSA) by order date level (i.e., we group
counties within a CSA who received a stay-at-home order on the same day together) using data
from February 1, 2020 to April 30, 2020. We call our unit of observation a “CSA” for simplicity.
To estimate the causal effect of these stay-at-home orders, we estimate the following event-study
specification
                                                 k=21
                            Yit = µi + δt +       ∑         ωk 1{t−Ti =k} + εit                  (1)
                                              k=−21,k6=−1

where Yit is the outcome of interest in CSA i during time t, µi is a CSA fixed effect, δt is a date




                                                   7
fixed effect, and 1{t−Ti =k} is an indicator for the days relative to the first stay-at-home order Ti .6
Standard errors are clustered at the CSA level irrespective of order timing. Earlier and later time
periods are pooled in the k = −21 and k = 21 time indicators respectively.
      Figure 4 shows clear effects of stay-at-home orders on social distancing and economic out-
comes. Panel A shows that a stay-at-home order decreases POI visits by 17.8 percent (se = 1.3) by
the day after the order’s effective start date (k = 1). This decrease persists and is relatively stable
throughout the window of analysis. Panel B estimates that a stay-at-home order decreases con-
sumer debit spending (in total $) by 7.1 percent (se = 0.9) by the day after an order’s effective start
date. Panel C estimates an 12.3 percent (se = 1.5) reduction in the number of employees working
in our Homebase sample on the day following an order’s implementation.
      The estimated policy effects are robust to alternative specifications. In Appendix Figure A7
we estimate that a stay-at-home order decreases the number of Facteus debit transactions by 5.7
percent (se = 0.7), the number of total hours in Homebase worked by 13.2 percent (se = 1.6), and
the total wages of employees in Homebase by 12.2 percent (se = 1.8) by the day after the order’s
effective start date. We show that our results are very similar at the county level in Appendix Figure
A3, with analogous estimated decreases of 18.1 percent (se = 1.5) for mobility, 7.3 percent (se =
1.0) for consumer spending, and 12.6 percent (se = 1.3) for employment.
      In Appendix Figure A6, we estimate much weaker immediate effects from the removal of a
stay-at-home order, suggesting a strong asymmetry in treatment effects between the onset and the
removal of the order. By the day after an order’s removal, we find increases of 3.7 percent (se =
0.9) for POI visits, 0.9 percent (se = 1.2) for total debit card spending, and 2.4 percent (se = 2.3)
for employment.


4       Effects on Health Outcomes

4.1      SIRD Model

We start with a discrete-time SIRD model (Kermack and McKendrick 1927), suppressing notation
for different geographies i. In outlining this model, we make the assumption that there are no
health spillovers across geographies. Furthermore, we abstract from issues around testing and the
endogeneity of stay-at-home order timing.


6 For   CSAs without a stay-at-home order in our sample, 1{t−Ti =k} is always set to zero.


                                                             8
   The population is defined by
                                        St + It + Rt + Dt = N                                        (2)

where St , It , Rt , and Dt are the number of susceptible, infected, recovered, and deceased individuals
at time t. Dynamics in the SIRD model are defined by the transition probabilities between states.
The laws of motion are given by:

                                                               It
                                         St+1 − St = −βt St                                          (3)
                                                               N

                                                           It
                                       It+1 − It = βt St      − γIt                                  (4)
                                                           N


                                       Rt+1 − Rt = (1 − κ)γIt                                        (5)



                                           Dt+1 − Dt = κγIt                                          (6)

where βt is the contact rate that governs the speed at which new infections propagate, γ is the rate
at which infected individuals recover, and κ is the proportion of recovered individuals that die. We
treat the recovery rate γ and death rate κ as fixed parameters during the time period we analyze.
   Defining the total number of cases to be Ct = It + Rt + Dt and combining equations (4), (5),
and (6), we get that new cases evolve as

                                                              It
                                         Ct+1 −Ct = βt St                                            (7)
                                                              N
                                                                                  St
We make the simplifying assumption that St ≈ Nt so that we can treat the ratio    Nt   = 1. As of May 1,
less than 0.5 percent of the US population has or had a confirmed case—making this approximation
reasonable—though true case count may be greater. This allows us to replace equations (3) and
(4) with
                                           Ct+1 −Ct = βt It .                                        (8)

Furthermore, we can write
                                   It = (Ct −Ct−1 ) + (1 − γ)It−1 .                                  (9)

Given initial conditions C0 , I0 , the contact rate βt , and the recovery rate γ, equations (8) and (9)


                                                   9
define the dynamics of cases over time.


4.2     Estimation Framework

A key parameter of interest for policymakers is the contact rate βt . As social distancing increases,
the contact rate decreases—yielding fewer new cases. The contact rate βt is proportionally related
to the reproduction number R0t as R0t = βt /γ. A proportional effect on the contact rate βt will have
the same proportional effect on the reproduction number R0t .
      We suggest it is natural to think of stay-at-home orders as a proportional effect τ on the contact
rate. That is, the contact rate is βt (1 + τ) under a stay-at-home order as opposed to βt .
      Taking logs of equation (8), we get


                           log(Ct+1 −Ct ) = log(It ) + log(βt ) + log(1 + τTi ).


We then use an event-study framework to estimate the impact of treatment Ti

                                                                   k=21
                 log(Ci,t+1 −Cit ) = α log(Iit ) + δt + ξit +       ∑         ωk 1{t−Ti =k} + εit ,      (10)
                                                                k=−14,k6=−1


where, relative to equation (1), ξit is an indicator for the non-binned event-study window.7
      The ωk coefficients can be interpreted as estimates of τ while δt and ξit control for variation in
βt over time unrelated to the policy. Even though It is not directly observed, given initial conditions
C0 = I0 and γ, no additional data is required to construct the time-path for It beyond the growth in
cases. Below, we use values for γ suggested by the epidemiology literature and examine robustness
to alternative values. Note that one test of the model and its assumptions is whether α̂ = 1.
      In the appendix, we show that this estimator performs well when estimated on data simulated
from an SIRD model.


4.2.1    Other Methods of Estimation in the Literature

Several previous attempts at estimating the effect of stay-at-home orders have not been model-
driven. For example, Dave et al. (2020) use the log of confirmed cases as the outcome in an event-
study framework with state-specific linear trends. Lin and Meissner (2020) also use a similar

7 The event-study window indicator is required for normalization when geography fixed effects are excluded. We
 exclude geography fixed effects because they bias estimates in our simulations.


                                                     10
event-study specification with log cases on the left-hand side.8 These estimators can produce
unexpected results when the data comes from an SIRD data-generating process.
      In the appendix, we show that the Dave et al. (2020) estimator exhibits substantial pretrends
and fails to recover the estimated treatment effect when estimated on simulated data. We also apply
the estimator to real, state-level data as in Dave et al (2020). We qualitatively replicate their results
when using the 7-day pre-period event window. When using a more complete 14-day or 21-day
pre-period event window, the estimator produces null results with substantial pretrends—mirroring
the estimates from this estimator when using data simulated from an SIRD model. To gain intuition
for the poor performance of these estimators, equation (8) implies log cases follow


                                            log(Ci,t+1 ) = log(βit Iit +Cit ).                                            (11)


Therefore, the ωk coefficients from an event study with log cases on the left-hand side are going to
pick up differential trends in a nonlinear function of βit , Iit , and Cit across treated and non-treated
units rather than differential trends in log(βit ) alone.9


4.3    Results

A key input into the estimation process is γ which is the inverse of the average infectious period for
COVID-19. We report estimates using a range of values for γ. On one extreme, we set γ = 0 which
implies Iit = Cit or an infinite infectious period. On the other extreme, we set γ = 1 which implies
an average infectious period of 1 day. Early indications in the literature suggested an infectious
period of 4.4 to 7.5 days (Anderson et al. 2020). As of May 8, 2020, the CDC website recommends
home isolation until at least 10 days have passed since symptoms first appeared, whereas the UK
NHS recommends a minimum of 7 days.10 We view the range of γ = 1/3 (an infectious period of

8 Friedson  et al. (2020) use a synthetic control estimator with log cases on the left-hand side to estimate the effect of
  California’s stay-at-home order. Fowler et al. (2020) and Courtemanche et al. (2020) use a difference-in-difference
  specification with log(Ci,t+1 ) − log(Cit ) on the left-hand side, which gives log(Ci,t+1 ) − log(Cit ) = log(βit Iit +Cit ) −
  log(βi,t−1 Ii,t−1 +Ci,t−1 ). Given the nonlinear dynamics of the SIRD model, synthetic control or matching estimates
  may perform better when the model structure is not accounted for parametrically.
9 Note that even under the simplifying assumption that C = I (which implies γ = 0), rewriting equation (11) still
                                                               it    it
  gives
                                             log(Ci,t+1 ) = log(1 + βit ) + log(Cit ).

10 https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/if-you-are-sick/steps-when-sick.html                                           and
  https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/coronavirus-covid-19/what-to-do-if-you-or-someone-you-live-with-has-
  coronavirus-symptoms/staying-at-home-if-you-or-someone-you-live-with-has-coronavirus-symptoms/


                                                              11
three days on average) and γ = 1/12 (an infectious period of twelve days on average) as limits to
the range of likely values.
    Table 2 reports our estimates using case data and stay-at-home orders. To reduce instances
where log(Ci,t+1 −Cit ) is undefined, we group counties by the interaction between their cumulative
statistical area and the timing of their stay-at-home order.11 We restrict attention to CSA-days with
at least 10 cases, the set of CSAs to either never treated CSAs or CSAs which are observed for at
least 8 days before and 20 days after the order, and the time period prior to May 1, 2020. Because
of the imprecision of the estimates, we estimate an aggregated event study specification (see table
notes). In general, γ is positively correlated with the estimated treatment effects of stay-at-home
orders on case prevalence.
    Using likely values of γ, we find a negative estimated effect of stay-at-home orders on case
prevalence though these estimated effects have wide confidence intervals. Setting γ = 1/6, which
implies an average infectious period of 6 days, our baseline estimates suggest that stay-at-home
orders decreased the contact rate βt (i.e., the rate of new cases) by 9.1 percent (se = 4.8) relative
to their pre-order levels. Consistent with the data coming from an SIRD data generating process,
estimates for α are close to 1.
    Figure 5 reports the full event-study plot for γ = 0 which sets It = Ct , along with our preferred
value of γ = 1/6. The appendix reports the full event studies for the other values of γ.
    Our estimates come with several caveats. First, there is measurement error in confirmed cases.
Adapting the method outlined above, the appendix reports negative point estimates for the effect of
stay-at-home orders on the log of new deaths.12 Second, the onset of the stay-at-home orders may
be prompted by information that future cases or deaths are likely to exhibit substantial increases.
This could lead to upward bias in our estimated effects. On the other hand, stay-at-home orders
may be issued in places where people are more likely to respond to the pandemic and so may
exhibit higher levels of counterfactual social distancing.




11 For   simplicity, we subsequently refer to these CSA-timing groups as CSAs.
12 Note    that we can write
                                log(Di,t+1 − Dit ) = log(κγ) + log(1 + βit − γ) + log(Ii,t−1 )
  which we can utilize in the same event study framework where ωk are estimates for the impact of the stay-at-home
  order on log(1 + βit − γ).


                                                             12
5     Explaining Variation in Outcomes

5.1    Temporal Variation

In this section, we compute the share of the overall change in each outcome during our time
period attributable to stay-at-home and business closure orders. Secular trends in the outcomes are
prominent over our time period as individuals make voluntary behavioral changes (e.g., Figure 2).
      To examine the share of aggregate changes explained by policy, we first compute the average
total percent reduction in the outcome as

                                                              YT −Y0
                                                  Total∆ =                                                           (12)
                                                                Y0

where Yt is the weighted average of the level of the outcome in week t taken over geographies that
enact the corresponding order during our time period, t = 0 is the first week of February, and t = T
is the third week of April. We average across days in the week when computing Yt to remove any
day-of-week effects.13
      Next, we compute the average policy-induced change relative to baseline levels as

                                                        1      ωk ×YT (i)
                                          Policy∆ =       ∑ wi                                                       (13)
                                                        N i       Y0

where ωk is the estimated treatment effect from Sections 3 and 4, wi are geography population
weights that sum to N, and T (i) is the period prior to the order’s implementation for geography
i. We account for uncertainty induced by the estimation of ωk in the standard errors, and treat
the values of Yt as given. We set k = 1 in our baseline specification and examine robustness to
alternative assumptions.
      Figure 6 presents the ratio Policy∆/Total∆ for our social distancing, employment, and health
outcomes.14 We compute this estimate separately for stay-at-home orders and mandatory business

13 Most  CSAs do not have any cases in early February, so the pre-period levels cannot be estimated from the data
   when examining the overall change in the contact rate βt . Since we must choose γ for each specification and the
   reproduction number R0 is is βt /γ, we can recover βt in the pre-period by specifying R0 . Anderson et al. (2020) and
   D’Arienzo and Coniglio (2020) provide an overview of estimates of the initial reproduction rate R0 , ranging from
   2.5 to 3.5. Our preferred reproduction rate is R0 = 3.0. We then compute YT and YT (i) using equation (8) and the
   assumed γ value; we use the assumed R0 when (8) is undefined in our data.
14 Debit card transactions and total spending, according to the Facteus data, did not have a similarly strong decrease

   between February and April. As a result, the decomposition of this small reduction (or increase in the case of total
   spending) into a voluntary and mandatory portion is more difficult to interpret. We note that Farrell et al. (2020) find
   a decrease in consumer spending when using data sources other than Facteus’ debit card panel.


                                                           13
closure orders. Table 3 reports Total∆ and Policy∆ individually for the stay-at-home orders, the
business closure orders, and the simultaneous implementation of both orders.
      We estimate that stay-at-home orders explain 16.2 percent of the change in POI visits, 15.6
percent of the change in total wages, 16.0 percent of the change in total employment, and 13.1
percent of the change in the contact rate βt when setting γ = 1/6 and R0 = 3.0. Overall, while
stay-at-home orders only explain a small proportion of the overall changes in social distancing and
case growth, they do not appear inefficient. Stay-at-home orders have a wage cost per unit of social
distancing that is 0.96 times as large as the average cost across voluntary behavioral changes and
other government orders and has a relative employment cost that is 0.99 times as large.15
      In contrast to the stay-at-home orders, the employment cost per unit of social distancing for
business closures is relatively high. Our estimates suggest that business closure orders have a wage
cost per unit of social distancing that is 2.25 times larger than the average cost across voluntary
behavioral changes and other government orders and has a relative employment cost that is 1.91
times greater.16
      It is important to note that these cost-benefit comparisons are necessarily restrictive and do not
account for all economic and health factors associated with the policies. Moreover, we analyze
short-run cost-benefits and the long-run implications of policy may be different.
      In Appendix Table 4, we also consider the case where we set k = 20 for estimating the treat-
ment effects or where we estimate treatment effects from fitting a linear pretrend in the two weeks
prior to the order’s implementation and computing the estimated treatment effect as the difference
between the extrapolated pretrend and the treatment effect at k = 20.17 The qualitative conclu-
sions regarding the relative efficiency of stay-at-home orders is unchanged across these alternative
estimators.


5.2       Geographic Variation

We next examine factors that explain the geographic variation in health outcomes.
      Table 1 reports summary statistics for all CSAs, CSAs with above median average contact
rates, and CSAs with below median average contact rates. It also reports the difference between
the above- and below-median groups. CSAs with above median contact rates actually exhibited
15 That  is, .156   1−.156            .160 1−.160
             .162 / 1−.162 = 0.96 and .162 / 1−.162 = 0.99.
16 That      .182 1−.182
         is, .090 / 1−.090 = 2.25 and .159   1−.159
                                      .090 / 1−.090 = 1.91.
17 In computing the standard errors for this specification, we account for the additional variance induced by the extrap-

   olation by adding the variance from the predicted value from the linear fit.


                                                          14
larger decreases in POI visits and were under stay-at-home orders for longer than CSAs with
below median contact rates, though these differences are statistically insignificant and may reflect
endogenous changes. The primary difference between the two groups are that CSAs with above
median contact rates have denser, more urban, and larger populations. They also commute by
automobile less, have more international flights passing through, are more Democratic, and are
more educated.
    To formalize the comparison across CSAs, we extend our parameterization of the contact rate
βit as a function of social distancing behaviors along with date and CSA fixed effects


                                  log(βit ) = Λ0 ∆ log(POIit ) + θi + ρt + νit                                        (14)

where ∆ log(POIit ) is the change in the log of POI visits between March 1, 2020 and t, θi are CSA
fixed effects, ρt are date fixed effects, and νit are unobserved by the econometrician. We use our
constructed series for Iit and the case growth Ci,t+1 −Cit to define βit as in equation (8) assuming
γ = 1/6. Note that we can use the ratio of the treatment effects of stay-at-home orders on social
distancing behaviors in Section 3 and on the contact rate from Table 2 to provide a causal estimate
Λ̂0 for the change in the contact rate per change in social distancing. Constraining Λ0 to be the
estimated ratio from our event-study specifications, we estimate equation (14) via a fixed effects
estimator.18
    Table 4 reports the average difference in log contact rates log(βit ) across various groups of
CSAs with high and low average case growth. To understand the role of social distancing and
policy in explaining differences between these groups, we use equation (14) and our previous
event-study estimates to obtain the predicted log contact rates if (i) stay-at-home policies were
equated across all CSAs and (ii) if changes in social distancing were equated across all CSAs. Our
estimates suggest that little to none of the average geographic variation in log contact rates can
be explained by differences in social distancing behaviors or policy. The timing of virus onset,
accounted for by ρt , does little to explain these averages differences either.19
    Consistent with Table 1, these results suggest the vast majority of differences across CSAs are
18 To                                                                                         1                        1
     implement the regression constraint and avoid taking the log of zero, we set βik =   1,000,000   when βik <   1,000,000
  and we estimate
                                      log (βit ) − Λ̂0 ∆ log(POIit ) = θi + ρt + νit
   where we use the same estimating sample as in Section 4 restricted to the period between March 15 and April 30,
                           .091
   2020, and we set Λ̂0 = .178  = .51. We do not use population weights.
19 Appendix Table A3 reports the share of the cross-CSA variance in log contact rates log(β ) explained by each set
                                                                                            it
   of covariates and provides similar conclusions as the additive decomposition in Table 4.


                                                        15
driven by the estimated fixed effects θi . What, however, explains the geographic variation in fixed
effects?
    To examine the determinants of these fixed differences across CSAs, we first perform the de-
scriptive exercise of regressing the CSA fixed effects θi on CSA-level covariates using OLS. Panel
A of Figure 7 shows the standardized coefficient estimates from univariate regressions. Panel B of
Figure 7 shows the corresponding coefficients when controlling for log population. While many
variables are significant predictors in the univariate regressions, only racial composition (share
Black, Asian, and Other) and partisanship (Republican vote share) are significant predictors after
controlling for log population.
    Next, we formalize the prediction exercise using the full set of covariates and lasso to select
and penalize coefficients.20 We choose the lasso penalty to maximize out-of-sample fit in a 10-fold
cross-validation without using population weights. Lasso selects variables that cover population
(log population and log population density), racial composition (share Black and Other), and par-
tisanship (Republican vote share). Figure 8 shows the fit of the predicted fixed effects from the
lasso regression and the estimated fixed effects θ̂i . Overall, the model performs well—accurately
predicting the contact rate fixed effect for NYC and other major CSAs but performing less well on
smaller CSAs.
    Using the lasso estimates, we return to the additive decomposition in Table 4. We recompute
the log contact rates after equating various subsets of covariates using the estimated coefficients
from our lasso model. Overall, the covariates in our lasso model explain 55 percent of the differ-
ence between CSAs with above-median case growth and CSAs with below-median case growth.
The population variables, log population and log population density, are the primary predictors—
explaining 48 percent of the above-below median difference in CSAs by themselves with partisan-
ship explaining smaller shares.
    These results suggest fixed differences across locations played a larger role in explaining dif-
ferential case growth early on in the pandemic than policy or observed social distancing behaviors.
Predictors and drivers of temporal or geographic variation later in the pandemic may be different.
The S = N assumption is also less tenable during later periods in the pandemic as the recovered
population grows—thus, complicating an analysis of this later period.




20 We   exclude the log number of tests as of April 30th from the lasso exercise for endogeneity reasons.


                                                           16
5.3     Counterfactuals

Finally, we conduct several counterfactual exercises. Our exercises take the form of constructing
alternate sequences of contact rates {βik }tk=0 and using the SIRD model outlined above to compute
counterfactual cases given observed initial conditions I0 = C0 .21
      In Figure 9, we compute various counterfactual contact rate sequences {βikc }tk=0 and examine
how these alternative sequences would have shaped the evolution of total cases in our sample.
Assuming a proportional impact of stay-at-home orders on social distancing behaviors as estimated
in Section 3, a uniform stay-at-home order implemented on March 17 (when the San Francisco Bay
Area implemented their stay-at-home order) would have resulted in 154,000 fewer cases by April
30th, or a 19.5 percent reduction in cases.22 If, instead, we assume that stay-at-home orders cause
social distancing behaviors to fall to a fixed level at 35 percent of baseline levels, a uniform stay-
at-home order implemented on March 17 would have resulted in 494,000 fewer cases, or a 62.5
percent reduction in cases. If all CSAs followed the social distancing behaviors of the counties
in the San Francisco Bay Area that were the first to initiate stay-at-home orders, there would be
349,000 fewer cases in our sample, or a 44.1 percent reduction. Lastly, removing the proportional
effect of all policy would have resulted in 494,000 more cases, or a 62.4 percent increase in cases.
      While policy explains a small proportion of the temporal variation in case growth and an even
smaller proportion of the geographic variation, policy still has led to a non-trivial reduction in
cases. As of September 4, 2020, the observed case fatality rate in the United States was 3 percent.23
Based on this observed case fatality rate, the stay-at-home policies saved 14,800 lives and a further
10,500 lives could have been saved if all CSAs followed the social distancing behavior of the
counties in the San Francisco Bay Area that were the first to initiate stay-at-home orders during
the initial period of the pandemic.


6       Conclusion

We use event studies and a model-driven regression framework to provide new decompositions on
the role of policy in driving the spatial and temporal variation in case transmission during the early
months of the coronavirus pandemic. We find that policy was responsible for roughly 15 percent

21 We                      1
        restrict βik ≥ 1,000,000 .
22 To implement, we counterfactually reduce the log of POI visits by .178 after March 17 for CSAs not under an order

   at that time.
23 See https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/data/mortality accessed on September 4, 2020.



                                                        17
of the change in virus contact rates between early March and mid-April. Moreover, policy explains
little-to-none of the differences in average contact rates between CSAs with high- and low-contact
rates. Rather, the most important predictors of which cities were hardest hit by the pandemic are
exogenous characteristics such as population and density.
   These results inform the debate about the role of policy in the initial months of the coronavirus
pandemic. While our results suggest they explain a small proportion of the overall spatial and
temporal variation, this does not mean that (a) policy is inefficient or (b) policy is not important.
We find evidence that policy is no less costly in the short-run than voluntary social distancing
behaviors. Additionally, our counterfactual estimates suggest a uniform stay-at-home policy im-
plemented on March 17th would have resulted in a 20 percent reduction in cases by April 30th.




                                                 18
References

Abatzoglou, John T. 2011. Development of gridded surface meteorological data for ecological ap-
     plications and modelling. International Journal of Climatology. http://www.climatologylab.org/gridmet.html
Alexander, Diane and Ezra Karger. 2020. Do stay-at-home orders cause people to stay at home?
     Effects of stay-at-home orders on consumer behavior. Working Paper.
Allcott, Hunt, Levi Boxell, Jacob Conway, Matthew Gentzkow, Michael Thaler, and David Yang.
     2020. Polarization and public health: Partisan differences in social distancing during the
     coronavirus pandemic. Journal of Public Economics. Forthcoming.
Anderson, Roy M., Hans Heesterbeek, Don Klinkenberg, T. Deirdre Hollingsworth. 2020. How
     will country-based mitigation measures influence the course of the COVID-19 epidemic? The
     Lancet. 395(10228): 931–934.
Baker, Scott R., Robert A. Farrokhnia, Steffen Meyer, Michaela Pagel, and Constantine Yannelis.
     2020. How does household spending respond to an epidemic? Consumption during the 2020
     COVID-19 pandemic. NBER Working Paper 26949.
Bartik, Alexander W., Marianne Bertrand, Zoë B. Cullen, Edward L. Glaeser, Michael Luca, and
     Christopher T. Stanton. 2020. How are small businesses adjusting to COVID-19? Early
     evidence from a survey. NBER Working Paper 26989.
Brzezinski, Adam, Guido Deiana, Valentin Kecht, and David Van Dijcke. 2020. The COVID-19
     pandemic: Government vs. community action across the United States. Covid Economics:
     Vetted and Real-Time Papers 7: 115–156.
Chen, M. Keith, Yilin Zhuo, Malena de la Fuente, Ryne Rohla, and Elisa F. Long. 2020a. Causal
     estimation of stay-at-home orders on SARS-CoV-2 transmission. Working Paper.
Chen, Sophia, Deniz Igan, Nicola Pierri, and Andrea F. Presbitero. 2020b. Tracking the economic
     impact of COVID-19 and mitigation policies in Europe and the United States. Working Paper.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, and Michael Stepner. 2020. Real-time eco-
     nomics: A new platform to track the impacts of COVID-19 on people, businesses, and com-
     munities using private sector data. Working Paper.
Cori, Anne, Neil M. Ferguson, Christophe Fraser, and Simon Cauchemez. 2013. A new framework
     and software to estimate time-varying reproduction numbers during epidemics. American
     Journal of Epidemiology 178(9): 1505–1512.
Courtemanche, Charles, Joseph Garuccio, Anh Le, Joshua Pinkston, and Aaron Yelowitz. 2020.
     Strong social distancing measures in the United States reduced the COVID-19 growth rate.
     Health Affairs. 39(7): 1237–1246.
Dave, Dhaval M., Andrew I. Friedson, Kyutaro Matsuzawa, and Joseph J. Sabia. 2020. When do
     shelter-in-place orders fight COVID-19 best? Policy heterogeneity across states and adoption


                                              19
     time. Economic Inquiry.
Desmet, Klaus, and Romain Wacziarg. 2020. Understanding spatial variation in COVID-19 across
     the United States. NBER Working Paper 27329.
D’Arienzo, Marco and Angela Coniglio. 2020. Assessment of the SARS-CoV-2 basic reproduc-
     tion number, R0, based on the early phase of COVID-19 outbreak in Italy. Biosafety and
     Health.
Farrell, Diana, Fiona Greig, Natalie Cox, Peter Ganong, and Pascal Noel. 2020. The initial house-
     hold spending response to COVID-19: Evidence from credit card transactions. JPMorgan
     Chase Institute Report. Accessed at https://institute.jpmorganchase.com/institute/research/household-
     income-spending/initial-household-spending-response-to-covid-19.
Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, and Charles I. Jones. 2020. Estimating and simulating a SIRD model
     of COVID-19 for many countries, states, and cities. NBER Working Paper 27128.
Flaxman, Seth, Swapnil Mishra, Axel Gandy, H. Unwin, Helen Coupland, T. Mellan, Harisson
     Zhu et al. 2020. Report 13: Estimating the number of infections and the impact of non-
     pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 in 11 European countries. Working Paper.
Fowler, James H., Seth J. Hill, Remy Levin, and Nick Obradovich. 2020. The effect of stay-at-
     home orders on COVID-19 cases and fatalities in the United States. Working Paper.
Friedson, Andrew I., Drew McNichols, Joseph J. Sabia, and Dhaval Dave. 2020. Did California’s
     shelter-in-place order work? Early coronavirus-related public health effects. NBER Working
     Paper 26992.
Gold, Lyta and Nathan Robinson. 2020. Andrew Cuomo is no hero. He’s to blame for New York’s
     coronavirus catastrophe. The Guardian. Accessed at https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/may
     cuomo-new-york-coronavirus-catastrophe.
Goolsbee, Austan, and Chad Syverson. 2020. Fear, lockdown, and diversion: Comparing drivers
     of pandemic economic decline. NBER Working Paper 27432.
Greenstone, Michael, and Vishan Nigam. 2020. Does social distancing matter? Working Paper.
Gupta, Sumedha, Thuy D. Nguyen, Felipe Lozano Rojas, Shyam Raman, Byungkyu Lee, Ana
     Bento, Kosali I. Simon, and Coady Wing. 2020. Tracking public and private response to the
     covid-19 epidemic: Evidence from state and local government actions. NBER Working Paper
     27027.
Kermack, William Ogilvy, and Anderson G. McKendrick. 1927. A contribution to the mathemat-
     ical theory of epidemics. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing
     Papers of a Mathematical and Physical Character. 115(772): 700–721.
Knittel, Christopher R., and Bora Ozaltun. 2020. What does and does not correlate with COVID-
     19 death rates. NBER Working Paper 27391.
Kong, Edward, and Daniel Prinz. 2020. The impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on un-


                                            20
     employment during a pandemic. Working Paper.
Lasry, Arielle, Daniel Kidder, Marisa Hast, Jason Poovey, Gregory Sunshine, Nicole Zviedrite,
     Faruque Ahmed, and Kathleen A. Ethier. 2020. Timing of community mitigation and changes
     in reported COVID-19 and community mobility four US metropolitan areas, February 26–
     April 1, 2020. Working Paper.
Lin, Zhixian and Christopher M. Meissner. 2020. Health vs. wealth? Public health policies and
     the economy during COVID-19. NBER Working Paper 27099.
Mervosh, Sarah, Denise Lu, and Vanessa Swales. 2020a. See which states and cities have told resi-
     dents to stay at home. The New York Times. Accessed at https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/corona
     stay-at-home-order.html.
Mervosh, Sarah, Jasmine C. Lee, Lazaro Gamio, and Nadja Popovich. 2020b. See how all 50 states
     are reopening. The New York Times. Accessed at https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/states-
     reopen-map-coronavirus.html.
MIT Election Data and Science Lab. 2018. County presidential election returns 2000-2016. Har-
     vard Dataverse. https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/VOQCHQ.
Olive, Xavier. 2019. Traffic, a toolbox for processing and analysing air traffic data. Journal of
     Open Source Software. 4(39).
Schäfer, Matthias, Martin Strohmeier, Vincent Lenders, Ivan Martinovic, and Matthias Wilhelm.
     2014. Bringing up OpenSky: A large-scale ADS-B sensor network for research. Proceed-
     ings of the 13th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Information Processing in Sensor
     Networks. 83–94.
Thompson, Kimberly M., Mark A. Pallansch, Radboud J. Duintjer Tebbens, Steve G. Wassilak,
     Jong-Hoon Kim, and Stephen L. Cochi. 2013. Preeradication vaccine policy options for
     poliovirus infection and disease control. Risk Analysis. 33(4): 516–543.
Villas-Boas, Sofia B., James Sears, Miguel Villas-Boas, and Vasco Villas-Boas. 2020. Are we
     #stayinghome to flatten the curve? Working Paper.
Wu, Xiao, Rachel C. Nethery, Benjamin M. Sabath, Danielle Braun, and Francesca Dominici.
     2020. Exposure to air pollution and COVID-19 mortality in the United States. Working
     Paper.




                                              21
                                          Figure 1: Distribution of Timing of First Government Order


                                1.5e+05
           Number of Counties




                                1.0e+05




                                5.0e+04




                                     0
                                              Mar 4       Mar 11        Mar 18           Mar 25        Apr 1        Apr 8
                                                                         Date of Order

                                                          Stay-at-home order               Business closing order

Note: Figure shows the distribution of government order effective start dates over time and across counties.
Each bar represents the number of counties (y-axis) for which the first order of a given type went into effect
on the date specified (x-axis). Stay-at-home and business closing orders are shown in blue and orange bars
respectively. See Section 2.1 for detail on data sources and processing.




                                                                      22
                                           Figure 2: Trends in Average Mobility and Health

                                                          Panel A: Mobility

                             0.0
Normalized Log(Visits)




                            −0.4
                                                                                                    Timing
                                                                                                        Early Order
                                                                                                        Late Order
                                                                                                        No Order

                            −0.8




                            −1.2
                                     Fe




                                            Ma




                                                               Ap




                                                                                  Ma




                                                                                             Ju
                                                                                               n
                                       b




                                                                 r




                                                                                    y
                                              r




                                                            Week


                                                          Panel B: Health

                             2
Normalized Log(New Cases)




                             0                                                                      Timing
                                                                                                        Early Order
                                                                                                        Late Order
                                                                                                        No Order




                            −2
                                   Fe




                                           Ma




                                                               Ap




                                                                                  Ma




                                                                                             Ju
                                                                                                n
                                      b




                                                                r




                                                                                    y
                                            r




                                                            Week


Note: Figure reports trends in average mobility and health by county order timing and week. Panel A
plots the log of daily average POI visits, normalizing relative to the week starting January 29, 2020. Panel
B plots the log of daily new COVID-19 cases, normalized to the week starting March 25, 2020. In both
panels, averages are weighted by population and taken across counties and days prior to taking logs or
normalization. ‘Early Order’ indicates counties with a stay-at-home order on or before March 25, 2020.
‘Late Order’ indicates counties with a stay-at-home order after this point. ‘No Order‘ indicates counties
which did not issue a stay-at-home order during this sample period. The dashed vertical line indicates the
week starting March 25, 2020.

                                                                    23
                   Figure 3: Geographic Variation in Social Distancing and Public Policy

                                   Panel A: % Change in SafeGraph Visits




    (-45,38]
    (-51,-45]
    (-56,-51]
    (-63,-56]
    [-96,-63]
    No data

                            Panel B: Shelter-in-Place Order Effective Start Date




    [12mar,24mar]
    (24mar,26mar]
    (26mar,30mar]
    (30mar,02apr]
    (02apr,07apr]
    No identified order

Note: This figure shows the U.S. geographic distribution of social distancing and public policy responses.
Panel A shows for each county the percent change in aggregate visits between the week beginning January
29, 2020 and the week beginning April 8, 2020. Blue shading denotes a more negative percent change in
visits during the latter week relative to the former. Red shading indicates an increase or a smaller decrease in
visits. These visits are sourced from SafeGraph’s mobile device location data. Panel B shades U.S. counties
by the effective start date for the earliest shelter-in-place order issued (see Section 2.1 for sources). Blue
shading indicates an earlier order, while red shading indicates that an order was issued later or was never
issued.
                                                      24
              Figure 4: Effect of Stay-at-Home Orders on Mobility and Economic Outcomes

                                                                   Panel A: Effect on Mobility
                                                    0.40




                                                    0.20




                             Coefficient Estimate
                                                    0.00




                                                    -0.20




                                                    -0.40
                                                            -21      -14    -7             0              7   14   21
                                                                                 Days Relative to Order




                                                        Panel B: Effect on Consumer Spending
                                                    0.40




                                                    0.20
                             Coefficient Estimate




                                                    0.00




                                                    -0.20




                                                    -0.40
                                                            -21      -14    -7             0              7   14   21
                                                                                 Days Relative to Order




                                                                  Panel C: Effect on Employment
                                                    0.40




                                                    0.20
                             Coefficient Estimate




                                                    0.00




                                                    -0.20




                                                    -0.40
                                                            -21      -14    -7             0              7   14   21
                                                                                 Days Relative to Order




Note: Figure plots estimated treatment effects ωk of stay-at-home orders on different outcomes, using the
event-study specification outlined in equation (1) at the CSA-day level. Panel A shows the effect on mobility,
using the log of total POI visits in SafeGraph data. Panel B shows the effect on consumer spending, using
the log of total spending in Facteus’ debit card sample. Panel C shows the effect on employment, using
the log number of individuals with positive work hours from the Homebase sample. All regressions include
CSA fixed effects µi and date fixed effects δt . CSAs are weighted by population in the regression. Standard
errors are clustered at the CSA level irrespective of order timing.


                                                                                   25
                                             Figure 5: Effect of Stay-at-Home Orders on Health Outcomes

                                                        Panel A: Log New Cases, Model Free

                                     1.00

                                     0.75

                                     0.50
              Coefficient Estimate




                                     0.25

                                     0.00

                                     -0.25

                                     -0.50

                                     -0.75

                                     -1.00
                                             -14          -7            0               7        14       21
                                                                      Days Relative to Order



                                                          Panel B: Contact Rate (γ = 1/6)

                                     1.00

                                     0.75

                                     0.50
              Coefficient Estimate




                                     0.25

                                     0.00

                                     -0.25

                                     -0.50

                                     -0.75

                                     -1.00
                                             -14          -7            0               7        14       21
                                                                      Days Relative to Order



Note: Figure plots estimated treatment effects ωk from the event-study specification outlined in equation
(15) using the log of new cases in a CSA for a given day as the outcome. Panel A includes date fixed effects
δt , the event window indicator ξit , and sets γ = 0 which implies log(Iit ) = log(Cit ). Panel B is the same as
Panel A, except that it sets γ = 1/6. CSAs are weighted by population in the regression. Standard errors are
clustered at the CSA level irrespective of order timing.




                                                                         26
                                                     Figure 6: Temporal Variation Explained by Policy

                                                   Panel A: Social Distancing and Employment Outcomes

                                            0.25




                                            0.20
              Policy-Induced Share




                                            0.15




                                            0.10




                                            0.05
                                                        POI Visits                   Wages              Employment

                                                                           Stay-at-Home      Business



                                                                     Panel B: Contact Rate βt
                                            0.8



                                            0.6
                     Policy-Induced Share




                                            0.4



                                            0.2



                                            0.0
                                                          γ=1/6                      γ=1/9                   γ=1/12
                                                                               Contact Rate (β)

                                                        R0=2.7                  R0=3                R0=3.3



Note: Figure plots the share of the total change in each outcome that is attributable to a given policy
Policy∆/Total∆ following Section 5.1. Panel A reports estimates using stay-at-home orders and business
closure orders for POI visits from SafeGraph, total wages from Homebase, and employment from Home-
base. For each policy treatment, we restrict attention to the CSAs treated by the given policy. Panel B reports
estimates of the policy-induced change in the contact rate βt from stay-at-home orders. In both panels, the
bars depict 95 percent confidence intervals. See Table 3 for additional details.


                                                                                27
                    Figure 7: Determinants of Geographic Variation in Log Contact Rates

                                  Panel A: Univariate Regression of θ̂i on Covariates
                            Log Pop.
                    Log Pop. Density
                         Frac. Urban

                Share 4-year Degree
                      Share Hispanic
                 Share Race - Other
                 Share Race - Asian
                 Share Race - White
                 Share Race - Black
                      Share Age <18
                      Share Age ≥65
              Republican Vote Share
             Log International Flights
             Share Commute by Car
                Avg. Summer Temp.
                  Avg. Winter Temp.
                           Log Tests

                                         -.75      -.5      -.25         0          .25   .5   .75
                                                              Standardized Coefficient



                                            Panel B: Controlling for Log Population
                            Log Pop.
                    Log Pop. Density
                         Frac. Urban

                Share 4-year Degree
                      Share Hispanic
                 Share Race - Other
                 Share Race - Asian
                 Share Race - White
                 Share Race - Black
                      Share Age <18
                      Share Age ≥65
              Republican Vote Share
             Log International Flights
             Share Commute by Car
                Avg. Summer Temp.
                  Avg. Winter Temp.
                           Log Tests

                                         -.75      -.5      -.25         0          .25   .5   .75
                                                              Standardized Coefficient



Note: Figure plots the coefficients of regressing the CSA log contact rate fixed effect estimates θ̂i from
equation (14) on CSA-level determinants. The θ̂i and all covariates have been standardized to have a mean
0 and a standard deviation of 1. Panel A plots the standardized coefficients and 95 percent confidence
intervals from univariate regressions. Panel B repeats Panel A but the regressions also control for the log
of population. Population weights are not used. Robust standard errors are used to compute the confidence
intervals.


                                                              28
                                     Figure 8: Model Fit for Average Log Contact Rates, Full Lasso Model



                                 2




                                                                                                                               Boston
                                                                                                                                        Philly   Chicago
                                                                                                                     LA   Cleveland
                                                                                                                                                 DC
                                                                                                         Miami       Detroit
                                                                                               Denver                                   NYC
                                                                                                              SF
                                                                                             Atlanta                             Minneapolis
                                                                                 Orlando
                                                                                                          Portland
                                                                               Charlotte   Dallas                     Seattle

                                                                                                    Houston

                                 0
Estimated Log Contact Rate FE




                                −2




                                −4


                                            −1                                 0                                                         1
                                                                 Predicted Log Contact Rate FE

Note: Figure plots predictions of the estimated fixed differences in CSA log contact rates θ̂i in OLS re-
gressions using γ = 1/6. The plotted points are sized proportional to CSA population and the top 25 most
populous CSAs are filled in and labeled. In this figure, the fixed effects are averaged using population
weights and the population is summed across order timings when a CSA has multiple order timings. The
solid line is a 45 degree line indicating perfect prediction and the dashed line is a linear fit of the estimated
fixed effects on their predictions for the CSAs plotted. We drop two observations when plotting to focus on
the variation across the majority of CSAs.


                                                                     29
                                             Figure 9: Counterfactual Cases

                                 1.5




                                  1
              Cases (millions)




                                  .5




                                  0
                                   Mar 1   Mar 15             Mar 29          Apr 12              Apr 26

                                             No Policy - Proportional                  Observed
                                             March 17 Policy - Proportional            SF Distancing
                                             March 17 Policy - Fixed


Note: Figure plots observed and counterfactual cases following the methodology outlined in Section 5.3 for
our sample of cumulative statistical areas (CSAs) using γ = 1/6. Figure reports the observed number of
cases along with the estimated number of cases if a uniform stay-at-home order was implemented on March
17 with proportional effect on social distancing behaviors, a uniform stay-at-home order was implemented
on March 17 that caused social distancing behaviors to fall to a fixed level of 35 percent of March 1 levels,
and the estimated number of cases if all areas followed the same social distancing behavior as the San
Francisco Bay Area (defined to be the counties in the San Francisco CSA that were first to implement a
stay-at-home order).




                                                              30
                                                  Table 1: CSA Summary Statistics

                                                              All             Above Med.            Below Med.                 Difference
                                                                              Contact Rate          Contact Rate
    Log Contact Rate (βt , γ = 1/6)                         -2.259               -1.617                -2.901                     1.285
                                                           (1.230)              (0.138)                (1.482)              [0.914, 1.668]
    Log Cases per 100,000 on April 30                        5.100                5.403                 4.798                     0.605
                                                           (0.894)              (0.820)                (0.869)              [0.288, 0.876]
    Log Deaths per 100,000 on April 30                       1.738                2.154                 1.308                     0.846
                                                           (1.203)              (1.178)                (1.078)              [0.368, 1.195]
    Log POI Visits                                         10.545               11.137                  9.953                     1.184
                                                           (1.125)              (0.947)                (0.971)              [0.828, 1.555]
    ∆Log POI Visits                                         -0.642               -0.658                -0.626                    -0.032
                                                           (0.219)              (0.193)                (0.242)              [-0.099, 0.053]
    Share of Days with Order                                 0.650                0.697                 0.603                    0.094
                                                           (0.271)              (0.232)                (0.299)              [-0.013, 0.186]
    Log Pop Density                                          6.044                6.836                 5.252                     1.584
                                                           (1.501)              (1.447)                (1.083)              [1.101, 2.035]
    Log Population                                         13.436               14.114                 12.758                     1.356
                                                           (1.192)              (1.018)                (0.947)              [0.999, 1.712]
    Share Urban                                              0.821                0.881                 0.761                     0.120
                                                           (0.181)              (0.153)                (0.188)              [0.070, 0.196]
    Average Summer Temperature                             88.440               87.480                 89.400                    -1.920
                                                           (5.215)              (5.413)                (4.867)              [-3.525, 0.200]
    Average Winter Temperature                             50.292               50.386                 50.198                    0.187
                                                          (12.432)             (13.712)               (11.125)              [-4.010, 5.249]
    Share Commute Auto                                       0.887                0.864                 0.910                    -0.045
                                                           (0.076)              (0.096)                (0.038)             [-0.069, -0.019]
    Log International Flights                                2.759                4.297                 1.222                     3.075
                                                           (3.084)              (3.280)                (1.901)              [1.973, 4.093]
    Republican Vote Share                                    0.491                0.445                 0.538                    -0.093
                                                           (0.152)              (0.140)                (0.151)             [-0.150, -0.043]
    Share Age ≥ 65                                           0.145                0.142                 0.147                    -0.005
                                                           (0.039)              (0.041)                (0.037)              [-0.020, 0.009]
    Share Black                                              0.157                0.163                 0.150                    0.014
                                                           (0.143)              (0.129)                (0.156)              [-0.035, 0.067]
    Share White                                              0.741                0.721                 0.762                    -0.040
                                                           (0.148)              (0.135)                (0.158)              [-0.101, 0.012]
    Share with Bachelor’s or More                            0.304                0.328                 0.280                     0.047
                                                           (0.090)              (0.077)                (0.095)              [0.014, 0.082]
Note: Table reports summary statistics of the average CSA covariate values between March 15 and April 30, except for cases and deaths which the
April 30th values are used. The means across all CSAs and the grouped CSAs by average log contact rate log(βt ) using γ = 1/6 are reported along
with bootstrapped standard errors. The difference-in-means between the top and bottom contact rate groups are reported along with bootstrapped
95 percent confidence intervals. Statistically significant difference-in-means are bolded. ‘∆Log Visits’ reports the change in log POI visits relative
to March 1, 2020. ‘Share of Days with Order’ reports the share of the March 15–April 30 time period in which a CSA is under a stay-at-home order.




                                                                         31
                      Table 2: Estimated Effects of Stay-at-Home Orders on Contact Rate

                                        (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)
                                       γ =0       γ = 1/12      γ = 1/9    γ = 1/6     γ = 1/3

                       Post-order     -0.203       -0.139       -0.121       -0.091     -0.023
                                      (0.086)      (0.060)      (0.055)     (0.048)     (0.045)

                       log(Iit )       1.053        1.048        1.044       1.037       1.013
                                      (0.027)      (0.019)      (0.017)     (0.012)     (0.006)

                       Clusters          76          76           76          76          76
                       Obs.             5240        5240         5240        5240        5240
Note: Table shows estimated coefficients from estimating an aggregated version of the event study in equa-
tion (1):
                   log(Ci,t+1 −Cit ) = α log(Iit ) + δt + ω0 Eit + ω1 Postit + ξit0 + ξit1 + εit      (15)
where Eit = 1{−9<t−Ti <21} , Postit = 1{−1<t−Ti <21} , ξit0 = 1{t−Ti <−8} , and ξit1 = 1{t−Ti >20} . ‘Post-order’ reports
ω̂1 , and ‘log(Iit )’ reports α̂. Each column reports estimates for a different value of γ as reported in the header.
Observations are weighted by population. Standard errors clustered by CSA are reported in parenetheses.




                                                           32
Table 3: Role of Policy in Explaining Aggregate Temporal Changes in Distancing, Economic, and Health
Outcomes

                           Panel A: Social Distancing and Economic Outcomes
                                            (1)                  (2)                       (3)
                                       Stay-at-Home           Business                Both Orders
                                      Total    Policy      Total    Policy           Total    Policy

        POI Visits                     -0.672   -0.109       -0.665    -0.060       -0.700   -0.178
                                                (0.008)                (0.011)               (0.018)
        Homebase Wages                 -0.590   -0.092       -0.577    -0.105       -0.582   -0.183
                                                (0.013)                (0.023)               (0.039)
        Homebase Employment            -0.592   -0.095       -0.584    -0.093       -0.620   -0.170
                                                (0.012)                (0.017)               (0.038)
        Facteus Debit Transactions     0.048    -0.055        0.056    -0.017       -0.003   -0.057
                                                (0.007)                (0.007)               (0.013)
        Facteus Total Spending         0.284    -0.071        0.302    -0.012       0.195    -0.069
                                                (0.009)                (0.010)               (0.017)

                                         Panel B: Contact Rate βt
                                             (1)                  (2)                      (3)
                                          γ = 1/12             γ = 1/9                  γ = 1/6
                                       Total    Policy     Total     Policy          Total    Policy

        R0 = 2.7                       -0.574    -0.245      -0.610    -0.172       -0.634    -0.098
                                                (0.107)                (0.078)               (0.052)
        R0 = 3.0                       -0.617    -0.221      -0.649    -0.155       -0.670    -0.088
                                                (0.096)                (0.070)               (0.047)
        R0 = 3.3                       -0.652    -0.201      -0.681    -0.141       -0.700    -0.080
                                                (0.087)                (0.064)               (0.042)


Note: Table reports the total and policy-induced changes in various outcomes as outlined in Section 5.1. In
Panel A, we consider the policy-induced changes of stay-at-home orders, business closures, and simultane-
ous stay-at-home and business closures. Each column restricts attention to the set of CSAs that receive a
given treatment, with Column (3) restricting to counties in which business closure and stay-at-home orders
went into effect on the same day. The treatment effects ωk used in Panel A set k = 1. In Panel B, all specifi-
cations estimate the effect of stay-at-home orders using estimates from the CSA level and use the estimated
treatment effect ωk from Table A1.




                                                     33
                  Table 4: Additive Decomposition for Differences in Log Contact Rates

                                               Above/Below Med.   Top/Bot. Quart.   Top/Bot. Dec.
           Overall Difference                        1.228            2.171             3.565

           Share of difference explained by:
           Social Distancing                        -0.009            -0.010           -0.023
               Policy                               -0.006            -0.007           -0.007
           Timing of Virus                          -0.000            -0.003           -0.003
           Observed Covariates                      0.548             0.508             0.424
               Population                           0.482             0.423             0.336
               Climate                              0.000             0.000             0.000
               Transport                            0.000             0.000             0.000
               Race                                 -0.036            -0.015           -0.023
               Partisanship                         0.103             0.100             0.110
               College Degrees                      0.000             0.000             0.000
               Age Demographics                     0.000             0.000             0.000
Note: Table reports the difference in the average log contact rate log(βit ) between March 15 and April 30,
2020 for each group of CSAs. It also reports the counterfactual share of the overall difference explained by
each set of determinants as outlined in Section 5.2.




                                                      34
A     Appendix

See the replication code for exact details on data construction and estimation.

A.1    Data Construction Procedures

We construct the datasets used in our analysis as follows.

    1. We begin by matching SafeGraph POIs to the counties in which they are located. We use
       latitude and longitude from SafeGraph’s August 2020 Core POI dataset, along with the 2010
       TIGER county shapefile.24 We successfully assign 99.9 percent of the POIs to a county.

    2. We then merge the POI-county mapping from (1) onto SafeGraph’s Patterns data using the
       safegraph-place-id variable. We sum visits by county for a given day, aggregating across
       POIs. Our SafeGraph series ranges from January 1, 2020 to August 30, 2020.

    3. We then merge onto the output from (2) a dataset of county-level demographic information
       constructed as follows. We use the Open Census data from SafeGraph, aggregating up the
       data given at the census block group level to the county level. We combine this with data on
       county 2016 Presidential votes shares (MIT Election Data and Science Lab 2018). We define
       the Republican vote share to be the share of votes received by the Republican candidate over
       the sum of votes across all candidates. We exclude counties without valid vote data, which
       drops Alaska and two additional counties (FIPS: 15005, 51515). We also merge on the
       urban population share from the 2010 Census.25 We also use average seasonal temperatures
       by geography from Wu et al. (2020), which is ultimately sourced from gridMET. Averages
       for a given county and season are taken across the years 2010-2016.

    4. We then merge onto the output from (3) the number of incoming international flights for each
       US county from December 2019 to February 2020 made available by the OpenSky Network
       (Schäfer et al. 2014; Olive 2019).

    5. We then merge data on Covid-19 health outcomes onto the output from (4). We source
       confirmed Covid-19 cases and deaths by county and day from The New York Times. We
       assume zero cases and deaths for the observations not observed in The New York Times
       data. We drop the four counties which overlap with Kansas City (MO), because The New
       York Times lists these as geographic exceptions where it either does not assign cases to these
       counties or excludes cases occurring within the city. For the five boroughs of New York City,
24 Downloadedfrom https://www.census.gov/geo/maps-data/data/cbf/cbf counties.html on July 24, 2018.
25 Downloaded    from       https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/geography/technical-documentation/records-
 layout/2010-urban-lists-record-layout.html on June 25, 2020.


                                                     35
   we assign cases and deaths based on their population share. We also merge data on testing
   and hospitalizations from the Covid Tracking Project, by state and day.

6. We then merge a dataset of county-level shelter-in-place and business closure order start
   dates onto the output from (5) and construct an indicator for whether a county had been
   subject to a shelter-in-place and/or business closure order by a given date. It is ultimately
   sourced from The New York Times, Keystone Strategy, a crowdsourcing effort from Stanford
   University and the University of Virginia, and Hikma Health. The New York Times has
   been tracking “shelter-in-place”, “stay-at-home”, “healthy-at-home”, etc. policies enacted
   at the city, county and state level (Mervosh et al. 2020a). We use the dates reported by
   the NYT for our stay-at-home policy. The relevant NPIs from Keystone’s data are shelter-
   in-place (SIP) and closure of public venues (CPV) policies. Keystone considers an “order
   indicating that people should shelter in their home except for essential reason” as a SIP
   intervention and a “government order closing gathering venues for in-person services” as
   a CPV intervention. We will use Keystone’s SIP and CPV dates for our stay-at-home and
   business closure policies respectively. The crowdsourced data collected by a group from
   Stanford and University of Virginia solicits policy and personal information from survey
   participants in an online form. We use the “lockdown” and “business closed” dates for
   counties from this data. Hikma Health, a non-profit working on data systems and analysis
   for healthcare providers, has carried out their own crowdsourcing effort to document NPIs.
   We use the county “shelter date” and “work date” from Hikma Health in our construction
   of stay-at-home and business closure policies respectively. Given that none of the sources
   have entirely overlapping policy data, we define both our stay-at-home and business closure
   policies by sequentially assigning enforcement dates when data is available in the order:
   NYT, Keystone, Stanford/Virginia crowdsource, and Hikma Health. Once a state enacts a
   policy, the counties inherit the policy of the state. We then merge on a dataset of reopening
   dates at the state level collected by the NYT (Mervosh et al. 2020b) and curated by Rearc.

7. We then merge on debit card transactions and spending totals from Facteus onto the output
   from (6). Prior to this merge, Facteus data is aggregated from the zip code to the county level
   using a 5-digit zip code to county crosswalk downloaded from HUD (https://www.huduser.gov/portal/dataset
   on April 12, 2020. Facteus data ranges from Jan 1, 2020 to August 27, 2020, with missing
   data on August 7, 2020.

8. We then merge on employment data from Homebase onto the output from (7). Homebase
   data is aggregated to the county-day level prior to this merge. This step completes the con-
   struction of the dataset used in our county-level analysis. Homebase data ranges from Jan 1,
   2020 to August 31, 2020.

                                             36
   9. For analysis at the level of a CSA, order date, and day, we then aggregate the output from
      (8) to this level. We use a county to CSA crosswalk downloaded on May 29, 2020 from the
      NBER (http://data.nber.org/cbsa-csa-fips-county-crosswalk/cbsa2fipsxw.csv), which uses de-
      lineation files originally sourced from the Census. We sum countable variables such as POI
      visits or Covid-19 cases. For other variables, we take a population-weighted average across
      counties in a CSA-day with the same social distancing policy start date. In our CSA-level
      analysis, we exclude counties not assigned to a CSA.

A.2     SIRD Simulations and Estimation Details

A.2.1    Simulation

To generate data from an SIRD data generating process, we assume a death rate κ = .008 and
an average infectious period of 10 days (γ = .1). We assume βit evolves as βit = γ(Ri0 eλit +
R1 (1 − eλit )) × (1 + τTit ) where Ri0 is drawn from a normal distribution with mean of 2.4 and
standard deviation of 0.1, R1 = .95, τ is either 0 or -0.1 depending on the simulation, Tit is drawn
from a binomial distribution with size 150 and probability 4/15, and λ is drawn from a normal
distribution with mean −0.08 and standard deviation 0.01. The exponential decay process for βt
follows Fernández-Villaverde and Jones (2020). The initial share of the population infected is
drawn from an exponential distribution with rate 10, 000. The size of the population is drawn from
an exponential with rate 1/100, 000.
      We then follow the laws of motion outlined in the main text, updating βt each period. Note
that in constructing the simulations, we do not use the S/N ≈ 1 assumption but simulate data
from the complete model. We simulate data for 200 geographies with 150 time periods. We then
follow the estimation process outlined in the main text and assume that γ is the true value used in
simulations. We drop the event window indicator in equation (15) when including geography fixed
effects. We also show robustness to incorrectly specifying τ as half its true value and twice its true
value.

A.2.2    Dave et al. (2020)

Dave et al. (2020; Figure 4) use an event-study specification with the log of confirmed cases on
the left-hand side and geography-specific linear time trends, e.g.,

                                                         k=21
                      log(Cit ) = µi + µi × t + δt +      ∑         ωk 1{t−Ti =k} + εit          (16)
                                                       k=−7,k6=−1




                                                  37
where log(Cit ) is the log of confirmed cases in geography i during time t, µi is a geography fixed
effect, δt is a date fixed effect, 1{t−Ti =k} is an indicator for the days relative to the first stay-at-home
order Ti , and µi × t is a geography-specific linear time trend.26 Following Dave et al. (2020), we
exclude data after April 20, 2020.

A.2.3     Estimation Details

To implement our SIRD estimator, we proceed as follows:

   1. We assume zero cases in counties for which none have been reported, aggregate county data
      to the CSA-order timing level (subsequently “CSA”), and constrain cumulative cases to be
      non-decreasing at the CSA level. We then make the following restrictions:

         (a) CSA-days with at least 10 cases,
         (b) CSAs that either never receive a stay-at-home order or are observed at least 8 days prior
             and 20 days after the implementation of the order, and
         (c) CSA-days between February 1, 2020 and April 30, 2020.

   2. We set Ci0 to be the number of confirmed cases during the period in which at least 10 cases
      are confirmed, and we define Ci0 = Ii0 .

   3. We then use equation (9) to define the full time path of Iit for each geography given γ.

   4. We then estimate equation (15), using log( 21 + Ct+1 − Ct ) to avoid taking log of zero when
      no new cases are observed.




26 In their event-study specification, Dave et al.   (2020) aggregate multiple post-treatment periods into a single treatment
  effect and include other control variables.


                                                               38
                                                      Appendix Figure A1: Relative Timing of Stay-at-Home Orders


                                               1.0
          Fraction With a Stay-at-Home Order


                                               0.8



                                               0.6



                                               0.4



                                               0.2



                                               0.0
                                                     -20             -10                 0                   10     20
                                                                    Days Relative to 0.01% of Population Infected


Note: Figure plots the population weighted share of counties with a stay-at-home order relative to the point
in time in which at least 0.01% of the population has a confirmed case.




                                                                                   39
                             Appendix Figure A2: Distribution of Stay-at-Home Order Removal Timing


                             1500




                             1000
          Number of States




                              500




                                0
                                Apr 22   Apr 29   May 6   May 13   May 20   May 27   Jun 3   Jun 10

Note: Figure shows the distribution of state reopenings. Each bar represents the number of states that
initiated the removal of their stay-at-home order on the corresponding date. See Section 2.1 for detail on
data sources and processing.




                                                              40
                 Appendix Figure A3: Effect of Stay-at-Home Orders at the County Level

                                                                   Panel A: Effect on Mobility

                                                    0.30


                                                    0.20




                             Coefficient Estimate
                                                    0.10


                                                    0.00


                                                    -0.10


                                                    -0.20


                                                    -0.30


                                                            -21      -14    -7             0              7   14   21
                                                                                 Days Relative to Order




                                                        Panel B: Effect on Consumer Spending

                                                    0.30


                                                    0.20
                             Coefficient Estimate




                                                    0.10


                                                    0.00


                                                    -0.10


                                                    -0.20


                                                    -0.30


                                                            -21      -14    -7             0              7   14   21
                                                                                 Days Relative to Order




                                                                  Panel C: Effect on Employment

                                                    0.30


                                                    0.20
                             Coefficient Estimate




                                                    0.10


                                                    0.00


                                                    -0.10


                                                    -0.20


                                                    -0.30


                                                            -21      -14    -7             0              7   14   21
                                                                                 Days Relative to Order




Note: Figure plots estimated treatment effects ωk of stay-at-home orders on different outcomes, using the
event-study specification outlined in equation (1) at the county-day level. Panel A shows the effect on
mobility, using the log of total POI visits in SafeGraph data. Panel B shows the effect on consumer spending,
using the log of total spending in Facteus’ debit card sample. Panel C shows the effect on employment, using
the log number of individuals with positive work hours from the Homebase sample. All regressions include
county fixed effects µi and date fixed effects δt . Counties are weighted by population in the regression.
Standard errors are clustered at the state level irrespective of order timing.


                                                                                   41
                                Appendix Figure A4: Effect of Mandatory Business Closure or Simultaneous Orders

                                                                                          Panel A: Effect on Mobility
                                                    Business Closure                                       Combined Business Closure and Stay-at-Home
                                0.40                                                                                              0.40



                                                                                                                                  0.20
                                0.20
         Coefficient Estimate




                                                                                                           Coefficient Estimate
                                                                                                                                  0.00

                                0.00

                                                                                                                                  -0.20


                                -0.20
                                                                                                                                  -0.40



                                -0.40
                                        -21   -14       -7             0              7       14     21                                   -21   -14   -7             0              7   14   21
                                                             Days Relative to Order                                                                        Days Relative to Order




                                                                           Panel B: Effect on Consumer Spending
                                                    Business Closure                                       Combined Business Closure and Stay-at-Home
                                0.40                                                                                              0.40




                                0.20                                                                                              0.20
         Coefficient Estimate




                                                                                                           Coefficient Estimate




                                0.00                                                                                              0.00




                                -0.20                                                                                             -0.20




                                -0.40                                                                                             -0.40
                                        -21   -14       -7             0              7       14     21                                   -21   -14   -7             0              7   14   21
                                                             Days Relative to Order                                                                        Days Relative to Order




                                                                                  Panel C: Effect on Employment
                                                    Business Closure                                       Combined Business Closure and Stay-at-Home
                                0.40                                                                                              1.20


                                                                                                                                  0.80
                                0.20
         Coefficient Estimate




                                                                                                           Coefficient Estimate




                                                                                                                                  0.40


                                0.00                                                                                              0.00


                                                                                                                                  -0.40
                                -0.20
                                                                                                                                  -0.80


                                -0.40                                                                                             -1.20
                                        -21   -14       -7             0              7       14     21                                   -21   -14   -7             0              7   14   21
                                                             Days Relative to Order                                                                        Days Relative to Order




Note: Figure plots estimated treatment effects ωk of policy orders on different outcomes, using the event-study speci-
fication outlined in equation (1) at the CSA-day level. ‘Business Closure’ subfigures analyze event studies of business
closure orders. ‘Combined Business Closure and Stay-at-Home’ restricts to CSAs that implement their business clo-
sure and stay-at home orders at the same time. Panel A shows the effect on mobility, using the log of total POI visits
in SafeGraph data. Panel B shows the effect on consumer spending, using the log of total spending in Facteus’ debit
card sample. Panel C shows the effect on employment, using the log number of individuals with positive work hours
from the Homebase sample. All regressions include CSA fixed effects µi and date fixed effects δt . CSAs are weighted
by population in the regression. Standard errors are clustered at the CSA level irrespective of order timing.
                                                                                                      42
Appendix Figure A5: Heterogeneity in Effect of Stay-at-Home Orders on Social Distancing by Order Date


                           0.1
                                                                              Slope: 0.0021
                                                                                    (0.0034)
                           0.0
          Estimate of ω1




                           -0.1



                           -0.2



                           -0.3



                           -0.4
                              Mar 16   Mar 21              Mar 26            Mar 31            Apr 5
                                                Date of Stay-at-Home Order


Note: Figure plots estimated treatment effects ω1 from the event-study specification outlined in equation
(1), run separately by date of the stay-at-home order, using the log of total POI visits in a CSA for a given
day. Each regression is run on a sample of CSAs that either had an order issued on the day of interest, never
had an order issued, or had an order issued later than April 6. As a result, each ω1 is estimated relative to
the set of CSAs that never had orders or had orders after April 6. The regressions include CSA fixed effects
µi and date fixed effects δt . CSAs are weighted by population in the regression. Robust standard errors are
used for the line of best fit.




                                                      43
                     Appendix Figure A6: Effect of Stay-at-Home Orders, Reopening

                                                                   Panel A: Effect on Mobility
                                                    0.40




                                                    0.20




                             Coefficient Estimate
                                                    0.00




                                                    -0.20




                                                    -0.40
                                                            -21      -14    -7             0              7   14   21
                                                                                 Days Relative to Order




                                                        Panel B: Effect on Consumer Spending
                                                    0.40




                                                    0.20
                             Coefficient Estimate




                                                    0.00




                                                    -0.20




                                                    -0.40
                                                            -21      -14    -7             0              7   14   21
                                                                                 Days Relative to Order




                                                                  Panel C: Effect on Employment
                                                    0.40




                                                    0.20
                             Coefficient Estimate




                                                    0.00




                                                    -0.20




                                                    -0.40
                                                            -21      -14    -7             0              7   14   21
                                                                                 Days Relative to Order




Note: Figure plots estimated treatment effects ωk from the removal of stay-at-home orders on different
outcomes, using the event-study specification outlined in equation (1) at the CSA-day level using data from
March 1, 2020 to July 31, 2020. Panel A shows the effect on mobility, using the log of total POI visits in
SafeGraph data. Panel B shows the effect on consumer spending, using the log of total spending in Facteus’
debit card sample. Panel C shows the effect on employment, using the log number of individuals with
positive work hours from the Homebase sample. All regressions include CSA fixed effects µi and date fixed
effects δt . CSAs are weighted by population in the regression. Standard errors are clustered at the CSA level
irrespective of order timing.

                                                                                   44
         Appendix Figure A7: Effect of Stay-at-Home Orders on Alternative Economic Outcomes

                           Panel A: Log Number of Debit Transactions (Facteus)
                                                    0.40




                                                    0.20




                             Coefficient Estimate
                                                    0.00




                                                    -0.20




                                                    -0.40
                                                            -21   -14    -7             0              7   14   21
                                                                              Days Relative to Order




                                                            Panel B: Log Work Hours (Homebase)
                                                    0.40




                                                    0.20
                             Coefficient Estimate




                                                    0.00




                                                    -0.20




                                                    -0.40

                                                            -21   -14    -7             0              7   14   21
                                                                              Days Relative to Order




                                                            Panel C: Log Total Wages (Homebase)
                                                    0.40




                                                    0.20
                             Coefficient Estimate




                                                    0.00




                                                    -0.20




                                                    -0.40
                                                            -21   -14    -7             0              7   14   21
                                                                              Days Relative to Order




Note: Figure plots estimated treatment effects ωk from the event-study specification outlined in equation (1).
Relative to Figure 4, we use alternative economic outcome measures. Panel A includes as the dependent
variable the log number of debit transactions in Facteus’ debit card sample; Panel B uses the log number of
work hours from Homebase; and Panel C gives the log total wages from Homebase for a given home CSA
and day. All plots include CSA fixed effects µi and date fixed effects δt . CSAs are weighted by population
in the regression. Standard errors are clustered at the CSA level irrespective of order timing.




                                                                                45
                                                                              Appendix Figure A8: Simulations

                                                                                       Panel A: Preferred estimator
                                                                  τ=0                                                                                             τ=-.1
                              0.30                                                                                                0.30


                              0.20                                                                                                0.20
       Coefficient Estimate




                                                                                                           Coefficient Estimate
                              0.10                                                                                                0.10


                              0.00                                                                                                0.00


                              -0.10                                                                                               -0.10


                              -0.20                                                                                               -0.20


                              -0.30                                                                                               -0.30
                                      -21     -14    -7             0              7       14    21                                       -21   -14   -7             0              7   14   21
                                                          Days Relative to Order                                                                           Days Relative to Order




                                                    Panel B: Preferred estimator but not controlling for log(Iit )
                                                                  τ=0                                                                                             τ=-.1




                                                                                                                                   0.30
       Coefficient Estimate




                               0.30                                                                        Coefficient Estimate    0.20
                               0.20                                                                                                0.10
                               0.10                                                                                                0.00
                               0.00                                                                                               -0.10
                              -0.10                                                                                               -0.20
                                                                                                                                  -0.30
                              -0.20
                              -0.30




                                      -21     -14    -7             0              7       14    21                                       -21   -14   -7             0              7   14   21
                                                          Days Relative to Order                                                                           Days Relative to Order




                                            Panel C: Log cases event study with linear time trends (Dave et al. 2020)
                                                                  τ=0                                                                                             τ=-.1
                              0.30                                                                                                0.30


                              0.20                                                                                                0.20
       Coefficient Estimate




                                                                                                           Coefficient Estimate




                              0.10                                                                                                0.10


                              0.00                                                                                                0.00


                              -0.10                                                                                               -0.10


                              -0.20                                                                                               -0.20


                              -0.30                                                                                               -0.30
                                      -21     -14    -7             0              7       14    21                                       -21   -14   -7             0              7   14   21
                                                          Days Relative to Order                                                                           Days Relative to Order




Note: Figure plots estimated treatment effects ωk from the event-study specification outlined in equation
(11) using the data simulated from an SIRD model. The first column uses data simulated from an SIRD
model where the true treatment effect of the stay-at-home order is τ = 0. The second column uses data
simulated from an SIRD model where the true treatment effect of the stay-at-home order is τ = −.1. Panel
A our preferred estimator. Panel B is the preferred estimator, but does not control for log(Iit ). Panel C is
Dave et al. (2020) estimator that uses log cases on the left-hand side and controls for geography-specific
linear time trends. Geographies are weighted by population in the regression. Standard errors are clustered
at the geography level.




                                                                                                      46
                                                   Appendix Figure A9: Simulations with Alternative Specifications

                                                       Panel A: Preferred estimator but adding geography FEs
                                                                    τ=0                                                                                        τ=-.1
                               0.30                                                                                            0.30


                               0.20                                                                                            0.20
        Coefficient Estimate




                                                                                                        Coefficient Estimate
                               0.10                                                                                            0.10


                               0.00                                                                                            0.00


                               -0.10                                                                                           -0.10


                               -0.20                                                                                           -0.20


                               -0.30                                                                                           -0.30
                                       -21   -14       -7             0              7   14   21                                       -21   -14   -7             0              7   14   21
                                                            Days Relative to Order                                                                      Days Relative to Order




                                                    Panel B: Preferred estimator but setting γ at half its true value
                                                                    τ=0                                                                                        τ=-.1
                               0.30                                                                                            0.30


                               0.20                                                                                            0.20
        Coefficient Estimate




                               0.10                                                                     Coefficient Estimate   0.10


                               0.00                                                                                            0.00


                               -0.10                                                                                           -0.10


                               -0.20                                                                                           -0.20


                               -0.30                                                                                           -0.30
                                       -21   -14       -7             0              7   14   21                                       -21   -14   -7             0              7   14   21
                                                            Days Relative to Order                                                                      Days Relative to Order




                                                   Panel C: Preferred estimator but setting γ at twice its true value
                                                                    τ=0                                                                                        τ=-.1
                               0.30                                                                                            0.30


                               0.20                                                                                            0.20
        Coefficient Estimate




                                                                                                        Coefficient Estimate




                               0.10                                                                                            0.10


                               0.00                                                                                            0.00


                               -0.10                                                                                           -0.10


                               -0.20                                                                                           -0.20


                               -0.30                                                                                           -0.30
                                       -21   -14       -7             0              7   14   21                                       -21   -14   -7             0              7   14   21
                                                            Days Relative to Order                                                                      Days Relative to Order




Note: Figure plots estimated treatment effects ωk from the event-study specification outlined in equation
(11) using the data simulated from an SIRD model. The first column uses data simulated from an SIRD
model where the true treatment effect of the stay-at-home order is τ = 0. The second column uses data
simulated from an SIRD model where the true treatment effect of the stay-at-home order is τ = −.1. Panel
A is the preferred estimator, but adds geography fixed effects. Panel B is the preferred estimator, but sets γ
to half its true value. Panel C is the preferred estimator, but sets γ to twice its true value. Geographies are
weighted by population in the regression. Standard errors are clustered at the geography level.




                                                                                                   47
                               Appendix Figure A10: Effect of Stay-at-Home Orders on Contact Rate, All γ Values

                                                   Panel A: γ = 0                                                               Panel B: γ = 1/12
                               1.00                                                                               1.00

                               0.75                                                                               0.75

                               0.50                                                                               0.50
        Coefficient Estimate




                                                                                           Coefficient Estimate
                               0.25                                                                               0.25

                               0.00                                                                               0.00

                               -0.25                                                                              -0.25

                               -0.50                                                                              -0.50

                               -0.75                                                                              -0.75

                               -1.00                                                                              -1.00
                                       -14   -7          0               7      14   21                                   -14   -7         0               7      14   21
                                                       Days Relative to Order                                                            Days Relative to Order




                                                  Panel C: γ = 1/9                                                               Panel D: γ = 1/6
                               1.00                                                                               1.00

                               0.75                                                                               0.75

                               0.50                                                                               0.50
        Coefficient Estimate




                                                                                           Coefficient Estimate
                               0.25                                                                               0.25

                               0.00                                                                               0.00

                               -0.25                                                                              -0.25

                               -0.50                                                                              -0.50

                               -0.75                                                                              -0.75

                               -1.00                                                                              -1.00
                                       -14   -7          0               7      14   21                                   -14   -7         0               7      14   21
                                                       Days Relative to Order                                                            Days Relative to Order




                                                  Panel E: γ = 1/3                                                                   Panel F: γ = 1
                               1.00                                                                               1.00

                               0.75                                                                               0.75

                               0.50                                                                               0.50
        Coefficient Estimate




                                                                                           Coefficient Estimate




                               0.25                                                                               0.25

                               0.00                                                                               0.00

                               -0.25                                                                              -0.25

                               -0.50                                                                              -0.50

                               -0.75                                                                              -0.75

                               -1.00                                                                              -1.00
                                       -14   -7          0               7      14   21                                   -14   -7         0               7      14   21
                                                       Days Relative to Order                                                            Days Relative to Order




Note: Figure plots estimated treatment effects ωk from the event-study specification outlined in equation
(15) using the log of new cases in a state for a given day as in Panel A of Figure 5. Each panel uses a
different value of γ. CSAs are weighted by population in the regression. Standard errors are clustered at the
CSA level irrespective of order timing.




                                                                                      48
Appendix Figure A11: Dave et al. (2020) Estimators for Effect of Stay-at-Home Orders on COVID Cases

                                                         Panel A: 7-day Preperiod as in Dave et al. (2020)
                                                         2.00

                                                         1.50

                                                         1.00




                             Coefficient Estimate
                                                         0.50

                                                         0.00

                                                         -0.50

                                                         -1.00

                                                         -1.50

                                                         -2.00

                                                                 -21   -14    -7              0              7   14   21
                                                                                    Days Relative to Order




                                                                       Panel B: 14-day Preperiod
                                                          2.00

                                                          1.50

                                                          1.00
                                  Coefficient Estimate




                                                          0.50

                                                          0.00

                                                         -0.50

                                                         -1.00

                                                         -1.50

                                                         -2.00

                                                                 -21   -14     -7             0              7   14   21
                                                                                    Days Relative to Order




                                                                       Panel C: 21-day Preperiod
                                                          2.00

                                                          1.50

                                                          1.00
                                  Coefficient Estimate




                                                          0.50

                                                          0.00

                                                         -0.50

                                                         -1.00

                                                         -1.50

                                                         -2.00

                                                                 -21   -14     -7             0              7   14   21
                                                                                    Days Relative to Order



Note: Figure plots estimated treatment effects ωk from the event-study specification outlined in equation (16) using
the log of cases in a state for a given day and including state-specific linear trends. Panel A restricts the preperiod to
7 days. Panels B and C are the same as Panel A, except they use a 14- and 21-day preperiod. States are not balanced
across the event window. States are weighted by population in the regression. Data is restricted to dates on or before
April 20, 2020. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
                                                                                      49
           Appendix Figure A12: Effect of Stay-at-Home Orders on Change in Log New Deaths

                                                         Panel A: γ = 0




                                      1.00
                                      0.75
              Coefficient Estimate




                                      0.50
                                      0.25
                                      0.00
                                     -0.25
                                     -0.50
                                     -0.75
                                     -1.00
                                     -1.25
                                     -1.50
                                     -1.75
                                     -2.00
                                             -14   -7         0               7      14          21
                                                            Days Relative to Order



                                                        Panel B: γ = 1/6



                                     1.00
                                     0.75
                                     0.50
              Coefficient Estimate




                                     0.25
                                     0.00
                                     -0.25
                                     -0.50
                                     -0.75
                                     -1.00
                                     -1.25
                                     -1.50
                                     -1.75
                                     -2.00
                                             -14   -7         0               7      14          21
                                                            Days Relative to Order



Note: Figure plots estimated treatment effects ωk from the event-study specification outlined in equation
(15) using the log of new deaths in a CSA for a given day. Panel A only includes date fixed effects δt and
sets γ = 0 which implies log(Iit ) = log(Cit ). Panel B is the same as Panel A, except that it sets γ = 1/6. CSAs
are weighted by population in the regression. Standard errors are clustered at the CSA level irrespective of
order timing.




                                                               50
   Appendix Figure A13: Determinants of Variation in Log Contact Rates, Not Controlling for Mobility

                                  Panel A: Univariate Regression of θ̂i on Covariates
                            Log Pop.
                    Log Pop. Density
                         Frac. Urban

                Share 4-year Degree
                      Share Hispanic
                 Share Race - Other
                 Share Race - Asian
                 Share Race - White
                 Share Race - Black
                      Share Age <18
                      Share Age ≥65
              Republican Vote Share
             Log International Flights
              Share Commute by Car
                Avg. Summer Temp.
                  Avg. Winter Temp.
                           Log Tests

                                         -.75      -.5      -.25         0          .25   .5   .75
                                                              Standardized Coefficient



                                            Panel B: Controlling for Log Population
                            Log Pop.
                    Log Pop. Density
                         Frac. Urban

                Share 4-year Degree
                      Share Hispanic
                 Share Race - Other
                 Share Race - Asian
                 Share Race - White
                 Share Race - Black
                      Share Age <18
                      Share Age ≥65
              Republican Vote Share
             Log International Flights
              Share Commute by Car
                Avg. Summer Temp.
                  Avg. Winter Temp.
                           Log Tests

                                         -.75      -.5      -.25         0          .25   .5   .75
                                                              Standardized Coefficient



Note: Figure plots the coefficients of regressing the CSA log contact rate fixed effect estimates θ̂i from
equation (14) on CSA-level determinants, except that the change in social distancing is not subtracted prior
to computing the fixed effects. The θ̂i and all covariates have been standardized to have a mean 0 and a
standard deviation of 1. Panel A plots the standardized coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals from
univariate regressions. Panel B repeats Panel A but the regressions also control for the log of population.
Population weights are not used. Robust standard errors are used to compute the confidence intervals.


                                                              51
                      Appendix Table A1: Sources of Non-pharmaceutical Interventions

                                       Stay-at-home                     Business closures
                                       Unweighted        Weighted         Unweighted      Weighted
           Inherited from State            0.898            0.464               0.923               0.629
           NYT                             0.895            0.638               0.000               0.000
           Keystone Strategy               0.016            0.078               0.949               0.822
           Crowdsourced                    0.038            0.216               0.033               0.139
           Hikma Health                    0.018            0.057               0.016               0.038
           Manual Entry                    0.034            0.012               0.000               0.000
Note: Table summarizes the source of county stay-at-home and business closure policies. We report shares of county
policies both unweighted and weighted by county population. The first row indiciates the share of county policies that
are inheritied from the state; that is, counties did not enact the corresponding policy before the state took action. The
remaing columns indicate the share of county policies coming from each of the our sources. The manual entry source
is reserved for corrections to state policies which we hand checked. We only had to recode the Tennessee state policy.




                                                          52
        Appendix Table A2: Decomposing Changes in Distancing, Economic, and Health Outcomes

                                          Panel A: Stay-at-Home Orders
                                                                (1)       (2)       (3)
                                                              k = 1 k = 20 Pre-Trend
                                                  Total ∆           Policy-Induced ∆

                   POI Visits                       -0.672        -0.109     -0.165       -0.102
                                                                 (0.008)    (0.026)      (0.028)
                   Homebase Wages                   -0.590        -0.092     -0.197       -0.039
                                                                 (0.013)    (0.047)      (0.049)
                   Homebase Employment              -0.592        -0.095     -0.206       -0.067
                                                                 (0.012)    (0.051)      (0.053)
                   Facteus Debit Transactions       0.048         -0.055     -0.071       -0.023
                                                                 (0.007)    (0.012)      (0.014)
                   Facteus Total Spending           0.284         -0.071     -0.034       0.006
                                                                 (0.009)    (0.020)      (0.024)

                                        Panel B: Business Closure Orders
                                                                (1)       (2)       (3)
                                                               k = 1 k = 20 Pre-Trend
                                                  Total ∆           Policy-Induced ∆

                   POI Visits                       -0.665        -0.060     -0.102       -0.060
                                                                 (0.011)    (0.031)      (0.033)
                   Homebase Wages                   -0.577        -0.105     -0.273       -0.353
                                                                 (0.023)    (0.093)      (0.096)
                   Homebase Employment              -0.584        -0.093     -0.203       -0.262
                                                                 (0.017)    (0.068)      (0.069)
                   Facteus Debit Transactions       0.056         -0.017     -0.016       -0.006
                                                                 (0.007)    (0.021)      (0.023)
                   Facteus Total Spending           0.302         -0.012     0.017        -0.012
                                                                 (0.010)    (0.026)      (0.029)


Note: Table reports the total and policy-induced changes in various outcomes as outlined in Section 5.1 using alter-
native estimators of the treatment effect. In Panel A, we consider the policy-induced changes of stay-at-home orders.
In Panel B, we consider the policy-induced changes of business closure orders. For k = 1 and k = 20, we use the
treatment effects ωk with corresponding value k. The ‘Pre-Trend’ estimator use the trend in estimates in the two weeks
leading up to treatment to adjust the treatment effect ωk for k = 20.




                                                         53
            Appendix Table A3: Variance Decomposition for Differences in Log Contact Rates


                               Cross-CSA Variance of Log Contact Rate   1.514

                               Share of variance explained by:
                               Social Distancing                        0.008
                                   Policy                               0.000
                               Timing of Virus                          0.001
                               Observed Covariates                      0.264
                                   Population                           0.182
                                   Climate                              0.000
                                   Transport                            0.000
                                   Race                                 0.032
                                   Partisanship                         0.031
                                   College Degrees                      0.000
                                   Age Demographics                     0.000
Note: Table reports the cross-CSA variance of the average log contact rate log(βit ) between March 15 and
April 30, 2020 in the first row. We calculate the cross-CSA variance of each explanatory variable and report
the share of the log contact rate variance accounted for by the variation in each set of explanatory variable
using the estimated coefficients from our lasso model in Section 5.2.




                                                      54
