NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DYNAMICS OF AN AGING POPULATION:
THE CASE OF FOUR OECD COUNTRIES

Alan J. Auerbach
Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Robert Hagemann
Giuseppe Nicoletti

Working Paper No. 2797

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1989

Work on this paper by Auerbach and Kotlikoff was part of a consultancy for
the OECD secretariat. Robert Hagemann is a member of the Monetary and Fiscal
Policy Division and Giuseppe Nicolletti was also a consultant to that
Division. The authors wish to thank Kumiharu Shigehara, Jeff Shafer, JeanClaude Chouraqui, and many colleagues in the Economics and Statistics
Department and the Manpower, Social Affairs and Education Directorate for
their useful suggestions. However, the views expressed reflect the authors'
own opinions and do not necessarily represent those of the OECD nor of the
governments of its member countries. This research is part of NEER's

research program in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2797
February 1989

THE DYNAMICS OF AN ACING POPULATION:
THE CASE OF FOUR OECD COUNTRIES

ABSTRACT

Demographic changes, such as those anticipated in most OECD countries,
have many economics effects that impinge on a country's fiscal viability.
Evaluation of the effects of associated changes in capital-labor ratios and
the welfare and behavior of different generations requires the use of a
dynamic general equilibrium model.
The 75 generations - 250 year demographic simulation model, presented in

Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987, Chapter 11), has been modified to incorporate
bequest behavior, technological change, the possibility that the economy is
open to international trade, and government consumption expenditures that
depend on the age composition of the population.

The model has been further adapted to study the effects of impending
demographic changes in Japan, the Federal Republic of Germany, Sweden and the

United States. The simulation results indicate that these changes will have
a major impact on rates of national saving, real wage rate and current

accounts. One of this paper's fundamental lessons is that allowing for
general equilibrium adjustments reduces the adverse welfare effects of

increasing dependency ratios. Nevertheless, the welfare costs, and
particularly their distributions across cohorts, pose serious challenges for
policy makers in some cases.

Alan J. Auerbach
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297

Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road

Robert Hagemann
OECD
2, Rue Andre-Pascal
75775 Paris, Cedex 16
FRANCE

Ciuseppe Nicoletti
OECD
2, Rue Andre-Pascal
75775 Paris, Cedex 16
FRANCE

Boston, MA 02138

1

I. Introduction
Demographic changes, such as those anticipated in most OECD countries,

have many economic effects that impinge on a country's fiscal viability. For
instance, a higher ratio of old (who have saved) to middle aged (who work) is
likely to increase a country's capital intensity, raising real wages and the

potential for workers to finance government programs. Also, the presence of
fewer children per family may reduce child-related spending needs, Of
perhaps greatest importance, changes in tax rates and pension attributes are

likely to influence household behavior. For example, any anticipated
reductions in the generosity of government pension schemes should increase the
saving of those currently at work, who would then provide more personal
resources for their retirement years.

The impact of a .hange in the capital-labor ratio and in household
behavior can only be measured using a general equilibrium model of the
economy, one that takes account of the interaction of decisions of households,

producers, and the government. Moreover, to measure the effects of a
demographic transition on the behavior and welfare of different generations,

it is necessary for such a model to be disaggregated (by age cohorts) and
dynamic, describing the experience of each age cohort over time as economic

conditions change. The model developed in Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987),
described in some detail below, satisfies these criteria. It is based on the
life-cycle model of saving behavior, augmented, however, to include bequests.
It traces out and aggregates the labor supply, retirement, consumption,

fertility and bequest behavior of individuals born in each year. These
choices reflect fully rational responses to current and future tax rates and

public pension benefits, which are assumed to be known. Aggregate behavior
leads, through the production sector, to a determination of wages and interest

2

rates and, given the stock of government debt, tax rates. Of course, even
such a complex model as this lacks many important real world features. For
example, it does not take account of differences among individuals within
generations with respect to economic attributes or life expectancy, nor does
it

deal

with the short-run macroeconomic problems of inflation and cyclical

unemployment. These limitations should be kept in mind when evaluating the
model's simulation results.
The 75 generations - 250 year demographic simulation model, presented in

Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987, Chapter 11), has been modified to incorporate
bequest behavior, technological change, the possibility that

the economy is

open to international trade, and government consumption expenditures

that

depend on the age composition of the population.

We have further adapted the model, initially parameterized only for the
United States (but for an arbitrary demographic transition), to simulate the
general equilibrium effects of demographic changes in Japan, the Federal

Republic of Germany, and Sweden as well. For each country, several questions

are addressed. These include:

1.

What would happen to government revenue and tax rates if current
government spending patterns (i.e. by age groups) are maintained?

2.

By how much must social security contribution rates be increased if
the current levels of old-age pension benefits are to be maintained?

3.

How would national saving rates and real wages be affected by the
changing population age structure?

4.

What pressures would effects on saving rates and real wages exert on
international capital flows?

5.

How would the overall well-being of individuals o' different

3

generations be affected by the economic changes associated with the
demographic transitions?
6.

Jhat would be the impact on economic performance and generational
welfare of reductions in the generosity of public pension schemes?

Our analysis indicates that rates of national saving, real wage rates, and
current accounts all appear very sensitive to the forecast increases in

dependency ratios. General equilibrium analysis highlights

the fact that the

burden on those who must support this increasing dependent population is
somewhat overstated by looking simply at social security contributions, for
real wages can be expected to rise and, at least temporarily, other tax rates

to fall. The fundamental lesson of general equilibrium analysis is that
allowing for adjustments (and assuming that economies are sufficiently
flexible for such adjustments to take place) leads to smaller costs from

adverse population developments. Nevertheless, the welfare costs, and
particularly their distribution across cohorts, pose serious challenges for

policymakers in some cases. Thus, policies aimed at cushioning the fiscal
burden of the demographic transition, including cuts in old-age pensions

and

other age-related government spending, can improve the welfare of future
generations, although they also reduce the welfare of earlier ones. These

must be carefully weighed before one concludes that program cuts are needed or
even beneficial.

II. Modelling the Demorahic Transition
The model contains three sectors: a household sector, a production

sector, and a government sector. For each sector, there is a system of
nonlinear equations relating endogenous behavioral variables (e.g.

consumption

4
or labor supply) to predetermined economic variables and taste

and

technological parameters. Jointly solving the equations of the different
sectors determines the economy's dynamic equilibrium transition path.

The

individual components of the model are fairly simple, but their interactions

can be quite complex. By solving for the economy's general equilibrium
transition path the model takes into account all relevant feedbacks between
policy and demographic changes, on the one hand, and changes

in the time paths

of wages, interest rates, labor supply, and the capital stock, on the other.

For example, the gradual capital deepening in a closed economy associated with
a baby bust gradually changes real wages and real interest rates.

But changes

in the time paths of these variables necessitate changes in the time path of
tax rates, holding fixed the time path of government consumption.

Such

changes in fiscal instruments feed back to influence the time path of capital
deepening by affecting the time paths of consumption demand and labor supply.

A. Household Behavior
At any given time the household sector comprises seventy-five overlapping

generations. These generations correspond to children ages 1-20 and adults
ages 21-75. Each year the 75 year-olds die and new children are born. Age 21
is a critical age in the model. At age 21 each individual changes status from
that of a child who is cared for by a parent to that of an adult. At this
age the individual also becomes a parent with the number of children

determined exogenously in the model. Between ages 21 and 41 the parent cares
for her (his) children, financing their consumption and receiving any of their
labor earnings.

Individual tastes are assumed to be identical for all agents, with
differences in behavior being generated entirely by differecc.s in economic

5

opportunities. Since all individuals in an age cohort are assumed identical,
differences in economic opportunities are present only across cohorts.
Households in the model make decisions about consumption, leisure, and
bequests based on their intertemporal preferences.

1. Preferences
Each parent is assumed to have preferences that can be represented by a
function whose arguments are i) utility from the parent's own current and
future values of consumption and leisure, ii) her (his) children's utility
from consumption and leisure through age 20, and iii) utility from the

parent's bequest per child. The three components are indicated on the right
side of equation (1) which gives an expression for the lifetime utility of a
member of a generation who reaches age 21 and becomes an adult and parent at

time t. The first term, V, refers to the parent's lifetime utility from his
or her own annual consumption and leisure from age 21 through age 75. The
second term Vkt is the child's utility from annual consumption and leisure
from age 1 through age 20 (at which time the parent is 40) multiplied by the

number of children, Nt. The third term,

is the number of children

multiplied by the parent's utility from bequests per child,

(1)

Ut —

The terms

V + NtVkt + NB
and Vkt are expressed in equation (2) in terms of their

respective annual components u. and

where the subscript j stands for

parent's age, and t still refers to the year the parent becomes age 21:

(2)

V + NVkt

—

l/(l-l/)((l+6)

40
-(j-2l)

-(j-21)

u.t + N
j—2l

ukj)

6

In (2) 5 is the rate of time preference, and y is the intertemporal elasticity
of substitution.

The annual utility components,

and Ut(..t which are functions of

annual consumption and leisure, are assumed to have the same constant

elasticity of substitution functional form. The annual function takes the
form:

(3)

u.. —

[cV + ll/p1(ll/-i)/(ll/p)

i —

p,k

where cj and Ait are, respectively, consumption and leisure of the
generation t parent and her (his) child at the parent's age j. The term a is
a leisure share parameter, and p is the static elasticity of substitution

between leisure and consumption. Leisure is measured as a fraction of the
maximum amount of time an individual could work in a given year, taking values

between zero and one. In the model individuals endogenously retire by
choosing a value of leisure equal to one.

Individuals make bequests at age 75 (the end of their lives) leaving

equal amounts to each of their age 55 children. In contrast to the
formulation by Robert Barro (1974), redistribution between generations, as

might be associated with government deficits, is not neutral in this model
because parents at age 75 receive utility from the amount of bequests they
leave each of their adult children rather than from their adult children's

utility. Equation (4) displays the isoelastic function chosen for the utility
of bequest component,

(4)

B —

(l+6) b'

7

In equation (4) v is a preference parameter that influences the size of

bequests, and b75 stands for the bequest made per child by generation t
parent when the parent is age 75.

By altering the parameters of the three components of the utility
one can consider a very wide range of shapes of age-consumption

function

and age-earnings profiles as veil as levels of bequests. Given the paucity of
empirical evidence about age- consumption and age-earnings profiles as well as
bequests, it is not possible to identify with precision all of the preference
parameters of the particular functional form assumed for U. There is little
reason, therefore, to resort to a more general, and more complicated,
functional form for utility.

2. The Household Budget Constraint
Equation (5) presents the generation t parent's lifetime budget

constraint in the absence of government policy. This budget constraint states
that the present value of the parent's consumption as well as that of her
(his) children when young plus the present value of the parent's bequest

equals the present value of the parent's labor earnings as well as that of her
(his) children when young plus the present value of the parent's inheritance
received at age 55.

t+20 i

t+54 i
(5)

_

pjt

[rs]wjejkjtkjt1
t+54

—

Nb

II [l÷r)1 s—t

b2i

t+34
1
II [l+r]
s—t

8

In equation (5) the subscript j equals the generation t

parent's

age in year i

(i.e., j—2l+i-t). The left hand side of the equation equals the present value
difference between the earnings of the parent and her (his) children and their
combined consumption, while the right hand side equals the present value of

bequests given less the present value of bequests received. The term rs is
the interest rate in year s, w is the standardized wage rate in year i (the
wage rate of a 21 year old in year i), and ej is an age-specific adjustment
factor to allow for the fact that a worker's productivity varies with age.

One may think of the vector e, composed of values of ej for all

as

the

household's "human capital" profile, reflecting its change in earning capacity

over time. It is taken as fixed from the household's viewpoint.
In addition to this overall budget constraint, we impose the requirement
that labor supply never be negative, i.e., if the parent or child would choose
to demand more than one unit of leisure in a given period (there is nothing in
the decision problem specified so far to prevent this) the parent or child

must "retire" for that year, supplying zero labor. In the solution we
introduce shadow wages whose values are set to insure that retirees
voluntarily choose to supply precisely zero labor.

The addition of government policy to the problem alters the budget

constraint in a straightforward manner. If taxes are proportional, as they
are in this model, the pretax wage in year i, w, is replaced by
w.(l-r .-r wi -r
ssi.•)
t
yi.

where

r

r

yi wi

and r

ssi

are income wage, and payroll tax

rates in year i, respectively. The pretax interest rate, r, in equation (5)
is replaced by rs (l-r -r )
ys ks

where r

and r

ys

ks

are the income and capital

income tax rates in year s, respectively. The consumption expenditures of

parents and children, cj and ckj. are each multiplied by (l+rcj) the
consumption tax rate in year i. Finally, the right hand side of equation (5)

9

needs to be modified to include the present value of social security benefits.
The conditions determining the parent's optimal choice of her (his) own

consumption.

leisure, and bequests as well as the consumption and leisure of

her (his) young children are found by maximizing equation (1) subject to the
version of equation (5) that holds after one includes taxes and social

security. With the exception of the choice of bequests, these conditions can
be found in Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987).

B. Firm Behavior and Technological ChanEe
The model has a single production sector that is assumed to behave
competitively, using capital and labor subject to a Cobb-Douglas production

function. Capital is assumed to be homogeneous and nondepreciating, while
labor differs only in its efficiency. That is, all forms of labor are perfect
substitutes, but individuals of different ages supply different amounts of
some standard measure of labor input per unit of leisure foregone.

This

amount is the term e. for age j, introduced above. Capital and labor are
perfectly mobile in this version of the AK model, and firms hire capital and
labor up to the point that their rental rates equal their marginal products.

The assumption of labor augmenting technological change appears frequently
in analyses of growth, where labor augmenting refers here to increasing the

effective labor input entering the production function. Unfortunately, unless
the utility function is,Cobb-Douglas, this assumption, in the presence of
variable labor supply, will not be consistent with the economy's arriving at a

steady state (see Auerbach and Kotlikoff, 1987). As an alternative we make
the assumption that technological change is time augmenting, i.e., it
increases the endowment of time entering the individual's budget constraint.
Specifically, we assume that each successive cohort of parents has a

1.5 per

10

cent greater endowment of time at each age in its lifespan than had the

previous cohort. Since the utility function is homothetic, this implies, in
the steady state, that each successive cohort will consume and earn 1.5 per

cent more at each age than the previous cohort. While this assumption is
consistent with a steady state it does not produce the steepening of the
age-earnings profile over the life cycle that arises in standard models of

labor augmenting technical change. To generate this feature we have

multiplied the ej factor by the term (l.015)321 for 2l. With this
modification, the individual's wage rises by 1.5 per cent per year over and
above any age-specific changes in productivity.

In combination, the assumption of time-augmenting technical change and
this steepening of the wage profile over the lifespan produces the equivalent

of secular wage growth in the economy of 1.5 per cent per year; i.e., in the
steady state labor earnings at any age are 1.5 per cent higher in year t+l
than they are in year t, and are also 1.5 per cent higher (over and above
human capital accumulation) for a given cohort in year t+1 than in year t.

C. Government Behavior
To study the response of government expenditures to changing demographics
we have modified the AK model to allow government expenditures to depend on

the age composition of the population. In particular, we divide total
government expenditure into four targeted expenditure categories. One of
these categories is non age-specific expenditures including items such as

defense. We refer to this category as the ocr capita expenditure category,
since the expenditure benefits individuals regardless of their ages. The
other expenditure categories are those targeted at three ag groups, 1-24,
25-64, and 65 plus. In the simulations we use country-specific tax rates to

11

determine the level of government expenditures between 1960 and 1985. For
1985 we apportion the model's total government expenditure to the four
expenditure categories using data for each country for 1980 on the shares of

expenditures allocated to the four categories. Based on these allocations and
the model's 1985 age distribution of population, we determine the 1985 level
of expenditure targeted and made to each individual age 1-24 in the model.
Similarly, we determine the levels of expenditures targeted and made to each

individual age 25-64 and to each individual age 65 plus. Finally, we
determine the level of per capita non-age-specific expenditure in the model in

1985. These four numbers are then used to project total government
expenditure in each year in the future. The method is simply to multiply the
1985 expenditure level in each of the four categories by the number of
individuals in the corresponding four categories in each year in the future.

As mentioned, between 1960 and 1985 the level of government expenditure is
determined endogenously by each country's observed level of wage, income, and

consumption tax rates. Since government expenditure is fixed exogenously in
the model after 1985, one of the tax instruments or the level of government

deficit must be endogenous in each subsequent year. In the simulations we let
the consumption tax rate adjust endogenously in response to
demographics-induced changes in the level of government expenditures and

changes in revenues from the other tax bases. With this adjustment process
the model satisfies the government's intertemporal budget constraint that
requires that the present value of the government's expenditure plus the value
of its outstanding debt equal the present value of its tax receipts.
The social security system is kept logically separate in the model,
because of its historical legal and financial separation from other government

operations, at least in the U.S. Payroll taxes are assessed independently of

12

whatever other taxes on labor income may exist, and benefits are paid for by

payroll taxes. In this version of the AK model social security operates on a
"balanced budget", "pay as you go" basis in which payroll tax rates are
adjusted each year to meet that year's benefit payments.

The model's social security benefits are determined as a fraction (the
replacement rate) of the average of wage-indexed labor earnings from age 21
through the social security age of retirement (which may differ from the age

of true retirement). The wage-indexation procedure involves multiplying
earnings in years prior to the social security retirement age by the ratio of
the standardized wage at retirement, adjusted for the 1.5 per cent rate of
technical change, to the standardized wage in the year in the past that the
earnings were received.

D. Oveninz the Economy to International Trade
For purposes of this study we have modified the model to permit the
possibility that the economy is open and takes factor prices from abroad.
Hence, the modified model can be simulated as a closed economy, or it can be

simulated as an open economy whose wage and interest rates are determined

exogenously by international conditions. In the case of the closed economy
simulations, the economy's ownership of assets corresponds to the domestic

capital stock. In the case of the open economy simulations, the economy's
ownership of assets may differ from its domestic capital stock with the
difference corresponding to its net ownership of foreign assets (which could

be negative). The difference in any year between the change in the economy's
ownership of assets and the change in its domestic capital stock is the

economy's current account. In the open economy simulations the economy's
domestic capital stock is determined by multiplying its cap...tai-labor ratio by

13

the size of the labor input. The capital-labor ratio is determined such that
the marginal products of labor and capital equal the wage and interest rates

pegged from abroad. The economy's ownership of assets is determined by adding
up the asset holdings of all adults alive at a point in time and adding to
this the government's ownership of assets.

E. Eauilibrium Under Perfect Foresight
In static general equilibrium models, a general equilibrium solution is
one in which the behavior of each sector of the economy is consistent with the

prices that are established, and markets clear. The concept of equilibrium is
no different in this model, except that the behavior of households, firms and
the government must be consistent not only with current prices, but future

ones as well. Household labor supply and consumption must be optimal, given
the entire future path of interest rates, wage rates, and tax rates. Firm
investment decisions must adequately reflect the future behavior of interest

rates and wage rates. Government's projected path of tax schedules must
satisfy its intertemporal budget constraint. Given the behavior of each
sector, markets for labor and capital must clear.
Because of the assumption of perfect foresight (the same would be true
even with a limited degree of foresight), behavior of the economy today

depends on conditions in the future. One cannot compute a "separate"
equilibrium for a given year without a complete characterization of future

economic developments. Hence, the solution method must treat the present and
future together, with different year's products corresponding to those of
different markets in the traditional large-scale static models.
The calculation of the economy's equilibrium transition path, given a

particular parametrization, proceeds in three stages. First, we solve for the

14

economy's initial steady state prior to either policy or demographic changes.
Second, we solve for the final steady state to which the economy will

ultimately converge. And third, we solve for the economy's transition path
between the initial and final steady states. The method used to solve for
steady states and transition paths is described in detail in Auerbach and
Kotlikoff (1987) .

III.

Calibrating the Model
For every simulation, projections begin in 1960 in order to produce

conditions in the 1980s that actually prevailed. For each country, the
model's parameters are adjusted so that simulated aggregates match those of
the country itself and behavior at the household level is realistic. The
targeted variables are: i)the rate of national saving; ii)the social
security contribution rate; and iii)tax rates on consumption, labor income

and capital income. Household behavior is characterized by lifetime patterns
of labor supply, retirement and consumption broadly consistent with available

empirical evidence on age-earnings and age-consumption profiles.2 We now
review the choice of parameters.

A. DemozraDhics
The time path of values of

the number of children born to individuals

who become parents at time t, was chosen for each of the four countries to
approximate, as closely as possible, values by decade from 1960 to 2050 of the
age distribution of the population, according to data supplied by the OECD.
After 2050, birth rates are fixed at replacement levels so that one may
observe the transition the economy will make to its "long-run" state in the
absence of further disturbances to the population structure

Tables 1 through

15

4 present by decade the OECD age distributions and the age distributions
generated by the model.

The model's age distributions are generally quite close to the OECD
projected distributions particularly if one combines the categories 55-64 and

65 plus. The ability of the model to track actual age distributions this well
is surprising given that in the real world parents do not all give birth to
children at age 21 and do not all die at age 75.

A comparison of these tables across countries indicates that Germany and
Sweden are expected to experience quite similar changes in the age

distributions of their populations. This is also true of Japan and the United
States, although Japan is projected to experience a more rapid aging of its

population than is the United States. Compared with Germany and Sweden, Japan
and the U.S. had a younger age distribution in 1960. All four age
distributions show a marked increase in the fraction of the population over

55, but the timing and especially the magnitude is different. For Germany

the

fraction over 55 rises from 25 per cent in 1980 to 39 per cent by 2020,

reaching a maximum of roughly 41 per cent by 2030. For Japan this fraction
rises from 18 per cent in 1980 to 32 per cent by 2010 and reaches a peak of

about 34 per cent by 2030. For Sweden the fraction is 28 per cent in 1980 and
rises to 35 per cent by 2030. And for the U.S. the 1980 fraction is

21 per

cent and rises to 30 per cent by 2020.

B.

Preference and Production Function Parameters
For each of the four countries the intertemporal elasticity of

substitution, ,

in

the utility function (see equation (3)) was set equal to

.35, the static elasticity of substitution, p, was set equal to .8, and the

leisure share parameter, a, was set equal to 1.5. Since the simulation

16
results are somewhat more sensitive to the value of y than to other

parameters. it seemed best to use a common value across countries for this

parameter. The time preference rate, 8, (see equation (2)) and the bequest
parameter ' were chosen to insure that the model's value for each country's

rate of saving out of GDP less depreciation corresponded to the value for this
saving rate derived from the OECD historic series on national income and

product accounts. The model's 1960 saving rates are 23.3 per cent for
Germany, 24.4 per cent for Japan, 15.9 per cent for Sweden, and 10.1 per cent
for the U.S. -

all

of which are extremely close to their actual 1960 values.
it

Because the actual German, Japanese, and Swedish saving rates are so high

was necessary to choose negative time preference rates and fairly large values

of the bequest parameter v to replicate their saving rates. The time
preference rates chosen are -5.5 per cent for Germany, -4 per cent for Japan,

and -4 per cent for Sweden. For the United States a time preference rate of 1

per cent was chosen. The value of the bequest parameter ' was chosen such
that the 1960 ratio of the flow of bequests to the stock of capital equals 4.2
per cent for Germany, 5.2 per cent for Sweden, 3.1 per cent for Japan, and 3.1
per cent for the United States.

At first glance the use of negative time preference rates may seem
and

surprising. But one needs to bear in mind that the shape of age-earnings

age consumption profiles are determined not only by this parameter, but also
by the interest rate and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution.

For

each of the four countries the shapes of these profiles resulting from the
combination of parameters and the resulting interest rates are very
reasonable. Use of larger time preference rates and larger values of i',

to

insure the same 1960 saving rate, would produce slightly less realistic shapes
of age-earnings and age-consumption profiles and levels of .e.1uests, but

17

otherwise very

similar

simulated transition paths. Sweden's somewhat higher

ratio of the bequest flow to the capital stock can be explained in the

following terms. Given Sweden's high rate of consumption, income, and payroll
taxation in 1960, preferences for bequests must be set relatively high in
order to explain Sweden's high 1960 saving rate.
As mentioned above, the production function used is Cobb-Douglas, with a

capital income share coefficient of .25. The coefficient multiplying the
production function is chosen such that each country's 1960 wage is normalized

to unity. This normalization does not imply that wage rates in each country
are equalized in 1960.

C. Choice of Fiscal Parameters
Between 1960 and 1985, tax rates for each country on capital and labor
income are set at historical values of the average rates of tax on these types
of income, and the growth rate of government spending during this period is
adjusted to keep consumption tax rates in accord with historical values.
After 1985, each year's fiscal deficit is set to keep constant the level of

national debt er capita, and tax rates on capital income, labor income and
consumption are chosen to raise the revenue needed to finance spending
(including interest payments on the national debt), after accounting for the
receipts from new debt issues.

In the simulations below, tax rates on

capital income and labor income are kept constant, and consumption taxes are
made endogenous (i.e. in accordance with budget requirements).
Ages at which public pensions may be received are based on typical
behavior in each country, and, following the practice in each, benefits in

the simulation model are based on individual earnings histories. For 1960 the
model's social security replacement rate was set for each country to produce a

18

payroll tax rate equal to that observed in 1960. After 1960 the social
security replacement rate is held fixed and the payroll tax rate is determined
endogenously.

OECD data were used to determine values for the four tax rates in the
following manner: data on consumption and income tax receipts were adjusted

and divided by the relevant tax consumption and income bases. The adjustments
involve eliminating from the payroll tax those tax receipts used to finance

government programs other than old age pensions. These non old age pension
payroll tax receipts were then allocated to wage tax receipts. For a country
such as Germany that uses social security receipts to finance many forms of

expenditures other than old age pensions this adjustment is quite large. This
adjustment explains why our estimated wage tax rates exceed capital income

tax rates. It also explains, in part, why the payroll tax rates are less than
their statutory tax rates. The other part of the explanation is that the
payroll tax rates are being computed relative to total wages plus self

employment income rather than relative to covered wage bases. Table 5
presents the values of wage, capital income, consumption, and payroll tax
rates in the model for the four countries for 1960 and for 1985.

The procedure for determining the share of non-social security government
expenditure targeted to the young, the middle aged, the elderly, and to
society in general utilized additional country-specific unpublished OECD data

for 1980, concerning the age distribution of expenditures. The method
involved first adding to the reported level of general revenue-financed
expenditures those payroll tax-financed social security expenditures that are

not old age pension payments. The revised total non-social security
expenditures were then allocated to the four spending categories. For Germany
the respective 1980 shares of non social security expendit'irs allocated to

19

those under 25, those 25 to 64, those 65 plus, and to society in general are

.272, .119, .156, and .453. For Japan the 1980 shares are .261, .085, .083,

and .571. For Sweden the 1980 shares are .292, .092, .190, and .426. And for
the U.S. the 1980 shares are .291, .060, .071, and .578. The much larger
share of expenditures targeted to the elderly in Germany and Sweden reflects,
in part, the fact that the elderly represented a larger fraction of the
population in 1980 than in Japan or the U.S.

A final fiscal variable is the initial level of government assets. The
choice of these levels of net government assets was determined in large part

to help achieve the observed 1960 saving rates. Unfortunately, the value of
government assets, including assets such as land and mineral rights, is poorly

understood. Hence, there is no firm

empirical

basis for choosing the level of

net government assets, and we, therefore, chose an equal value of percapita

government assets for each country. Fortunately, the simulation results are
not very sensitive to the choice of the mix of the time preference rate, the
bequest coefficient v, or the initial level of net government assets used to
achieve the observed 1960 saving rates.

IV. Simulation Results
Alternative simulations are required to analyze the economic effects of

the demographic transition and the impacts of policy changes. Baseline
simulations assume that there will be no change in the average replacement
rate, the initial age at which such pensions may be received, or the pattern

of public spending after 1985. That is, except for general growth associated
with the 1.5 annual per cent rate of technical change, per caDita
expenditures specific to each of three age-groups (under 25, 25 to 64, and 65
and over) are held constant, while outlays not identifiably age-specific (such

20

as national defence) are kept constant per person in the total population.

These baseline projections also assume a closed economy. Alternative
projections consider the impact of particular fiscal changes and of relaxing
the closed economy assumption.

A. Baseline simulations
Table 6 describes the simulated transition paths for the four countries

under the baseline assumptions. Listed for selected years along these paths
are the consumption tax rate, the social security contribution rate,

the

national saving rate, the real wage rate, and the real after-tax wage rate,

the latter two shown relative to their 1960 levels.3 As explained above, due
to differences in definition, the social security contribution rates shown

for

1960 and 1985 are lower, and the consumption taxes higher, than the statutory
rates that prevailed in those years.4
The net national saving rate equals the level of public and private
saving (GD? less public and private consumption and depreciation) divided by

net domestic product (GD? less depreciation). This broad measure is
preferable to narrower measures of saving such as private and personal saving
because it is independent of the country-specific differences in the
allocation of activities between public and private sectors and, within the
private sector, between households and firms.

The aggregate 1960 characteristics of the four countries indicate

considerable differences among them. Higher consumption tax rates and social
security contribution rates in Germany and Sweden mirror the generally higher
rates of taxation and public share of GD? in those countries than in Japan and
the United States, although the gaps in contribution rates are larger than can

be explained by differences in the public share of output aLcne. This

21

reflects the additional fact that Germany and Sweden in 1960 already had more
slowly growing populations and higher ratios of retired persons to working

adults than did Japan or the United States. Rates of national saving are also
quite different, as Germany and Japan saved a greater fraction of national
income than either Sweden or the United States.
To a large extent, the changes evident in Table 6 between 1960 and 1985

are associated with shifts in fiscal policy. Perhaps the most noticeable
change is the considerable rise in the consumption tax in Sweden, reflecting
the rapid growth in the share of GDP absorbed by the public sector in that

country. However, the effects of earlier declines in birth rates are also
present. Each country exhibits a decline in its national saving rate between
1960 and 1985, attributable to a movement of a relatively large cohort into

the period of life when life-cycle dissaving occurs. Despite this decline in
saving rates, one also observes increases in real wages, due to the scarcity

of labor associated with relatively small working age populations. This
effect is particularly noticeable even in 1985 in Japan, where the real wage
is 2.3 per cent above trend.

Between 1985 and 2050 and thereafter, considerable changes are observed in
the

aggregate

measures shown in Table 6. First, in each country, the

consumption tax rate generally declines during the transitional period, after
which it increases, although the long-run rate is lower than in 1985 in all

countries except Sweden. The lower consumption tax rate reflects both the
interactions of changes in the age distribution over time and differences in
per capita public outlays by age group, as well as the fact that the
consumption base is larger in an older society than in a younger one.
Cross-country differences also arise from differences in both demographic
developments and the age composition of social expenditures.

22

Second, the social security contribution rates increase in all four
countries as a consequence of population ageing, although they settle at an

intermediate level in the final steady-state. The rise is particularly large
in Germany, where the contribution rate nearly doubles. In all four
countries, the social security contribution rate required for old-age income
support is lower in the' final steady-state than its transitional peak. This
is due to the fact that in each country (to a varying degree), the post
world-war II behavior of fertility will result in an "overshooting" of the

ultimate age composition. Each population will have an interim age structure
that is older, on average, than in the long run.

Third, the simulations suggest that demographic prospects may have
important effects on national savings rates, given the underlying life-cycle

framework of the model. Over the long term of the simulation period,
population ageing would result in a general decline in the national savings
rates of all four countries, although at different rates and with different

intensities. In the United States, the national savings rate would remain
roughly unchanged for several decades, after which it would decline

gradually. This "flatness" of the trend in the national savings rate in the
United States arises in large part from the fact that consumption already
begins to rise early in the period given the model's assumption of perfect

foresight, future real wage increases lead to lower saving today. Also,
ageing is more gradual in the United States. In Japan, the quite rapid drop
in the national savings rate reflects the speed of population ageing assumed

in the model. This contrasts with the simulated path of German savings, which
decline more gradually and only after rising for a while during the period

2000-2010. The national savings rates of Japan and Sweden rise toward the end
of the period shown, reflecting a recovery from the demograp.ic "overshoot"

23

discussed above. This upturn in national savings rates does not occur in the
other two countries until the second half of the next century.
Fourth, real wages are heavily affected by demographic developments.

Differences among the countries are partially attributable to demographic

factors. Germany and Sweden begin the simulation period with older
populations than either Japan or the United States, leading to smaller changes
in the age structure under the long-run assumption of zero population growth.
As a result, the relative increases in capital intensity and real wages

associated with population ageing are smaller in these two countries. The
simulated poor real wage performance of Sweden relative to Germany is due to
the much faster growth in the size of government in Sweden during the period
1960-85, a result due in part to the fact that the model treats all government
outlays as consumption.

A useful way of isolating the overall fiscal strain one may expect from
this ageing of populations is to consider evolution of real after-tax wages,

with the trend attributable to technical change removed. As is evident from
Table 6, increases in social security contribution rates overstate this
burden; in the demographic transition, real before-tax wage rates also rise,
and consumption tax rates may fall, also contributing to larger after-tax real

wages. In some cases, after-tax real wages rise in spite of higher pension
financing requirements. In the United States, for example, the social
security contribution rate rises from 7.6 per cent to 12.5 per cent between
1985 and 2050, an increase of 4.9 percentage points in the tax rate, implying
a decline of roughly the same percentage in the real after-tax wage rate.
However, the consumption tax rate declines from 9.7 per cent to 6.6 per cent,
implying a rise of roughly 3.1 percentage points in the real after-tax wage
rate, while the real wage rate (detrended) itself rises by 4.7 percentage

24

points. Overall, the adjusted real wage rate increases by nearly 2 per cent.
Indeed, the real after-tax wage rate in the United States is lower in 1985

than in any subsequent year in the table. While this is true of no other
country, each country experiences at least temporary real wage rate
improvement after 1985 even as social security contributions are rising.
Japan, like the United States, is projected to have a higher after-tax wage

in

2050 than in 1985. This relatively favorable outcome for the United States
and Japan reflects a key difference between these countries and Sweden and
Germany: their old-age pensions are considerably less generous.

B. Simulations of Selected Policy Responses
The foregoing results suggest that, despite the economic changes wrought
by changing population structure, the burden of higher social expenditures may

not be a uniformly serious problem. Nevertheless, it is useful to consider
the possible implications of changes in the level of old-age pensions or other
social programmes aimed at easing the burden of rising social expenditures per

worker. In this respect, three types of policies are assumed: i)a smoothing
of expenditures financed by general revenues; ii)reductions in old-age
pensions through increases in the age of initial benefit receipt; and
iii)reductions in the "replacement rate", the ratio of benefits to

pre-retirement wages. Tables 7a-d present the simulated results of such
experiments for the four countries. The first column in each table repeats
the baseline results from Table 6 for the country in question.

a) Constant government outlays per member of the total population
The baseline projections assume that components of government spending on
the young, middle aged, elderly and overall population each grow at 1.5 per

25

cent per year per member of the associated age group, even as the fraction of

such individuals in the total population changes. In particular, as the
fraction of elderly in the population increases, there is no adjustment in the

level of spending per elderly individual. Suppose, instead, that the level of
such expenditures is held fixed per person in the total population. This
would entail cutting expenditures per retiree as the fraction of retirees in

the population rises. The effectiveness of such a policy in reducing the
rise in general revenues can be seen in comparing the second column with the
first in each panel of Table 7.

For each country, the tax relief would be considerable during the period

of greatest fiscal strain (as measured by the real after-tax wage). By 2050,
the consumption tax rate in the United States could be cut to 5.4 per cent
from 6.6 per cent in the baseline simulation, and from 17.2 per cent to 11.2

per cent in Germany. In Japan, the cut would be from 9.9 per cent to 7.7 per
cent in 2030, while in Sweden, the reduction would be from 40.0 per cent to

34.1 per cent. The gains are clearly largest in Germany and Sweden, those
countries with the highest levels of government spending and taxes. In each
country, the reduction in the real after-tax wage rate remains but is
considerably smaller.6

b) Raising the retirement age
The second policy simulation is a 2 year increase in the age of initial
benefit receipt, the results of which are shown in the third column of each

panel of Table 7. A one-year increase in retirement age is introduced for
individuals reaching the previous retirement age in 2000, followed by another
one-year increase in 2010.

As in the previous section, this policy has a

substantial impact on the social security contribution rates required after

26

the year 2000, the period during which their sharpest rise would otherwise

occur. In Germany, for example, the social security contribution rate in 2030
is projected to be 19.8 per cent instead of 24.7 per cent, the reduction being

from 32.7 per cent to 25.5 per cent by 2050. A similar impact is observed for
Sweden, where the policy effectively smoothes the social security contribution
rate, causing it to remain between 17.4 per cent and 18.5 per cent for the
entire 1985-2050 period.

Other aggregate changes are observed as well. Because this policy reduces
the size of the unfunded liability of the government, the simulation of an
increase in retirement age induces a rise in personal saving by prospective

retirees. In Germany and Sweden, where such cuts are larger relative to
lifetime resources, the national saving rates is over a percentage point above

its level in the base case. This additional saving leads to higher real wages
and higher incomes, and hence lower consumption tax rates necessary to fund

other government programs. Thus, all three factors determining real after-tax
wage rates work in the same direction, and after-tax wage rates increase

substantially. The after-tax wage rate in Germany increases by 13 per cent in
2050 relative to the baseline simulation, while in Sweden, it increases by 10

per cent. The increases in the same year in Japan and the United States are 3
per cent and 5 per cent, respectively.

As indicated, it is possible to compare the benefits of these increases in
after-tax income to the costs of pension benefit cuts and arrive at an overall

measure of the policy's impact on individual welfare. It is important that
these measurements be made for members of different generations. for the

policy affects individuals born at various dates differently. Calculations
for members of selected cohorts are presented in the first column of Table 8.
The numbers shown are the percentage increases (or decrease.) in potential

27

lifetime consumption (including the value of leisure) induced by the policy

change. In each country, individuals born in 1960 are worse off because of
the reduced value of old-age pension benefits. Conversely, those born in 201
are better off because, although they receive lower benefits, they also

receive the higher after-tax real wages just discussed. Except in the United
States, individuals born in 1985 do not benefit from these higher real wages
for long enough to offset the reduced retirement benefits.

c) Benefit reduction
The approach considered here is a uniform 20 per cent cut in benefits.
The simulated transition to this regime assumes that, beginning in 1990,
benefits are reduced by 1 per cent per year until the entire 20 per cent

reduction has occurred, in 2010. The results, shown in the fourth column of
the panels of Table 7, are similar to those of the previous set of

simulations. Social security contribution rate increases are mitigated,
national saving rates rise, consumption tax rates fall and real wages

before-tax and after-tax increase. For Sweden and the United States, the two
policies have very similar quantitative effects as well, with changes in the
social security contribution rates in 2030 and 2050 being almost identical.
In Germany and Japan, the benefit cut has a somewhat greater impact than the
increase in age of initial benefit receipt because these countries begin
benefits at an earlier age and hence pay them for more years per typical
retiree.

Like the previous policy option, too, the cut in benefit levels helps

some generations at the expense of others. Comparing the two columns in
Table 8, one observes that in each country, as before, those born in 1960

lose and those born in 2010 gain. However, both losses and gains are of a

28

larger magnitude. The timing of gains and losses is different, too.
Individuals born in 1985 fare better under the benefit Cut policy in Japan,

Sweden and the United States. This difference is due to the somewhat earlier
date of the policy's commencement.

d. The case of open economies
All of the previously reported simulations are based on a "closed
economy" assumption (i.e. changes in domestic saving, interest rates and wages
are assumed to have no impact on the country's current and capital accounts).
The closed economy assumption is obviously very restrictive, but taking the
OECD area as a whole, it is perhaps less unrealistic than at first glance,
since most countries will be experiencing comparable demographic transitions.
Jevertheless, because such transitions are not perfectly synchronized, it is
useful to consider the alternative (equally) extreme "open economy"

assumption. Here, each country is considered to be sufficiently small and
open to international movements of both goods and capital such that domestic

wage rates and interest rates are pegged from abroad. In fact, the model
structure is such that international trade flows induced by the demographic

shifts have no feed-back effects. Incipient changes in the domestic
capital-labor ratio (such as would arise from large swings in population
growth rates) induce international capital outflows or inflows to preserve the

pre-existing factor returns. Hence, increased national saving generates a
capital account deficit (and, consequently, a current account surplus) rather
than more domestic capital formation. As a result, real wage rates do not
fluctuate as in the closed economy simulations.

In the last column of the panels of Table 7 are shown simulated economic

paths based on this "small open economy" assumption. For purposes of

29

comparison, each country is assumed to begin with balanced current and capital
accounts, so that the economy in 1960 is the same as in previous simulations

in which such balance was imposed. After 1960, the simulations diverge from
those reported for the base case because of the economic consequences of

international flows. Current accounts of the four countries, expressed as a
fraction of net domestic product, are shown in Table 9.

A striking result of this last set of simulations is how little the
social security contribution rates are affected by the open economy

assumption. This results from the fact that the model follows the normal
practice of indexing old-age pension benefits for the growth in real wages

occurring between years of work and year of retirement. In the open economy
simulations, where real wages (relative to trend) are fixed, benefits are
correspondingly also fixed, and contribution rates need not be increased to

offset the lower wage base than in the closed economy simulation. However,
because other government spending programs are not assumed to be indexed in
the same way, consumption tax rates

higher in this final set of

simulations. This effect is least important in Sweden, which exhibits little
increase in real wages even in the base case.

In the closed economy simulations, real wage rates rise and interest

rates fall as the result of capital-deepening. In the open economy case, one
might expect higher saving rates during this period, since capital flowing
abroad prevents domestic interest rates from falling and provides a greater

incentive to save. Indeed, saving rates do rise noticeably in Japan and, to a
lesser extent, in the United States relative to the baseline simulation. The
effects are quite small in Sweden and Germany, however.7
Obviously, it would be incorrect to interpret these simulations as
suggesting that gains from free international trade would not be significant.

30
Unchanging real wage rates over the simulation period reflect the assumption
that the underlying productivity trends (i.e. the rate of technical progress,
or total factor productivity) are the same in both open and closed economies.
For a number of reasons, the growth in total factor productivity might be
significantly and positively related to the openness of trade.

The current accounts associated with these open economy transitions are
quite dramatic, reflecting the extreme assumption of perfect capital mobility

and asset substitutability and no international mobility of labor. The
magnitudes are relatively small for Sweden and the United States, consistent
with the smoother demographic transitions projected for the two countries.

Japan, and especially Germany, are simulated to have much larger swings in
their current accounts, as large incipient increases in capital-labor ratios
lead to significant outflows of capital and associated surpluses in their

current accounts. These increases are due greatly to declines in the domestic
labor force. Germany, for example, is projected to experience a significant
absolute decline in total population during the transition period and a much

larger decline in its labor force. All countries experience much larger
current account imbalances during the transition period than are predicted for
the long run, reflecting the potential effect which population swings can have
on an economy's stocks of capital and labor.

Clearly, a country's capital and current accounts are influenced by many
factors (e.g. differential rates of growth of domestic demand, fiscal and
monetary policies, constraints on capital flows, international variations in
rates of capital taxation, etc.), and the simulations presented here represent

very conditional potential outcomes. Moreover, these projections, derived
from a model of unlinked economies, implicitly treat the rest of the world as
a sink, able to absorb the capital flows arising from the demographic

31

transitions. The partial nature of these simulations is underscored by
disparities between the current account projections from 1960 to 1985 and what

actually occurred. Thus, while this exercise identifies cx ante pressures
arising from demographic forces, it does not provide guidance concerning how
they might be resolved given the general pattern of ageing populations and the
simple accounting fact that capital outflows of one country must be inflows of
another.

V. Conclusions
Although the model and its simulations necessarily involve restrictive
assumptions that make it inappropriate to rely heavily on their specific
numerical predictions for policy purposes, they do provide important insights
into the complex economic effects of the demographic transition that is in

progress. They confirm intuition that significant changes in demographic
structure underway in Germany, Japan, Sweden and the United States will have a

major impact on economic performance. One may infer that this experience
will be shared by other OECD countries confronting similar population
projections.

32

Footnotes
1.

One

question

that may be raised with respect to the solution to any

equilibrium is its uniqueness. Laitner (1988) has recently completed an
extensive study of the uniqueness properties of the AK model. He computed
the eigenvalues of the model and showed that the model's transition path
is locally unique for the range of parameter values examined in Auerbach

and Kotlikoff (1987). This range of parameters encompasses those used in
this study.

2. In particular, this means consumption growth of about 2 per cent per year,
a transition to full-time work in the early '20s, and a steady reduction
in average hours worked late in life, with full retirement occurring
before age 75.

3. Hence, each country has a relative wage of 1.0 for 1960. A value of 1.0
in 1985, for example, would represent a wage rate equal to the 1960 real

wage multiplied by 1.015 raised to the 25th power. A wage rate above or
below 1.0 in any year indicates an increase or decline in wages relative

to this general growth trend. The real after-tax wage is this detrended
real wage rate less the social security contribution rate and after
accounting for the higher relative price level resulting from the
consumption tax. (Other taxes on labor income are omitted from this

calculation because they are held constant after 1985.) Thus, for
example, if the detrended real before-tax wage rate is equal to 1.0, and
the social security contribution and consumption tax rates are 0.10 and
0.15, respectively, the real after-tax wage is equal to

[1-O.lO]/[1+O.l5] or 0.78. Hence, it measures the purchasing power of
labor income.
4.

In addition, the consumption tax rates for 1985 differ slightly from those

33

reported in Table 5 because of the computational difficulty and expense

calibrating the model exactly. However, these deviations are
inconsequential.

5. This estimate is clearly affected by the assumption about the rate of
technical change, since Japan's post-var trend in wages exceeds that of
most countries.
6.

It is, of course, impossible to make overall welfare judgments about
policies of this sort without knowing the value of the foregone social
expenditures.

7. It must be remembered that this experiment is a complicated one; not only
are rates of return increased, but the real wages out of which savings

come are reduced relative to the closed economy assumption. With higher
consumption tax rates, real after-tax wage rates are reduced even more
than before-tax wage rates

34
References

Auerbach, Alan J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Dynamic

Fiscal

Policy, Cambridge,

England: Cambridge University Press, 1987.
Laitner, John, "Tax Changes and Phase Diagrams for an Overlapping Generations
Model," mimeo, May 1988.

Table I
POPULATION AGE DISTRIBUTIONS FOR GERMANY

65 PLUS

1960
OECD
21.7
29.6
25.9
12.2
10.6

AK Model
22.8
29.0
25.2
11.3
11.6

Age Group
O - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64
65 PLUS

1970
OECD
23.2
28.0
23.4
12.3
13.2

AK Model
23.4
28.8
25.0
11.3
11.5

Age Group
O
15
35
55

-

14
34
54

64

1980

Age Group
O - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64
65 PLUS

OECD
18.2
29.5
27.2
9.6
15.5

AK Model
17.6
31.5
26,6
12.0
12.2

1990

OECD

65 PLUS

14.9
30.1
27.8
11.6
15.6

AK Model
14.7
30.2
28.8
13.0
13.3

Age Group
0 - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64
65 PLUS

2000
OECD
15.5
23.7
30.2
13.6
17.0

AK Model
14.2
24.5
32.5
14.2
14.6

Age Group

2010
OECD

AK Model

Age Group
0
15
35
55

0
15
35
55

-

-

14
34
54

64

14
34
54

64

65 PLUS

13.3
21.7
31.6
13.3
20.2

11.9
22.5
32.8
16.2
16.6

Table 1 (cont'd)
POPULATION AGE DISTRIBUTIONS FOR GERMANY

14
34
54
64
65 PLUS

2020
OECD
13.2
21.9
26.1
17.2
21.6

Age Group

OECD

0 - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54

14.6
20.0
24.5
15.1
25.9

ge Group
0
15
35
55

-

AK Mode_i

12.2
21.2
27.9
19.6
19.1

2030

55 - 64
65 PLUS

Age Group
O - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64

65 PLUS

Age Group
O
15
35
55

-

14

34
54
64
65 PLUS

AK Model
12.3
20.0
26.7
17.3
23.7

2040
OECD
14.6
20.6
25.0
11.8
28.0

AK Model
12.9
21.5
27.1
15.8
22.7

2050
OECD
15.9
22.2
22.9
14.0
25.0

AK Model
13.7
22.5
26.5
17.3
20.0

Final Steady State
AK Model
Age Group
18.7
O - 14
26.7
15 - 34
26.7
35 - 54
13.3
55 - 64
14.7
65 PLUS

Table 2
POPULATION AGE DISTRIBUTIONS FOR JAPAN

Age Group
O - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64
65 PLUS

Age Group
o - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64

65 PLUS

Age Group

o - 14

15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64
65 PLUS

Age Group
o - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64

65 PLUS

Age Group
O - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64

65 PLUS

Age Group
o - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64

65 PLUS

1960
OECD
na
na
na
na
na

1970
OECD
na

na
na
na
na
1980
OECD
23.6
30.7
28 .

1

8.6
9.1

AK Model
29.3
31.5

22.5
8.7
8.0

AK Model
24.6
33.6
24.0
9.3
8.6

AK Model
22.6
32.6
25.7
10.0
9.2

1990
OECD
18.6
28.3
29.8
11.7
11.6

AK Model
12.1
33.4
31.2
12.1
11.1

2000
OECD
17.5
27.4
27.8
12.2
15.1

AK Model
20.0
23.8
30.8
13.2
12.2

2010
OECD
18.5
23.2
26.3
14.5
17.6

AK Model
12.7

23.1
32.5
16.5
15.2

Table 2 (cont'd)
POPULATION ACE DISTRIBUTIONS FOR JAPAN
2020

Age Group

OECD

15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64

16.8
24.0
26.9
11.4
21.0

o - 14

65 PLUS

Age Group

- 14

o
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64

65 PLUS

2030
OECD
16.8
25.1
23.9
14.2
20.1

65 PLUS

2040
OECD
16.9
23.4
24.8
12.2
22.7

Age Group
O - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64
65 PLUS

2050
OECD
16.6
23.5
25.9
11.2
22.8

Age Group
o - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64

AK Model
19.6
23.1
24.3
15.5
17.4

AK Model
14.4
24.7
24.5
17.5
18.9

AK Model
16.4
27.0
26.8
9.7
20.1

AK Model
15.1
25.3
28.9
17.8
12.9

Final Steady State
AK Model
Age Group
18.7
0 - 14
26.7
15 - 34
26.7
35 - 54
13.3
55 - 64
14.7
65 PLUS

Table 3
POPULATION AGE DISTRIBUTIONS FOR SWEDEN

14
34
54
64

1960
OECD
22.4
26.0
28.4
11.4

65 PLUS

11.7

Age Group
O
15
35
55

-

AK Model
22.3
28.7
25.4
11.6
12.0

1970

Age Group
0 - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64
65 PLUS

Age Group
0 - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64
65 PLUS

Age Group
0
15
35
55

-

14
34
54

64

65 PLUS

OECD
20.3
28.7
24.5
12.3
13.7

AK Model
20.6
29.4
26.0
11.8
12.2

1980
OECD
19.6
28.6
23.7
11.8
16.3

AK Model
19.6
28.9
26.7
12.2
12.6

1990
OECD
17.3
27.5
27.3
10.1
17.8

AK Model
16.8
28.4
28.4
13.0
13.4

2000

Age Group
0
15
35
55

-

14
34
54
64

65 PLUS

OECD
17.5
26.0
28.1
11.9
16.6

35 - 54
55 - 64

2010
OECD
17.0
24.3
27.7
13.6

65 PLUS

17.5

Age Group
0 - 14
15 - 34

AK Model
17.6
26.0
28.7
13.7
14.1

AK Model
16.9
24.7
28.5
14.7
15.2

Table 3 (cont'd)
POPULATION AGE DISTRIBUTIONS FOR SWEDEN
2020

4ge Group
O - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64
65 PLUS

OECD
16.2
24.1
26.1
12.8
20.8

AK Model
16.2
25.4
27.0
14.8
16.6

2030

Age Group
0 - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54

OECD

65 PLUS

16.6
23.4
24.8
13.3
21.8

Age Group
0 - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64
65 PLUS

2040
OECD
16.8
23.4
25.3
11.8
22.7

55 - 64

Age Group
O - 14

15
35
55
65

- 34
- 54
- 64
PLUS

2050
OECD
17.3
24.0
24.7
12.3
21.8

AK Model
16.6
25.0
26.3
15.1
17.0

AK Model
16.1
25.1
27.7
13.7

17.4

AK Model
16.0
25.4
27.7
14.8
16.1

Final Steady State
AK Model
Age Group
O - 14
18.7
15 - 34
26.7
35 - 54
26.7
55 - 64
13.3
14.7
65 PLUS

Table 4
POPULATION AGE DISTRIBUTIONS FOR THE U.S.
1960
OECD
31.0
26.3
24.8
8.6
9.2

AK Model
30.0
31.7
22.2
8.4
7.7

65 PLUS

1970
OECD
31.0
26.3
24.8
8.6
9.2

AK Model
27.3
32.9
23.0
8.8
8.0

Age Group
0 - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64
65 PLUS

1980
OECD
22.5
35.3
21.3
9.6
11.3

Age Group
0 - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64
65 PLUS

1990
OECD
21.8
31.9
25.4
8.6
12.3

Age Group
O - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64
65 PLUS

Age Group
O - 14
15
34
35 - 54
55 - 64

Age Group
0 - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64
65 PLUS

Age Group
0 - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64
65 PLUS

2000
OECD
21.1
27.4
30.5
8.8

12.2
2010
OECD
19.3

27.0
28.5
12.6
12.6

AK Model
23.1
34.0
24.9
9.5
8.6

AK Model
23.4
30.3
26.6
10.2
9.3

AK Model
21.0
28.9
28.4
11.3
10.3

AK Model
20.2
28.5
26.7
12.8
11.7

Table 4 (cont'd)
POPULATION AGE DISTRIBUTIONS FOR THE U.S.

Age Group
O - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64
65 PLUS

Age Group
0 - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64
65 PLUS

Age Group
0 - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64

65 PLUS

Age Group
0 - 14
15 - 34
35 - 54
55 - 64
65 PIUS

2020
OECD
19.0
26.0
25.2
13.7
16.2
2030
OECD
18.5

24.9
25.4
11.5
19.6

2040
OECD

AK Model
18.3
27.7
26.6
13.7
13.6

AK Model
19.1
26.5
27.4
12.2
14.8

25.0
25.4
11.4
20.0

AK Model
18.2
26.5
27.5
14.1
13.7

2050
OECD

AK Model

18.2

18.3
24.9
24.8
12.2
19.7

19.0
26.1
26.4
13.4
15.1

Final Steady State
AK Model
Age Group
0 - 14
18.7
15 - 34
26.7
35 - 54
26.7
55 - 64
13.3
65 PLUS
14.7

Tax Rates for 1960 and 1985

Table 5

Ware Tax

Capital Income Tax
1960
1985

Consumotion Tax
1960

1985

Payroll Tax
1960
1985

17.0

22.2

21.4

16.4

16.6

10.1

16.2

10.7

6.2

5.6

6.3

29.1

20.4

27.6

17.3

37.1

16.8

17.6

18.7

16.2

15.7

9.8

9.7

7.1

7.6

1960

1985

Germany

21.3

25.7

12.6

Japan

12.1

18.2

Sweden

21.9

U.S.

19.2

Table 6

Demographic Transitions in Four Countries

Year
Consumption Tax
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050

long run
Social Security Tax
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050
long run

Germany

Country
Sweden United States
Japan

0.222
0.214
0.202
0.116
0.113
0.172
0.172

0. 107

0.173

0.062
0.058
0.067
0.099
0.060
0.108

0 •

0.098
0.097

0

0 •

0.367
0.400
0.366
0.452

0. 064
0. 064

0.164
0.166
0.169
0 • 184
0.247
0.327
0.202

0.056
0.063
0.066
0.097
0.114
0 • 075
0.090

0.168
0.176
0.180
0.208
0.230
0.217
0.200

0.071
0.076
0.079
0.099
0.123
0.125
0.121

0.233
0.215
0.197
0.191
0.139
0.027
0.166

0.244
0.202
0.213
0.125
0.031

0. 159

0. 101
0. 100

1.000
1.000
1.002
1.005
1.031
1.061
1.015

1 •

1.080
1.058
1.048

1. 007

0.684
0.687
0.693
0.735
0.698

0.853
0.903
0.908
0.910

0.709

0. 609

0.923
0.861

371
• 353

085

0.066
0.068

National Saving Rate
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050

long run

0. 133

0.119
0.089
0.063
0.088

0.132

0. 109

Real Wage, Detrended
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050

long run

Real

0. 1 14

000

1.023
1.028
1. 075

000
008

1.000

1.005
1.010

1.016
1.040
1.049
1.054
1.049

1 •
1 .

0.998
0.985

After-Tax Wage
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050
long run

0.691

0 •

871

0.091
0.072
0.051
0.046
0.053

0. 606

0.609
0. 585
0. 554
0. 572

0.543

1. 007

0.846
0.848
0.862
0.881
0.865
0.865
0.863

Table 7 a

The Impact of Policy Alternatives: Germany
No

Year

2 Year

20% Cut

Base Case Spending Rise in
in
Rise
Ret. Age Benefits

Consumption Tax

Small

Open
Economy

0.222
0.214
0.202
0.116
0.113
0.172
0.172

0.222
0.214
0.204
0.115
0.088
0.112
0.154

0.222
0.212
0.198
0.109
0.105
0.164
0.162

0.222
0.206
0.193
0.105
0.102
0.161
0.159

0.222
0.215
0.204
0.117
0.122
0.190
0.177

0.164
0.166
0.169
0.184
0.247
0.327
0.202

0.164
0.166
0.169
0.185
0.24/
0.326
0.202

0.164
0.165
0.167
0.166
0.198
0.255
0.164

0.164
0.160
0.157
0.148
0.198
0.262
0.161

0.164
0.166
0.170
0.185
3.250
0.336
0.202

National Saving Rate
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050
long run

0.233
0.215
0.197
0.191
0.139
0.027
0.166

0.233
0.214
0.196
0.189
0.140
0.036
0.166

0.233
0.222
0.206
0.205
0.152
0.036
0.174

0.233
0.230
0.214
0.208
0.152
0.037
0.176

0.233
0.213
0.195
0.192
0.140
0.018
0.166

Real Wage, Detrended
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050
long run

1.000
1.000
1.002
1.005
1.031
1.061
1.015

1.000
1.000
1.003
1.005
1.030
1.058
1.016

1.000
1.001
1.003
1.010
1.041
1.076
1.031

1.000
1.003
1.006
1.016
1.048
1.082
1.035

1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

Real After-Tax Wage
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050
long run

0.684
0.687
0.693
0.735
0.698
0.609
0.691

0.684
0.687
0.692

0.684
0.690
0.697
0.760
0.756
0.689
0.742

0.684
0.699
0.711
0.783
0.763
0.688
0.749

0.684
0.686
0.689
0.730
0.668
0.558
0.678

1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050

long run
Social Security Tax
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050

long run

0735
0.713
0.641
0.703

Table lb
The Impact of Policy Alternatives: Japan
No

Year

2 Year

20%

Cut in
Base Case Spending Rise in
Rise
Ret. Age Benefits

consumption Tax
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050
long run

Social Security Tax
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050
long run

National Saving Rate
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050
long run

Small
Open
Economy

0.107
0.062
0.058
0.067
0.099
0.060
0.108

0.107
0.062
0.061
0.059
0.077
0.059
0.092

0.107
0.061
0.057
0.066
0.098
0.058
0.106

0.107
0.059
0.055
0.064
0.096
0.057
0.104

0.107

0.056

0.056
0.063
0.066
0.097
0.114
0.076
0.090

0.056
0.062
0.066
0.089
0.094
0.054
0.077

0.056
0.060
0.061
0.077
0.091
0.060

0.056

0.063
0.066
0.097
0.114
0.075
0.090

0.244
0.202
0.213
0.125
0.031
0.133
0.132

0.244
0.201
0.211
0.124
0.034
0.128
0.132

0.244
0.204
0.216
0.130
0.035
0.135
0.134

0.244
0.208
0.220
0.133
0.037
0.136
0.136

0.244

1.000
1.023
1.028
1.075
1.080
1.058
1.048

1.000
1.022
1.028
1.074
1.080
1.060
1.049

1.000
1.023
1.029
1.077
1.085
1.064
1.054

1.000
1.024
1.031
1.081
1.091
1.070
1.058

1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

0.853
0.903
0.908
0.910
0.871
0.923
0.861

0.853
0.902
0.905
0,916
0.888
0.925
0.874

0.853
0.904
0.909
0.920
0.895
0.951
0.880

0.853
0.909
0.918
0.938
0.905
0.952
0.889

0.853

0.072

0.063
0.060
0.073
0.105
0.063
0.112

0.063
0.067
0.101
0.116
0.076
0.091

0. 202
0. 216
0. 121

0.018
0. 139

0.132

Real Wage, Detrended
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050
long run

Real After-Tax Wage
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050
long run

0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.

881
880
838
800
869
817

Table 7c
The Impact of Policy Alternatives: Sweden
No

Year

2 Year

20%

Base Case Spending Rise in
Cut in
Rise
Ret. Age Benefits

Consumption Tax
1960

Small
Open

Econom

0.173
0.371
0.353
0.367
0.400
0.366
0.452

0.173
0.371
0.352
0.338
0.341
0.326
0.412

0.173
0.365
0.345
0.349
0.373
0.338
0.418

0.173
0.358
0.338
0.342
0.369
0.335
0.416

0.173
0.374
0.355
0.370
0.403
0.365
0.444

Social Security Tax
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050
long run

0.168
0.176
0.180
0.208
0.230
0.217
0.200

0.168
0.176
0.180
0.208
0.229
0.218
0.200

0.168
0.174
0.178
0.184
0.185
0.175
0.158

0.168
0.171
0.169
0.167
0.184
0.173
0.160

0.168
0.176
0.179
0.208
0.230
0.216
0.200

National Saving Rate
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050
long run

0.159
0.114
0.119
0.089
0.063
0.088
0.109

0.159
0.112
0.116
0.089
0.067
0.086
0.110

0.159
0.124
0.130
0.107
0.079
0.098
0.118

0.159
0.130
0.136
0.108
0.077
0.097
0.119

0.159
0.112
0.118
0.090
0.061
0.090
0.109

1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050

1.000

long run

0.985

1.000
1.008
1.005
1.009
1.007
1.001
0.987

1.000
1.009
1.007
1.020
1.027
1.024
1.012

1.000
1.012
1.011
1.027
1.033
1.028
1.014

1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

0.709
0.606
0.609
0.585
0.554
0.572
0.543

0.709
0.606
0.610
0.597
0.579
0.590
0.559

0.709
0.611
0.615
0.617
0.610
0.631
0.601

0.709
0.618
0.628
0.637
0.616
0.637
0.602

0.709
0.600
0.606
0.578
0.549
0.574
0.554

1985
1990
2010
2030
2050

long run

Real Wage, Detrended

Real After-Tax Wage
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050

long run

1.008
1.005
1.010
1.007
0.998

Table 7d
The Impact of Policy Alternatives: United States
No

Year

2 Year

20%

Base Case Spending Rise in
Cut in
Rise
Ret. Age Benefits

Consumption Tax
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050
long run

Social Security Tax
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050
long run

Small
Open
Economy

0.098
0.097
0.085
0.064
0.064
0.066
0.068

0.098
0.097
0.085
0.061
0.054
0.054
0.057

0.098
0.096
0.084
0.062
0.062
0.064
0.066

0.098
0.095
0.083
0.062
0.062
0.064
0.066

0.098
0.159
0.144
0.114
0.112
0.115
0.117

0.071
0.076
0.079
0.099
0.123
0.125
0.121

0.071
0.076
0.079
0.099
0.123
0.125
0.121

0.071
0.076
0.079
0.088
0.098
0.098
0.096

0.071
0.074
0.075
0.080
0.099
0.100
0.097

0.071
0.076
0.079
0.100
0.124
0.127
0.123

0.101
0.100
0.091
0.072
0.051
0.046
0.053

0.101
0.100
0.091
0.071
0.052
0.046
0.053

0.101
0.102
0.094
0.076
0.055
0.048
0.055

0.101
0.103
0.095
0.076
0.055
0.048
0.055

0.101
0.103
0.098
0.082
0.056
0.048
0.056

1.000
1.007
1.016
1.040
1.049
1.054
1.049

1.000
1.007
1.016
1.040
1.048
1.054
1.050

1.000
1.009
1.018
1.046
1.059
1.067
1.064

1.000
1.011
1.020
1.049
1.061
1.068
1.064

1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

0.846
0.848
0.862
0.881
0.865
0.865
0.863

0.846
0.848
0.862

0.846
0.851
0.865
0.898
0.899
0.905
0.902

0.846
0.855
0.871
0.909
0.900
0.903
0.901

0.846
0.797
0.805
0.808
0.788
0.783
0.785

National Saving Rate
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050

long run
Real Wage, Detrended
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050

long run
Real After-Tax Wage
1960
1985
1990
2010
2030
2050

long run

0.872
0.875
0.873

Table 8
Welfare Effects of Changes in Policy
(as a percentage of lifetime resources)
Country

Increased
Retirement
Age

Year of
Birth

Cut in
Replacement
Rate

Germany
—1. 67

long run

—0.82
—0.84
0.26
0.46

1960
1985
2010
long run

—0.23
—0.18
0.25
0.19

—0.55
0.07
0.47
0.33

1960
1985
2010
long run

—0.76
—0.33
1.39
1.63

—1.23
0.56
1.70
1.70

1960
1985
2010
long run

—0.18
0.04
0.96
1.28

—0.22
0.42
1.07
1.33

1960
1985
2010

Japan

—0.28
0.50
0.58

Sweden

United States

Table 9
Current Accounts in Transition
(relative to 1960, as a fraction of NDP)
Year
Germany

Country
Sweden United States
Japan

1960

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

1985

0.016

0.039

—0.028

0.029

1990

0.050

0.056

—0.014

0.034

2010

0.095

0.038

0.010

0.040

2030

0.148

—0.150

—0.017

0.018

2050

0.064

0.014

—0.0002

0.015

long run

0.010

0.023

—0.007

0.014

