                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           CIVIL LIBERTIES IN TIMES OF CRISIS

                                        Marcella Alsan
                                        Luca Braghieri
                                       Sarah Eichmeyer
                                      Minjeong Joyce Kim
                                      Stefanie Stantcheva
                                        David Y. Yang

                                       Working Paper 27972
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27972


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




We thank Dynata for assistance with data collection and incorporating civil liberties concerns into
their surveys. We thank participants at Harvard Public Seminar, Harvard COVID Seminar, the
Health and Pandemics Seminar, London School of Economics, Princeton and NBER SI
Development. Funding provided by Harvard Kennedy School and Harvard Economics
Department. The authors have no conflicts to disclose. The study is approved by IRB at Harvard
University (IRB-20-0495 and IRB20-0467), and registered at AEA-RCT registry
(AEARCTR-0005609). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Marcella Alsan, Luca Braghieri, Sarah Eichmeyer, Minjeong Joyce Kim, Stefanie
Stantcheva, and David Y. Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Civil Liberties in Times of Crisis
Marcella Alsan, Luca Braghieri, Sarah Eichmeyer, Minjeong Joyce Kim, Stefanie Stantcheva,
and David Y. Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 27972
October 2020
JEL No. D8,I18,P0

                                          ABSTRACT

The respect for and protection of civil liberties are one of the fundamental roles of the state, and
many consider civil liberties as sacred and “nontradable.” Using cross-country
representative surveys that cover 15 countries and over 370,000 respondents, we study whether
and the extent to which citizens are willing to trade off civil liberties during the COVID-19
pandemic, one of the largest crises in recent history. We find four main results. First, many
around the world reveal a clear willingness to trade off civil liberties for improved public
health conditions. Second, consistent across countries, exposure to health risks is
associated with citizens’ greater willingness to trade off civil liberties, though
individuals who are more economically disadvantaged are less willing to do so. Third,
attitudes concerning such trade-offs are elastic to information. Fourth, we document a
gradual decline and then plateau in citizens’ overall willingness to sacrifice rights and
freedom as the pandemic progresses, though the underlying correlation between individuals’
worry about health and their attitudes over the trade-offs has been remarkably constant. Our
results suggest that citizens do not view civil liberties as sacred values; rather, they are willing
to trade off civil liberties more or less readily, at least in the short-run, depending on their own
circumstances and information.

Marcella Alsan                                   Minjeong Joyce Kim
Kennedy School of Government                     Harvard University
Harvard University                               Malcolm Wiener Center for
79 John F. Kennedy St.                           Social Policy
Rubenstein Bldg R403                             Cambridge, MA 02138
Cambridge, MA 02138                              minjeong_kim@hks.harvard.edu
and NBER
marcella_alsan@hks.harvard.edu                   Stefanie Stantcheva
                                                 Department of Economics
Luca Braghieri                                   Littauer Center 232
Economics Department                             Harvard University
Stanford University                              Cambridge, MA 02138
579 Serra Mall                                   and NBER
Stanford, CA 94305                               sstantcheva@fas.harvard.edu
lucabrag@stanford.edu
                                                 David Y. Yang
Sarah Eichmeyer                                  Department of Economics
Economics Department                             Harvard University
Stanford University                              Littauer Center M-31
579 Jane Stanford Way                            Cambridge, MA 02138
Stanford, CA 94305                               and NBER
saraeich@stanford.edu                            davidyang@fas.harvard.edu


A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/5609
                                                   “Emergencies” have always been the pretext on which the
                                                   safeguards of individual liberty have been eroded.
                                                                                      — Friedrich August von Hayek




1    Introduction
The notion that humans have natural, inalienable rights is the foundation of liberal democracies
(Locke, 1698; Mill, 1875; Rawls, 1971). A defining feature of liberal democracies is their respect
for and protection of civil liberties — such as due process, freedom of speech, and right to pri-
vacy.1 Indeed, in liberal democracies, civil liberties are so fundamental that political philosophers
sometimes consider them as “sacred values,” “goods” or rights that should not be subject to com-
parisons or trade-offs (e.g., Aberle et al. (1950); Radcliffe-Brown (1952); Fiske and Tetlock (1997);
Tetlock et al. (2000); Tetlock (2003)).
    Yet, when societies confront major crises — from terrorist attacks, or devastating natural dis-
asters, to global pandemics, trade-offs between individual civil liberties and societal well-being
become acute. Crises provide a sharp view of the otherwise subtle trade-offs involved in civil lib-
erties. Temporarily curtailing civil liberties is often a crucial part of the policy response. Emergency
policies during a crisis sometimes become a pretext for eroding rights in the long run, making the
trade-off between societal well-being during crisis and civil liberties protection even starker.2
    In this paper, we study, in real time, how citizens trade off civil liberties and public health
conditions during one of the largest crises in recent history. As the world confronts the global
health threat of the COVID-19 pandemic, what are citizens willing to sacrifice and what are they
steadfast in supporting no matter what the circumstance? How does this vary by country and
individual characteristics? Citizens of which country and which sub-group within the countries
are more willing to trade-off their rights and freedom during the crisis? What factors may shape
views on such trade-offs?
    A detailed understanding of such views is important for at least four reasons. First, the policy
responses adopted by governments, especially democratic ones, should be responsive to the pref-
erences of the citizenry. Second, the extent to which citizens comply with policies enacted in times
of crises likely depends on whether they agree with the restrictions imposed by the policies, which
could ultimately determine the efficacy of these policies against the pandemic. Third, a weaken-
ing of the support for the broad protection of civil liberties during times of crises may be revealed
to be temporary, and yet may be exploited by the state to seize additional power and by interest
groups to further political agendas. Indeed, in an open letter “A Call to Defend Democracy,” signed

     1
       Civil liberties, as defined by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, respect individuals’ right to
self-determination, right to privacy, free movement, free speech, worship, and procedural fairness.
     2
       The erosion of civil liberties is particularly noticeable in recent decades, as one observes consecutive years of decline
in global freedom and retreat in mature democracies, according to Freedom House’s Freedom of the World Report.
Source: https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world/2019/democracy-retreat, last accessed on August 28, 2020.


                                                               1
by many organizations, former politicians, and scholars, the COVID-19 pandemic is described as
“threaten[ing] more than the lives and the livelihoods of people throughout the world. It is also a
political crisis that threatens the future of liberal democracy.”3 Finally, attitudes such as whether
one would be willing to withstand public health risks in order to fulfill civic duties (e.g., voting)
could shape the composition of voters, and as a result government’s policy-making far beyond that
in the public health domain.4 Such preference would become particularly relevant as the state and
federal governments are making plans about the elections (e.g., whether to hold the campaign and
elections in person) in the upcoming months.
    To answer these questions, we conduct large-scale, representative surveys that cover more than
370,000 individuals from 15 countries between March and October of 2020, at various phases of the
COVID-19 pandemic: Australia, Canada, China, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, the Nether-
lands, Singapore, Spain, South Korea, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United States. A
key challenge in studying citizens’ views on trade-offs between civil liberties and public health
conditions is that such views are not readily observable, and one cannot simply take a revealed
preference approach as there is rarely a referendum regarding public health policies. Our surveys
aim to explicitly measure citizens’ attitudes over public health policies and civil liberties, as well as
their evolution over time. Thus, our surveys allow us to describe how people navigate the trade-
offs between public health conditions and civil liberties, and to leverage both quasi-experimental
and experimental variations to understand factors that shape citizens’ preferences.
    We find four core results. First, many people around the world reveal a clear willingness to
trade off civil liberties over public health conditions, though countries differ substantially in the
extent of such willingness. Overall, about 80% of the survey respondents are willing to sacrifice
at least some of their own rights in times of crisis. Moreover, respondents across a wide range of
countries agree about the relative importance of different core civil liberties — respect for privacy
being one of the most valued and ensuring business activities being one of the least. There exist,
however, substantial differences across countries regarding individuals’ views about these trade-
offs, and willingness to give up rights during crises such as the COVID-19. For example, while
only 5% of the respondents in China are unwilling to sacrifice any rights even during time of major
crises, nearly four times as many respondents in the United States are unwilling to do so.
    Second, consistent across countries, we find a strong and robust pattern that individual expo-
sure to health risks is associated with citizens’ trade-offs between civil liberties and public health
conditions. We begin by documenting that respondents who are more concerned about health
risks are substantially more willing to give up their rights and freedom during crises, and those
who are more worried about the long-term erosion of civil liberties are much more likely to hold
onto their rights and freedom even at times of crises. Next, we examine to what extent people’s
    3
      Source: https://www.idea.int/news-media/multimedia-reports/call-defend-democracy, published on June 25,
2020.
    4
      For instance, during pandemics, citizens would need to decide on whether to participate in civil activities amid
of health risks — this was the case during the 1918 global pandemic when an “anti-mask movement” was organized
to protest for freedom, and it has been the case during COVID-19 pandemic for citizens across the US to join protests
demanding racial equality.


                                                          2
views about the trade-offs between public health conditions and civil liberties stem from their their
differential exposure risk and differential disease severity of illness conditional on exposure. We
use two strategies which closely follow the epidemiology literature: (i) we adopt a health risk score
constructed by Mathematica, and exploit the fact that individuals’ chances of encountering severe
health consequences non-linearly increase with the number of contacts who are contracted with
COVID-19; and (ii) we compare individuals with demographic characteristics and pre-existing
health conditions (e.g., being affected by chronic lung diseases) that lead them to be at higher
health risks with respect to COVID-19 with those with lower-risk related characteristics, across
residents in sub-national regions that have different levels of spread of COVID-19 at the time of
the survey — this approach allows us to separately identify the differential impact of exposure to
COVID-19 related health risks due to the combination of individuals’ own health background and
their location of residence.
   These two approaches yield consistent findings: individuals who are more prone to COVID-19
related health risks are differentially more willing to sacrifice rights and freedom, more willing to
relax privacy protections, more willing to suspend democratic procedures and delegate decisions
to experts, and more willing to accept strong public health measures that curtail economic activities
and mobility. In other words, how individuals trade off public health conditions and civil liberties
is affected by their direct exposure to the health risks during the crisis. The findings are remarkably
stable with respect to different measures of geographic COVID exposure. Permutations where
respondents’ medical histories or locations are reshuffled fail to replicate the main findings. The
results display interesting heterogeneity: those with less education, weaker attachment to the labor
force and (in the United States), racial and ethnic minorities are less willing to trade-off rights than
other groups.
   Third, individuals’ views about the trade-offs between public health conditions and civil liber-
ties are elastic to information. Using two embedded survey experiments, we find that upon seeing
a treatment that highlights the public health risks and the rationale for strong measures to flat-
ten the curve, the treated subjects become more willing to delegate decisions to expert and prefer
strong national leaders. On the contrary, upon seeing a treatment that describes the aggressive
public health measures taken by China and the potential danger of such policies eroding civil lib-
erties even after the COVID-19 crisis ends, the treated subjects become significantly less willing to
give up their rights and freedom, and exhibit consistent behaviors such as less willing to adopt a
test and trace mobile app.
   Fourth, we document a gradual but continuous decrease in respondents’ overall willingness to
sacrifice rights and freedom, throughout March to mid-June of 2020. Willingness to curtail civil
liberties decreases by as much as 28 percent of a standard deviation between March and June 2020.
A similar pattern of evolution of respondents’ attitudes over the trade-offs between public health
conditions and civil liberties over time is observed across almost all the domains. Such declines are
accompanied by a decrease in expressed worries on health and economic conditions. Interestingly,
from mid-June and on, the willingness to sacrifice civil liberties begin to plateau across all countries


                                                   3
despite their different trajectories of COVID-19 spread.5 Such dynamics closely track respondents’
worries about health and economic conditions, resulting in a remarkably constant underlying cor-
relation between individuals’ worry about health and their attitudes over the trade-offs throughout
this time frame.
    Taken together, these results suggest that individuals are willing to give up civil liberties for
public health conditions. Many, even in the stronghold of liberal democracies, do not view civil
liberties as “sacred values.” Rather, they find “interior solutions” to the trade-off problem. As
exposure to a major crisis such as the COVID-19 pandemic could shift individuals’ views about
trade-offs between public health conditions and civil liberties, such trade-offs could be elastic to
circumstances. Individuals’ willingness to accept fewer civil liberties correlates strongly with their
expected personal health gain from such restrictions, suggesting that personal cost-benefit analyses
play a significant role in the formation of attitudes towards democratic rights and freedoms in
times of crisis. The pattern that citizens’ willingness to give up rights becomes tempered over time
paints a rather complicated picture: on one hand, such attitude affects the degree of compliance
over long-lasting public health policies; on the other hand, this serves as a check over threats over
civil liberties that the incumbent government can take advantage of during the crisis.
    At least two channels could contribute to the increased willingness to trade-off civil liberties
during the crisis of COVID-19. First, citizens may respond to an increase in either the objective (e.g.,
actual epidemic burden) or perceived (e.g., salience of the pandemic) health risks due to COVID-
19, moving along the indifference curve between health conditions and civil liberties. They may
also be responding to changes in the perceived efficacy of restrictive public health measures (i.e.,
the benefits of giving up civil liberties). Second, the shape of citizens’ indifference curve between
health conditions and civil liberties may be altered due to COVID-19, resulting in a more long-
lasting change in the underlying willingness to sacrifice rights and freedom for a given level of
health risks. This might be due to new information brought to light by the viral threat such as the
potential health risk itself or the value of protecting civil liberties. While we cannot conclusively
distinguish between these two channels, it is worthwhile to note that even transient moves along
the trade-off curve could results in long-term societal consequences as they may generate changes
in institutions and norms that are difficult to reverse after the crisis.
    We take a holistic view of exposure to the pandemic — the full impact of the COVID-19 crisis
would induce stress not only about health, but also directly (e.g., through inability to work if sick)
or indirectly (e.g., due to general economic climate) about economic well-being. In fact, many
of those who are worried about health risks are economically disadvantaged (such as poor or
unemployed). Interestingly, we find that the correlation between economic well-being and public
health conditions is close to zero. This might reflect the contrasting effects of those who view public
health conditions as harmful to the economy (in the short-run at least) and those who view them
as necessary for economic recovery (in the median-run).6
    5
      In July, as some countries infections spike again, so too are worries. These surveys are ongoing.
    6
      This could also echo the divergent attitudes towards private health and public health conditions: at the aggregate
level, public health regulations could generate substantial job losses; but at the private level, being sick could directly


                                                            4
    Our work contributes to understanding how crises and collective experience could shape such
perceptions and underlying preferences. Specifically in the context of COVID-19 pandemic, Rees-
Jones et al. (2020) find that exposure to the COVID-19 pandemic makes individuals in the US more
favorable of government-provided healthcare and unemployment insurance programs; Amat et al.
(2020) show that such exposure (in Spain) is associated with lower support in the incumbent; and
Bol et al. (2020) document that experiences of strict lockdown in March and April in Europe are
associated with higher trust in the incumbent. Our paper highlights how exposure to crisis such as
the COVID-19 pandemic could change citizens’ attitudes over the fundamental trade-offs between
civil liberties and public health conditions.7 In doing so, we present results that suggest, contrary
to the conventional wisdom that crises typically make autocratic regimes tumble (e.g., Huntington
(2009); Acemoglu and Robinson (2006)), crises may in fact strengthen such regimes as they make
citizens more willing to tolerate limits on their rights and freedom.
    Our work also relates to several recent findings in political economy which examine how citi-
zens trade off various aspects of political rights and institutions. For example, Acquisti et al. (2016)
study citizens’ views about the trade-off between privacy protection and economic activities and
convenience; Graham and Svolik (2020) and Svolik (2020) examine how voters trade off partisan
loyalty with protection over democratic institutions and their integrity. More broadly, our study re-
lates to the historical debate between civil liberties on the one hand and economic and social rights
(i.e. the right to a standard of living) popularized during the Cold War. Sen (1981), noting that
famine (a failure of material goods) could not occur in a liberal democracy, advanced the view that
civil and political rights were complementary to guaranteeing material standards.8 On the other
hand, many have noted the difficulty democracies may have in reaching consensus, promoting
collective action and responding to a health threat.9
    The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we describe the two cross-country surveys that we
have conducted. In Section 3, we present descriptive evidence from the survey. We then present
results from the two quasi experimental strategy in Section 4; and we present the survey experi-
mental results in Section 5. In Section 6, we discuss the dynamic patterns of citizens’ views about
the trade-offs over civil liberties and public health conditions. Finally, we conclude with a discus-
sion on the potential normative implications in Section 7.

induce income loss.
     7
       Since citizens’ attitudes over trade-offs between civil liberties and public health conditions matter for their inclina-
tion to comply with social distancing and other public health related restrictions, our work also relates to the papers that
aim to understand what factors shape social distancing compliance (see, among others, Allcott et al. (2020), Bargain and
Aminjonov (2020), Barrios et al. (2020), Besley and Dray (2020), Bursztyn et al. (2020), Gitmez et al. (2020), Simonov
et al. (2020)).
     8
       See also Acemoglu et al. (2019). More recently, Acemoglu et al. (2019), among others, demonstrated that demo-
cratic institutions facilitate spending that improves public health outcomes; Acemoglu and Robinson (2019) show that
civil societies and protection of civil rights are critical to not only the well-functioning of democratic institutions, but
perhaps more importantly, the kind of institutions that would evolve in equilibrium.
     9
       A recent Lancet editorial, “COVID-19 and China: Lessons and the Way Forward” noted China’s success in con-
trolling the virus, stating: “measures that could sacrifice individual freedom, like mandatory mask-wearing in public
areas, were accepted readily by the public [...] there are tensions between freedom and security that each country has
to reckon with, and some of China’s approaches to surveillance, for example, would not be acceptable elsewhere. But
China’s experiences show the importance of community solidarity and what it can achieve.” (Lancet, 2020)


                                                              5
2        Cross-country surveys
In order to examine how people trade off public health conditions and civil liberties, both generi-
cally and during a time of major crisis such as the COVID-19 pandemic, we administer two cross-
country surveys — a long survey that we design (the “COVID-19 and Civil Liberties Survey”) and
a short module included in a weekly commercial survey (the “COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends
Report”). These two surveys collectively cover more than 370,000 respondents from 15 countries
over the course of six months during COVID-19 (ongoing since March 2020). The countries cov-
ered in total are Australia, Canada, China, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands,
Singapore, Spain, South Korea, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
      These two surveys complement each other: the weekly COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends
Report has wider geographic and temporal reach, allowing us to describe citizens’ views about
the trade-offs over public health conditions and civil liberties across a large set of countries and
over a relatively long span of time during the pandemic. The COVID-19 and Civil Liberties Survey
that we design features more comprehensive questions, and importantly, it allows us to carry out
quasi-experimental and experimental analyses. It is targeted at a smaller set of countries.
      Both the COVID-19 and Civil Liberties Survey and COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Re-
port began simultaneously on March 30th, 2020. The timing of the surveys coincide with different
stages of the COVID-19 pandemic across countries, which provides us with both cross-sectional
and temporal variation in individuals’ exposure to the COVID-19 pandemic (Section 6).10


2.1      COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report
We collaborated with Dynata, a global data and insights firm, to administer a module of seven
questions on trade-offs between public health conditions and civil liberties in its weekly cross-
country online survey, named the “COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report.”11
      Starting on March 30th, 2020, 1,000 participants were sampled every week from each of the
following 12 countries: Australia, Canada, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands,
Singapore, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Sweden was added to the set of
countries sampled on a weekly basis starting on May 18th 2020. The sample from each country
is representative on first moments of age, gender, and geographical region. In addition to our
module, respondents are asked questions about: (i) general outlook for the future; (ii) worries
related to the COVID-19 pandemic; (iii) changes in behavior and consumption patterns induced
by the pandemic; (iv) beliefs and attitudes vis-à-vis the pandemic; and (v) information sources
about the pandemic.




    10
      Appendix Figure A.1 shows the epidemic curves of the 15 countries covered in our surveys. Our data collection
begins after the peak for China and South Korea, well before the peak for India, and right before or around the peak for
the rest of the countries of the curve.
   11
      Each survey respondent is asked one main question, and then randomly asked two of the remaining six questions.


                                                           6
2.2     COVID-19 and Civil Liberties Survey
Our detailed cross-country online survey was fielded in seven countries that cover a spectrum
of liberal democracies and autocracies: Germany, France, Italy, the United Kingdom, the United
States, South Korea, and China between March 30th and April 18th, 2020.


2.3     Survey overview
Figure 1 summarizes the design of the COVID-19 and Civil Liberties Survey. It consists of five mod-
ules which are the demographic, health, experimental treatment, first stage, and main outcomes
modules. The survey was translated into five different languages by native speakers; the English
version of the COVID-19 and Civil Liberties Survey instrument can be viewed in its entirety in
Appendix G.1.
      Potential participants were first shown a consent form that did not mention the topic of the
study so as to avoid attrition based on the survey topic. Respondents who reported being younger
than 18 and respondents who reported not living in the country where the survey was adminis-
tered were screened out.
      The first module (“demographics”) queried respondents on their demographic characteristics
including gender, citizenship status, ZIP or postal code, education, income, employment status,
occupation, and household composition.12
      At the end of the demographics module, participants were asked about their political affiliation,
about the information sources they use to keep up-to-date with the developments of the COVID-19
pandemic, their trust in the news, their risk preferences, and their time preferences. Time and risk
preferences were elicited using questions similar to the ones from the Global Preference Survey
(Falk et al., 2018).
      The second module (“health”) queried individuals on medical issues including whether the
respondent was affected by a variety of chronic health conditions such as chronic lung disease,
and whether the respondent or someone in her household had conditions that require frequent
hospital visits.13 These questions on pre-existing health conditions are a core component of our
measurement on individuals’ COVID-19 related health risks, which we discuss in greater detail in
Section 4. The health module also asked questions directly about COVID-19, including whether
the participant had already been infected with COVID-19, the participant’s perceived likelihood
of becoming ill from COVID-19 in the subsequent month, the forecast on the number (out of 100)
of individuals in the participant’s community who would become ill from COVID-19 in the sub-
sequent month, and the number of people known personally by the respondent who had been
infected with COVID-19. We use these questions to adjust for the heterogeneous priors regarding

    12
       Some additional, country-specific questions were also asked, such as the state in which they were born (for Ger-
many) whether they or their relative moved from North Korea during or after the Korean war (for South Korea), and
their race/ethnicity and whether they have health insurance (for the U.S.).
    13
       We also included a 2-question Generalized Anxiety Disorder screener (Plummer et al., 2016) and elicited changes
in health-related behavior (hand-washing and social-distancing).


                                                          7
COVID-19 severity in the community, which could directly affect respondents’ attitudes on some
aspects of the civil liberties trade-offs.
    After the health module, respondents from all countries other than China were split evenly into
a control group, a public health (PH) treatment group and a civil liberties (CL) treatment group.14
The full treatment scripts are in Appendix C. In brief, the public health treatment provided infor-
mation about the rationale behind policies aimed at flattening the epidemic curve. It consisted of:
(i) a simple graphical explanation of exponential disease spread (see Appendix Figures A.2 and
A.3); (ii) a description of the threat posed by an exponentially-growing disease to a system with
limited hospital capacity (see Appendix Figures A.4 and A.5); (iii) a description of how public
health measures such as social distancing can flatten the epidemic curve and reduce the burden on
the healthcare system; and (iv) a description that many COVID-19 patients died alone, away from
their families due to the quarantine requirements.15
    The civil liberties treatment provided information about some of the most drastic measures
adopted by China and South Korea in order to contain the pandemic.16 It consisted of: (i) a graph-
ical depiction of the epidemic curves in China and South Korea, highlighting the fact that the two
countries seemed to have effectively contained the epidemic as per the date of our COVID-19 and
Civil Liberties Survey (see Appendix Figure A.6); (ii) a description of some of the most drastic
measures adopted by China and South Korea to curtail the pandemic (see Appendix Figure A.7);
and (iii) a description of a set of concerns raised by a variety of parties (e.g., Human Rights Watch)
about the possible long-term erosion of civil liberties resulting from policies adopted during the
pandemic (see Appendix Figure A.8). The control group skipped the treatment section all together,
and moved straight to the subsequent module.
    In the “first stage module,” participants were asked a series of questions directly related to
the content of either the public health or civil liberties treatments. For instance, they were asked
whether they thought that delaying the spread of the virus could help save lives, a topic directly
addressed in the public health treatment when describing the rationale for policies aimed at flat-
tening the epidemic curve.
    Finally, participants were asked a set of questions about how they perceive the trade-offs be-
tween public health conditions and civil liberties in a time of crises such as the one caused by
COVID-19. This module elicits our main outcome variables and is discussed in detail next. At the
end of the survey, respondents received payment from the survey platform for their participation.



    14
       All respondents from China were assigned to the control group out of precaution: it is too politically sensitive
to administrate the treatment materials in China, as it includes explicit language cautioning the Chinese government’s
policies during the COVID-19 pandemic. Similarly, we omit a small number of outcome questions among respondents
from China due to political sensitivity.
    15
       Note that the public health treatment does not explicitly inform subjects about their personal health risks, because at
the time of the survey, such risk measure was still highly uncertain and we do not wish to deliver uncertain information
to subjects that could substantially affect their behaviors and decisions.
    16
       China and South Korea were two countries that, as per March 30th, 2020, had successfully contained the first wave
of the COVID-19 pandemic.


                                                              8
2.4     Outcome variables
2.4.1    Outcome variables in the COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report

All respondents in the COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report were asked the question related
to the following statement:


            To what extent do you agree with the following statements:
            I am willing to sacrifice my own rights and freedom during a crisis like the current
            one, in order to maintain the health and well-being of the whole society.

            0 = completely disagree
            10 = completely agree


      Next, respondents were randomly shown one of the following statements on different types of
civil liberties:


            I am willing to relax privacy protections and let the government access my personal
            data during a crisis like the current one, in order to allow the government to make
            timely and accurate decisions.

            I am willing to suspend democratic procedures and give the President [or Prime Min-
            ister] more power during a crisis like the current one, in order to ensure swift govern-
            ment actions.

            I am willing to support the government controlling the media during a crisis like the
            current one, in order to ensure effective and uniform communication between the gov-
            ernment and citizens.

            I am willing to endure substantial economic losses during a crisis like the current one,
            in order to maintain the health and well-being of society as a whole.

            I am willing to tolerate public health risks in order to participate in elections and other
            civic duties, even during a crisis like the current one.17



We aimed to make the trade-off questions as intuitive as possible — thus the benefits are based

   17
      An important caveat of this question is that its direction was in contrast with the rest of the questions. As the order
of all thee willingness statements was randomized in the COVID-19 and Civil Liberties Survey, we observe an order effect
in responses to this question (see Appendix Table F.1) but not on give up privacy protection (see Appendix Table F.2)
and suspend democratic procedures (see Appendix Table F.3). Hence, we exclude this question on civic duties from
our baseline results; we show the results on this question in Appendix Tables F.4 and F.5 and our baseline categorical
indices on democratic related preferences are not affected by the inclusion of this variable.


                                                             9
on the right that is being foregone. We frame the question around “during a crisis like the current
one” for two reasons. First, highlighting crisis makes the trade-offs more relevant — during typical
times, citizens may not be actively articulating preferences and attitudes across these domains,
especially since public health, when functioning well, is the absence of disease and less salient
(Garrett, 2000). Second, we refrain from explicitly mention the specific COVID-19 pandemic to
make the attitudes and trade-offs more generically applicable beyond the specific context we study.
    Lastly, all participants were shown the question asking whether they were worried that the
rights forgone during the COVID-19 crisis will not be recovered once the crisis is over.

2.4.2   Outcome variables in the COVID-19 and Civil Liberties Survey

For our quasi-experimental and experimental analysis, we considered the outcome variables in
the seven families highlighted in bold face below. We also construct inverse-covariance-weighted
indices that combine the outcome variables within each family, as described in Anderson (2008).
In constructing these indices, we orient the variables so that more positive values have the same
meaning: for instance, when constructing the index for questions related to privacy, we orient the
components of the index in such a way that more positive values always mean “more willing to
forego privacy protections.”

Overall rights and freedoms This family comprises two questions, both of which ask participants
about the extent to which they agree with a certain statement on a scale from 0 to 10, where 0 stands
for completely disagree and 10 stands for completely agree. Henceforth, we will refer to the format
described above as the agree-disagree format. The first statement is "I am willing to sacrifice my own
rights and freedom during a crisis like the current one, in order to maintain the health and well-being of the
whole society". The second statement is "I am willing to impose strict limits to the rights and freedom of
other people during a crisis like the current one, in order to maintain the health and well-being of the whole
society".

Protection of privacy This family comprises four questions. The first question has the agree-
disagree format. The statement is "I am willing to relax privacy protections and let the government
access my personal data during a crisis like the current one, in order to allow the government to make timely
and accurate decisions".
    The second and third questions have a different format, which we refer to henceforth as the
minimum-lives-saved format. These questions describe a specific policy designed to curtail the
COVID-19 pandemic and asks respondents to report the minimum number of lives (out of ev-
ery 100 people in your country that would have otherwise died) that the policy would need to
save in order for the respondent to support it. Detailed instructions and a comprehension question
ensure respondents’ understanding, and subjects cannot proceed until they correctly answer the
comprehension question. We interpret low numbers as corresponding to policies that respondents
perceive as exacting a modest toll on their civil liberties or economic prosperity and high numbers
as policies that respondents perceive as exacting a severe toll. The two policies that relate to privacy


                                                     10
are "During the epidemic, the government can track smartphone locations and social contact data of the cit-
izens who tested positive for COVID-19" and "During the epidemic, the government can track smartphone
location and social contact data of all citizens".
    An important advantage of the minimum-lives-saved format design — normalizing answers to
lives needed to be saved out of every 100 that would have otherwise died — is that such questions
allow us to quantify respondents’ trade-offs on key civil liberties dimensions without imposing
an actual benchmark for the effectiveness of the policies of interest. However, respondents prior
beliefs on the severity of COVID-19 in their countries could still affect answers to these questions
irrespective of direct civil liberties trade-offs, since such beliefs dictates the magnitude of the prob-
lem at stake. These prior beliefs on COVID-19 severity could directly relate to subjects’ worries
about health risks, and hence generating a mechanical correlation between health-related worries
and answers on minimum-lives-saved. In order to take these prior beliefs into account, we construct
a binary indicator for individuals who are unwilling to impose the policies (namely, expressing
a very high number of lives the policies need to save in order to justify its implementation) de-
spite holding the beliefs that many people would have died from COVID-19.18 We discuss how
respondents answer such minimum-lives-saved questions in greater detail in Section 4.2.
    The last question in this family asked participants whether they wanted to receive a link to an
app developed at MIT to facilitate contact tracing. The app logs a user’s location every five minutes
so that, if the user tests positive for COVID-19, the authorities can reconstruct the user’s location
history and social interactions with fidelity.19 .

Support for democracy This family comprises six questions. Three of the questions are taken
from the World Value Survey. They ask respondents to report whether they think a certain way
of governing a country is very bad, fairly bad, fairly good, or very good. The topics are: "Having
a strong national leader who does not have to bother with Congress and elections", "Having experts, not the
government, make decisions according to what they think is best for the country", and "Having a democratic
political system". The other three questions have the agree-disagree format. The statements are:
"I am willing to suspend democratic procedures and give the President more power during a crisis like the
current one, in order to ensure swift government actions", "I am willing to tolerate public health risks in order
to participate in elections and other civic duties, even during a crisis like the current one", "I am willing to
support the government controlling the media during a crisis like the current one, in order to ensure effective
and uniform communication between the government and citizens".20

   18
       Specifically, we take the median value of subjective community risk of COVID-19 by each country and marked as
1 if the respondent’s response of subjective community risk of COVID-19 is greater than the median value within each
country. We then take the median value of each policy variable across the entire sample and marked as 1 if the respon-
dent’s response to the policy variables is greater than the median value. Recall the policy variable already referenced
the country in the question stem, the indicator equals 1 if the respondent’s subjective risk of COVID-19 is less than the
median value but the policy variable is greater than the median value. Although this is our preferred coding given the
importance of priors, our results are robust to alternative normalizations.
    19
       We list the link to the app here: https://privatekit.mit.edu/.
    20
       Where necessary, the text of the statement was adapted to better fit the political system of each country. For instance,
in Germany the word "President" was replaced with the word "Chancellor." A few of these questions are not asked in
China due to their political sensitivity.


                                                              11
Right to free movement This family comprises three questions. All three questions have the
minimum-lives-saved format. The first policy is "During the epidemic, the government closes the na-
tional border to prevent foreigners from entering". The second policy is "During the epidemic, the gov-
ernment recommends citizens do not leave their homes except for limited, permitted reasons". The third
policy is "During the epidemic, the government arrests citizens who are outside their home if they do not
have government permission".

Business and school operations This family comprises three questions, all of which have the
minimum-lives-saved format. The corresponding policies are: "During the epidemic, the govern-
ment closes restaurants, bars, and entertainment businesses", "During the epidemic, the government closes
all non-essential businesses", "During the epidemic, the government closes all schools". The willingness to
support closure of either business and school captures respondents’ view on whether continuation
of economic activities and access to (face-to-face) education is an important right and freedom that
individuals have a claim to exercise, even during times of crises.

      Our survey also includes a variety of auxiliary questions that help inform the interpretation of
our core questions. There are two major categories. First, to the extent that the COVID-19 pan-
demic is a crisis not only on public health, but also directly and indirectly on economic conditions,
we elicit respondents’ attitudes related to economic well-being.21 Second, to the extent that the
COVID-19 pandemic could last for months if not years, the expected duration and future condi-
tions could affect respondents’ attitudes over what they are willing to tolerate. Thus, we elicit
various components of respondents’ beliefs about the future COVID-19 severity.22 Finally, one of
the questions elicited the participants’ willingness-to-pay for a 100 USD voucher redeemable at any
dine-in restaurant of their choosing in month of June 2020. We interpret this choice as a measure
of the participants’ confidence that the pandemic would be under control by June 2020.


2.5     Recruitment and sampling
COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report                          The sample consists of 1,000 respondents from each
country each week. The sample is representative on first moments of age, gender and geographic
location of residence. The sampling frame is built based on Dynata’s weekly consumer trend survey
infrastructure. Appendix Table B.1 presents the summary statistics of the sample’s gender, age, and
    21
       This family comprises five questions. One of the questions has the agree-disagree format. The statement is "I
am willing to endure substantial economic losses during a crisis like the current one, in order to maintain the health and well-
being of society as a whole". The other three questions have the minimum-lives-saved format. The policies are: "During the
epidemic, the government implements a set of public health measures that doubles the unemployment rate", "During the epidemic, the
government implements a set of public health measures that triples the unemployment rate", "During the epidemic, the government
implements a set of public health measures that cuts the pay of low income workers in half ".
    22
       One question asked participants to forecast how long it would take before the participant’s own country would go
a week without any new reported cases. Another question asked participants to forecast how long it would take before
a randomly selected country other than the participant’s own would go a week without any new reported cases. One
question asked participants to forecast the total official number of COVID-19-related deaths in the participant’s own
country. Two questions asked participants to report, on a scale from 0 to 10, the extent to which they worried that "the
rights, freedoms, and procedures that are forgone during a crisis like the current one won’t be recovered after the crisis is over" or
that "the economic prosperity that is lost during the COVID-19 epidemic won’t be recovered after the crisis is over".


                                                                 12
labor market conditions. While the COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report is repeated cross-
sectional in nature, a small number of respondents have participated in more than one wave of the
survey.

COVID-19 and Civil Liberties Survey For each country, we aimed to recruit a sample that is
representative on first moments of age, gender, and household income distribution. As far as ge-
ographic representativeness is concerned, we aimed for 80% of our sample to be geographically
representative and for 20% to over-sample the regions within each country where the COVID-19
pandemic was particularly severe at the time of our survey (“hotspots”). In most countries, one
singular location clearly stood out as the area of major concern. In China, we selected the city of
Wuhan as the hotpot; in Germany, the city of Munich; in France, the city of Paris; in the U.K., the
city of London; in South Korea, the city of Daegu. At the time of our survey, no single location in
Italy and the United States could easily be pinpointed as the hotspot; as a consequence, we selected
two locations in each country. For Italy, we selected the cities of Milan and Bergamo; for the United
States, we selected the cities of New York City, Seattle, New Orleans, and Detroit. These definitions
of COVID-19 hotspots are pre-registered before the survey was administrated.
   We aimed to recruit 1,200 individuals from each country other than the United States, and
3,600 individuals from the United States. Since some of the demographic quotas proved hard to
fill, the total number of participants recruited was larger than originally planned. Appendix Ta-
ble B.2 shows our targeted and realized quotas. Overall, the recruitment effort manages to fill in
most of the desired demographic quotas, with a few exceptions, primarily with respect to macro-
region representation within the country. Throughout our baseline analyses, we re-weight the
sample to match our targets and hence population representativeness along the targeted margins.
The survey weights were constructed by implementing an iterative proportional fitting procedure
(raking) based on the marginal distributions of gender, age, gross household income, and region.
The results are robust to alternative re-weighting methods, which we discuss in greater detail in
Section 4.2.
   To ensure data quality, we exclude from the analysis all individuals who are in the bottom
5% in terms of survey duration within country, as measured by time taken to respond to the pre-
treatment modules (thus treatment would not mechanically affect the survey duration). Our base-
line results are robust to not using this quality control criteria, or using an alternative criterion.
   We present the summary statistics of the respondents in Appendix Table B.3, first for all coun-
tries pooled together in columns 1 and 2, and separately for each individual country in the sample
in columns 3 to 16. In particular, we present respondents’ characteristics and survey answers in
six main categories: demographic traits (e.g., gender, age, education); employment status and in-
come; political leaning and media consumption; health related issues (e.g., frequently require hos-
pital use); contracted or having acquaintances contracted with COVID-19; and whether residing
in COVID-19 hotspots or urban areas.
   While we cannot comprehensively cross-validate sample representativeness, we take advan-


                                                   13
tage of the fact that a subset of our survey questions follow the exact format as those asked in the
World Value Survey, which uses a very different sampling strategy to ensure population represen-
tativeness. Reassuringly, we find that the relative ranking of countries with respect to the average
answers to these questions in our survey are virtually identical to those elicited by the World Value
Survey (see Appendix Figure E.2).


2.6      Balance of experimental intervention
Assignment to the treatment and control conditions is balanced across demographic characteris-
tics. Appendix Table B.4 presents the balance tests among respondents in the two experimental
groups and the control group, controlling for survey countries’ fixed effects, first pooling all coun-
tries together, and then country by country. Across a wide range of demographic and background
characteristics that are time-invariant, and also a set of attitudes that are elicited prior to the exper-
imental intervention, we do not observe statistical significant differences between respondents in
the treatment and control groups. Receiving experimental treatment, in particular the civil liberties
treatment, induces a 3% increase in attrition in completing the survey — although it is statistically
significant, the magnitude of the attrition is economically negligible (see Appendix Table B.5). In
order to address the differential attrition in the civil liberties treatment arm, we show bounds on es-
timated treatment incorporating selective attrition, following Lee (2009). The results are presented
in Appendix Table B.6.


3        Describing trade-offs over civil liberties
We begin by providing descriptive evidence on how people navigate the trade-offs between health,
economic prosperity, and civil liberties, primarily based on the repeated COVID-19 Global Con-
sumer Trends Report. Moving from the macro to the micro, we first describe overall patterns across
countries and cross-country differences; and we then illustrate differences across demographic
groups and individual characteristics.


3.1      Are people willing to trade-off civil liberties?
Figure 2 pools respondents from all countries in the COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report
and shows the fraction of respondents who are unwilling to give up civil liberties in times of crises
such as the one caused by COVID-19. Across domains such as sacrificing one’s own rights, relax-
ing privacy protections, suspending democratic procedures, restricting freedom of the press, and
enduring economic losses, about 19% of respondents declare themselves unwilling to give up civil
liberties during a time of crisis.23 Thus, the median person in the countries we survey places some

    23
     "Unwilling" is defined as answering a 4 or less on a given 10-point Likert scale question about the willingness to give
up different rights and freedoms. Appendix Figure E.3 presents the average level of agreement among all participants
in the COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report with the statements related to sacrificing one’s own rights, relaxing
privacy protections, suspending democratic procedures, restricting freedom of the press, and enduring economic losses.


                                                            14
emphasis on swift and effective crisis response, even at the expense of some civil liberties.
      Comparing across different dimensions of civil liberties, respondents are more readily willing
to give up some of their individual rights than to relax privacy protection and suspend democratic
procedures. The ranking from Figure 2 suggests that participants are less willing to give up civil
liberties that apply more broadly across society, such as freedom of the press, democratic proce-
dure, and the right to privacy.
      Moving to the COVID-19 and Civil Liberties Survey, we compare the extent to which respon-
dents support different policies aimed at containing the COVID-19 pandemic in terms of minimum
number of lives saved. Appendix Figure A.9 shows, for each policy, the average number of lives out
of every 100 that respondents reported requiring the policy to save in order for them to support
it. In most countries, respondents perceive policies related to the closure of schools, businesses
and national borders as among the more tolerable ones (i.e., requiring a small minimum number
of lives saved). Conversely, they perceive policies that drastically reduce economic prosperity, es-
pecially of the most vulnerable workers, as harder to tolerate (i.e., requiring a larger minimum
number of lives saved).


3.2     Which country’s respondents are more willing to trade off civil liberties?
As the COVID-19 pandemic is spreading around the world, countries face similar public health
challenges and need for interventions to curb the infection. However, citizens’ willingness to give
up their rights and freedom, and to comply with public health interventions need not be uniform
across countries.24
      In fact, we observe substantial differences across countries regarding citizens’ views about the
trade-offs between public health and civil liberties. Figure 3, top left panel, presents the share of
respondents who are unwilling to sacrifice their own rights (at least to some degree) during the
crisis, across the 15 countries in our surveys.25 The US mean is shown in the dotted vertical line.
Taking respondents in the US as a benchmark, approximately 23% of the respondents in the US
are unwilling to sacrifice their own (general) rights even during time of major crisis.
      The gap between China and the US is consistently one of the largest in terms of willingness to
give up rights and freedom. While only about 5% of the respondents in China are unwilling to give
up any of their rights and freedom, the share is four times higher in the US. Relative to the US, a
smaller share of respondents in the Netherlands, Germany, France, the UK, Spain, Singapore, Italy,
India, Canada, and Australia are unwilling to sacrifice rights.26
    24
       During the time period covered in our survey, the countries in our sample were at different stages of the COVID-19
pandemic: Some are at the early stage, and some have already passed the (first) peak of infection by the time of our
survey. The results we present above pool all weeks from the weekly surveys together, controlling for overall week
fixed effects, and hence exploiting only cross-sectional differences across countries. In Section 6, we will examine the
over-time variation and cross-country dynamics throughout the COVID-19 crisis.
    25
       “Unwilling” is defined as answering a 4 or lower on a given 10-point Likert scale question about the willingness to
give up different rights and freedoms.
    26
       Within our sample, Japan is the only country than exhibits lower share of respondents willing to sacrifice their own
rights, compared to the US. See Beer (1983) for a discussion of the century of national emergency broken by “interludes
of martial law” and the reaction of the post-WWII citizenry to the Potsdam declaration and attendant policies: “the vast


                                                            15
    We observe similar cross-country differences across other civil liberties dimensions that we
elicit. As shown in the other panels in Figure 3, we observe substantial differences in the share
of respondents who are willing to relax privacy protections, to suspend democratic procedures,
to forgo civic duties, to sacrifice freedom of the press, and to endure economic losses during the
time of a major crisis such as COVID-19. We present the average answers to these questions on a
more continuous scale, in Appendix Figure A.10, where we standardize the answers (from 0-10
scale) and benchmark against the average in the US (set as 0). The average attitudes across these
countries fall between 0.5 unit of a standard deviation below and 1 unit of a standard deviation
above the average in the US. Moreover, the relative rankings of the countries in terms of their
average citizens’ attitudes are largely stable across these 6 dimensions of the trade-offs between
health crisis and civil liberties.
    Interestingly, despite the fact that European countries tend to be more concerned about privacy
protection, as reflected in the enactment of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), one of
the strictest privacy regulations in the world, respondents in Europe are considerably more likely
to give up their privacy rights during periods of crisis such as COVID-19, than their American
counterparts.
    Overall, citizens in places with strong existing civil liberties protections are more likely to hold
onto their rights. Take the respondents’ willingness to relax privacy protection during the time
of crisis as an example — respondents in countries that have high level of ex-ante political and
civil freedom ratings, according to the Freedom House, are significantly more likely to hold onto
privacy protection (Appendix Figure A.11). This suggests that a component of the cross-country
differences in such attitudes indeed capture countries’ differences in institutions — those living in
countries that have existing low protection over personal privacy are less favorable of holding onto
those protection at the time of crisis, presumably because the political cost of not doing so is high,
or that there is not much privacy protection to forgo in the first place.
    Moreover, tendency to hold onto rights such as privacy protection is even stronger among those
individuals who have previously resided in regimes where citizens had limited freedom and rights.
We find that German respondents who reside in the East, in particular the cohorts who spent
the formative years in East Germany prior to German unification (Fuchs-Schündeln and Schün-
deln, 2015), are significantly less willing to give up their rights even during time of crisis, and they
worry that the rights will not be restored once they are taken away (see Panel (A) of Appendix
Figure A.12). Similarly, respondents who reside in South Korea but were migrated from North
Korea during the Korean War (1950-1953) are substantially less likely to give up their rights dur-
ing the crisis, and demonstrate a strong worry about the rights given up during crisis becoming
permanently lost (see Panel (b) of Appendix Figure A.12).
    Such cross-country differences in willingness to trade-off civil liberties reflect, at least par-
tially, the pre-existing characteristics and institutional features of these countries, irrespective of
the COVID-19 crisis. It is important to note that such institutional features and citizens’ attitudes

majority of citizens responded with overwhelming support for the new regime of freedom.”


                                                       16
over civil liberties are likely co-evolving and outcomes of a political equilibrium — institutions
shape and are shaped by citizens’ attitudes and preferences.
      Beyond reflecting institutional characteristics, the cross-country differences could reflect di-
verse populations and their attitudes, and capture respondents’ differential response to the COVID-
19 crisis. We find that, on average across all the dimensions of trading off civil liberties that we
elicit, only around 10% of the overall variance in attitudes over trade-offs of civil liberties and public
health conditions can be attributed to cross-country differences (see Appendix Table F.6). Interest-
ingly, willingness to sacrifice freedom of the press has the highest fraction of variation attributable
to cross-country differences (14%), while willingness to endure economic losses has the lowest
(5%).


3.3     Who is more willing to trade off civil liberties?
We now turn our attention to which individuals within-country are more willing to trade off civil
liberties.

Demographic characteristics We first examine which demographic characteristics are system-
atically associated with one’s willingness to give up rights during the time of a crisis. Appendix
Figure A.13 presents the correlation coefficients on each of the key demographic characteristics (in
a multivariate regression), pooling across respondents in the seven countries in our COVID-19 and
Civil Liberties Survey sample where we have elicited a rich set of individual characteristics. We
control for a full set of survey country interacted with survey week fixed effects, hence zooming
in on within country patterns. We find that older individuals (65+) and females are more (by 4%
and 6% of a standard deviation, respectively; the estimates are based on multivariate regressions)
willing to give up their own rights during crisis. On the contrary, the youngest individuals (age
18-25) and those who are unemployed are the subgroups of the population that are the least will-
ing to give up their rights during crisis (by 6% and 9% of a standard deviation, respectively; the
estimates are based on multivariate regressions).
      We observe such patterns consistently across the countries that we sample, and across the out-
comes that we elicit (see Appendix Figures E.4 for the demographic correlates patterns country by
country; Appendix Tables F.7-F.13 present the corresponding results in regression format). This
suggests that that individuals with less advantaged in society are more hold more strongly onto
their rights, a pattern that we will return to later in the paper.

Perceived risks and worries associated with COVID-19 We next turn to factors more directly
related to the COVID-19 pandemic. In particular, we investigate the extent to which individuals’
perceptions of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic are associated with their willingness to trade-
off civil liberties.
      We focus on three dimensions of such perceived impact: risks induced by COVID-19 for one’s
health, worries about one’s economic well-being and prosperity, and the risks associated with


                                                   17
the long-term erosion of civil liberties.27 Figure 4 presents the regression coefficients, where we
regress an index for health-related worries (e.g., worry about own health conditions), an index
for economic-related worries (e.g., worry about household financial situation), and a measure of
worry about potential long-term erosion of civil liberties, on each of the six dimensions of attitudes
about trade-offs between public health and civil liberties.28
    We observe a strong pattern that greater worry about health is substantially associated with
more willingness to sacrifice rights. On average, a one standard deviation increase in one’s health-
related worries is associated with about half of a standard deviation unit increase in the respon-
dents’ inclinations such as willingness to sacrifice rights and suspend democratic procedures. This
pattern holds virtually across all countries in the sample, despite the differences in overall levels
that we observe across countries as discussed above.
    On the contrary, worries about long-term erosion of civil liberties are strongly associated with
less willingness to sacrifice rights and freedom during times of crises. A one standard deviation
increase in one’s civil liberty related worries is associated with approximately one third a standard
deviation unit decrease in such inclinations.
    The association between worries about economic well-being and willingness to trade-off civil
liberties is more muted and nuanced. While economic considerations are certainly very salient, the
magnitude of the association is much smaller as compared to that between worries about health
conditions and willingness to trade-off civil liberties, and the signs of the association are mixed.
Conceptually, the trade-offs between economic well-being and public health conditions could be
ambiguous for at least two reasons. First, to the extent that public health measures could generate
restrictions on short term economic activities and induce economic slowdown, individuals who are
more worried about economic well-being are less likely to support such restrictions and give up
their rights and freedom in the economic domains accordingly. However, to the extent that respon-
dents may consider that strong public health measures could reduce threats to economic prosperity
in the long run, then worries about economic well-being could be associated with stronger will-
ingness to trade-off civil liberties and support restrictions. Second, while there may exist a private
trade-off between one’s economic well-bring and adherence of public health measures, experts in
public health and economics alike tend to believe that there isn’t ultimately a trade-off between
public health and economic conditions at the social level — after all, societal economic activities

    27
       These worries are strongly associated with disease avoidance and social distancing behaviors. As shown in Ap-
pendix Figure A.14, respondents who exhibit stronger health-related worries are substantially more likely to wash hands
frequently, avoid going to restaurants, and stay at home for work. Those who exhibit stronger worry for civil liberty ero-
sion are much less likely to engage in these hygiene and social distancing behaviors.
    28
       The indexes of health and economic-related worries are constructed from answers to the question "When thinking
about COVID-19, how worried, if at all, are you personally about...", which are elicited on a 5-point Likert scale. The index of
health-related worries is a simple average of four items: worries about personal health, the health of the elderly, being
around strangers, and the health care system being unable to cope. Similarly, the index of economic-related worries
is a simple average of four items: worries about own household’s financial position, about availability of food, about
one’s own country’s economy, and about the world economy. The measure of worries about long-term erosion of civil
liberties is given by the answer to the survey question "On a scale of 0 to 10, how worried are you that the rights, freedoms,
and procedures that are forgone during a crisis like the current one won’t be recovered after the crisis is over?". This analysis is
conducted using COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report sample.


                                                                18
cannot function without the basic level of public health.


4        Individual COVID-19 health risks and civil liberties trade-offs: quasi-
         experimental approach and results
In this section, we exploit quasi-experimental variation in the health risk associated with the pan-
demic to examine the extent to which the correlations between health worries and views on civil
liberties presented in Section 3.3 represent a causal relationship.


4.1      Estimation
We combine natural variation in underlying individual medical conditions, age, income and sex
with geographical COVID-19 spread to construct health risk scores using the Mathematica 19 & Me
COVID-19 risk calculator (Hu et al., 2020).29
      The main specification for the quasi-experimental approach is:

                            Yihjd = α + βHRihj + πXij + µj + γh + δd + ihjd ,                                    (1)

for respondent i in (or outside of) hotspot h in country j at survey date d. Y is one of outcomes
of interest described above. Country and survey date fixed effects (µ and δ) are included in each
specification as are indicators for each hotspot location (γ).
      We control for a large set of individual and regional characteristics that may affect willingness
to trade-off civil liberties. The vector X includes indicators for age group, sex, income, education
attainment, employment status (retired, student, unemployed full/part-time employed), political
affiliation (right, left, neutral/independent), measures of risk and time preferences, population
density and distance to the nearest COVID-19 hotspot.30 We also include a set of indicators for the
experimental intervention — though results are similar when dropping all except those in the con-
trol group.31 X also contains each covariate used in the construction of the Mathematica COVID-19
health risk index (described in detail below).
      The main coefficient of interest is β which reflects the effect of a one-unit standard deviation
increase in COVID-19 health risk (HRihj ) on a given outcome of interest.

4.1.1     Individual COVID-19 health risk score

We use the Mathematica 19 & Me risk score to construct health risk.32 We adapt the original for-
mula so that it reflects more recent and robust medical estimates, and that it relies more on factors
    29
      See https://www.mathematica.org/commentary/19-and-me-a-covid-19-risk-calculator.
    30
      These variables are harmonized so that their interpretation across locations is comparable. For instance, income
categories are relative to the distribution within country.
   31
      See Appendix Table F.14.
   32
      See Appendix D.2 for further details about HR(k). See Appendix D.1 for further details on the Mathematica Score.
See Appendix D.2.1 for details of infection rates.


                                                         19
independent of individuals’ (endogenous) behaviors. The index is the product of the probability
of COVID-19 infection and the probability of severe COVID-19 outcome (e.g., death) conditional
on infection (Hu et al., 2020):

                    HR(k)i = P r(COV ID-19 Inf ectioni ) ∗ P r(COV ID-19 Deathi )                                 (2)

where the k refers to different versions of the index, described below.
    The first component — the probability of COVID-19 infection is given by:


                                                                Exposure Odds Ratioi
                        P r(COV ID-19 Inf ectioni ) =                                  ,                          (3)
                                                              1 + Exposure Odds Ratioi

where the Exposure Odds Ratioi is:

                                             P r(Exposurei )
            Exposure Odds Ratioi =                             ∗ Risk M itigating Behaviors−i                     (4)
                                           1 − P r(Exposurei )

and the probability of exposure for respondent i is:

                           P r(Exposurei ) = 1 − (1 − T (τ, ρ))N um. of Contacts−i .                              (5)

    In a nutshell, exposure to COVID-19 is an absorbing state: the probability of exposure is 1 mi-
nus the chance of not contracting the virus from any of the close contacts. To reduce endogeneity
of one’s own behavior, we substitute own contact rates with a leave-one-out mean among respon-
dent i’s age group-sex-country cell. Thus, each individual i is assigned N um. of Contacts−i other
contacts. For each contact, one faces a transmission probability (T (τ, ρ)) which is the product of
τ , a constant conditional transmission rate, and ρ, a proxy for local prevalence. The exposure odds
can be reduced by preventive behaviors (i.e., Risk M itigating Behaviors−i in Equation 12), which
include a (leave-one-out) measure of hand hygiene.33
    The second component — death conditional on infection, is constructed based on the empiri-
cal odds of dying from COVID-19 given certain medical conditions, and sociodemographic factors
(age, sex and income). We update the original Mathematica risk score to incorporate more recent
and robust medical estimates.34 The updated odds ratios herein are from an analysis of the United
Kingdom’s National Health System electronic medical records which covered approximately 17
million primary care visits and over 10,000 COVID-19 related deaths (Williamson et al., 2020).
The odds ratios combined in P r(COV ID-19 Deathi ) include a higher odds for older age, lower in-
come, male sex, obesity, smoking, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), cardiovascular

   33
      Specifically, Risk M itigating Behaviors−i is 1 minus a leave-one-out number of times having washed hands dur-
ing the past 24 hours by sex, age, divided by the maximum number of hand washing across all countries. Mask wearing
was not universally recommended at the time of our survey.
   34
      The original Mathematica risk score relies on a medical study conducted in early March 2020, which included only
a sparse number of COVID-19 deaths in China (Verity et al., 2020).


                                                         20
disease (CVD) diabetes and miscellaneous chronic medical conditions.
    We construct two variations of the health risk indices concerning how local COVID-19 preva-
lence is incorporated in the infection probability. These two variants rely on different identifying
assumptions and proxy for COVID-19 spread in different ways; hence, they complement each other
in our identification strategy.
    The first index, HR(1)ihj , directly incorporates the local prevalence of COVID-19 infection into
the transmission rate. Specifically, ρ is the leave-one-out mean of respondents with an acquaintance
infected with COVID-19 in i’s broad geographic region (i.e., administrative level 1).35
    The second index, HR(2)ihj , follows HR(1)ihj but sets ρ as 1 so that geographic variation in
COVID-19 prevalence is not directly incorporated into the health risk index itself. Instead, we in-
teract HR(2)ihj in Equation 2 with an indicator for residence in a COVID-19 hotspot. Specifically,
the alternative specification is:

            Yihjd = α + β(HR(2)ij ∗ 1hotspot ) + ψHR(2)ij + πXij + µj + γh + δd + ihjd .                            (6)

    Thus, β in this specification is identified not solely on the non-linearity of the health risk index,
but on the interaction between health risk index and local COVID-19 prevalence.
    Importantly, both of the baseline COVID-19 health risk indices that we constructed based on
the epidemiological and medical literature are strongly correlated with our own survey data on
respondents’ perceived risk of contracting with COVID-19. Appendix Figure A.15 shows that re-
spondents with high health risk scores have indeed a much higher subjective likelihood of getting
sick from COVID-19 (p-value < 0.01), and to have actually been contracted with COVID-19 (p-
value = 0.09). To the extent that subjective health risks are directly affecting individuals’ attitudes
and behaviors, we show in Appendix Table B.8 that subjective health risks regarding COVID-19
are strongly associated with individuals’ willingness to trade-off civil liberties over public health
conditions. While respondents’ perceived COVID-19 risks could directly drive their behaviors and
preferences on civil liberties trade-offs, such perception is highly endogenous and the health risk
indices aim to capture the more objective components that shape risk perceptions.36 In Section 4.2,
we discuss the robustness of our baseline health risk scores to various alternative specifications.

4.1.2   COVID-19 hotspots designation

Both HR(1)ihj and HR(2)ij rely on the designation of COVID-19 hotspots (at the time of April
2020). These are cities we pre-specified (and over-sampled) before the survey implementation
(see Section 2.2 for details).

   35
       Since the acquaintances with COVID-19 may not be located in the region as the respondent, to properly measure
the local exposure risks, we adjust the acquitance-based proxy for ρ so that it exponentially decays in distance from the
nearest COVID-19 hotspot.
    36
       The objective health risks imperfectly capture individuals’ subjective health risks, potentially because: (i)there
are (objective) factors that are not accounted for such as number of elderly in the family; (ii) people may be over- or
under-reacting to objective risk factors; and (iii) people may be affected by (mis)information on what is actually a risk
factor.


                                                           21
    Although COVID-19 hotspots were pre-registered, there are, of course, many different ways
to measure regional COVID-19. The baseline results that we will present are robust to many al-
ternative measurements of regional COVID-19 prevalence: (i) the cumulative number of reported
COVID-19 cases in the respondent’s region of residence during the week prior to when the sur-
vey was taken37 (ii) the standardized count for cumulative COVID-19 cases in the corresponding
region; (iii) the cumulative number of COVID-19 related death in the respondent’s region of resi-
dence during the week prior to when the survey was taken; and (iv) whether the regions are in the
top 5% percentile in terms of cumulative number of reported COVID-19 deaths as of March 30th,
2020.38 We discuss the robustness with respect to these alternative measures in greater detail in
Section 4.1.3.

4.1.3   Identification assumptions and threats to identification

The two variants of health risk indices require different identification assumptions and are sub-
ject to different threats. Identification with HR(1)ihj relies on the non-linear functional form of
the virus contraction and disease risks with respect to individuals’ characteristics. The critical
identification assumption to interpret β in specification (1) as causal is the correct functional form
specification for the epidemiological health risks, in particular, the non-linear components of the
specification. Our baseline measure follows a reputable measure and is developed based on a large
medical literature.
    We conduct two sets of robustness exercises to assess the underlying functional form specifi-
cation of the epidemiological health risks. First, we perturb aspects of the specification such as
the exact formulation of the COVID-19 contraction risks and the disease severity conditional on
contraction; we discuss in subsequent sub-section that our results are not affected by such pertur-
bations. Second, we replace the key disease and health conditions with ailments that not medically
directly related to COVID-19, while maintaining other aspects of the epidemiological health risks
formulation; we discuss in subsequent sub-section that our baseline results crucially depend on
the specification tailored to COVID-19.
    Identification with HR(2)ihj relies on the interaction between regional characteristics (Hotspot
indicator) and individual characteristics. The latter dimension of our difference-in-differences
aims to capture individual characteristics and pre-existing conditions that lead certain individ-
uals to be at higher health risk in the COVID-19 pandemic than others: for example, being affected

   37
       Data on number of infections by region comes from the following sources: China Data Lab (2020) for China;
Santé publique France (2020) for France; Robert Koch Institute (2020) for Germany; Dipartimento della Protezione
Civile (2020) for Italy; Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (KCDC) (2020) for South Korea, GOV.UK
website (2020); National Health Service (2020); Office for National Statistics (2020); Department of Health of Northern
Ireland (2020); Public Health Wales (2020); Scottish Government (2020) for the UK, and The New York Times (2020)
for the US. Region is defined as harmonized administrative level 1 region — the most detailed geographic level at which
infection data is available for all countries in our sample. Germany: States; USA: States; China: Provinces; South Korea:
Metropolitan cities, special city, special autonomous city, and provinces; Italy: Regions; Great Britain: Regions; France:
Regions.
    38
       Regions selected are: Germany: Bayern; USA: New York State and Washington State; China: Henan and Hubei;
South Korea: Daegu; Italy: Lombardia; Great Britain: London; France: Île de France.


                                                           22
by chronic lung disease. Of course individuals with different degrees of pre-existing risk propensi-
ties to COVID-19 are different across many observable and in particular, unobservable dimensions.
Thus, we incorporate a second dimension of variation that aims to capture geographic variation in
pandemic intensity. As such, the difference-in-differences approach compares the attitudes of indi-
viduals with different COVID-19 related health risks across regions that have different prevalence
of COVID-19 infection, conditional on specific hotspot fixed effects and the nonlinear risk score. In
other words, we difference out the baseline differences in attitudes that would exist among indi-
viduals with different health risks within a region, or differences in attitudes among individuals
with similar risk propensity across regions. In order to interpret β in specification (6) as the causal
effect of high intensity COVID-19 exposure on the attitudes of individuals at high-health risk, the
following assumption has to be satisfied: had COVID-19 intensity been the same in all regions
within a country, then, conditional on controls, the difference in the outcome variables between
people at high and low health risk would, on average, have been the same in regions with different
actual exposure (parallel trends). As the COVID-19 hotspots tend to be more urban and metropoli-
tan (see Appendix Table F.15) we condition on residence in a given hotspot in all specifications
as well as population density and political affiliation. To probe our identifying assumptions con-
cerning HR(2)ihj , we perform three types of robustness checks. First, we demonstrate consistent
results across different definitions of who is considered at high health risk and different geograph-
ical definitions of pandemic intensity. Second, we include a rich set of controls in order to absorb
variation that may lead to the violation of the identifying assumptions, such as regional fixed ef-
fects. Third, although we do not have data from prior to the discovery of COVID-19 to directly test
for a “pre-trend,” we show that respondents who are not prone to COVID-19 health risks individu-
ally or those who reside in regions that are not COVID-19 hotspots do not report their attitudes on
trade-offs related to civil liberties have changed at least during the two weeks prior to the survey
(see Appendix Table F.16; we discuss this in detail in Section 4.2).
   While each of the two empirical strategies confront with specific threats to identification, these
two strategies complement each other and strengthen the overall identification. Consistency of
the estimated effects would suggest that the identification assumption would have to be violated
simultaneously across both specifications.
   It is important to note that we view both empirical strategies as capturing a “holistic” effect of
COVID-19 exposure that ranges from direct health effects to community health impacts, as well as
various socioeconomic disruptions arising from the COVID-19 pandemic. This reflects the fact that
major crises such as the COVID-19 by definition will generate broad consequences across multiple
aspects of people’s lives, and it is particularly important and relevant to examine views about trade-
offs over various aspects of society under such circumstances, of which we focus on two (civil
liberties and public health conditions). We leverage survey experiments to isolate specific channels
through which the holistic effects due to COVID-19 pandemic exposure operates, and we discuss
these in detail in Section 5.




                                                  23
4.2     Results
We present results from our baseline specifications in Table 1, estimated on one outcome at a time.
Column 3 shows the estimated β coefficients from the first empirical strategy and column (4) its
standard error, following specification (1); column (5) shows the estimated β coefficients from the
second empirical strategy, following specification (6) and column (6) the corresponding standard
errors. Each panel corresponds to a category of outcomes grouped by theme. In addition to in-
dividual outcomes, we also report the effect on a z-score index that summaries all the individual
outcome variables in the category.
      A consistent pattern emerges from both empirical strategies. We find that exposure to COVID-
19 risks significantly and substantially increases individuals’ willingness to give up some rights
and freedom for improvement of public health conditions. Individuals who are subject to greater
epidemiological COVID-19 health risks are more likely to express willingness to give up not only
their own rights, but also the rights and freedom of others in the society, even controlling linearly
for all the components that shape the health risks. Those who are residing in regions that are more
severely hit are also more willing to give up rights and freedom. Individuals in these regions who
are more prone to health risks related to COVID-19 themselves are differentially and substantially
more willing to give up their rights and freedom, compared to those who are either less prone to
health risks and living in the same region, or those with similar risk propensity but living in less
severe COVID-19 hit regions.
      The magnitude of the differences in attitudes that we identify is large. As a benchmark, we can
use the US-China gap (column 7) between an average respondents in China and the US, which is
one of the largest cross-country gaps that we observe in terms of citizens’ willingness to trade-off
civil liberties. The increase in willingness to give up rights due to a one standard deviation increase
in and individual’s exposure to COVID-19 risks as measured by HR(1) is approximately 10% of
the baseline US-China gap.
      Such differences in willingness to give up rights due to exposure to COVID-19 crisis are reflected
across a range of specific civil liberties domains. We find that individuals more exposed to COVID-
19 risks (according to either measure) are more willing to trade off protection of privacy for public
health conditions and more supportive of policies that track and trace individuals in the society
(Panel B). Exposure to the COVID-19 risks is also correlated with more support for strong leaders
and even for suspending democratic procedures and key institutions such as freedom of press in
order to improve public health conditions (Panel C). The latter results are statistically weaker using
the second empirical strategy. Moreover, exposure to the COVID-19 risks leads to greater tolerance
of an array of public health policies that restrict individuals’ mobility and right of movement (Panel
D); greater tolerance of policies that limit business activities and school operations (Panel E); and
greater tolerance of public health measures that may induce economic hardship (Panel F).
      In fact, these very individuals who are willing to trade-off civil liberties due to their more se-
vere exposure to COVID-19 risks are also more pessimistic about the prospect that the rights and
freedom that they are willing to give up may be restored in the future (see Appendix Tables F.17


                                                   24
and F.18). This makes their willingness to sacrifice rights and freedom even starker, considering
the long-term risks on civil liberties erosion that they are willing to tolerate.
   Although we cannot directly test for the absence of pre-trends since we do not observe respon-
dents prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, we can examine whether those who are more prone to
COVID-19 health risks and reside in COVID-19 hotspots are more likely to have changed, over the
past two weeks, their views on these attitudes over civil liberties related trade-offs. We find that, in
Appendix Table F.16, this is indeed the case across all the dimensions that we elicit. This suggests
that the differences between those who are more heavily exposed to the COVID-19 risks emerge
only recently, presumably during the COVID-19 pandemic, rather than reflecting these individuals’
pre-existing differences.
   Moreover, we use our survey questions overlapped with the World Value Survey to examine
the country level patterns in a much longer time horizon prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. We find
that citizens’ preference for strong leaders and democratic political system remain relatively stable
between 2005 and 2018 (two most recent waves of the World Value Survey). However, there is a
significant increase in the preference for strong leadership and decrease in preferences for demo-
cratic political system between 2018 and 2020, after the COVID-19 pandemic started (Appendix
Figure A.16), suggesting that the COVID-19 crisis may have upended a set of stable and funda-
mental preferences and attitudes among the citizens around the world.
   While we may have intuitively expected at least some citizens to become more willing to give
up some personal freedoms for public health, it is more surprising that they are willing to also give
up freedom of mobility, privacy protections, electoral procedures, and freedom of speech, which
are backbones of liberal democratic institutions. Freedom of speech and press are considered as
especially critical during time of crises to ensure that the governments’ actions are to the best of citi-
zens’ interests (Sen, 1981). The short and longer-run social welfare implications of this willingness
to give up fundamental rights are unclear.

Robustness

The baseline results presented above are robust to a variety of alternative specifications. On the
first empirical strategy, we show, in Appendix Table B.9, that the baseline results are robust to: (i)
controlling for sub-nation regional fixed effects (Panel A); (ii) replacing the geographic exposure
component in the epidemiological health risks with cumulative COVID-19 cases in the region by
the time of the survey (Panel B); (iii) replacing the geographic exposure component in the epi-
demiological health risks with cumulative COVID-19 related deaths in the region by the time of
the survey (Panel C); (iv) replacing the geographic exposure component in the epidemiological
health risks with standardized cumulative COVID-19 cases in the region by the time of the survey
(Panel D); and (v) dropping New York City sample, the largest COVID-19 hotspot at the time of the
survey (Panel E). In addition, the baseline specifications are robust to including regional (instead
of country) fixed effects.
   With respect to the second empirical strategy, we show, in Appendix Table B.10, that the base-


                                                   25
line results are robust to: (i) controlling for sub-nation regional fixed effects (Panel A); (ii) using
cumulative COVID-19 related deaths as an alternative measure of regional COVID-19 exposure
(Panel B); (iii) re-defining COVID-19 hotspots as regions where residents’ perceived community
risks of COVID-19 infection is in the top 10th percentile in the corresponding country (Panel C);
(iv) using an alternative, non-Mathematica based personal health score as an alternative mea-
sure of individual risk propensity (Panel D); and (v) dropping New York City sample, the largest
COVID-19 hotspot at the time of the survey (Panel E) (Panel E). 39
    We also perform a number of placebo exercises. First, when constructing COVID-19 health
risks, we replace the pre-existing health conditions from chronic lung diseases, a key risk associ-
ated with severe COVID-19 symptoms conditional on contracting the virus, with conditions shown
in the medical literature to be unrelated to COVID-19 severity, such as back pain. The estimated
effects of this placebo health risk on attitudes towards trading-off civil liberties become muted and
statistically indistinguishable from zero (see Appendix Table B.11). Second, when constructing re-
gional COVID-19 exposure, we replace COVID-19 hotspots in the baseline specification with an in-
dicator for highest historic (2018) regional population death rate,40 which are unrelated to COVID-
19 severity by definition. Again, we observe that the estimated effects on civil liberties trade-offs
attitudes are muted and statistically indistinguishable from zero (see Appendix Table B.12). We
can also replace COVID-19 regional hotspots with a set of randomly drawn zipcodes, while main-
taining the overall share of regions that are designated as pseudo-hotspots. We re-estimate the
baseline specification for each randomly drawn pseudo-hotspots, and we repeat this 5,000 times.
We plot the distribution of estimated t-statistics on each of the categorical z-scores on key outcomes,
in Appendix Figure E.11, where the red vertical lines mark the corresponding t-statistics estimated
from the true COVID-19 hotspots. One observes that the t-statistics of the estimated effects on all
the dimensions of attitudes trading-off civil liberties are substantially larger than those from the
pseudo-hotspots, indicating that the relationship between COVID-19 exposure and respondents’
attitudes are unlikely to be driven by random distribution of certain regional patterns.
    Finally, while we have kept most of the survey outcomes as they are elicited, as we discussed
in Section 2, we construct binary indicators based on the “minimum lives needed to save" ques-
tions. The re-constructed outcomes allow us to take into account of the differences in respondents’
beliefs on the total fatality scale due to COVID-19, which may affect how respondents think about
the magnitudes of the trade-offs involved. In Appendix Table B.13, we show that the baseline re-
sults (shown in Panel A) are robust to alternative reconstruction such as normalizing the policy
tolerance attitudes by the perceived number of (future) COVID-19 related deaths (shown in Panel
    39
       One may be worried about the complexity of the baseline personal health risk score. For robustness, we develop
an alternative, simpler measure of individual’s health risk. It consists of an index that assigns risk points to health
conditions (cardiovascular disease, diabetes, chronic lung disease, obesity, pregnancy, tobacco use, or being someone
who (or living with someone who) requires frequent hospital use) and demographic characteristics (age and gender),
based on the medical literature describing factors associated with the severity of COVID-19 health risk. See, among
others, Guan et al. (2020), Huang et al. (2020), Zhou et al. (2020), Wu and McGoogan (2020)), and factors associated
with exposure to the virus (Alsan et al., 2020). See Appendix D for more details of the index construction procedure.
    40
       Defined as a binary indicator that equals one if a respondent’s region had a death rate in 2018 that put the region
at or above the 75th percentile within the country.


                                                           26
B). Note, however, without taking into account of such beliefs, we find that exposure to COVID-
19 risks’ effects mixed across the attitudes regarding the minimum number of lives (out of 100) a
particular policy needs to save in order to justify its implementation (shown in Panel C).

Heterogeneity

We explore two aspects of the heterogeneity in the baseline results that we presented. First, we ex-
amine whether the patterns of COVID-19 risk exposure and trading-off civil liberties are consistent
across the seven countries in our sample. Appendix Tables F.7 to F.13 present the baseline estima-
tion for respondents from each of the seven individual countries. One observes broadly consistent
and quantitatively similar effects of COVID-19 risk exposure and willingness to trade off civil lib-
erties across the US and five European countries, albeit the statistical significance decreases due to
the much smaller sample size.
   Second, we turn to heterogeneity across individuals within country. We re-estimate COVID-19
exposure effects on the z-score index of the category of outcomes on respondents’ overall will-
ingness to give up rights and freedom, splitting the sample into various sub-groups. We do so
with both empirical strategies, and consistent patterns emerge. We present the results following
the first reduced form specification in Appendix Table 2.41 We split the sample across three types
of sub-groups: (i) based on income, education, labor market status, and economic vulnerability
(Panel A); (ii) based on political leaning, political attitudes such as trust in government and trust
in media (Panel B); and (iii) demographic characteristics such as gender, age and race (Panel C).
While there are many interesting patterns on heterogeneity, one theme that emerges consistently
is that the increase in willingness to trade-off civil liberties due to COVID-19 risk exposures are
particularly stronger among the young, educated, non-black/Hispanic (in the US), employed, and
those who are economically secure. This suggests that the ability to trade-off rights and freedom
may be considered as “luxury goods,” especially in times of major crisis when survival-hood and
livelihood are in question for millions of individuals. Those who have socioeconomic cushion to
weather the crisis are more willing to let go (at least temporarily and at least to some degree) civil
liberties and political rights. Those who are less cushioned hold onto their rights, potentially out
of conviction that civil liberties and political rights protect their well-being during the crisis, and
out of worries that their liberties and rights, once give up, would not be restored in the future.

   Taken together the evidence presented above, we find that how people trade off fundamental
civil liberties in times of crises is responsive to individual costs and benefits, in particular that of
health related risks. This stands in contrast with the notion that such trade-offs are taboo and views
on core and fundamental rights and freedom are inelastic.




  41
       We present the heterogeneity analyses following the second reduced form specification in Appendix Table B.14.


                                                          27
5        Concerns over public health and civil liberties erosion: experimental
         results
In this section, we leverage a set of survey experiments to enrich our understanding of the relation-
ship between exposure to the COVID-19 crisis and the ways in which people navigate the trade-offs
between public health and civil liberties.
      While we cannot directly, experimentally shifts respondents’ objective health risks, the exper-
imental intervention aims to shift public and private health risk perceptions. The intervention
administered in our COVID-19 and Civil Liberties Survey allows us to separately identify the ef-
fects of different components of the risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic by providing
separate materials related to different dimensions of such risks, regarding public health demands
or the erosion of civil liberties.


5.1      First stage results
We first present the treatment effects on a set of questions directly related to the information con-
tained in the two treatment arms.42 Table 3 presents the treatment effects on these outcomes. We
find that the civil liberties treatment makes the respondents, relative to those in the control group,
significantly more likely to state that China ranks among the most effective countries in terms of
handling the COVID-19 pandemic, and more likely to express worry that (personal) information
collected during the COVID-19 crisis in order to fight the pandemic may be misused in the future
(Panel A). These two elements — China as an exemplifying case and the potential danger of privacy
violation — are core to the civil liberty treatment material. We find that the public health treatment
makes the treated respondents substantially more likely to agree that flattening the curve is impor-
tant to fight the pandemic, and a key constraint to surge in death is due to insufficient supply of
personal protective equipment (PPE). Similarly, these two elements are centrally featured in the
public health treatment.
      These results suggest that subjects paid attention to and understood the information content in
the treatments. Moreover, it is important to note that the civil liberties treatment and public health
treatment have successfully affected the treated respondents only in the specific domains of inter-
ests. In other words, respondents assigned to the public health treatment exhibit treatment effects
on the questions related to public health and not on the other questions; conversely, respondents
assigned to the civil liberties treatment exhibit treatment effects on the questions related to civil
liberties and not on the other questions. The question on worry about information misuse is one
exception, where both treatment arms make the respondents increase their perceived worry rela-
    42
      Throughout the experimental treatment effect estimation, we include a set of demographic and geographic controls
that mirroring those in the quasi-experimental estimation in Section 4, which include: country and survey date fixed
effects, geographic controls, respondent demographic controls (male, income, age, employment status, having a college
degree, political affiliation, political neutral dummy, risk preference, time preference, the “leave-one-out" mean of past
COVID-19 related behaviors, disease controls (cardiovascular, diabetes, chronic lung disease, tobacco use, obesity, and
any other medical conditions), time since the first case of COVID-19 at region/state level, the distance to the nearest
hotspot, and the “leave-one-out" mean of knowing someone contracted with COVID-19 at admin 1 geographical level.


                                                           28
tive to the control group, albeit the civil liberties treatment generates a much stronger effect than
the population health treatment.
      Finally, we examine whether either the civil liberties or the public health treatment changes the
respondents knowledge regarding the COVID-19 pandemic that are not specifically mentioned in
the treatment. In two such dimensions — knowledge on how COVID-19 spreads, and what are
the common symptoms of COVID-19, treatment respondents are not more likely to answer these
questions correctly than those in the control group. This suggests that while our experimental
treatments have successfully shifted the respondents attitudes on the pandemic, the changes are
pertained to the specific aspects that are mentioned in the treatment, rather than a generic and
broad changes in the knowledge, attention, awareness of the pandemic per se.
      While the treatment effects that we show is the average treatment effects among all treated sub-
jects, it is useful to examine which sub-group of the treated subjects are more responsive to the
treatment and “comply” to the treated materials. In Appendix Table F.19, we present results on
the heterogeneous treatment effects on the first stage outcomes across key demographics charac-
teristics and pre-treatment attitudes and behaviors. We find that among the treated subjects, those
who distrust the media more and are more patient (e.g., care more about the future) are more
responsive to the civil liberties treatment, and those who are more risk-loving have been engaged
in less social distancing practices are more responsive to the public health treatment. Moreover,
respondents who are not yet contracted COVID-19 constitute a bigger share of the treatment com-
pliers. These patterns indicate that indeed our experimental treatment is making those who are
on the margin of not aware of the potential erosion of civil liberties or the need for public health
measures more salient to these aspects of the COVID-19 pandemic.


5.2     Treatment effect on views about trade-offs between public health conditions and
        civil liberties
We now examine whether the experimental treatments induce changes in respondents’ attitudes
regarding the trade-offs between civil liberties and public health. We present the experimental
results on outcomes one category at a time, first on individual survey questions, and then on the
category as a whole where we summarize the questions using an z-score index.
      First, we look at respondents’ overall willingness to give up rights and freedom during the cri-
sis. In Table 4, Panel A, we present the treatment effect estimates first on the civil liberties treatment
(Columns 3 and 4) and then on the public health treatment (Columns 5 and 6). One observes that
upon receiving information about the potential erosion of civil liberties during the COVID-19 cri-
sis, the treated respondents are not only significantly less willing to give up their own rights and
freedom, but also less willing to give up the rights of others in the society. The public health treat-
ment, on the other hand, has minimum impact on the respondents attitudes in these dimensions.
The effect of civil liberties treatment on respondents’ willingness to give up rights is substantial
in magnitude: the treatment induces 0.2 of one standard deviation unit reduction in willingness
to give up rights, which corresponds to around one tenth of the pre-existing differences among


                                                   29
control group respondents from China and the US.
    Second, we examine treatment effects on respondents’ views about the trade-off between pri-
vacy protection and public health conditions. The results are presented in Table 4, Panel B. We
find that respondents who are presented with the civil liberties treatment are less willing to let go
of privacy protection during the pandemic. Compared to those in the control group, these treated
respondents on average demand about three more lives (or 6% more compared to control group
mean) to be saved in order for them to support the implementation of policies that allow the gov-
ernment to track individuals infected with the COVID-19; and they demand about two more lives
(or 3% more compared to control group mean) to be saved in order to support the implementation
of policies that track everyone in the population to battle the pandemic. The public health treat-
ment induces changes in the opposite direction: respondents who are informed of the urgency
to battle pandemic exhibit a lower threshold for them to be willing to accept policies that track
sick individuals or everyone in the population — 1.5 and 2.5 few lives needed to be saved, respec-
tively.43 Consistent with the respondents’ attitudes on trade-offs between privacy protection and
public health conditions, we find that the public health treatment makes the respondents 7% (or, 2
percentage points) more interested and willing to participate in an initiative led by scholars at the
MIT that provides tracking services over smartphone devices.
    Third, we examine how treatments affect respondents’ views about the trade-off between demo-
cratic procedure and public health conditions. The results are presented in Table 4, Panel C. Upon
receiving the public health treatment, respondents become significantly more likely to prefer hav-
ing strong political leaders, as well as to delegate decisions to experts. Importantly, while the treat-
ment emphasizes the need for strong, swift, and coordinated actions during the pandemic in order
to protect public health conditions, the treated respondents increase support for strong leaders
regardless of whether the pandemic is still in place, and for delegation to experts regardless of
whether decisions concern public health. We also find that the public health treatment makes the
respondents slightly more willing to forgo media freedom, more unfavorable of democratic sys-
tems, and more willing to suspend democratic procedures in exchange for swift decision-making,
although the treatment effects are not statistically distinguishable from zero. Interestingly, we do
not find the civil liberties treatment inducing a strong effect along these dimensions.
    Fourth, we examine both views about the trade-offs between rights to movements and public
health conditions, as well as between business operations and public health conditions (Table 4,
Panels D and E). We do not observe strong and statistically significant treatment effects on either
margin, suggesting that respondents’ attitudes over the fundamental rights and freedom on mo-
bility and business operation may be inelastic to the exposure to public health risks or salience on
the potential erosion of civil liberties.
    Finally, we investigate the extent to which the experimental treatment affects respondents’ will-
ingness to accept public health measures that would disrupt economic well-being (Table 4, Panel
   43
    We present, in Appendix Table B.15, the treatment effects estimated on various format of the “lives needed to be
saved” questions, including the binary version described in Section 2, the raw version as we elicit, and the version that
accounts for subjects’ beliefs on COVID-19 local severity.


                                                           30
F). We find that while the public health treatment does not affect respondents’ attitudes, the civil
liberties treatment makes the respondents substantially less willing to accept and tolerate strong
public health measures that significantly disrupt the economy. For example, the treated respon-
dents stated that they would need heavy-handed public health policies that double the unemploy-
ment rate to save 2.7 lives (out of 100 who would have died) in order for them to support such
policies to fight the pandemic.
      Overall, the experimental treatment effects presented above indicate that views about the trade-
offs between public health conditions and civil liberties are elastic to treatments that highlight the
risks of civil liberties erosion. The two experimental treatments consistently shift people’s reported
views about the trade-offs in the opposite direction. Specifically, participants assigned to the public
health treatment report being more willing to tolerate erosion of civil liberties to promote public
health; conversely, participants assigned to the civil liberties treatment report being less willing
to tolerate erosion of civil liberties for the sake of better public health (see Appendix Table F.20
for comparison between the two treatments’ effects). The treatment that highlight public health
risks generally has lesser impact, though it does induce greater willingness to sacrifice privacy,
one of the tightest held rights among the respondents. These patterns suggest that both the public
health demands and concerns for long-term protection of civil liberties are important components
of individuals’ overall exposure to the COVID-19 crisis, and could constitute parts of the “holistic”
COVID-19 risks exposure effect that shapes individuals’ attitudes on trading-off civil liberties that
we documented in Section 4.


5.3     Heterogeneous treatment effects
We next investigate whether the experimental treatment effects are particularly strong among cer-
tain sub-groups of the population. We re-estimate the treatment effects on each category of the
outcomes that we examined above, summarizing individual questions within each category us-
ing an z-score index, on sub-sample split according to respondents’ age, income, political leaning
(only among the US respondents), COVID-related health risks, and residence in a highly affected
area. The results are presented in Appendix Table B.16.
      By and large, we find that the civil liberties treatment induces stronger effects among respon-
dents who economically less vulnerable and left-leaning in terms of political ideology. This pattern
suggests that those who are less willing to give up rights and freedom for public health conditions,
as shown in the previous sections, have become even more unwilling to do so once the potential risk
of long-term erosion of civil liberties is made salient by the civil liberties treatment. The pattern of
heterogeneity treatment effects also suggests that the treatments that highlight the potential civil
liberties erosion work in a way that interact with naturally occurring crisis exposure — individu-
als who are more shielded from the COVID-19 pandemic are less elastic in their views about the
trade-offs. Note that we do not observe notable heterogeneity treatment effects generated by the
public health treatment.



                                                   31
6        How do attitudes evolve over time?
We have shown in the previous sections that exposure to COVID-19 risks significantly shifted in-
dividuals’ views about the trade-offs between civil liberties and public health conditions. In this
final section, we examine the dynamics of attitudes over such trade-offs throughout the COVID-19
pandemic, aiming to shed light on how do these attitudes evolve over time. Thanks to data that
give us the ability to follow people’s concerns over time, we present four findings.
     First, individuals around the world became less willing to sacrifice rights and freedom over
time as the pandemic develops until mid-June, 2020. Figure 5 presents the over-time trend on
our main outcomes of interests on views about the trade-offs between public health conditions
and civil liberties, where we control for country fixed effects and plot the survey week fixed ef-
fects (the 1st week is normalized to be zero).44 One observes that across all outcomes, there is a
downward trend: by mid-June 2020, respondents’ willingness to give up rights and freedom to
trade off public health conditions diminished by as much as 30% of one unit of standard deviation
relative to the level observed three and a half months ago in March.45 This downward trend up
until mid-June is corroborated by the diminished impact of COVID-19 hotspots on these attitudes
as the respondents experienced longer COVID-19 related restrictions. In Appendix Figure E.10,
we non-parametrically plot the interaction between the COVID-19 hotspots and time since the first
local case. The lowest quartile corresponds to the first 30 days after a case was reported. We find
that in the month following the first case, individuals are much more likely to sacrifice their own
rights. However, after one month, the willingness to sacrifice rights is close to zero and often turns
negative thereafter. This pattern is similar for all outcomes.
     Second, from mid-June and onward, individuals’ willingness to trade-off civil liberties plateaus.
The plateau turning point at mid-June is observed across the vast majority of the countries that we
survey 46 . Why is the plateau occurring around the same time for different countries despite the
fact that they are at quite different points in their trajectories? This could in part be due to the
fact that views have shifted to truly viewing the pandemic as a global and very severe problem
that is here to stay and that people start updating their views on what is happening more globally.
Another possibility is the worries about health are declining and plateauing over time. Indeed, in
Figure 6 for most countries the health concerns diminish over time, though in some instances they
are relatively flat (i.e. India) and in some instances they appear to wax and wane (i.e. Australia
and Japan).47 On average, respondents’ worry about their own health has decreased by 12% of a
standard deviation relative to the level we observed at the end of March 2020.
     In contrast, the concern that civil liberties will not be restored is slowly rising over time. Figure 7
    44
      We present the corresponding plots for each individual country in Appendix Figures E.5 to E.9.
    45
      The change in respondents’ willingness to give up rights is remarkably similar across all age groups. That is, young
and old respondents experience a similarly-sized decrease followed by a plateauing of their willingness to give up rights
over time.
   46
      See Appendix Figure E.5 for each individual country’s each individual country.
   47
      Appendix Figure A.17 presents the over time trend of respondents’ expressed worries on their health, economic
conditions, and potential erosion of civil liberties across all countries. See Appendix Figure E.12 for economic worries
by country.


                                                           32
presents these country by country trends. The magnitude is small relative to the changes in worries
regarding health risks and societal economic well-being. One exception, however, is a sharp rise
noted in India during the country-wide lockdown which lasted for approximately 2 months.
     Moreover, the forecast for the length of the epidemic starkly increased over time. At the end
of March 2020, individuals forecast the pandemic would last approximately 8 months; by mid-
June, this had increased to 13 months on average, and by the beginning of October, it had further
increased to 15 months on average (see Appendix Figure A.18).
     Fourth, the relationship between willingness to trade off civil liberties with respect to perceived
health worries remains relatively constant over time. As shown in Figure 8, where we regress the
attitudes on trade-offs between civil liberties and public health with the individuals’ corresponding
health related worries in that week, the regression coefficients are remarkably stable over time.48
In other words, even though the overall degrees to which people are worried about the health
and economic aspects of the COVID-19 crisis could change and fluctuate over time, the underlying
elasticity of such worries to willingness to trade-off civil liberties stay constant. Caution must be
used in interpreting these results as the composition of individuals who remain concerned may
be shifting over time. However, when we condition on immutable characteristics of the sample,
such as age or sex, the estimated relationship is positive and flat over time within all subgroups,
suggesting compositional changes alone are not accounting for the relationship.49
     In sum, we observe a clear pattern of declining and then plateauing and in some instances
rebounding willingness to sacrifice rights and freedom, which correlates with worries about health.
Taken together, these findings suggest a trade-off between health and civil liberties concerns that
remains remarkably stable. These patterns could plausibly be due to the pandemic continuing
and people lengthening their forecast over the pandemic’s duration. As people see the pandemic
lasting longer than they initially thought and as they start expecting it to last even longer, they
may be moving along their (relatively stable) trade-off curve between civil liberties and health
concerns and start putting more weight again on civil liberties over health. This is consistent with
respondents’ increasing worries that their rights and freedom will not be restored. As such worries
plateau, so does the decreased willingness to trade-off civil liberties.


7        Conclusion
Civil liberties, including the protection of privacy, freedom of speech, and freedom of mobility,
are the basis of well-functioning liberal democracies. Major crises confront societies and their citi-
zens with a set of fundamental trade-offs between social well-being during times of crisis and the
protection of liberties.

    48
     We present the corresponding plots for each individual country in Appendix Figures E.13 to E.17.
    49
     As a point of comparison, we also include the relationship between willingness to sacrifice civil liberties and eco-
nomic concerns. Concerns regarding household finances over time mirrored the downward trend in personal health
concerns. However, in sharp contrast to health, economic concerns have a slightly negatively relationship with respect
to sacrificing civil liberties.


                                                           33
   In this paper, we study how citizens around the world trade off public health conditions and
civil liberties throughout one of the most challenging crises in recent history, the COVID-19 pan-
demic. We find that exposure to health risks during the pandemic leads to greater willingness to
give up rights and freedoms. Such willingness can be reduced when the potential long-run erosion
of civil liberties is made salient.
   While citizens do not consider civil liberties as “sacred” and unwilling to trade them off for
enhanced public health conditions, we document a decrease in the willingness to do so as the
pandemic evolves, especially before mid-June of 2020. This decline is mirrored by a reduction in
worries about health, so that the trade-off between health and civil liberties appears quite constant
over time. The decrease in willingness over time to sacrifice rights and freedom poses a complex
dynamic dilemma regarding the effective implementation of durable public health-related restric-
tions and the protection of civil liberties. The increasing concern among citizens that their rights
and freedom will not be restored post-crisis should raise flags and impose a check on threats to
civil liberties that incumbent governments and other actors could pose during the crisis.
   Our results are purely positive and do not consider the normative implications of crisis re-
sponses. This is a thorny issue, but our findings point to two possible lessons for policy.
   First, the effects of our public health treatment that explains the rationale between various mea-
sures increases support for individual and public action to curb the pandemic, even if these involve
giving up some individual rights. This points to giving citizens tools to understand the need for
policy intervention. Improved understanding can increase compliance with otherwise hard-to-
tolerate policy measures. Special attention and care may be needed when messaging to groups
that have are socially disadvantaged, as members of these groups were found to be less willing to
tolerate restrictions in response to heightened health risk, and more unwilling to do so following
information about the long-run erosion of civil liberties.
   Second, for the sake of public health and safety in a crisis such as pandemic, immediate policy
responses that often involve curtailing individual liberties are needed. Yet, our dynamic results —
in particular the fact that willingness to give up rights declines as health worries decrease and the
increased worries that rights will not restore — also point to the need for safeguards that ensure
these restrictions are lifted once the crisis subsides.




                                                   34
References
Aberle, David Friend, Albert K Cohen, Arthur K Davis, Marion J Levy Jr, and Francis X Sutton
  (1950), “The functional prerequisites of a society.” Ethics, 60, 100–111.

Acemoglu, Daron, Suresh Naidu, Pascual Restrepo, and James A Robinson (2019), “Democracy
  does cause growth.” Journal of Political Economy, 127, 47–100.

Acemoglu, Daron and James A Robinson (2006), Economic origins of dictatorship and democracy. Cam-
  bridge University Press.

Acemoglu, Daron and James A Robinson (2019), The narrow corridor : states, societies, and the fate of
  liberty. Penguin Press, New York.

Acquisti, Alessandro, Curtis Taylor, and Liad Wagman (2016), “The economics of privacy.” Journal
  of economic Literature, 54, 442–92.

Allcott, Hunt, Levi Boxell, Jacob Conway, Matthew Gentzkow, Michael Thaler, and David Y Yang
  (2020), “Polarization and public health: Partisan differences in social distancing during the coro-
  navirus pandemic.” NBER Working Paper.

Alsan, Marcella, Stefanie Stantcheva, David Yang, and David Cutler (2020), “Disparities in coro-
  navirus 2019 reported incidence, knowledge, and behavior among us adults.” JAMA Network
  Open, 3, e2012403–e2012403.

Amat, Francesc, Andreu Arenas, Albert Falcó-Gimeno, and Jordi Muñoz (2020), “Pandemics meet
  democracy. experimental evidence from the covid-19 crisis in spain.” SocArXiv.

Anderson, Michael L (2008), “Multiple inference and gender differences in the effects of early
  intervention: A reevaluation of the abecedarian, perry preschool, and early training projects.”
  Journal of the American statistical Association, 103, 1481–1495.

Bargain, Olivier and Ulugbek Aminjonov (2020), “Trust and Compliance to Public Health Policies
  in Times of COVID-19.”

Barrios, John M, Efraim Benmelech, Yael V Hochberg, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2020),
  “Civic capital and social distancing during the covid-19 pandemic.” NBER Working Paper.

Beer, Lawrence W (1983), “Postwar law on civil liberties in japan.” UCLA Pac. Basin LJ, 2, 98.

Besley, Timothy and Sacha Dray (2020), “Citizen responsiveness to a pandemic: Differences in
  social distancing during covid-19.”

Beumer, MC, RM Koch, D van Beuningen, AM OudeLashof, FL van de Veerdonk, E Kolwijck,
  JG van der Hoeven, DC Bergmans, and CWE Hoedemaekers (2019), “Influenza virus and factors
  that are associated with icu admission, pulmonary co-infections and icu mortality.” Journal of
  critical care, 50, 59–65.

                                                   35
Bol, Damien, Marco Giani, André Blais, and Peter John Loewen (2020), “The effect of covid-19
  lockdowns on political support: Some good news for democracy?” European Journal of Political
  Research.

Burke, Rachel M (2020), “Active monitoring of persons exposed to patients with confirmed covid-
  19—united states, january–february 2020.” MMWR. Morbidity and mortality weekly report, 69.

Bursztyn, Leonardo, Aakaash Rao, Christopher Roth, and David Yanagizawa-Drott (2020), “Mis-
  information during a pandemic.” University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics
  Working Paper.

China Data Lab (2020), “China COVID-19 Daily Cases with Basemap.” Accessed 6/13/2020.

Department of Health of Northern Ireland (2020), “Department of Health dashboard.” Accessed
  6/13/2020.

Dipartimento della Protezione Civile (2020), “Dipartimento della Protezione Civile - Aggiorna-
  mento casi COVID-19.” Accessed 6/13/2020.

EVS (2020), “European Values Study 2017: Integrated Dataset (EVS 2017).” Accessed 8/30/2020.

Falk, Armin, Anke Becker, Thomas Dohmen, Benjamin Enke, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde
  (2018), “Global evidence on economic preferences.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133, 1645–
  1692.

Fiske, Alan Page and Philip E Tetlock (1997), “Taboo trade-offs: reactions to transactions that
  transgress the spheres of justice.” Political psychology, 18, 255–297.

Fuchs-Schündeln, Nicola and Matthias Schündeln (2015), “On the endogeneity of political prefer-
  ences: Evidence from individual experience with democracy.” Science, 347, 1145–1148.

Garrett, Laurie (2000), Betrayal of trust : the collapse of global public health, 1st ed. edition. Hyperion,
  New York.

Gitmez, Arda, Konstantin Sonin, and Austin Wright (2020), “Political economy of crisis response.”
  University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper.

GOV.UK website (2020), “Coronavirus (COVID-19) in the UK.” Accessed 6/13/2020.

Graham, Matthew H and Milan W Svolik (2020), “Democracy in america? partisanship, polariza-
  tion, and the robustness of support for democracy in the united states.” American Political Science
  Review, 114, 392–409.

Guan, Wei-jie, Zheng-yi Ni, Yu Hu, Wen-hua Liang, Chun-quan Ou, Jian-xing He, Lei Liu, Hong
  Shan, Chun-liang Lei, David SC Hui, et al. (2020), “Clinical characteristics of coronavirus disease
  2019 in china.” New England journal of medicine, 382, 1708–1720.

                                                    36
House,    Freedom      (2020),    “Countries    and     territories.”   Freedom   House.   Available   at:
  https://freedomhouse. org/countries/freedom-world/scores (Accessed 10/12/2020).

Hu, Cindy, George Luo, Emma Pendl-Robinson, and Erin Lipman (2020), “19andme.” https://
  github.com/mathematica-mpr/covid_risk_score. (Accessed on 05/14/2020).

Huang, Chaolin, Yeming Wang, Xingwang Li, Lili Ren, Jianping Zhao, Yi Hu, Li Zhang, Guohui
  Fan, Jiuyang Xu, Xiaoying Gu, et al. (2020), “Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel
  coronavirus in wuhan, china.” The lancet, 395, 497–506.

Huntington, Samuel P (2009), “How countries democratize.” Political Science Quarterly, 124, 31–69.

Inglehart, R., C. Haerpfer, A. Moreno, C. Welzel, K. Kizilova, J. Diez-Medrano, M. Lagos, P. Norris,
  E. Ponarin, and B. et al. Puranen (2014), “World values survey: Round five - country-pooled
  datafile.” Accessed 8/30/2020.

Inglehart, R., C. Haerpfer, A. Moreno, C. Welzel, K. Kizilova, J. Diez-Medrano, M. Lagos, P. Norris,
  E. Ponarin, and B. et al. Puranen (2017), “World values survey: Round seven - country-pooled
  datafile version.” Accessed 8/30/2020.

Jefferson, Tom, Ruth Foxlee, Chris Del Mar, Liz Dooley, Eliana Ferroni, Bill Hewak, Adi Prabhala,
  Sree Nair, and Alex Rivetti (2008), “Physical interventions to interrupt or reduce the spread of
  respiratory viruses: systematic review.” Bmj, 336, 77–80.

Killerby, Marie E, Ruth Link-Gelles, Sarah C Haight, Caroline A Schrodt, Lucinda England, Danica J
  Gomes, Mays Shamout, Kristen Pettrone, Kevin O’Laughlin, Anne Kimball, et al. (2020), “Char-
  acteristics associated with hospitalization among patients with covid-19—metropolitan atlanta,
  georgia, march–april 2020.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 69, 790.

Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (KCDC) (2020), “The updates on COVID-19 in
  Korea.” Accessed on 04/21/2020.

Lancet, The (2020), “Covid-19 and china: lessons and the way forward.” Lancet (London, England),
  396, 213.

Lee, David S (2009), “Training, wages, and sample selection: Estimating sharp bounds on treat-
  ment effects.” The Review of Economic Studies, 76, 1071–1102.

Locke, John (1698), Two treaties of government : in the former, the false principles and foundation of Sir
  Robert Filmer and his followers are detected and overthrown, the latter is an essay concerning the true
  original, extent, and end of civil government. Goldsmiths’-Kress library of economic literature ; no.
  3546, Printed for Awnsham and John Churchill ..., London.

Mill, John Stuart (1875), On liberty, people’s edition. edition. Longmans, Green, Reader, Dyer,
  London.


                                                   37
National Health Service (2020), “COVID-19 Daily Deaths.” Accessed 6/13/2020.

Novel, Coronavirus Pneumonia Emergency Response Epidemiology et al. (2020), “The epidemi-
  ological characteristics of an outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus diseases (covid-19) in china.”
  Zhonghua liu xing bing xue za zhi= Zhonghua liuxingbingxue zazhi, 41, 145.

Office for National Statistics (2020), “Number of deaths in care homes notified to the Care Quality
  Commission, England.” Accessed 6/13/2020.

Plummer, Faye, Laura Manea, Dominic Trepel, and Dean McMillan (2016), “Screening for anxiety
  disorders with the gad-7 and gad-2: a systematic review and diagnostic metaanalysis.” General
  hospital psychiatry, 39, 24–31.

Public Health Wales (2020), “Rapid COVID-19 virology - Public.” Accessed 6/13/2020.

Radcliffe-Brown, Alfred Reginald (1952), The sociological theory of totemism.

Rawls, John (1971), A theory of justice. Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
  Mass.

Rees-Jones, Alex, John D’Attoma, Amedeo Piolatto, and Luca Salvadori (2020), “Covid-19 changed
  tastes for safety-net programs.” NBER Working Paper.

Robert Koch Institute (2020), “Robert Koch-Institut: COVID-19-Dashboard.” Accessed 6/13/2020.

Santé publique France (2020), “Infection au nouveau Coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2), COVID-19,
  France et Monde.” Accessed on 04/21/2020.

Scottish Government (2020), “Coronavirus (COVID-19):               trends in daily data.” Accessed
  6/13/2020.

Sen, Amartya (1981), “Ingredients of famine analysis: availability and entitlements.” The quarterly
  journal of economics, 96, 433–464.

Shor, Eran, David Roelfs, and Zoua M Vang (2017), “The “hispanic mortality paradox” revisited:
  Meta-analysis and meta-regression of life-course differentials in latin american and caribbean
  immigrants’ mortality.” Social Science & Medicine, 186, 20–33.

Simonnet, Arthur, Mikael Chetboun, Julien Poissy, Violeta Raverdy, Jerome Noulette, Alain
  Duhamel, Julien Labreuche, Daniel Mathieu, Francois Pattou, Merce Jourdain, et al. (2020),
  “High prevalence of obesity in severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2)
  requiring invasive mechanical ventilation.” Obesity.

Simonov, Andrey, Szymon K Sacher, Jean-Pierre H Dubé, and Shirsho Biswas (2020), “The persua-
  sive effect of fox news: non-compliance with social distancing during the covid-19 pandemic.”
  Technical Report w27237.

                                                 38
Svolik, Milan w (2020), “When polarization trumps civic virtue: Partisan conflict and the subver-
  sion of democracy by incumbents.” Quarterly journal of political science, 15, 3–31.

Tetlock, Philip E (2003), “Thinking the unthinkable: Sacred values and taboo cognitions.” Trends
  in cognitive sciences, 7, 320–324.

Tetlock, Philip E, Orie V Kristel, S Beth Elson, Melanie C Green, and Jennifer S Lerner (2000), “The
  psychology of the unthinkable: taboo trade-offs, forbidden base rates, and heretical counterfac-
  tuals.” Journal of personality and social psychology, 78, 853.

The New York Times (2020), “Coronavirus (Covid-19) Data in the United States.” https://github.
  com/nytimes/covid-19-data. Accessed on 04/6/2020.

Verity, Robert, Lucy C Okell, Ilaria Dorigatti, Peter Winskill, Charles Whittaker, Natsuko Imai, Gina
  Cuomo-Dannenburg, Hayley Thompson, Patrick GT Walker, Han Fu, et al. (2020), “Estimates of
  the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based analysis.” The Lancet infectious diseases.

Williamson, Elizabeth J, Alex J Walker, Krishnan Bhaskaran, Seb Bacon, Chris Bates, Caroline E
  Morton, Helen J Curtis, Amir Mehrkar, David Evans, Peter Inglesby, et al. (2020), “Factors asso-
  ciated with covid-19-related death using opensafely.” Nature, 1–7.

Wu, Zunyou and Jennifer M McGoogan (2020), “Characteristics of and important lessons from the
  coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) outbreak in china: summary of a report of 72 314 cases from
  the chinese center for disease control and prevention.” Jama, 323, 1239–1242.

Zhou, T, F amd Yu, R Du, and et al. (2020), “Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult
  inpatients with covid-19 in wuhan, china: a retrospective cohort study.” Lancet, ?, 395–1054.




                                                    39
Figures




          Figure 1: Survey Flow




                   40
Notes: Figure is based on the sample from COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report, pooling all weeks from the week of March 30
to the week of April 13, 2020 and including countries: Australia, Canada, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Singapore, Spain, the
Netherlands, the United Kingdom, the United States. Sweden is omitted in this figure due to the absence of data from the week of
March 30 to the week of May 11, 2020. Bars represent the fraction of respondents, in a given country, who is “unwilling" to give up
the relevant civil liberty rights denoted on the y-axis. Unwilling is defined as answering "4" or less to questions of "On a scale of 1
(extremely unwilling) to 10 (extremely willing), to what extent do you agree with the following statements: I am willing to [subtitle of
each sub figure]" as described in Section 2.4. The figure is not a strict complement to Figure 3 that shows "unwillingness" of forego civil
liberties and rights across countries because respondents who answered "5 (neutral)" are excluded in both figures. 95% confidence
intervals are depicted in red on each bar.



                         Figure 2: Fraction of Unwillingness to Give Up Civil Liberties




                                                                   41
42




     Notes: Figure is based on the sample from COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report and from COVID-19 Civil Liberties Survey, pooling all weeks from the week of March 30 to the week
     of April 13, 2020 and including countries: Australia, Canada, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Singapore, Spain, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, the United States. Sweden is
     omitted in this figure due to the absence of data from the week of March 30 to the week of May 11, 2020. Bars represent the fraction of respondents, in a given country, who is “unwilling"
     to give up the relevant civil liberty rights denoted on the y-axis. Unwilling is defined as answering "4" or less to questions of "On a scale of 1 (extremely unwilling) to 10 (extremely
     willing), to what extent do you agree with the following statements: I am willing to [subtitle of each sub figure]" as described in Section 2.4. Dashed lines represent the mean of the
     outcome variable of U.S. respondents. The figure is not a strict complement to Figure 2 that shows "unwillingness" of forego civil liberties and rights across countries because respondents
     who answered "5 (neutral)" are excluded in both figures. 95% confidence intervals are depicted in gray.



                                              Figure 3: Unwillingness to Forego Civil Liberties & Rights Across Countries
Notes: Figure is based on the sample from COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report, pooling all weeks from the week of March 30
to the week of April 13, 2020 and including countries: Australia, Canada, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Singapore, Spain, the
Netherlands, the United Kingdom, the United States. Sweden is omitted in this figure due to the absence of data from the week of
March 30 to the week of May 11, 2020. Diamonds denote coefficients from separate OLS estimates of our six main outcome variables
(as described in Section 2.4) on an index for health worries, an index for economic worries, and civil liberties worries. The index for
health worries refers to an average value of level of worries about personal health, the health of the elderly in the community, being
around strangers, and healthcare systems being able to cope on a 1 (not worried at all) to 5 (extremely worried) scale. The index of
economic worries refers to an average value of level of worries about household’s financial position, the availability of foodstuffs, the
national economy, and the world economy on a 1 (not worried at all) to 5 (extremely worried) scale. Civil liberties worries refers to
worries about the rights, freedoms, and procedures that are forgone during a crisis like the current one won’t be recovered after the
crisis is over; it is on a scale of 0 (not at all worried) to 10 (extremely worried). All outcomes and indexes are standardized to mean zero
and standard deviation 1. Country and week fixed effects are included in the regressions but not reported. 95% confidence intervals
based on robust standard errors are also shown.


Figure 4: Association Between Health, Economic, and Civil Liberty Worries and Main Outcomes




                                                                    43
Notes: Figure is based on the sample from COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report, pooling all weeks from the week of March 30
to the week of September 28, 2020 and including countries: Australia, Canada, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Singapore, Spain,
Sweden, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, the United States; weekly data from the week of May 18 to the week of September
28, 2020 are used for Sweden due to the absence of data from the week of March 30 to the week of May 11, 2020. Dots represent
coefficients obtained from OLS estimates of outcome of interest (as described in Section 2.4) on week fixed effects. Outcomes are
standardized based on mean and standard deviation as of the week of March 30, 2020 except Swedish data; outcomes of Swedish
data are standardized based on the week of March 30, 2020 data from European countries (i.e. France, Germany, Italy, Spain, the
Netherlands, and the United Kingdom) due to the absence of weekly data from the week of March 30 to the week of May 11, 2020.
Numbers in blue under the first dot in each subfigure indicate the constant term obtained from the same regression specification but
with unstandardized outcome on a scale of 0 (extremely unwilling) to 10 (extremely willing), which are: 8.21 for Figure A; 6.30 for
Figure B; 6.93 for Figure C; 7.42 for Figure E; 6.86 for Figure F. Country and fixed effects are included in the regressions but not reported.
95% confidence intervals based on robust standard errors are also shown.

                                        Figure 5: Time Trends in Main Outcomes




                                                                     44
45




     Notes: Figure is based on the sample from COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report, pooling all weeks from the week of March 30 to the week of September 28, 2020 and including
     countries: Australia (AUS), Canada (CAN), France (FRA), Germany (DEU), India (IND), Italy (ITA), Japan (JPN), Singapore (SGP), Spain (ESP), the Netherlands (NLD), the United
     Kingdom (GBR), the United States (USA); weekly data from the week of May 18 to the week of September 28, 2020 are used for Sweden (SWE) due to the absence of data from the week
     of March 30 to the week of May 11, 2020.. Dots represent coefficients obtained from OLS estimates of outcome of interest on week fixed effects for each country. Outcomes of interest is
     the index for health worries which refers to an average value of level of worries about personal health, the health of the elderly in the community, being around strangers, and healthcare
     systems being able to cope on a 1 (not worried at all) to 5 (extremely worried) scale. Outcome variable is standardized based on mean and standard deviation in a given country as of the
     week of March 30, 2020 (or the week of May 18, 2020 for Sweden). Numbers in blue under the first dot in each subfigure indicate the constant term obtained from the same regression
     specification but with unstandardized outcome on a scale of 1-5, which are: 3.49 for Figure AUS; 3.51 for Figure CAN; 3.31 for Figure DEU; 3.81 for Figure ESP; 3.49 for Figure FRA; 3.52
     for Figure GBR; 3.82 for Figure IND; 3.66 for Figure ITA; 3.13 for Figure JPN; 3.30 for Figure NLD; 3.26 for Figure SGP; 3.07 for Figure SWE; 3.66 for Figure USA. 95% confidence intervals
     based on robust standard errors are shown.


                                                  Figure 6: Time Trends of Worries About Health: Country-by-Country
46




     Notes: Figure is based on the sample from COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report, pooling all weeks from the week of March 30 to the week of September 28, 2020 and including
     countries: Australia (AUS), Canada (CAN), France (FRA), Germany (DEU), India (IND), Italy (ITA), Japan (JPN), Singapore (SGP), Spain (ESP), the Netherlands (NLD), the United
     Kingdom (GBR), the United States (USA); weekly data from the week of May 18 to the week of September 28, 2020 are used for Sweden (SWE) due to the absence of data from the week
     of March 30 to the week of May 11, 2020. Dots represent coefficients obtained from OLS estimates of outcome of interest on week fixed effects for each country. Outcomes of interest is
     the Civil liberties worries refers to worries about the rights, freedoms, and procedures that are forgone during a crisis like the current one won’t be recovered after the crisis is over; it is
     on a scale of 0 (not at all worried) to 10 (extremely worried). Outcome variable is standardized based on mean and standard deviation in a given country as of the week of March 30,
     2020 (or the week of May 18, 2020 for Sweden). Numbers in blue under the first dot in each subfigure indicate the constant term obtained from the same regression specification but with
     unstandardized outcome on a scale of 1-5, which are: 5.71 for Figure AUS; 5.52 for Figure CAN; 5.33 for Figure DEU; 6.72 for Figure ESP; 6.01 for Figure FRA; 5.54 for Figure GBR; 7.19 for
     Figure IND; 6.23 for Figure ITA; 6.20 for Figure JPN; 4.98 for Figure NLD; 5.93 for Figure SGP; 5.12 for Figure SWE; 5.98 for Figure USA. Approximate 2 month lockdown period in India
     is highlighted in gray in Figure IND. 95% confidence intervals based on robust standard errors are shown.



                                              Figure 7: Time Trends of Worries About Civil Liberties: Country-by-Country
Notes: Figure is based on the sample from COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report, pooling all weeks from the week of March 30 to the week of September 28, 2020 and including
countries: Australia, Canada, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Singapore, Spain, Sweden, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, the United States; weekly data from the week
of May 18 to the week of September 28, 2020 are used for Sweden due to the absence of data from the week of March 30 to the week of May 11, 2020. Dots denote the coefficients
obtained from the OLS estimates of outcome of interest (denoted as the title of each subfigure) on the index of health worries (blue). The index for health worries refers to an
average value of level of worries about personal health, the health of the elderly in the community, being around strangers, and healthcare systems being able to cope on a 1 (not
worried at all) to 5 (extremely worried) scale. Outcomes are standardized to mean 0 and s.d. 1. The following controls are included each regression but not reported: demographic
controls (age, employment status, female), week FE, country FE. The constant terms obtained from the same regression specification but with unstandardized outcome on a scale
of 0-10 are reported in blue: 5.76 in Figure A; 4.71 in Figure B; 5.50 in Figure C; 6.55 in Figure D; 5.32 in Figure E. 95% confidence intervals based on robust standard errors are
shown.


                  Figure 8: Relationship Between Civil Liberties and Health Worries Over Time




                                                                                       47
Tables

                                                           Table 1: Quasiexperimental Results

                                                                                                   Spec. 1                       Spec. 2
                                                                                               Health Risk             Health Risk (HR(2)ij )             Gap b/w             Mean of
                   Outcome Variables                                    Scale                  (HR(1)ihj )                   X Hotspot                  China and US          dept. var
                          (1)                                            (2)                 (3)             (4)          (5)              (6)                 (7)               (8)
  Panel A: Overall rights and freedom
  Willing to give up own rights                                    Agree (0-10)           0.182***       (-0.045)      0.266***         (-0.071)              1.865             6.851
  Willing to give up others’ rights                                Agree (0-10)           0.157***       (-0.040)      0.219***         (-0.069)              1.636             6.778
    z-score: willing to give up rights                              Std. (0-1)            0.067***       (-0.016)      0.096***         (-0.026)              0.694             0.001
  Panel B: Protection of privacy
  Willing to give up privacy                                       Agree (0-10)           0.137***       (-0.049)       0.195**         (-0.080)              3.136              5.628
  Unwilling to accept: track sick people                             Binary                 -0.009       (-0.006)      -0.023**         (-0.010)              0.058              0.248
  Unwilling to accept: track everyone                                Binary               -0.013**       (-0.006)      -0.026**         (-0.011)              0.034              0.271
  Click MIT app                                                  Yes/No (binary)           -0.014*       (-0.008)       -0.013          (-0.013)              0.246              0.414
    z-score: willing to give up privacy                             Std. (0-1)              0.021        (-0.015)       0.050**         (-0.025)              0.646             -0.002
  Panel C: Democratic rights and duties
  Prefer strong leader                                             Agree (1-4)            0.059***       (-0.016)        0.043          (-0.028)             0.554               2.615
  Prefer delegating to experts                                     Agree (1-4)             0.005         (-0.016)       -0.004          (-0.025)             -0.000              2.943
  Willing to forgo media freedom                                   Agree (0-10)           0.138***       (-0.052)       0.145*          (-0.083)             3.211               5.579
  Prefer democratic system                                         Agree (1-4)             0.009         (-0.012)        0.013          (-0.019)              n.a.               3.317
  Willing to suspend democr. procedures                            Agree (0-10)           0.229***       (-0.053)      0.293***         (-0.095)              n.a.               5.024
    z-score: willing to curtail democracy                           Std. (0-1)             0.029*        (-0.016)        0.021          (-0.026)              n.a.              -0.002
  Panel D: Rights to movement
  Unwilling to accept: close national border                          Binary                -0.006       (-0.006)       -0.012          (-0.011)               0.16             0.258
  Unwilling to accept: recommend stay home                            Binary               -0.013**      (-0.006)      -0.023**         (-0.011)              0.147             0.263
  Unwilling to accept: arrest if outside home                         Binary               -0.016**      (-0.006)      -0.025**         (-0.011)              0.068             0.276
    z-score: willing to give up mobility                             Std. (0-1)            0.030**       (-0.014)       0.052**         (-0.025)              -0.31             -0.003
  Panel E: Business and school operation
  Unwilling to accept: close schools                                  Binary                -0.006       (-0.006)        -0.016         (-0.011)             0.149               0.263
  Unwilling to accept: close restaurants etc.                         Binary               -0.011*       (-0.006)      -0.029***        (-0.011)             0.129               0.266
  Unwilling to accept: close all businesses                           Binary                -0.009       (-0.006)       -0.022**        (-0.011)             0.128               0.269
    z-score: willing to limit operations                             Std. (0-1)             0.020        (-0.015)        0.053**        (-0.025)             -0.327             -0.003
  Panel F: Economic well-being
  Unwilling to accept: measures cut income                           Binary               -0.018***      (-0.006)      -0.034***        (-0.011)              0.027             0.277
  Unwilling to accept: measures 2x unemp. rate                       Binary               -0.017***      (-0.006)      -0.039***        (-0.011)              0.132             0.266
  Unwilling to accept: measures 3x unemp. rate                       Binary               -0.022***      (-0.006)      -0.042***        (-0.011)              0.094             0.268
  Willing to endure economic losses                                Agree (0-10)           0.136***       (-0.038)       0.201***        (-0.064)              1.002             5.957
    z-score: willing to harm economy                                Std. (0-1)            0.065***       (-0.015)       0.116***        (-0.025)              0.086             -0.003


Notes: Table reports OLS estimates of Equation 1. The results are based on the weighed sample from the COVID-19 and Civil Liberties Survey. Column (1) reports the outcome
variables. The “z-score" at the bottom of each panel is an inverse-covariance-weighted index as described in Anderson (2008), which combines all outcome variables in the panel.
Column (2) reports the scale of each outcome variable. Health Risk indices, HR(1)ihj and HR(2)ij , follow the main definitions as described in Section 4.1.1 respectively, while
Hotpot follows the definition as described in Section 4.1.2. Columns (3) and (5) reports β in Equations 1, respectively. Column (7) reports the difference in unconditional mean of
the control group of each outcome variable between China and US respondents. Column (8) reports the unconditional mean of the outcome variable of respondents in the control
group. The following covariates are included in each specification: country FE, date FE, treatment group dummies, geographic controls (11 individual hotspot city dummies:
New York City, Seattle, Detroit, and New Orleans for USA, Munich for Germany, Bergamo and Milan for Italy, Paris for France, London for U.K., Wuhan for China, and Daegu for
South Korea), respondent demographic controls (male dummy, income bracket FE, age bracket FE, employment status FE, college degree dummy, political right dummy, political
neutral dummy, risk preference, time preference, the “leave-one-out" number of times R left home during the past 3 days, the “leave-one-out" number of times R washed hands
during the past 24 hours, and “leave-one-out" number of household members), disease controls (cardiovascular, diabetes, chronic lung disease, tobacco use, obesity, and any other
medical conditions), time since the first case of COVID-19 at region/state level, the distance to the nearest hotspot, and “leave-one-out" version of knowing someone contracted
with COVID-19 at admin 1 geographical level. The number of observations is: 16,055 for all variables in Panel A; 16,055, 15,973, 15,973, 16,047, 15,965 in Panel B; 16,055 for first
three variables, 12,506 for the rest in Panel C; 15,973 for all variables in Panel D and E; 15,973, 15,973, 15,973, 16,055, 15,973 for Panel F. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *,
**, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                                                           48
                      Table 2: Heterogeneity Analysis: Quasiexperimental Results Using Spec. 1

                                                           Dependent Variable: z-score: Willingness to Give Up Rights
                    (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)      (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)                                   (11)             (12)

                                         PANEL A: SOCIOECONOMIC AND HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS

                        Income                   Received                                            USA Only: Econ.                 Having                     Living Alone
                       ≤50th pct                College Educ                  Employed                 Vulnerable                Partner/Spouse                in a Household
                    No            Yes           No            Yes           No           Yes            No           Yes           No            Yes          No               Yes
 HR(1)ihj        0.083***      0.047**        0.037        0.076***       0.032        0.074***     0.104***        0.055       0.074***      0.050**      0.058***         0.109**
                 (0.020)       (0.023)       (0.029)       (0.018)       (0.034)       (0.018)      (0.024)        (0.041)      (0.026)       (0.021)      (0.017)          (0.046)

 No. Obs           7451          8604          6164          9891          6003         10052          3895         1276          6634          9421         13814            2241

                                            PANEL B: POLITICAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CHARACTERISTICS

                       Pol. Aff:                 West Only:                    Media                   Satisfied with           DEU Only: Born             KOR Only: Migrated
                        Right                     Populist                     Distrust                Federal Govt             in East Germany              from N. Korea
                    No            Yes           No            Yes           No           Yes            No           Yes           No            Yes          No               Yes
 HR(1)ihj        0.066***       0.036        0.074***      0.073**       0.056***      0.093**        0.045*      0.065***        0.039        0.207         0.073           -0.072
                 (0.018)       (0.030)       (0.026)       (0.032)       (0.017)       (0.037)       (0.023)      (0.022)        (0.150)      (0.367)       (0.078)         (0.116)

 No. Obs          12390          3665          6077          3521         12055          4000          7305         8750          1053           215          728              225

                                        PANEL C: DEMOGRAPHIC AND GEOGRAPHICAL CHARACTERISTICS
                                                     Age                                               USA Only:                 In First Month               West only: Cases:
                          Male                      Over 45                  In Hotspot               White vs. Black            Since First Case                Post-Peak
                    No            Yes           No            Yes           No           Yes             –             –           No            Yes          No               Yes
 HR(1)ihj         -0.025       0.069***      0.078***       0.055*        -0.069       0.089***     0.081***        0.023       0.056***       0.052       0.096***          0.040
                 (0.044)       (0.022)       (0.020)       (0.031)       (0.054)       (0.034)      (0.026)        (0.064)      (0.017)       (0.069)      (0.022)          (0.034)

 No. Obs           8281          7774          8906          7149         13411          2644          3424          718          12056         3933         6101             5033



Notes: Table reports OLS estimates of Equation 1 on willingness to give up rights and freedom by different binary covariates. The results are based on the weighed sample from the
COVID-19 and Civil Liberties Survey. Health Risk Index, HR(1)ihj , follows the main definitions as described in Section 4.1.1. The dependent variable is an inverse-covariance-
weighted index as described in Anderson (2008), which combines the following outcome variables: willing to give up own rights, willing to give up others’ rights. Each binary
covariate is defined as following: Income ≤ 50th pct: 1 if R’s household income is less than the 50th percentile, or 0 otherwise; Received College Educ: 1 if R received any college
education, or 0 otherwise; Employed: 1 if R is currently employed, or 0 otherwise; USA Only: Econ. Vulnerability: 1 if R’s score of economic vulnerability coded based on occupation
is greater than the 75th percentile (only applies to respondents in USA); Having Partner/Spouse: 1 if R has a partner/spouse; Living Alone in q Household: 1 if R lives alone in the
household, or 0 otherwise; Pol. Aff: Right: 1 if R’s political affiliation is right-wing or conservative (this variable does not apply to Chinese respondents); West only Populist: 1 if
R voted for populist parties or candidates (Donald Trump in USA, Boris Johnson in GBR, AfD in DEU, Lega Movimento or 5 stelle in ITA, Marine Le Pen, François Asselineau, or
Nicolas Dupont-Aignan in FRA; only applies to western countries); Media Distrust: 1 if R’s level of trust in Media in general is less than 3 on a scale of 1 to 5; Satisfied with Federal
Govt: 1 if R’s level of satisfaction with the federal government is greater than 3 on a scale of 1 to 5; DEU only: Born in East Germany: 1 if R was born in East Germany; KOR only:
Migrated from N. Korea: 1 if R or any of R’s family members had migrated from North Korea to South Korea during the Korean War; Male: 1 if R is male; Age over 45: 1 if R’s age is
over 45; In Hotspot: 1 if R lives in one of the hotspot areas described in Section 4.1.2; USA only Race: White vs. Black: 1 if R’s race is African American/Black, or 0 if White/Caucasian;
In First Month Since First case: 1 if R was in the first month since the first COVID-19 case was detected in R’s region/area at admin level 1 (or at county level for USA); West only:
Cases: Post-peak: 1 if R was surveyed after the peak of COVID-19 case at admin level 1 for ITA, GBR, FRA and at county level for USA and DEU. Regression includes the following
controls: country FE, date FE, treatment group dummies, geographic controls (11 individual hotspot city dummies: New York City, Seattle, Detroit, and New Orleans for USA,
Munich for Germany, Bergamo and Milan for Italy, Paris for France, London for U.K., Wuhan for China, and Daegu for South Korea), respondent demographic controls (male
dummy, income bracket FE, age bracket FE, employment status FE, college degree dummy, political right dummy, political neutral dummy, risk preference, time preference, the
“leave-one-out" number of times R left home during the past 3 days, the “leave-one-out" number of times R washed hands during the past 24 hours, and “leave-one-out" number of
household members), disease controls (cardiovascular, diabetes, chronic lung disease, tobacco use, obesity, and any other medical conditions), time since the first case of COVID-19
at region/state level, distance to the nearest hotspot, and “leave-one-out" version of knowing someone contracted with COVID-19 at admin 1 geographical level. Robust standard
errors are in parentheses. *, **, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                                                           49
                                              Table 3: Experimental First Stage Results

                                                                  Cilvil Liberties      Public Health      Civil Liberties=     Gap b/w      Mean of
            Outcome Variables                      Scale            Treatment            Treatment          Public Health     China and US   dept. var
                         (1)                        (2)            (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)            (7)              (8)          (9)
 Panel A: Civil Liberties Treatment Content
 China Covid-19 response ranked high            Score (0-3)      0.338***   (0.031)    0.030     (0.027)        0.000            1.865         1.429
 Worried info misused later                     Agree (1-5)      0.324***   (0.031)   0.060**    (0.029)        0.000            -0.838        2.770
   z-score: civil lib treat direction            Std. (0-1)      0.378***   (0.025)   0.051**    (0.023)        0.000            0.629        -0.003
 Panel B: Public Health Treatment Content
 Flatten curve important                        Agree (1-5)      -0.056**   (0.027)   0.252***   (0.026)        0.000            -0.184       4.014
 Insufficient PPE                               Agree (1-5)        0.046    (0.029)   0.215***   (0.028)        0.000            -1.828       3.265
   z-score: public health treat direction        Std. (0-1)       -0.007    (0.023)   0.242***   (0.022)        0.000            -1.005       0.006
 Panel C: Covid-19 Knowledge (Placebo)
 Covid spread knowledge                        Score (-2 to 3)   -0.005     (0.023)   0.041*     (0.021)        0.042            -0.087       2.252
 Covid symptom knowledge                       Score (-3 to 3)    0.007     (0.022)   -0.004     (0.020)        0.647            0.130        2.739
   z-score: knowledge about Covid-19             Std. (0-1)      0.001      (0.025)   0.026      (0.023)        0.314            0.023        0.009


Notes: Table reports OLS estimates of treatment effects on “First-stage" outcomes. The results are based on the weighed sample from
the COVID-19 and Civil Liberties Survey. Column (1) reports the “First-stage" outcomes described in Section 5.1. The “z-score" at the
bottom of each panel is an inverse-covariance-weighted index as described in Anderson (2008), which combines all outcome variables
in the panel. Column (2) reports the scale of each outcome variable. Column (3) reports the effect of civil liberties treatment and
Column (5) reports the effect of public health treatment. Column (7) reports p-value of the joint significant test of the differential
effects of civil liberties treatment and public health treatment. Column (8) reports the difference in unconditional mean of the control
group of each outcome variable between China and US respondents. Column (9) reports the unconditional mean of the outcome
variable of respondents in the control group. The following covariates are included in each specification: country FE, date FE, treatment
group dummies, geographic controls (11 individual hotspot city dummies: New York City, Seattle, Detroit, and New Orleans for USA,
Munich for Germany, Bergamo and Milan for Italy, Paris for France, London for U.K., Wuhan for China, and Daegu for South Korea),
respondent demographic controls (male dummy, income bracket FE, age bracket FE, employment status FE, college degree dummy,
political right dummy, political neutral dummy, risk preference, time preference, the “leave-one-out" number of times R left home
during the past 3 days, the “leave-one-out" number of times R washed hands during the past 24 hours, and “leave-one-out" number
of household members), disease controls (cardiovascular, diabetes, chronic lung disease, tobacco use, obesity, and any other medical
conditions), time since the first case of COVID-19 at region/state level, the distance to the nearest hotspot, and “leave-one-out" version
of knowing someone contracted with COVID-19 at admin 1 geographical level. The number of observations is: 15,658 in Panel A; 16,055
for Panels B and C. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level,
respectively.




                                                                            50
                                                       Table 4: Experimental Treatment Effects

                                                                                     Cilvil Liberties          Public Health         Civil Liberties=        Gap b/w           Mean of
                  Outcome Variables                               Scale                Treatment                Treatment             Public Health        China and US        dept. var
                          (1)                                      (2)                (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)              (7)                  (8)              (9)
  Panel A: Overall rights and freedom
  Willing to give up own rights                               Agree (0-10)          -0.177**      (0.072)    -0.001      (0.065)           0.014                1.865            6.851
  Willing to give up others’ rights                           Agree (0-10)         -0.244***      (0.071)    -0.005      (0.063)           0.001                1.636            6.778
    z-score: willing to give up rights                         Std. (0-1)          -0.083***      (0.027)    -0.001      (0.024)           0.002                0.694            0.001
  Panel B: Protection of privacy
  Willing to give up privacy                                 Agree (0-10)            -0.092       (0.080)     0.083      (0.073)           0.029                3.136             5.628
  Unwilling to accept: track sick people                       Binary               0.027**       (0.011)    -0.000      (0.010)           0.013                0.058             0.248
  Unwilling to accept: track everyone                          Binary               0.029**       (0.012)    -0.005      (0.011)           0.003                0.034             0.271
  Click MIT app                                            Yes/No (binary)           0.005        (0.012)    0.023**     (0.012)           0.146                0.246             0.414
    z-score: willing to give up privacy                       Std. (0-1)            -0.048*       (0.026)    0.040*      (0.024)           0.001                0.646            -0.002
  Panel C: Democratic rights and duties
  Prefer strong leader                                        Agree (1-4)            -0.040       (0.026)   0.070***     (0.024)           0.000                0.554             2.615
  Prefer delegating to experts                                Agree (1-4)            0.017        (0.022)   0.089***     (0.020)           0.001                -0.000            2.943
  Willing to forgo media freedom                              Agree (0-10)           0.000        (0.084)    -0.004      (0.080)           0.961                3.211             5.579
  Prefer democratic system                                    Agree (1-4)            0.011        (0.019)    -0.005      (0.018)           0.427                 n.a.             3.317
  Willing to suspend democr. procedures                       Agree (0-10)          -0.158*       (0.082)    -0.001      (0.077)           0.058                 n.a.             5.024
    z-score: willing to curtail democracy                      Std. (0-1)            -0.015       (0.025)   0.072***     (0.023)           0.001                 n.a.            -0.002
  Panel D: Rights to movement
  Unwilling to accept: close national border                     Binary             0.008         (0.011)    0.000       (0.010)           0.488                0.160             0.258
  Unwilling to accept: recommend stay home                       Binary             0.008         (0.011)    -0.000      (0.010)           0.465                0.147             0.263
  Unwilling to accept: arrest if outside home                    Binary             0.017         (0.011)    0.007       (0.011)           0.359                0.068             0.276
    z-score: willing to give up mobility                        Std. (0-1)          -0.030        (0.024)    -0.007      (0.023)           0.351                -0.310           -0.003
  Panel E: Business and school operation
  Unwilling to accept: close schools                             Binary             0.014         (0.011)    -0.000      (0.010)           0.179                0.149             0.263
  Unwilling to accept: close restaurants etc.                    Binary             0.013         (0.011)    -0.004      (0.011)           0.133                0.129             0.266
  Unwilling to accept: close all businesses                      Binary             0.006         (0.011)    -0.007      (0.011)           0.258                0.128             0.269
    z-score: willing to limit operations                        Std. (0-1)          -0.027        (0.025)    0.008       (0.024)           0.156                -0.327           -0.003
  Panel F: Economic well-being
  Unwilling to accept: measures cut income                      Binary             0.026**        (0.012)    0.004       (0.011)           0.056                0.027             0.277
  Unwilling to accept: measures 2x unemp. rate                  Binary             0.022**        (0.011)    -0.000      (0.010)           0.043                0.132             0.266
  Unwilling to accept: measures 3x unemp. rate                  Binary             0.030***       (0.011)    0.012       (0.011)           0.102                0.094             0.268
  Willing to endure economic losses                           Agree (0-10)          -0.004        (0.070)    0.089       (0.065)           0.172                1.002             5.957
    z-score: willing to harm economy                           Std. (0-1)          -0.045*        (0.026)    0.016       (0.025)           0.017                0.086            -0.003


Notes: Table reports OLS estimates of the effects of civil liberties and public health treatment. The results are based on the weighed sample from the COVID-19 and Civil Liberties
Survey. Column (1) reports outcome variables. The “z-score" at the bottom of each panel is an inverse-covariance-weighted index as described in Anderson (2008), which combines
all outcome variables in the panel. Column (2) reports the scale of each outcome variable. Column (3) reports the effect of civil liberties treatment and Column (5) reports the
effect of public health treatment. Column (7) reports p-value of the joint significant test of the differential effects of civil liberties treatment and public health treatment. Column
(8) reports the difference in unconditional mean of the control group of each outcome variable between China and US respondents. Column (9) reports the unconditional mean of
the outcome variable of respondents in the control group. The following covariates are included in each specification: country FE, date FE, treatment group dummies, geographic
controls (11 individual hotspot city dummies: New York City, Seattle, Detroit, and New Orleans for USA, Munich for Germany, Bergamo and Milan for Italy, Paris for France,
London for U.K., Wuhan for China, and Daegu for South Korea), respondent demographic controls (male dummy, income bracket FE, age bracket FE, employment status FE,
college degree dummy, political right dummy, political neutral dummy, risk preference, time preference, the “leave-one-out" number of times R left home during the past 3 days,
the “leave-one-out" number of times R washed hands during the past 24 hours, and “leave-one-out" number of household members), disease controls (cardiovascular, diabetes,
chronic lung disease, tobacco use, obesity, and any other medical conditions), time since the first case of COVID-19 at region/state level, the distance to the nearest hotspot, and
“leave-one-out" version of knowing someone contracted with COVID-19 at admin 1 geographical level. The number of observations is: 16,055 for all variables in Panel A; 16,055,
15,973, 15,973, 16,047, 15,965 in Panel B; 16,055 for first three variables, 12,506 for the rest in Panel C; 15,973 for Panels D, E, and F. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **,
*** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                                                             51
Appendix
Table of Contents
   A Additional Figures                                                                                 A.2

   B Additional Tables                                                                                 A.16

   C Treatment Scripts                                                                                 A.31
      C.1 Civil Liberties Treatment Script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A.31
      C.2 Public Health Treatment Script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A.32

   D Health Risk Scores                                                                                A.34
      D.1 Mathematica’s COVID-19 Risk Score . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A.34
      D.2 Health Risk Scores, HR(1)ihj and HR(2)ij          . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A.35



  Please see Online Appendix for additional figures, tables, and details on survey and sampling.
A      Additional Figures




Notes: Figure shows moving averages (7-day lead and 7-day lag) of the number of COVID-19 cases over time in each of the 15 countries
collectively covered by our surveys. The data is from the European Center for Disease Prevention and Control. Superscript 1 denotes
countries included in the COVID-19 and Civil Liberties Survey. Superscript 2 denotes countries included in COVID-19 Global Consumer
Trends Report. Red dash lines indicate when data collection for COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report started, while gray shaded
regions indicate data collection period of COVID-19 and Civil Liberties Survey.



                      Appendix Figure A.1: Epidemic Progression and Survey Timing




                                                               A.2
Appendix Figure A.2: Public Health Treatment: Flattening the Curve




Appendix Figure A.3: Public Health Treatment: Key Health Measures




                               A.3
         Appendix Figure A.4: Public Health Treatment: Health Care Strain




Appendix Figure A.5: Public Health Treatment: Importance of Containment Measures


                                       A.4
 Appendix Figure A.6: Civil Liberties Treatment: Epidemic Curves for China and South Korea




Appendix Figure A.7: Civil Liberties Treatment: Example of Strict Measure Taken by South Korean
Government




     Appendix Figure A.8: Civil Liberties Treatment: Restrictions to Privacy and Movement




                                             A.5
Notes: The figure is based on COVID-19 and Civil Liberties Survey. It shows the average answers to the questions that have the
minimum-lives-saved format. Specifically, those questions describe a policy and ask respondents to report the minimum number of
lives (out of every 100 people in the respondent’s country that would have otherwise died due to COVID-19) that the policy would
need to save in order for the respondent to support it. The policies are: "During the epidemic, the government closes all schools",
"During the epidemic, the government closes restaurants, bars, and entertainment businesses", "During the epidemic, the government
closes the national border to prevent foreigners from entering", "During the epidemic, the government recommends citizens do not
leave their homes except for limited, permitted reasons", "During the epidemic, the government closes all non-essential businesses",
"The government requires everyone to become vaccinated against the coronavirus as soon as an effective vaccine becomes available",
"During the epidemic, the government can track smartphone locations and social contact data of the citizens who tested positive for
COVID-19", "During the epidemic, the government implements a set of public health measures that doubles the unemployment rate",
"During the epidemic, the government rations certain items designated by the government (e.g. masks, food, etc.) so one cannot
buy them from the market", "During the epidemic, the government arrests citizens who are outside their home if they do not have
government permission", "During the epidemic, the government can track smartphone location and social contact data of all citizens",
"During the epidemic, the government implements a set of public health measures that triples the unemployment rate", "During the
epidemic, the government implements a set of public health measures that cuts the pay of low income workers in half". 95% confidence
intervals are depicted in gray on each bar.



                  Appendix Figure A.9: Average of Number of Lives Needs To Be Saved




                                                               A.6
Notes: The figure is based on COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report, pooling all weeks from the week of March 30 to the week of
April 13, 2020 and including countries: Australia (AUS), Canada (CAN), France (FRA), Germany (DEU), India (IND), Italy (ITA),
Japan (JPN), Singapore (SGP), Spain (ESP), the Netherlands (NLD), the United Kingdom (GBR), the United States (USA). Sweden
is omitted in this figure due to the absence of data from the week of March 30 to the week of May 11, 2020. It shows a standardized
cross-country comparison of the average level of agreement on a scale from 0 (strongly disagree) to 10 (strongly agree) with each of the
following statements: "I am willing to sacrifice my own rights and freedom during a crisis like the current one, in order to maintain the
health and well-being of the whole society", "I am willing to relax privacy protections and let the government access my personal data
during a crisis like the current one, in order to allow the government to make timely and accurate decisions", "I am willing to suspend
democratic procedures and give the President more power during a crisis like the current one, in order to ensure swift government
actions", I am willing to tolerate public health risks in order to participate in elections and other civic duties, even during a crisis
like the current one", "I am willing to support the government controlling the media during a crisis like the current one, in order to
ensure effective and uniform communication between the government and citizens", "I am willing to endure substantial economic
losses during a crisis like the current one, in order to maintain the health and well-being of society as a whole". The participants’
answers are standardized by subtracting from them the U.S. mean and by dividing the result by the U.S. standard deviation. The U.S.
mean is represented by the dashed gray line in the figure. On each line, each marker represents the standardized mean for a country.



                 Appendix Figure A.10: Attitudes Across Countries, Standardized Means




                                                                  A.7
                                        9
                     Willingness to forgo privacy protection
                                                                                              IND




                                                       8
                                                                   CHN
                                              7
                                                                                  SGP


                                                                                                                   NLD
                                  6




                                                                                                         KOR       CAN
                                                                                                                   AUS
                                                                                                                   ITA
                                                                                                                   ESP
                                                                                                                   GBR
                                                                                                                   DEU
                                                                                                         FRA
                        5




                                                                                                                   JPN


                                                                                                                   USA
                                        4




                                                               1         2      3             4      5         6
                                                                             Civil liberties score

Notes: The figure is based on COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report, pooling all weeks from the week of March 30 to the week of
April 13, 2020 and including countries: Australia (AUS), Canada (CAN), France (FRA), Germany (DEU), India (IND), Italy (ITA),
Japan (JPN), Singapore (SGP), Spain (ESP), the Netherlands (NLD), the United Kingdom (GBR), the United States (USA). Sweden is
omitted in this figure due to the absence of data from the week of March 30 to the week of May 11, 2020. It shows correlation between
outcomes variables on the y-axis and x-axis. The outcome variable on the y-axis is from COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report
and refers to agreement on a scale from 0 (strongly disagree) to 10 (strongly agree) with each of the following statements: "I am willing
to relax privacy protections and let the government access my personal data during a crisis like the current one, in order to allow the
government to make timely and accurate decisions". The outcome variable on the x-axis is civil liberties score of each country obtained
from House (2020). A red line shows a linear prediction of the relationship between the two outcomes for each country.



     Appendix Figure A.11: Willingness to Give Up Own Rights and Demographic Correlates




                                                                                 A.8
                       Panel (A): Residing in a state that belonged to                                                  Panel (B): Having Migrated
                  the former German Democratic Republic (GDR) regime                                                        from North Korea
A.9




      Notes: Panel (A) shows the relationship between residing in a state that belonged to the former German Democratic Republic (GDR) regime and willingness to give up civil liberties
      based on the sample of German respondents from both surveys: COVID-19 and Civil Liberties survey, and COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report, pooling all weeks from the week
      of March 30 to the week of September 28, 2020; unlike other descriptive statistics, which only used the sample of the week of March 30 to the week of April 13, 2020 of COVID-19 Global
      Consumer Trends Report, we use the full sample in this analysis in order to have more statistical power, examining within a single country. Panel (B) shows the relationship between
      having migrated from North Korea and willingness to give up civil liberties rights based on the sample of COVID-19 and Civil Liberties survey including respondents from South Korea
      only. In Panel A, residing in a state that belonged to the former German Democratic Republic (GDR) regime is equal to 1 if the respondent lives in East German states, or 0 otherwise. The
      sample is restricted to the respondents who were born in 1985 or earlier. The sample size is: N = 21, 600 (N = 5, 095) for top (bottom) panels, and 18% reside in East Germany. In Panel
      B, Having Migrated from North Korea is a binary variable, which is equal to 1 if the respondent or any household members migrated from North to South Korea during the Korean War.
      Dots denote standardized regression coefficients obtained from regressing each outcome on residing in a state that belonged to the former German Democratic Republic (GDR) regime
      (Panel A) or exposure to North Korea (Panel B), controlling for male, employment, and week FEs. Survey FEs are also controlled for Panel A since two different survey samples were
      used for the analysis. 95% confidence intervals based on robust standard errors are shown.



                                                    Appendix Figure A.12: Exposure to East Germany and North Korea
Notes: Figure is based on the sample from COVID-19 and Civil Liberties survey. Diamonds represent coefficients obtained from OLS
estimate of "Willingness to give up own rights" on a set of demographic characteristics denoted on the y-axis. The outcome variable,
"Willingness to give up own rights", is standardized to mean 0, sd 1. Political affiliation variables were not asked from respondents in
China. Country and survey date fixed effects are included in the regression but not reported. 95% confidence intervals based on robust
standard errors are shown.

Appendix Figure A.13: Willingness to Give Up Own Rights and Socio-demographic Characteristics




                                                                A.10
Notes: Figure is based on the sample from COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report, pooling all weeks from the week of March 30
to the week of April 13, 2020 and including countries: Australia, Canada, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Singapore, Spain, the
Netherlands, the United Kingdom, the United States. Sweden is omitted in this figure due to the absence of data from the week of
March 30 to the week of May 11, 2020. Diamonds represent coefficients obtained from OLS estimates of each behavior on an index
for health worries, an index for economic worries, and civil liberties worries. The index for health worries refers to an average value
of level of worries about personal health, the health of the elderly in the community, being around strangers, and healthcare systems
being able to cope on a 1 (not worried at all) to 5 (extremely worried) scale. The index of economic worries refers to an average value of
level of worries about household’s financial position, the availability of foodstuffs, the national economy, and the world economy on a 1
(not worried at all) to 5 (extremely worried) scale. Civil liberties worries refers to worries about the rights, freedoms, and procedures
that are forgone during a crisis like the current one won’t be recovered after the crisis is over; it is on a scale of 0 (not at all worried)
to 10 (extremely worried). All outcomes and indexes are standardized to mean zero and standard deviation 1. Regressions include
country-week fixed effects. 95% confidence intervals based on robust standard errors are also shown.



Appendix Figure A.14: Association Between Health, Economic, and Civil Liberty Worries and
Behaviors
                                          A.11
                                                                                                                   Panel A: Spec. 1




                                              (a) Subjective Likelihood of COVID-19 Infection                                                          (b) Have Contracted COVID-19


                                                                                                                   Panel B: Spec. 2
A.12




                                              (c) Subjective Likelihood of COVID-19 Infection                                                          (d) Have Contracted COVID-19
       Notes: Figure shows OLS estimates of the relationship between between COVID-19 Infection and Health Risk based on the COVID-19 and Civil Liberties Survey. Health Risk indices, HR(1)ihj and HR(2)ihj , follow the main definitions as
       described in Section 4.1.1 respectively, while Hotpot follows the definition as described in Section 4.1.2. “Subj. Likelihood of COVID-19 Infection" refers to the respondent’s subjective likelihood of contracting COVID-19 on a scale of 0 (Not at all
       likely) to 10 (Extremely likely); it is standardized to mean 0 and s.d. 1. “Have Contracted COVID-19" is a binary variable which is equal to 1 if the respondent has contracted COVID-19, or 0 otherwise. The following covariates are included in each
       specification: country FE, date FE, treatment group dummies, geographic controls (11 individual hotspot city dummies: New York City, Seattle, Detroit, and New Orleans for USA, Munich for Germany, Bergamo and Milan for Italy, Paris for France,
       London for U.K., Wuhan for China, and Daegu for South Korea), respondent demographic controls (male dummy, income bracket FE, age bracket FE, employment status FE, college degree dummy, political right dummy, political neutral dummy,
       risk preference, time preference, the “leave-one-out" number of times R left home during the past 3 days, the “leave-one-out" number of times R washed hands during the past 24 hours, and “leave-one-out" number of household members), disease
       controls (cardiovascular, diabetes, chronic lung disease, tobacco use, obesity, and any other medical conditions), time since the first case of COVID-19 at region/state level, the distance to the nearest hotspot, and “leave-one-out" version of knowing
       someone contracted with COVID-19 at admin 1 geographical level. “Coef" refers to the coefficients obstained from each OLS estimate, and robust standard errors are in parentheses. “P-value" refers to the estimated p-value related to the coefficient,
       and “R-squared" refers to the R-squared of the relevant regression estimate.


                                                       Appendix Figure A.15: Relationship between COVID-19 Infection and Health Risk
Notes: The figure is based on data obtained from three different surveys. Wave 5 data of World Value Survey (Inglehart et al., 2014)
is used for Pre-COVID-19 (2005-2007) for all countries. Wave 7 data of World Value Survey (Inglehart et al., 2017) is used for Pre-
COVID-19 (2017-2018) for China (CHN), Germany (DEU), South Korea (KOR), and the United States (USA). European Value Survey
2017 (EVS, 2020) is used for Pre-COVID-19 (2017-2018) for France (FRA), the United Kingdom (GBR), and Italy (ITA). COVID-19
and Civil Liberties Survey is used for COVID-19 (2020) period for all countries; only control group is included in the analysis. The
figure shows the comparison of outcomes between two pre-COVID-19 periods (i.e. 2017-2018 and 2005-2007) and amid COVID-19
period. Outcome variables are survey responses to the questions adapted from World Value Survey: “For each one, would you say it
is a very good, fairly good, fairly bad or very bad way of governing this country? - Having a strong national leader who does not have
to bother with parliament and elections (Panel A); Having a democratic political system (respondents from China were not asked this
questions. Therefore, China is omitted in panel B.) (Panel B)". The responses are on a scale of 1 (very bad) to 4 (very good). Each dot
represent regression coefficients added to the constant terms obtained from regressing each outcome on the indicator for each period.
95% confidence intervals based on robust standard errors are shown.


                 Appendix Figure A.16: Comparison Between Pre- and Amid COVID-19




                                                                A.13
Notes: Figure is based on the sample from COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report, pooling all weeks from the week of March 30 to
the week of September 28, 2020 and including countries: Australia, Canada, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Singapore, Spain, the
Netherlands, the United Kingdom, the United States; weekly data from the week of May 18 to the week of September 28, 2020 are used
for Sweden due to the absence of data from the week of March 30 to the week of May 11, 2020. Dots represent coefficients obtained
from OLS estimates of outcome of interest on week fixed effects. the index for health worries refers to an average value of level of
worries about personal health, the health of the elderly in the community, being around strangers, and healthcare systems being able
to cope on a 1 (not worried at all) to 5 (extremely worried) scale. The index of economic worries refers to an average value of level of
worries about household’s financial position, the availability of foodstuffs, the national economy, and the world economy on a 1 (not
worried at all) to 5 (extremely worried) scale. Civil liberties worries refers to worries about the rights, freedoms, and procedures that
are forgone during a crisis like the current one won’t be recovered after the crisis is over; it is on a scale of 0 (not at all worried) to
10 (extremely worried). Outcomes are standardized based on mean and standard deviation as of the week of March 30, 2020 except
Swedish data; outcomes of Swedish data are standardized based on the week of March 30, 2020 data from European countries (i.e.
France, Germany, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom) due to the absence of weekly data from the week of March
30 to the week of May 11, 2020. Numbers in blue under the first dot in each subfigure indicate the constant term obtained from the
same regression specification but with unstandardized outcome, which are 3.36 on a scale of 1-5 for Figure A; 3.36 on a scale of 1-5 for
Figure B; 5.58 on a scale of 0-10 for Figure C. 95% confidence intervals based on robust standard errors are shown.

Appendix Figure A.17: Time Trends in Worries About Health, Economic Outcomes, Civil Liberties




                                                                  A.14
Notes: Figure is based on the sample from COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report. Dots represent coefficients obtained from OLS
estimates of outcome of interest on week fixed effects and country fixed effects, pooling all weeks from the week of March 30 to the
week of September 28, 2020 and including countries: Australia, Canada, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Singapore, Spain, the
Netherlands, the United Kingdom, the United States; weekly data from the week of May 18 to the week of September 28, 2020 are used
for Sweden due to the absence of weekly data from the week of March 30 to the week of May 11, 2020. Outcome of interest is belief
over months to end of pandemic; y-axis denotes the number of months. Week fixed effect coefficient estimates are shown (the week of
March 30, 2020 is omitted category); mean of the week of March 30, 2020 is added to coefficients. 95% confidence intervals based on
robust standard errors are shown.


                  Appendix Figure A.18: Time Trends: Beliefs Over Pandemic Duration




                                                              A.15
       B        Additional Tables



                                                       Appendix Table B.1: Summary Statistics for COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report
                                      All              Australia          Canada            China             France           Germany            India             Italy             Japan           Netherlands        Singapore          Spain             Sweden            U.K.               U.S.
                                    N=368,091          N=26,798          N=26,692          N=26,907          N=26,933          N=26,815          N=26,807          N=26,912          N=26,823          N=26,776          N=26,888          N=26,927          N=19,713          N=26,789          N=26,311
                                   Mean      SD      Mean      SD      Mean      SD      Mean      SD      Mean      SD      Mean      SD      Mean      SD      Mean      SD      Mean      SD      Mean      SD      Mean      SD      Mean      SD      Mean      SD      Mean      SD      Mean      SD
                                    (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)     (10)     (11)     (12)     (13)     (14)     (15)     (16)     (17)     (18)     (19)     (20)     (21)     (22)     (23)     (24)     (25)     (26)     (27)     (28)     (29)     (30)
                                                                                                                              PANEL A: DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS
        Male                       0.502     0.500   0.502    0.500    0.502     0.500    0.500   0.500     0.500   0.500    0.501    0.500    0.509    0.500    0.500    0.500    0.500    0.500    0.500    0.500    0.500    0.500    0.500    0.500    0.501    0.500    0.502    0.500    0.504    0.500
        Age                        45.441   16.529   46.152   16.817   47.313   16.669   41.417   14.317   47.305   16.825   49.340   16.343   38.175   14.583   40.715   15.292   50.698   16.785   47.811   16.629   39.819   14.403   46.809   15.937   47.402   17.581   47.150   16.729   46.658   16.614
                                                                                                                             PANEL B: EMPLOYMENT STATUS
        Employed                   0.637    0.481    0.594    0.491    0.582    0.493    0.798    0.402    0.559    0.497    0.583    0.493    0.829    0.376    0.614    0.487    0.597    0.491    0.575    0.494    0.811    0.392    0.610    0.488    0.536    0.499    0.613    0.487    0.593    0.491
        Unemployed                 0.069    0.254    0.089    0.285    0.067    0.250    0.008    0.086    0.072    0.258    0.043    0.204    0.032    0.175    0.098    0.297    0.135    0.342    0.058    0.233    0.047    0.211    0.091    0.287    0.088    0.283    0.065    0.246    0.085    0.279
        Out of Labor Force/Other   0.293    0.455    0.317    0.465    0.351    0.477    0.195    0.396    0.370    0.483    0.373    0.484    0.139    0.346    0.288    0.453    0.268    0.443    0.367    0.482    0.142    0.350    0.299    0.458    0.377    0.485    0.322    0.467    0.322    0.467

       Notes: Tables reports summary statistics of the sample from COVID-19 Global Consumer Trends Report, pooling all weeks from the week of March 30 to the week of September 28, 2020 (or from the week of May 18 to the week of September 28,
       2020 for Sweden). Male, Employed, Unemployed, Out of Labor Force/Other are binary variables, while Age is a continuous variable.
A.16
                                                        Appendix Table B.2: Comparison of Population and Sample Characteristics
                                        U.S.                           U.K.                            France                         Italy                       Germany                       South Korea                         China
                              Sample                         Sample                          Sample                         Sample                         Sample                          Sample                         Sample
                                           Population                     Population                       Population                    Population                      Population                     Population                     Population
                             (N=5,258)                      (N=1,581)                       (N=1,892)                      (N=1,619)                      (N=1,293)                       (N=1,036)                      (N=3,614)
                                (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)           (7)             (8)            (9)            (10)            (11)            (12)           (13)             (14)
        Male                    0.455          0.48            0.494          0.49             0.501            0.48          0.547           0.48           0.512          0.49             0.512          0.50            0.466           0.51

        18-25 years old         0.134          0.14            0.145          0.13             0.111            0.12          0.096           0.09           0.139          0.11             0.164          0.13            0.326           0.18
        26-30 years old         0.087          0.09            0.066          0.09             0.075            0.07          0.065           0.06           0.092          0.08             0.094          0.08            0.175           0.10
        31-35 years old         0.084          0.09            0.090          0.08             0.081            0.08          0.083           0.07           0.102          0.08             0.098          0.08            0.173           0.10
        36-45 years old         0.153          0.16            0.166          0.16             0.189            0.16          0.190           0.17           0.178          0.14             0.216          0.18            0.180           0.23
        46-55 years old         0.145          0.17            0.165          0.18             0.226            0.17          0.188           0.19           0.201          0.19             0.199          0.20            0.081           0.17
        56-65 years old         0.179          0.16            0.178          0.15             0.178            0.16          0.125           0.16           0.175          0.16             0.130          0.17            0.044           0.12
        66+ years old           0.218          0.19            0.190          0.21             0.139            0.24          0.252           0.26           0.113          0.24             0.100          0.16            0.021           0.10

        Income bracket 1        0.212          0.30            0.233          0.17             0.222            0.25          0.219           0.40           0.195          0.30             0.271          0.34            0.148           0.20
        Income bracket 2        0.199          0.19            0.210          0.28             0.355            0.30          0.348           0.25           0.278          0.25             0.263          0.21            0.161           0.20
        Income bracket 3        0.183          0.18            0.277          0.26             0.214            0.20          0.233           0.20           0.191          0.15             0.189          0.16            0.108           0.20
        Income bracket 4        0.143          0.12            0.280          0.24             0.209            0.25          0.200           0.15           0.335          0.30             0.166          0.14            0.583           0.40
        Income bracket 5        0.264          0.20            0.000          0.05                                                                                                           0.111          0.15

        Region 1                0.197          0.16            0.409          0.43             0.247            0.29          0.563           0.46           0.400          0.29             0.454          0.50            0.536           0.37
        Region 2                0.242          0.23            0.416          0.41             0.230            0.22          0.196           0.20           0.296          0.35             0.103          0.14            0.234           0.28
        Region 3                0.360          0.22            0.034          0.05             0.257            0.29          0.241           0.34           0.135          0.16             0.085          0.11            0.174           0.21
        Region 4                0.201          0.39            0.093          0.08             0.267            0.20                                         0.169          0.20             0.359          0.25            0.056           0.09
        Region 5                                               0.047          0.03
A.17




       Notes: Table reports summary statistics of the sample from the COVID-19 and Civil Liberties Report Survey (in odd columns) alongside nationally representative statistics (in even columns) of each country. Detailed sources for each
       variable and country are listed in H. Income brackets (annual gross household income) are defined for: (1) U.S. (in USD) as: less than 24,999; 25,000–49,999; 50,000–74,999; 75,999–99,999; more than 100,000.; (2) U.K. (in Pound)
       as: less than 20,000; 20,000–29,999; 30,000–49,999; 50,999-99,999; more than 100,000.; (3) France, Italy, and Germany (in Euros) as: less than 20,000; 20,000–39,999; 40,000–59,999; more than 60,000.; (4) South Korea (in KRW) as: less
       than 29,999,999; 30,000,000-49,999,999; 50,000,000-69,999,999; 70,000,000-99,999,999; more than 100,000,000; (4) China (in Yuan) as: less than 15,000; 15,000-34,999; 35,000-54,999; more than 55,000. Data Sources for Population Statistics.
       Detailed regional brackets are listed in I.
                                            Appendix Table B.3: Summary Statistics for COVID-19 and Civil Liberties Survey

                                                                All                   U.S.                  U.K.                  France               Italy                Germany             South Korea               China
                                                              N=16,264               N=5,243               N=1,579               N=1,890              N=1,619               N=1,290               N=1,034                N=3,609
                                                           Mean        SD        Mean        SD        Mean        SD       Mean         SD       Mean         SD       Mean         SD       Mean         SD        Mean         SD
                                                            (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)         (8)       (9)        (10)      (11)        (12)      (13)        (14)       (15)        (16)
                                                                                   PANEL A: DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS
        Male                                              0.484      0.500      0.455      0.498      0.494      0.500      0.501     0.500        0.547    0.498        0.512    0.500        0.512    0.500        0.466     0.499
        Age                                               44.127     17.039     48.201     17.800     47.391     17.207     46.856    15.395      49.438    16.928      44.909    15.735      42.978    15.220      33.017     11.920
        Citizenship                                       0.981      0.138      0.979      0.145      0.955      0.207      0.980     0.139       0.988     0.108        0.952    0.214        0.994    0.076        0.998     0.044
        Num. of Household Members                         2.066      1.558      1.753      1.536      1.748      1.415      1.807     1.400        2.100    1.253        1.731    1.538        2.361    1.693        2.814     1.548
        Risk Preference                                   5.562      2.505      5.704      2.540      5.321      2.491      5.354     2.523        5.431    2.527        4.709    2.636        5.218    2.045        6.034     2.392
        Time Preference                                   6.801      2.023      6.976      1.984      6.654      1.763      6.362     2.017        7.413    1.917        6.225    1.963        5.907    1.789        7.027     2.140
        Received College Education                         0.614     0.487       0.653     0.476      0.500      0.500       0.559    0.497        0.458    0.498        0.352    0.478        0.746    0.436        0.760     0.427
        Have College Diploma                               0.509     0.500       0.529     0.499       0.422     0.494       0.530    0.499        0.347    0.476        0.313    0.464        0.712    0.453        0.593     0.491
                                                                                  PANEL B: INCOME AND EMPLOYMENT STATUS
        Income < 25th Pct                                  0.247     0.431       0.212     0.409       0.443     0.497       0.222    0.416        0.219    0.413        0.195    0.397        0.271    0.445        0.251     0.434
        25th Pct ≤ HH Income < 50th Pct                    0.290     0.454       0.381     0.486       0.158     0.365       0.355    0.479        0.348    0.477        0.278    0.448        0.263    0.441        0.166     0.372
        50th Pct ≤ HH Income < 75th Pct                    0.221     0.415       0.143     0.350       0.194     0.395       0.214    0.410        0.233    0.423        0.334    0.472        0.256    0.437        0.294     0.456
        75th Pct ≤ HH Income                               0.242     0.428       0.264     0.441       0.205     0.404       0.209    0.407        0.200    0.400        0.192    0.394        0.210    0.407        0.289     0.453
        Employed                                           0.625     0.484       0.541     0.498       0.620     0.485       0.640    0.480        0.568    0.496        0.660    0.474        0.711    0.454        0.729     0.445
        Unemployed                                         0.104     0.305       0.146     0.353       0.104     0.305       0.097    0.296        0.122    0.328        0.070    0.255        0.134    0.341        0.042     0.200
        Out of Labor Force                                 0.271     0.445       0.313     0.464       0.276     0.447       0.263    0.441        0.310    0.463        0.271    0.444        0.155    0.362        0.229     0.421
A.18




                                                                                            PANEL C: POLITICS AND MEDIA
        Political Aff.: Right                              0.228     0.419       0.284     0.451       0.303     0.460       0.331    0.471        0.395    0.489        0.231    0.422        0.173    0.379          –       –
        Political Aff.: Left                               0.272     0.445       0.384     0.486       0.277     0.448       0.291    0.454        0.416    0.493        0.317    0.465        0.338    0.473          –       –
        Level of Media Trust                               3.372     1.187       3.146     1.233       3.366     1.077       3.220    1.058        3.444    0.968        2.357    0.954        2.993    1.025        4.225     0.881
                                                                                                      PANEL D: HEALTH
        Have Any Medical Condition                         0.520     0.500       0.553     0.497       0.483     0.500       0.521    0.500        0.602    0.490        0.542    0.498        0.555    0.497        0.431     0.495
        Frequent Hospital Use                              0.167     0.373       0.123     0.328       0.134     0.340       0.120    0.325        0.240    0.427        0.125    0.331        0.368    0.483        0.194     0.396
        Times Washed Hands in Last 24 Hours               12.714     33.294     15.649     42.078     14.555     37.902     13.891    32.529      12.648    19.078      11.877    29.880       8.884    10.613       8.446     26.265
        Times Left Home in Last 3 Days                     3.171     15.374      3.694     19.084      3.226     10.091     2.750     17.927      1.973     6.312        3.219    4.927        3.785    31.352       2.954     3.710
                                                                                                     PANEL E: COVID-19
        Contracted COVID-19                                0.027     0.163       0.037     0.189       0.040     0.196       0.037    0.189        0.012    0.108        0.030    0.171        0.012    0.107        0.012     0.111
        Num. of Acquaintances with Covid-19+              61.690     476.138    48.736     424.753    24.668     295.613    21.777    289.676     10.040    187.390     27.818    312.185     50.570    435.092     156.940    750.729
        Subj. Community Risk                              27.110     27.863     36.901     29.761     36.597     27.793     30.842    25.675      24.573    23.478      27.743    25.569      21.442    26.392       9.189     18.135
        Subj. Easiness of Testing                         4.617      3.109      4.186      2.897      2.243      2.521      3.928     2.975       3.105     2.877        5.040    2.861        5.693    2.567        6.862     2.440
                                                                                     PANEL F: GEOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS
        Hotspot Residency                                  0.164     0.370       0.214     0.410       0.139     0.346       0.192    0.394        0.232    0.422        0.138    0.345        0.178    0.383        0.062     0.242
        Urban Residency                                    0.475     0.499       0.574     0.495       0.740     0.439       0.334    0.472        0.612    0.487        0.282    0.450        0.816    0.387        0.200     0.400
       Notes: Tables shows summary statistics by country from COVID-19 and Civil Liberties survey. Following variables are binary variables: Male, Citizenship, Received College Education, Have College Diploma, all variables
       in Panel B, Political Aff.: Right, Political Aff.: Left, Have Any Medical Conditions, Frequent Hospital Use, Contracted COVID-19, Hotspot Residency, and Urban Residency. Following variables are continuous variables: Age,
       Num. of Household Members, Times Washed Hands in Last 24 Hours, and Times Left Home in Last 3 Days. Risk Preference refers to the respondent’s preference for risk; it is on a scale of 1 (Not at all willing) to 10 (Extremely
       willing). Time preference refers to the respondent’s willingness give up something that is beneficial today in order to benefit more from that in the future; it is on a scale of 1 (Not at all willing) to 10 (Extremely willing).
       Level of Media Trust refers to the respondent’s trust level on the news as a whole in the country; it is on a scale of 1 (Strongly disagree) to 5 (Strongly agree). Have Any Medical Condition is equal 1 if the respondent has
       any of the following medical condition: cardiovascular, diabetes, chronic lung disease, tobacco use, pregnancy, back pain, obesity, or arthritis. Subj. community risk refers to the respondent’s subjective number out of 100
       people in the community who will get sick from COVID-19 in the next month. Subj. Easiness of Testing refers to the respondent’s subjective easiness of getting tested for COVID-19 on a scale of 0 (Extremely difficult) to 10
       (Extremely easy). N is the number eligible to answer. A small number did not answer each question.
                                                                                                                                     Appendix Table B.4: Balance
                                                                 All                                            U.S.                                            U.K.                                            France                                          Italy                                          Germany                                    South Korea
                                                               N=11,621                                        N=5,243                                         N=1,579                                         N=1,890                                         N=1,619                                         N=1,290                                      N=1,034
                                              Mean [SD]   CL-Control   PH-Control   P-value   Mean [SD]   CL-Control   PH-Control   P-value   Mean [SD]   CL-Control   PH-Control   P-value   Mean [SD]   CL-Control   PH-Control   P-value   Mean [SD]   CL-Control   PH-Control   P-value   Mean [SD]   CL-Control   PH-Control   P-value   Mean [SD]    PH-Control   P-value
       PANEL A: DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS
       Male                                      0.492      -0.016          0.001   0.262        0.465      -0.018        -0.013    0.557        0.501      -0.040         0.020    0.144        0.516      -0.016        -0.028    0.601        0.514       0.032         0.067    0.082        0.526      -0.038        -0.004    0.474        0.513        -0.002    0.946
                                                [0.500]    (0.011)        (0.011)               [0.499]    (0.017)       (0.017)                [0.500]    (0.031)       (0.031)                [0.500]    (0.028)       (0.028)                [0.500]    (0.030)       (0.030)                [0.500]    (0.034)       (0.034)                [0.500]      (0.031)
       Age                                      47.591      -0.199          0.459   0.222       47.965      0.305         0.404     0.780       47.049      -0.279         1.333    0.277       46.075      0.755         1.584     0.182       49.381       0.160         0.013    0.985       46.700      -3.976        -1.458    0.001       43.591        -1.216    0.199
                                               [16.835]    (0.385)        (0.384)              [17.719]    (0.605)       (0.597)               [16.952]    (1.052)       (1.053)               [14.758]    (0.857)       (0.858)               [17.008]    (1.019)       (1.039)               [15.387]    (1.059)       (1.064)               [15.631]      (0.947)
       Citizenship                               0.974      -0.003          0.003   0.194        0.976      0.004         0.003     0.704        0.949       0.011         0.008    0.686        0.984      -0.017        0.005     0.032        0.989      -0.000        -0.002    0.933        0.963      -0.034        -0.001    0.055        0.992        0.004     0.403
                                                [0.159]    (0.004)        (0.003)               [0.152]    (0.005)       (0.005)                [0.221]    (0.013)       (0.013)                [0.124]    (0.009)       (0.006)                [0.104]    (0.006)       (0.007)                [0.188]    (0.015)       (0.013)                [0.088]      (0.005)
       Num. of Household Members                 1.822      -0.002         -0.041   0.382        1.776      -0.034        -0.035    0.740        1.779       0.021        -0.116    0.241        1.861      -0.050        -0.109    0.377        2.107      -0.011        -0.010    0.986        1.643       0.178        0.089     0.233        2.392        -0.062    0.558
                                                [1.454]    (0.033)        (0.033)               [1.520]    (0.052)       (0.052)                [1.387]    (0.088)       (0.085)                [1.456]    (0.081)       (0.078)                [1.243]    (0.076)       (0.076)                [1.469]    (0.104)       (0.103)                [1.732]      (0.105)
       Risk Preference                           5.445      -0.016          0.017   0.859        5.684      -0.007        0.065     0.653        5.335      -0.051         0.010    0.913        5.448      -0.090        -0.192    0.397        5.310       0.156         0.211    0.357        4.783      -0.115        -0.109    0.757        5.172        0.091     0.473
                                                [2.534]    (0.058)        (0.057)               [2.548]    (0.087)       (0.085)                [2.468]    (0.153)       (0.153)                [2.488]    (0.142)       (0.141)                [2.557]    (0.156)       (0.152)                [2.466]    (0.179)       (0.175)                [2.050]      (0.127)
       Time Preference                           6.809      -0.007          0.010   0.932        6.971      0.054         -0.038    0.400        6.740      -0.176        -0.089    0.266        6.417      -0.178        0.008     0.171        7.381      -0.004         0.101    0.582        6.085       0.205        0.218     0.188        5.827        0.160     0.151
                                                [1.978]    (0.044)        (0.044)               [1.924]    (0.066)       (0.067)                [1.767]    (0.108)       (0.108)                [2.089]    (0.114)       (0.115)                [1.961]    (0.118)       (0.115)                [1.983]    (0.134)       (0.134)                [1.811]      (0.111)
       Employed                                  0.591      -0.005         -0.012   0.549        0.550      -0.013        -0.014    0.648        0.627       0.007        -0.027    0.489        0.657      -0.016        -0.034    0.439        0.574      -0.007        -0.013    0.914        0.634       0.031        0.047     0.338        0.696        0.030     0.294
                                                [0.492]    (0.011)        (0.011)               [0.498]    (0.017)       (0.017)                [0.484]    (0.030)       (0.030)                [0.475]    (0.027)       (0.027)                [0.495]    (0.030)       (0.030)                [0.482]    (0.033)       (0.032)                [0.460]      (0.028)
       Unemployed                                0.119       0.003          0.002   0.934        0.136      0.010         0.021     0.221        0.112      -0.006        -0.018    0.619        0.105      -0.010        -0.014    0.686        0.123       0.003        -0.004    0.943        0.076      -0.000        -0.017    0.493        0.138        -0.008    0.711
                                                [0.324]    (0.007)        (0.007)               [0.343]    (0.012)       (0.012)                [0.315]    (0.019)       (0.019)                [0.307]    (0.017)       (0.017)                [0.328]    (0.020)       (0.020)                [0.265]    (0.018)       (0.017)                [0.346]      (0.021)
              PANEL B: INCOME AND EDUCATION
       Income < 25th Pct                        0.252       -0.012         -0.010   0.428       0.210       0.000         0.006     0.894       0.444       -0.018        0.016     0.542       0.235       -0.021        -0.018    0.630       0.264       -0.063        -0.073    0.009       0.190        0.027        -0.010    0.373       0.257         0.027     0.333
                                               [0.434]     (0.010)        (0.010)              [0.407]     (0.014)       (0.014)               [0.497]     (0.030)       (0.031)               [0.424]     (0.024)       (0.023)               [0.441]     (0.026)       (0.025)               [0.393]     (0.027)       (0.026)               [0.438]       (0.028)
       25th Pct ≤ HH Income < 50th Pct          0.331       -0.003          0.001   0.906       0.383        0.007        -0.012    0.528       0.154        0.001        0.014     0.786       0.345        0.002         0.029    0.492       0.347       -0.006         0.011    0.840       0.300       -0.052        -0.013    0.199       0.283         -0.039    0.156
                                               [0.471]     (0.011)        (0.011)              [0.486]     (0.017)       (0.016)               [0.361]     (0.022)       (0.023)               [0.476]     (0.027)       (0.027)               [0.476]     (0.029)       (0.029)               [0.459]     (0.030)       (0.031)               [0.451]       (0.027)
       50th Pct ≤ HH Income < 75th Pct          0.183        0.024          0.015   0.024       0.130        0.017        0.024     0.112       0.185        0.033        -0.005    0.252       0.219        0.017        -0.033    0.076       0.199        0.039         0.065    0.035       0.320        0.031         0.011    0.621       0.246         0.021     0.436
                                               [0.386]     (0.009)        (0.009)              [0.336]     (0.012)       (0.012)               [0.388]     (0.025)       (0.024)               [0.414]     (0.024)       (0.022)               [0.399]     (0.025)       (0.026)               [0.467]     (0.032)       (0.032)               [0.431]       (0.027)
       75th Pct ≤ HH Income                     0.235       -0.009         -0.007   0.625       0.277       -0.024        -0.018    0.258       0.218       -0.015        -0.025    0.608       0.201        0.002         0.023    0.549       0.191        0.030        -0.003    0.350       0.190       -0.006         0.013    0.778       0.214         -0.009    0.721
                                               [0.424]     (0.010)        (0.010)              [0.448]     (0.015)       (0.015)               [0.413]     (0.025)       (0.025)               [0.401]     (0.023)       (0.023)               [0.394]     (0.025)       (0.024)               [0.393]     (0.027)       (0.027)               [0.411]       (0.025)
       Received College Education               0.557       -0.003         -0.002   0.969       0.649       0.004         0.007     0.910       0.490        0.023        0.009     0.761       0.574       -0.023        -0.021    0.663       0.475       -0.014        -0.036    0.489       0.352       -0.017        0.016     0.594       0.747         -0.002    0.945
                                               [0.497]     (0.011)        (0.011)              [0.477]     (0.016)       (0.016)               [0.500]     (0.031)       (0.031)               [0.495]     (0.028)       (0.028)               [0.500]     (0.030)       (0.030)               [0.478]     (0.032)       (0.033)               [0.435]       (0.027)
       Have College Diploma                     0.471       -0.011         -0.008   0.610       0.531       -0.001        -0.006    0.940       0.422       -0.004        0.003     0.975       0.547       -0.027        -0.025    0.555       0.366       -0.035        -0.026    0.458       0.309       -0.002        0.015     0.839       0.710         0.004     0.874
                                               [0.499]     (0.011)        (0.011)              [0.499]     (0.017)       (0.017)               [0.494]     (0.030)       (0.030)               [0.498]     (0.028)       (0.028)               [0.482]     (0.029)       (0.029)               [0.463]     (0.032)       (0.032)               [0.454]       (0.028)
               PANEL C: POLITICS AND MEDIA
       Political Aff.: Right                    0.294        0.023          0.008   0.075       0.268       0.039         0.010     0.035       0.310       -0.003        -0.019    0.779       0.331       0.011         -0.012    0.678       0.393        0.012        -0.007    0.810       0.198        0.025        0.076     0.029       0.177         -0.008    0.719
A.19




                                               [0.456]     (0.010)        (0.010)              [0.443]     (0.015)       (0.015)               [0.463]     (0.028)       (0.028)               [0.471]     (0.027)       (0.026)               [0.489]     (0.030)       (0.030)               [0.399]     (0.028)       (0.029)               [0.382]       (0.024)
       Political Aff.: Left                     0.359       -0.014         -0.010   0.431       0.390       -0.019        0.001     0.395       0.288       -0.025        -0.006    0.638       0.298       0.007         -0.026    0.392       0.426       -0.021        -0.010    0.790       0.329        0.001        -0.036    0.412       0.318         0.039     0.182
                                               [0.480]     (0.011)        (0.011)              [0.488]     (0.016)       (0.016)               [0.453]     (0.027)       (0.028)               [0.458]     (0.026)       (0.025)               [0.495]     (0.030)       (0.030)               [0.470]     (0.032)       (0.032)               [0.466]       (0.029)
       Level of Media Trust                     3.150       -0.025          0.003   0.495       3.157       -0.015        -0.018    0.900       3.385       -0.103         0.046    0.075       3.229       -0.015        -0.012    0.965       3.443        0.015        -0.012    0.906       2.343       -0.032        0.074     0.254       2.982         0.021     0.737
                                               [1.161]     (0.025)        (0.025)              [1.233]     (0.042)       (0.042)               [1.085]     (0.068)       (0.065)               [1.066]     (0.060)       (0.060)               [0.956]     (0.058)       (0.059)               [0.949]     (0.065)       (0.065)               [1.009]       (0.064)
                         PANEL D: HEALTH
       Have Any Medical Condition                0.542      -0.005         0.011    0.354        0.546      0.004         0.017     0.569        0.486      -0.020         0.011    0.603        0.527      -0.033        0.014     0.232        0.599       0.017        -0.010    0.667        0.542      -0.009        0.008     0.882        0.558        -0.005    0.879
                                                [0.498]    (0.011)        (0.011)               [0.498]    (0.017)       (0.017)                [0.500]    (0.031)       (0.031)                [0.500]    (0.028)       (0.028)                [0.490]    (0.030)       (0.030)                [0.499]    (0.034)       (0.034)                [0.497]      (0.031)
       Frequent Hospital Use                     0.134       0.007         0.013    0.248        0.119      0.000         0.011     0.524        0.135       0.005        -0.011    0.744        0.122      -0.016        0.007     0.414        0.218       0.034         0.030    0.338        0.101       0.038        0.035     0.146        0.376        -0.015    0.609
                                                [0.340]    (0.008)        (0.008)               [0.324]    (0.011)       (0.011)                [0.342]    (0.021)       (0.021)                [0.328]    (0.018)       (0.019)                [0.414]    (0.026)       (0.026)                [0.301]    (0.022)       (0.022)                [0.485]      (0.030)
       Times Washed Hands in Last 24 Hours      13.906       0.584         0.827    0.580       15.232      -0.494        1.707     0.312       12.642       5.809         0.013    0.121       13.458      0.208         1.081     0.861       12.372       0.171         0.670    0.771       12.728      -0.468        -2.096    0.148        8.690        0.385     0.560
                                               [34.084]    (0.786)        (0.835)              [40.251]    (1.229)       (1.554)               [11.234]    (2.840)       (0.731)               [28.188]    (1.484)       (2.006)               [15.350]    (1.256)       (0.943)               [48.077]    (2.413)       (2.355)               [10.378]      (0.660)
       Times Left Home in Last 3 Days            2.988       0.564         0.027    0.310        3.208      1.393         0.100     0.189        2.921       0.624         0.307    0.589        2.906      -0.553        0.067     0.615        2.143      -0.208        -0.307    0.746        3.378      -0.251        -0.232    0.671        3.037        1.485     0.443
                                                [9.922]    (0.374)        (0.271)              [10.722]    (0.766)       (0.358)                [7.443]    (0.631)       (0.541)               [13.739]    (0.629)       (1.182)                [6.871]    (0.370)       (0.411)                [4.257]    (0.351)       (0.299)                [5.440]      (1.936)
                        PANEL E: COVID-19
       Contracted COVID-19                       0.037      -0.008         -0.004   0.128        0.043       -0.008        -0.010   0.286        0.046       -0.021         0.003   0.064        0.044       -0.016        -0.005   0.272        0.016       -0.003       -0.011    0.173        0.021        0.010       0.019     0.246        0.010         0.004    0.580
                                                [0.190]    (0.004)        (0.004)               [0.203]     (0.007)       (0.006)               [0.209]     (0.011)       (0.013)               [0.205]     (0.010)       (0.011)               [0.127]     (0.007)      (0.006)                [0.142]     (0.011)      (0.012)                [0.098]       (0.007)
       Num. of Acquaintances with Covid-19+     26.270       4.854        16.124    0.132       35.586      17.341        22.173    0.218       32.082      -15.789        -6.830   0.646       21.805      -21.101       20.093    0.007        1.101      19.243         7.899    0.158       19.931       -0.257      23.952     0.496       79.392        -57.035   0.036
                                              [311.872]    (7.414)        (8.044)             [357.315]    (13.820)      (13.882)             [359.024]    (17.922)      (20.156)             [285.909]    (11.329)      (19.690)               [5.031]    (11.717)      (7.927)              [284.144]    (18.844)     (22.598)              [554.727]      (27.237)
       Subj. Community Risk                     33.615      -0.600         -0.857   0.373       37.972       -1.947        -1.295   0.148       35.916        2.478        -0.414   0.211       32.058       -1.285        -2.355   0.267       24.619        0.036       -0.176    0.988       26.795        1.205       1.658     0.611       21.250         0.381    0.817
                                               [28.178]    (0.629)        (0.626)              [30.214]     (1.011)       (1.011)              [26.985]     (1.729)       (1.663)              [26.393]     (1.465)       (1.450)              [23.555]     (1.438)      (1.423)               [24.728]     (1.713)      (1.749)               [25.707]       (1.643)
       Subj. Easiness of Testing                 3.781       0.035          0.054   0.701        4.146       0.064         0.058    0.773        2.117        0.069         0.315   0.115        3.977       -0.004        -0.142   0.637        3.109       -0.028        0.016    0.970        5.022        0.006       0.050     0.965        5.659         0.068    0.670
                                                [2.937]    (0.065)        (0.065)               [2.914]     (0.098)       (0.098)               [2.410]     (0.151)       (0.156)               [2.979]     (0.171)       (0.169)               [2.778]     (0.173)      (0.174)                [2.717]     (0.199)      (0.198)                [2.512]       (0.160)
        PANEL F: GEOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS
       Hotspot Residency                        0.195        0.001         -0.002   0.938       0.212       0.001         0.004     0.957       0.144       -0.002        -0.014    0.778       0.194       -0.005        -0.002    0.977       0.231        0.007        -0.003    0.926       0.142       0.002         -0.014    0.764       0.177         0.001     0.963
                                               [0.396]     (0.009)        (0.009)              [0.409]     (0.014)       (0.014)               [0.352]     (0.022)       (0.021)               [0.396]     (0.022)       (0.022)               [0.422]     (0.026)       (0.026)               [0.349]     (0.024)       (0.023)               [0.382]       (0.024)
       Urban Residency                          0.538       -0.012         -0.008   0.518       0.583       -0.012        -0.016    0.611       0.740       -0.006         0.006    0.901       0.353       -0.039        -0.017    0.342       0.617       -0.007        -0.009    0.950       0.272       0.011         0.019     0.822       0.807         0.018     0.448
                                               [0.499]     (0.011)        (0.011)              [0.493]     (0.017)       (0.017)               [0.439]     (0.027)       (0.027)               [0.478]     (0.027)       (0.027)               [0.486]     (0.030)       (0.030)               [0.446]     (0.031)       (0.031)               [0.395]       (0.024)

       Notes: Table is based on the sample from COVID-19 and Civil Liberties survey. Respondents from China are not included in the table since they were not assigned to any treatment groups. Columns (1) to (4) show the results for all countries, excluding
       respondents from China and South Korea. Columns (1), (5), (9), (13), (17), (21) and (25) reports the mean and standard deviations (in brackets) of the control group. Columns (2), (3), (6), (7), (10), (11), (14), (15), (18), (19), (22), (23), and (26) report
       regression coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) for each randomization group relative to the omitted group (even-numbered columns are civil liberties treatment group relative to the control group, while odd-numbered columns are public health
       treatment group relative to the control group). Columns (4), (8), (12), (16), (20), (24), and (27) show the p-value associated with the F-statistic testing whether the treatment arms are jointly equal to zero. Following variables are binary variables: Male,
       Citizenship, Received College Education, Have College Diploma, all variables in Panel B, Political Aff.: Right, Political Aff.: Left, Have Any Medical Conditions, Frequent Hospital Use, Contracted COVID-19, Hotspot Residency, and Urban Residency. Following
       variables are continuous variables: Age, Num. of Household Members, Times Washed Hands in Last 24 Hours, and Times Left Home in Last 3 Days. Risk Preference refers to the respondent’s preference for risk; it is on a scale of 1 (Not at all willing) to 10
       (Extremely willing). Time preference refers to the respondent’s willingness give up something that is beneficial today in order to benefit more from that in the future; it is on a scale of 1 (Not at all willing) to 10 (Extremely willing). Level of Media Trust refers
       to the respondent’s trust level on the news as a whole in the country; it is on a scale of 1 (Strongly disagree) to 5 (Strongly agree). Have Any Medical Condition is equal 1 if the respondent has any of the following medical condition: cardiovascular, diabetes,
       chronic lung disease, tobacco use, pregnancy, back pain, obesity, or arthritis. Subj. community risk refers to the respondent’s subjective number out of 100 people in the community who will get sick from COVID-19 in the next month. Subj. Easiness of Testing
       refers to the respondent’s subjective easiness of getting tested for COVID-19 on a scale of 0 (Extremely difficult) to 10 (Extremely easy). N is the number eligible to answer. Observation count varies due to missing responses in the baseline survey.
                                 Appendix Table B.5: Testing For Differential Attrition

                                      (1)               (2)                 (3)                                 T-test
                                    Control        CL Treatment         PH Treatment                           P-value
              Variable              Mean/SE         Mean/SE               Mean/SE               (1)-(2)        (1)-(3)        (2)-(3)
              Completed survey        0.927             0.900                  0.917            0.000***       0.068*        0.006***
                                     (0.004)           (0.005)                (0.004)
              N                       4258              4221                   4253


               Notes: Table describes survey completion among participants who reached the randomization stage and
               were assigned to one of the treatment arms. Respondents from China and South Korea are excluded in this
               analysis. The results are based on the sample from COVID-19 and Civil Liberties survey. Country fixed
               effects are included. 10 hotspot city dummies are also controlled for, which are: New York City, Seattle,
               Detroit, and New Orleans for USA, Munich for Germany, Bergamo and Milan for Italy, Paris for France, and
               London for U.K. show the p-value associated with the F-statistic testing whether the treatment arms are
               jointly equal to zero. Column (4) presents p-values of tests of differences in means between each group.
               Standard errors are in parentheses.




                           Appendix Table B.6: Civil Liberties Treatment: Lee Bounds

                                      (1)            (2)              (3)             (4)            (5)                 (6)              (7)
                                    Sacrifice     Sacrifice      Relax privacy      Sacrifice      Suspend              Forgo           Endure
                                   own rights   others’ rights    protection       free press   democratic proc.     civic duties   economic losses
  Civil Liberties
    Treatment                       -0.158**      -0.197***          -0.094            0.045          -0.054              -0.091         -0.057
                                    (0.066)        (0.064)          (0.073)           (0.077)        (0.076)             (0.073)        (0.061)
  N excl. attriters                   7732          7732              7732             7732            7732                7732           7732
  N incl. attriters                   8479          8479              8479             8479            8479                8479           8479
  Mean of dept. var                   6.51           6.47              4.85             4.84           4.81                 6.03           5.80
  Lee (2009) TE lower bound           -0.36         -0.40             -0.25            -0.11           -0.21               -0.28          -0.24
  Lee (2009) TE upper bound           -0.05         -0.08              0.07             0.21           0.11                 0.03           0.08
  Lee (2009) 95% CI lower bound       -0.50         -0.53             -0.38            -0.25           -0.34               -0.42          -0.36
  Lee (2009) 95% CI upper bound       0.07           0.03              0.20             0.35           0.25                 0.16           0.19

Note: Table reports OLS estimates of outcome of interest on treatment indicator among the sample who completed the survey, excluding
respondents in the public health treatment, and excluding respondents from China and South Korea. It reports bounds on estimated
treatment incorporating selective attrition, following Lee (2009). The dependent variables are the main outcomes described in Sectiton
2.4.2. Regression does not include controls, and is unweighted. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *, **, *** refer to statistical
significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                                    A.20
                                                         Appendix Table B.7: Demographic Correlates - All Countries

                                                                                                     Age               Income                                     College              Pol. right                               Mean of
                    Outcome Variables                     Scale            Female                below 45           above median           Employed                degree               leaning                Urban            dept. var

                                (1)                        (2)           (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)       (7)        (8)        (9)       (10)       (11)       (12)       (13)       (14)       (15)       (16)       (17)
        Panel A: Overall rights and freedom
        Willing to give up own rights                  Agree (0-10)    0.428*** (0.069) -0.034 (0.075) 0.164*** (0.056) 0.005 (0.059) -0.064 (0.057) -2.158*** (0.209) -0.074 (0.066)                                            6.851
        Willing to give up others’ rights              Agree (0-10)    0.352*** (0.067) -0.011 (0.074) 0.172*** (0.055) 0.002 (0.058) -0.091 (0.056) -1.920*** (0.205) -0.033 (0.065)                                            6.778
          z-score: willing to give up rights            Std. (0-1)     0.155*** (0.025) -0.009 (0.028) 0.066*** (0.021) 0.001 (0.022) -0.030 (0.021) -0.808*** (0.077) -0.021 (0.025)                                            0.001
        Panel B: Protection of privacy
        Willing to give up privacy                     Agree (0-10)      -0.053    (0.077) 0.114 (0.085) 0.407***              (0.063)    0.120*    (0.066) -0.020 (0.063) -3.372*** (0.231)                0.016     (0.076)     5.628
        Unwilling to accept: track sick people           Binary        -0.071***   (0.011) -0.062*** (0.012) -0.036***         (0.009)    -0.003    (0.009) 0.005 (0.009) -0.057 (0.035)                  -0.026**    (0.011)     0.248
        Unwilling to accept: track everyone              Binary        -0.065***   (0.012) -0.063*** (0.013) -0.027***         (0.010)    -0.008    (0.010) 0.014 (0.010) 0.005 (0.036)                    -0.021*    (0.011)     0.271
        Click MIT app                                Yes/No (binary)     -0.019    (0.013) 0.016 (0.014) 0.013                 (0.010)   0.040***   (0.010) 0.046*** (0.010) -0.258*** (0.037)             0.023**    (0.012)     0.414
          z-score: willing to give up privacy           Std. (0-1)     0.071***    (0.026) 0.125*** (0.028) 0.119***           (0.021)   0.068***   (0.022) 0.037* (0.021) -0.718*** (0.078)              0.061**     (0.025)    -0.002
        Panel C: Democratic rights and duties
        Prefer strong leader                           Agree (1-4)       0.038     (0.025)   0.107***    (0.028)     -0.033    (0.021)   0.108***   (0.021)   -0.245***   (0.021)   -0.433***   (0.076) -0.008 (0.024)            2.615
        Prefer delegating to experts                   Agree (1-4)      0.056**    (0.024)     0.041     (0.026)    -0.035*    (0.019)    0.026     (0.020)     -0.030    (0.019)     0.120     (0.076) -0.007 (0.022)            2.943
        Willing to forgo media freedom                 Agree (0-10)    0.491***    (0.083)   0.312***    (0.093)     -0.020    (0.068)   0.153**    (0.070)   -0.564***   (0.067)   -3.237***   (0.242) 0.114 (0.081)             5.579
        Prefer democratic system                       Agree (1-4)     -0.074***   (0.021)   -0.103***   (0.023)    0.038**    (0.016)   -0.044**   (0.018)    0.113***   (0.017)   -0.380***   (0.020) -0.002 (0.019)            3.317
        Willing to suspend democr. procedures          Agree (0-10)    0.274***    (0.091)    0.373***   (0.098)      0.068    (0.071)   0.259***   (0.074)   -0.450***   (0.071)    1.306***   (0.086) 0.109 (0.082)             5.024
          z-score: willing to curtail democracy         Std. (0-1)     0.148***    (0.026)   0.197***    (0.029)   -0.060***   (0.022)   0.090***   (0.022)   -0.227***   (0.022)   0.456***    (0.026) 0.008 (0.025)            -0.002
        Panel D: Rights to movement
A.21




        Unwilling to accept: close national border       Binary        -0.064***   (0.012)   -0.051***   (0.013)   -0.025***   (0.009)    0.002     (0.009) -0.029*** (0.009) -0.156*** (0.034)           -0.021**    (0.011)     0.258
        Unwilling to accept: recommend stay home         Binary        -0.081***   (0.012)   -0.044***   (0.013)   -0.027***   (0.009)    0.008     (0.009) -0.024*** (0.009) -0.109*** (0.034)            -0.021*    (0.011)     0.263
        Unwilling to accept: arrest if outside home      Binary        -0.067***   (0.012)   -0.067***   (0.013)     -0.006    (0.010)   -0.005     (0.010) 0.008 (0.010) -0.039 (0.036)                   -0.020*    (0.011)     0.276
          z-score: willing to give up mobility          Std. (0-1)     0.180***    (0.026)   0.143***    (0.029)    0.046**    (0.021)   -0.002     (0.021) 0.034 (0.021) 0.252*** (0.079)                0.053**     (0.024)    -0.003
        Panel E: Business and school operation
        Unwilling to accept: close schools               Binary        -0.076***   (0.012)   -0.047***   (0.013)   -0.027***   (0.009)   -0.003     (0.009)   -0.024***   (0.009)   -0.122***   (0.034)    -0.017     (0.011)     0.263
        Unwilling to accept: close restaurants etc.      Binary        -0.064***   (0.012)   -0.048***   (0.013)   -0.028***   (0.009)   -0.003     (0.009)   -0.027***   (0.009)   -0.095***   (0.035)   -0.024**    (0.011)     0.266
        Unwilling to accept: close all businesses        Binary        -0.075***   (0.012)   -0.046***   (0.013)    -0.019**   (0.009)   0.002      (0.009)     -0.013    (0.009)   -0.118***   (0.035)   -0.022**    (0.011)     0.269
          z-score: willing to limit operations          Std. (0-1)     0.174***    (0.027)   0.113***    (0.029)   0.059***    (0.021)   0.003      (0.021)    0.052**    (0.021)   0.270***    (0.078)   0.049**     (0.024)    -0.003
        Panel F: Economic well-being
        Unwilling to accept: measures cut income         Binary        -0.055***   (0.012)   -0.059***   (0.013) 0.002 (0.010) -0.021** (0.010) 0.005 (0.010) -0.023 (0.036)                                -0.014    (0.011)     0.277
        Unwilling to accept: measures 2x unemp. rate     Binary        -0.062***   (0.012)   -0.043***   (0.013) -0.006 (0.010) -0.009 (0.010) -0.005 (0.009) -0.068** (0.035)                            -0.028***   (0.011)     0.266
        Unwilling to accept: measures 3x unemp. rate     Binary        -0.064***   (0.012)   -0.062***   (0.013) 0.002 (0.010) -0.013 (0.010) 0.005 (0.010) -0.055 (0.035)                                -0.029***   (0.011)     0.268
        Willing to endure economic losses              Agree (0-10)      0.077     (0.070)     0.059     (0.077) 0.116** (0.054) -0.028 (0.058) -0.084 (0.055) -1.657*** (0.203)                             0.008    (0.068)     5.957
          z-score: willing to harm economy              Std. (0-1)     0.130***    (0.027)   0.109***    (0.030) 0.031 (0.022) 0.018 (0.022) -0.021 (0.021) -0.307*** (0.079)                              0.043*     (0.026)    -0.003


       Notes: Table reports OLS estimates obtained from linear regressions of each dependent variable in Column (1) on a set of binary demographic covariates in Columns (3) to (16). The
       results are based on the sample from COVID-19 and Civil Liberties survey. The “z-score" at the bottom of each panel is an inverse-covariance-weighted index as described in Anderson
       (2008), which combines all outcome variables in the panel. Column (2) reports the scale of each outcome variable. The following covariates are included in each specification: country FE,
       date FE, treatment group dummies, geographic controls (11 individual hotspot city dummies: New York City, Seattle, Detroit, and New Orleans for USA, Munich for Germany, Bergamo
       and Milan for Italy, Paris for France, London for U.K., Wuhan for China, and Daegu for South Korea), HR(1)ihj of the main Specification 1, respondent demographic controls (risk
       preference, time preference, the “leave-one-out" number of times R left home during the past 3 days, the “leave-one-out" number of times R washed hands during the past 24 hours, and
       “leave-one-out" number of household members), disease controls (cardiovascular, diabetes, chronic lung disease, tobacco use, obesity, and any other medical conditions), time since the
       first case of COVID-19 at region/state level, the distance to the nearest hotspot, and “leave-one-out" version of knowing someone contracted with COVID-19 at admin 1 geographical level.
       Number of observations are: 16055 for Panel A; 16055, 15973, 15973, 16047, 15965 for Panel B; 16055, 16055, 16055, 12506, 12506, 12506 for Panel C; 15973 for Panels D and E; 15973, 15973,
       15973, 16055, 15973 for Panel F. Column (17) shows the mean of the dependent variable from the control group. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, *** refer to statistical
       significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.
Appendix Table B.8: Quasiexperimental Results Using Subjective Likelihood of COVID-19 Infec-
tion

                                                                                                              Spec. 1
                                                                                                     Subj. Likelihood of Gap b/w     Mean of
                            Outcome Variables                                       Scale            COVID-19 Infection China and US dept. var
                                (1)                        (2)          (3)                                             (4)               (5)               (6)
        Panel A: Overall rights and freedom
        Willing to give up own rights                  Agree (0-10) 0.209***                                        (-0.029)             1.865            6.851
        Willing to give up others’ rights              Agree (0-10) 0.209***                                        (-0.029)             1.636            6.778
          z-score: willing to give up rights            Std. (0-1)   0.083***                                       (-0.011)             0.694            0.001
        Panel B: Protection of privacy
        Willing to give up privacy                     Agree (0-10) 0.300***                                        (-0.032)             3.136            5.628
        Unwilling to accept: track sick people           Binary      -0.077***                                      (-0.004)             0.058            0.248
        Unwilling to accept: track everyone              Binary      -0.083***                                      (-0.004)             0.034            0.271
        Click MIT app                                Yes/No (binary) 0.051***                                       (-0.005)             0.246            0.414
          z-score: willing to give up privacy           Std. (0-1)   0.215***                                       (-0.010)             0.646            -0.002
        Panel C: Democratic rights and duties
        Prefer strong leader                           Agree (1-4)    0.019*                                        (-0.010)             0.554            2.615
        Prefer delegating to experts                   Agree (1-4)   0.044***                                       (-0.010)            -0.000            2.943
        Willing to forgo media freedom                 Agree (0-10) 0.097***                                        (-0.034)             3.211            5.579
        Prefer democratic system                       Agree (1-4)     0.005                                        (-0.009)              n.a.            3.317
        Willing to suspend democr. procedures          Agree (0-10) 0.215***                                        (-0.037)              n.a.            5.024
          z-score: willing to curtail democracy         Std. (0-1)   0.049***                                       (-0.011)              n.a.            -0.002
        Panel D: Rights to movement
        Unwilling to accept: close national border       Binary      -0.069***                                      (-0.004)            0.160             0.258
        Unwilling to accept: recommend stay home         Binary      -0.077***                                      (-0.004)            0.147             0.263
        Unwilling to accept: arrest if outside home      Binary      -0.079***                                      (-0.004)            0.068             0.276
          z-score: willing to give up mobility          Std. (0-1)   0.193***                                       (-0.010)            -0.310            -0.003
        Panel E: Business and school operation
        Unwilling to accept: close schools               Binary      -0.072***                                      (-0.004)            0.149             0.263
        Unwilling to accept: close restaurants etc.      Binary      -0.079***                                      (-0.004)            0.129             0.266
        Unwilling to accept: close all businesses        Binary      -0.080***                                      (-0.004)            0.128             0.269
          z-score: willing to limit operations          Std. (0-1)   0.185***                                       (-0.010)            -0.327            -0.003
        Panel F: Economic well-being
        Unwilling to accept: measures cut income         Binary      -0.081***                                      (-0.004)             0.027            0.277
        Unwilling to accept: measures 2x unemp. rate     Binary      -0.083***                                      (-0.004)             0.132            0.266
        Unwilling to accept: measures 3x unemp. rate     Binary      -0.086***                                      (-0.004)             0.094            0.268
        Willing to endure economic losses              Agree (0-10) 0.262***                                        (-0.029)             1.002            5.957
          z-score: willing to harm economy              Std. (0-1)   0.214***                                       (-0.010)             0.086            -0.003

       Notes: Table reports OLS estimates of Equation 1. The results are based on the weighed sample from the COVID-19 and Civil Liberties Survey. Column
       (1) reports the outcome variables. The “z-score" at the bottom of each panel is an inverse-covariance-weighted index as described in Anderson (2008),
       which combines all outcome variables in the panel. Column (2) reports the scale of each outcome variable. Subj. Likelihood of COVID-19 Infection
       refers to the respondent’s subjective likelihood of getting infected by COVID-19 measured on a scale of 0 to 10; it is standardized to mean 0 and sd 1.
       Columns (3) reports β in Equations 1, respectively. Column (5) reports the difference in unconditional mean of the control group of each outcome
       variable between China and US respondents. Column (6) reports the unconditional mean of the outcome variable of respondents in the control group.
       The following covariates are included in each specification: country FE, date FE, treatment group dummies, geographic controls (11 individual hotspot
       city dummies: New York City, Seattle, Detroit, and New Orleans for USA, Munich for Germany, Bergamo and Milan for Italy, Paris for France, London for
       U.K., Wuhan for China, and Daegu for South Korea), respondent demographic controls (male dummy, income bracket FE, age bracket FE, employment
       status FE, college degree dummy, political right dummy, political neutral dummy, risk preference, time preference, the “leave-one-out" number of times
       R left home during the past 3 days, the “leave-one-out" number of times R washed hands during the past 24 hours, and “leave-one-out" number of
       household members), disease controls (cardiovascular, diabetes, chronic lung disease, tobacco use, obesity, and any other medical conditions), time
       since the first case of COVID-19 at region/state level, the distance to the nearest hotspot, and “leave-one-out" version of knowing someone contracted
       with COVID-19 at admin 1 geographical level. The number of observations is: 16,052 for all variables in Panel A; 16,052, 15,970, 15,970, 16,044, 15,962 in
       Panel B; 16,052 for first three variables, 12,503 for the rest in Panel C; 15,970 for all variables in Panel D and E; 15,970, 15,970, 15,970, 16,052, 15,970 for
       Panel F. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                                                  A.22
Appendix Table B.9: RF Robustness Checks for Quasiexperimental Results Using HR(1)ihj

                              z-score: z-score: z-score: z-score: z-score:
                              give up give up curtail give up                    z-score:
                                                                      limit       harm
                               rights privacy democracy mobility operations economy
                                 (1)     (2)       (3)      (4)        (5)         (6)
     Panel A: Original Specification, controlling for Admin-level 1 Regional Fixed-Effects
     HR(1)_ihj                0.066*** 0.018     0.032**   0.027*     0.018     0.063***
                              (0.016) (0.015) (0.016) (0.014) (0.015)           (0.015)

     Gap b/w China and US 0.694 0.646           0.000   -0.310    -0.327                                                                   0.086
     Num. of Obs.             16055 15965       12506   15973     15973                                                                    15973
     Panel B: Modified Health Risk (HR(1)ihj ), Using Cumulative Cases
     Health Risk Using
        Cum_cases           0.053*** 0.009     0.035**  0.022*     0.011                                                                 0.047***
                             (0.014) (0.013) (0.015) (0.013) (0.013)                                                                     (0.012)

     Gap b/w China and US 0.690 0.643           0.000   -0.312    -0.328                                                                   0.082
     Num. of Obs.             16104 16011       12528   16019     16019                                                                    16019
     Panel C: Modified Health Risk (HR(1)ihj ), Using Cumulative Deaths
     Health Risk Using
       Cum_deaths           0.058*** 0.004      0.031    0.024     0.013                                                                 0.053***
                             (0.018) (0.017) (0.021) (0.017) (0.017)                                                                     (0.017)

     Gap b/w China and US 0.690 0.643           0.000    -0.312   -0.328     0.082
     Num. of Obs.            16104 16011       12528      16019   16019      16019
     Panel D: Modified Health Risk (HR(1)ihj ), Using Std. Cumulative Cases
     Health Risk Using
        cases_norm          0.048*** 0.016      0.001    0.029**   0.019    0.057***
                            (0.015) (0.014) (0.016) (0.014) (0.015)         (0.014)

     Gap b/w China and US 0.690 0.643            0.000                                              -0.312            -0.328               0.082
     Num. of Obs.               16104 16011     12528                                               16019             16019                16019
     Panel E: Original Specification, Dropping NYC
     HR(1)_ihj                 0.041** 0.020    -0.010                                             0.039**           0.036**             0.062***
                               (0.017) (0.017) (0.019)                                             (0.017)           (0.017)             (0.017)

     Gap b/w China and US 0.733                                 0.692             0.000             -0.297            -0.315               0.117
     Num. of Obs.         15467                                 15381             11918             15389             15389                15389

     Full Controls                                  Yes            Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes                  Yes

      Notes: Table reports OLS estimates based on the sample from COVID-19 and Civil Liberties survey. The “z-score" is an inverse-covariance-
      weighted index as described in Anderson (2008), which combines all outcome variables in each panel of Table 1. Panel A shows the OLS
      Esimates of the original specification 1, controlling for administrative 1 regional fixed-effects for each country. Panel B, C, and D show the
      OLS estimates of Equation 1 using modified Health Risk (HR(1)ihj ) in which the “leave-one-out" number of knowing someone contracted
      with COVID-19 at admin 1 geographical level (i.e.ρk in Appendix Equation 13) is replaced with other measures of geographical COVID-19
      exposure; cumulative cases for Panel B, cumulative deaths for Panel C, cumulative cases standardized by country for Panel D. Panel E shows the
      OLS estimates of the original Specification 1, excluding respondents from New York City. The following covariates are included in each panel:
      date FE, treatment group dummies, geographic controls (11 individual hotspot city dummies: New York City, Seattle, Detroit, and New Orleans
      for USA, Munich for Germany, Bergamo and Milan for Italy, Paris for France, London for U.K., Wuhan for China, and Daegu for South Korea),
      respondent demographic controls (male dummy, income bracket FE, age bracket FE, employment status FE, college degree dummy, political
      right dummy, political neutral dummy, risk preference, time preference, the “leave-one-out" number of times R left home during the past 3
      days, the “leave-one-out" number of times R washed hands during the past 24 hours, and “leave-one-out" number of household members),
      disease controls (cardiovascular, diabetes, chronic lung disease, tobacco use, obesity, and any other medical conditions), time since the first
      case of COVID-19 at region/state level, and the distance to the nearest hotspot. In addition, the following controls are included for each Panel:
      Cumulative Cases for Panel B, Cumulative Deaths for Panel C, Standardized Cumulative Cases for Panel D, “leave-one-out" version of knowing
      someone contracted with COVID-19 at admin 1 geographical level for Panels A and E. Country fixed effects are included in all Panels except
      Panel A. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5
      and 1 percent level, respectively.


                                                                           A.23
Appendix Table B.10: Robustness Checks for Quasiexperimental Results Using HR(2)ij

                                    z-score: z-score: z-score: z-score: z-score:
                                   give up give up curtail give up                   z-score:
                                                                           limit      harm
                                     rights privacy democracy mobility operations economy
                                       (1)     (2)      (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)
    Panel A: Original Specification, controlling for Admin-level 1 Regional Fixed-Effects
    HR(2)ij X Hotspot              0.102*** 0.066*** 0.078***    0.003     0.017    0.070***
                                   (0.023) (0.023) (0.024) (0.022) (0.023) (0.022)

    Gap b/w China and US            0.694 0.648     0.000                                                -0.309           -0.327            0.087
    Num. of Obs.                    16051 15961     12502                                                15969            15969             15969
    Panel B: Health Risk (HR(2)ij ) X Cumulative Cases
    HR(2)ij X Cumul. Cases        0.100*** 0.002 0.115***                                                0.021            -0.019            0.061*
                                   (0.038) (0.033) (0.036)                                              (0.034)          (0.037)           (0.034)

    Gap b/w China and US            0.694 0.646      0.000                                               -0.310           -0.327            0.086
    Num. of Obs.                   16055 15965      12506                                                15973            15973             15973
    Panel C: Health Risk (HR(2)ij ) X Empirical Hotspot
    HR(2)ij X Empirical Hotspot 0.124*** 0.077** 0.064**                                                 0.038            0.043           0.130***
                                  (0.028) (0.031) (0.030)                                               (0.038)          (0.037)          (0.035)

    Gap b/w China and US           0.694 0.646                                          0.000            -0.310           -0.327            0.086
    Num. of Obs.                   16055 15965                                          12506            15973            15973             15973
    Panel D: Linear Health Risk X Hotspot
    Linear Health Risk X Hotspot 0.093*** 0.042*                                      0.060**            -0.006           0.012            0.052**
                                  (0.024) (0.023)                                     (0.024)           (0.023)          (0.023)           (0.023)

    Gap b/w China and US             0.694 0.648     0.000                                               -0.309           -0.327            0.087
    Num. of Obs.                     16051 15961     12502                                               15969            15969             15969
    Panel E: Original Specification, Dropping NYC
    HR(2)ij X Hotspot               0.068** 0.051*   0.032                                               0.009            0.027            0.058**
                                    (0.027) (0.027) (0.028)                                             (0.026)          (0.026)           (0.026)

    Gap b/w China and US                                 0.733         0.693            0.000            -0.296           -0.314            0.118
    Num. of Obs.                                         15465         15379            11916            15387            15387             15387

    Full Controls                                          Yes           Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes

    Notes: Table reports OLS estimates of z-score indices on various interactions. The results are based on the sample from COVID-19 and Civil
    Liberties survey. The “z-score" is an inverse-covariance-weighted index as described in Anderson (2008), which combines all outcome variables
    in each panel of Table 1. Panel A shows the OLS estimates of the original Specification 6, controlling for administrative 1 regional fixed-effects
    for each country. Panel B shows the OLS estimates using the interaction of Health Risk (HR(2)ij ) and Cumulative Cases. Panel C Shows the
    OLS estimates using the interaction of Health Risk (HR(2)ij ) and Empirical Hotspot, which is a binary variable equal to 1 if the respondent’s
    subjective community risk of COVID-19 infection is greater than the 90th percentile by country. Panel D shows the OLS estimates using the
    interaction of Linear Health Risk described in Section 4 and Hotspot. Panel E shows the OLS estimates of the original Specification 6, excluding
    respondents from New York City. The following covariates are included in each specification: date FE, treatment group dummies, geographic
    controls (11 individual hotspot city dummies: New York City, Seattle, Detroit, and New Orleans for USA, Munich for Germany, Bergamo and
    Milan for Italy, Paris for France, London for U.K., Wuhan for China, and Daegu for South Korea), respondent demographic controls (male
    dummy, income bracket FE, age bracket FE, employment status FE, college degree dummy, political right dummy, political neutral dummy, risk
    preference, time preference, the “leave-one-out" number of times R left home during the past 3 days, the “leave-one-out" number of times R
    washed hands during the past 24 hours, and “leave-one-out" number of household members), disease controls (cardiovascular, diabetes, chronic
    lung disease, tobacco use, obesity, and any other medical conditions), time since the first case of COVID-19 at region/state level, the distance to
    the nearest hotspot, and “leave-one-out" version of knowing someone contracted with COVID-19 at admin 1 geographical level. Country fixed
    effects are included in all Panels except Panel A. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, *** refer
    to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                                          A.24
Appendix Table B.11: Placebo Exercise: Replace Medical Conditions That Are Risk Factors for
COVID-19 Severity With Medical Conditions Not Known to Be Risk Factors for COVID-19

                                                                                                            Pseudo
                                                                                                     Health Risk (HR(2)ij ) Gap b/w     Mean of
                       Outcome Variables                                           Scale                   X Hotspot       China and US dept. var
                          (1)                        (2)          (3)                                                     (4)                     (5)                (6)
  Panel A: Overall rights and freedom
  Willing to give up own rights                  Agree (0-10) 0.013                                                    (0.073)                   1.865             6.851
  Willing to give up others’ rights              Agree (0-10) -0.029                                                   (0.071)                   1.636             6.778
    z-score: willing to give up rights            Std. (0-1)    -0.003                                                 (0.027)                   0.694             0.001
  Panel B: Protection of privacy
  Willing to give up privacy                     Agree (0-10) -0.012                                                   (0.077)                   3.136             5.628
  Unwilling to accept: track sick people           Binary      -0.018*                                                 (0.010)                   0.058             0.248
  Unwilling to accept: track everyone              Binary       -0.018                                                 (0.011)                   0.034             0.271
  Click MIT app                                Yes/No (binary) -0.012                                                  (0.012)                   0.246             0.414
    z-score: willing to give up privacy           Std. (0-1)    0.012                                                  (0.026)                   0.646             -0.002
  Panel C: Democratic rights and duties
  Prefer strong leader                           Agree (1-4)    0.013                                                  (0.026)                   0.554             2.615
  Prefer delegating to experts                   Agree (1-4)    0.020                                                  (0.024)                  -0.000             2.943
  Willing to forgo media freedom                 Agree (0-10) -0.052                                                   (0.081)                   3.211             5.579
  Prefer democratic system                       Agree (1-4)    0.015                                                  (0.019)                    n.a.             3.317
  Willing to suspend democr. procedures          Agree (0-10) 0.009                                                    (0.084)                    n.a.             5.024
    z-score: willing to curtail democracy         Std. (0-1)    -0.007                                                 (0.026)                    n.a.             -0.002
  Panel D: Rights to movement
  Unwilling to accept: close national border       Binary       -0.007                                                 (0.010)                  0.160              0.258
  Unwilling to accept: recommend stay home         Binary       -0.010                                                 (0.010)                  0.147              0.263
  Unwilling to accept: arrest if outside home      Binary       -0.002                                                 (0.011)                  0.068              0.276
    z-score: willing to give up mobility          Std. (0-1)    0.015                                                  (0.024)                  -0.310             -0.003
  Panel E: Business and school operation
  Unwilling to accept: close schools               Binary       0.002                                                  (0.010)                  0.149              0.263
  Unwilling to accept: close restaurants etc.      Binary       0.001                                                  (0.011)                  0.129              0.266
  Unwilling to accept: close all businesses        Binary       -0.004                                                 (0.010)                  0.128              0.269
    z-score: willing to limit operations          Std. (0-1)    0.001                                                  (0.024)                  -0.327             -0.003
  Panel F: Economic well-being
  Unwilling to accept: measures cut income         Binary       -0.001                                                 (0.011)                   0.027             0.277
  Unwilling to accept: measures 2x unemp. rate     Binary       -0.010                                                 (0.011)                   0.132             0.266
  Unwilling to accept: measures 3x unemp. rate     Binary       -0.012                                                 (0.011)                   0.094             0.268
  Willing to endure economic losses              Agree (0-10) 0.057                                                    (0.065)                   1.002             5.957
    z-score: willing to harm economy              Std. (0-1)    0.025                                                  (0.027)                   0.086             -0.003

  Notes: Table reports OLS estimates of Equation 6 based on the sample from COVID-19 and Civil Liberties survey. Column (1) reports the outcome variables. The “z-score"
  at the bottom of each panel is an inverse-covariance-weighted index as described in Anderson (2008). Column (2) reports the scale of each outcome variable. The Pseudo
  Health Risk (HR(2)ij ) is constructed based on a multiplicative model, which is equal to the median value of deaths odd ratios related to the respondent’s demographic
                                                              0
                                                  P r(Exposurei )
  characteristics (i.e. male, age, income) and                  0     (as described in Appendix Equation 12) multiplied by death odds ratios related to medical conditions,
                                                 1−P r(Exposure )
                                                                i
  replacing obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, chronic lung disease with back pain and arthritis. Column (5) reports the difference in unconditional mean of the
  control group of each outcome variable between China and US respondents. Column (6) reports the unconditional mean of the outcome variable of respondents in the
  control group. The following covariates are included in each specification: country FE, date FE, treatment group dummies, geographic controls (11 individual hotspot
  city dummies: New York City, Seattle, Detroit, and New Orleans for USA, Munich for Germany, Bergamo and Milan for Italy, Paris for France, London for U.K., Wuhan for
  China, and Daegu for South Korea), respondent demographic controls (male dummy, income bracket FE, age bracket FE, employment status FE, college degree dummy,
  political right dummy, political neutral dummy, risk preference, time preference, the “leave-one-out" number of times R left home during the past 3 days, the “leave-one-
  out" number of times R washed hands during the past 24 hours, and “leave-one-out" number of household members), disease controls (cardiovascular, diabetes, chronic
  lung disease, tobacco use, obesity, and any other medical conditions), time since the first case of COVID-19 at region/state level, the distance to the nearest hotspot, and
  “leave-one-out" version of knowing someone contracted with COVID-19 at admin 1 geographical level. Number of observations is: 16055 for Panel A; 16055, 15973, 15973,
  16047, 15965 for Panel B; 16055, 16055, 16055, 12506, 12506, 12506, 12506 for Panel C; 15973 for Panels D and E; 15973, 15973, 15973, 16055, 15973 for Panel F. Robust standard
  errors in parentheses. *, **, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                                                    A.25
Appendix Table B.12: Placebo Exercise: Replace Covid-19 Hotspots with Highest Historic Popula-
tion Death Rate

                                                                                                         Health Risk
                                                                                                   (HR(2)ij )X Highest death Gap b/w     Mean of
                      Outcome Variables                                           Scale                  rate (2018)        China and US dept. var
                          (1)                        (2)          (3)                                                      (4)                       (5)                (6)
  Panel A: Overall rights and freedom
  Willing to give up own rights                  Agree (0-10) -0.064                                                    (0.048)                     1.865             6.851
  Willing to give up others’ rights              Agree (0-10) -0.045                                                    (0.049)                     1.636             6.778
    z-score: willing to give up rights            Std. (0-1)    -0.022                                                  (0.018)                     0.694             0.001
  Panel B: Protection of privacy
  Willing to give up privacy                     Agree (0-10) -0.066                                                    (0.057)                     3.136             5.628
  Unwilling to accept: track sick people           Binary       0.003                                                   (0.009)                     0.058             0.248
  Unwilling to accept: track everyone              Binary       -0.003                                                  (0.009)                     0.034             0.271
  Click MIT app                                Yes/No (binary) -0.009                                                   (0.010)                     0.246             0.414
    z-score: willing to give up privacy           Std. (0-1)    -0.019                                                  (0.019)                     0.646             -0.002
  Panel C: Democratic rights and duties
  Prefer strong leader                           Agree (1-4)    -0.007                                                  (0.019)                     0.554             2.615
  Prefer delegating to experts                   Agree (1-4)    0.014                                                   (0.019)                    -0.000             2.943
  Willing to forgo media freedom                 Agree (0-10) -0.060                                                    (0.064)                     3.211             5.579
  Prefer democratic system                       Agree (1-4)    0.009                                                   (0.016)                     0.000             3.317
  Willing to suspend democr. procedures          Agree (0-10) -0.150**                                                  (0.074)                     0.000             5.024
    z-score: willing to curtail democracy         Std. (0-1)   -0.037*                                                  (0.021)                     0.000             -0.002
  Panel D: Rights to movement
  Unwilling to accept: close national border       Binary       -0.011                                                  (0.010)                    0.160              0.258
  Unwilling to accept: recommend stay home         Binary       -0.010                                                  (0.010)                    0.147              0.263
  Unwilling to accept: arrest if outside home      Binary       -0.007                                                  (0.010)                    0.068              0.276
    z-score: willing to give up mobility          Std. (0-1)    0.023                                                   (0.022)                    -0.310             -0.003
  Panel E: Business and school operation
  Unwilling to accept: close schools               Binary       -0.002                                                  (0.010)                    0.149              0.263
  Unwilling to accept: close restaurants etc.      Binary       0.009                                                   (0.010)                    0.129              0.266
  Unwilling to accept: close all businesses        Binary       0.002                                                   (0.010)                    0.128              0.269
    z-score: willing to limit operations          Std. (0-1)    -0.006                                                  (0.022)                    -0.327             -0.003
  Panel F: Economic well-being
  Unwilling to accept: measures cut income         Binary       0.005                                                   (0.010)                     0.027             0.277
  Unwilling to accept: measures 2x unemp. rate     Binary       0.001                                                   (0.010)                     0.132             0.266
  Unwilling to accept: measures 3x unemp. rate     Binary       0.001                                                   (0.010)                     0.094             0.268
  Willing to endure economic losses              Agree (0-10) -0.022                                                    (0.053)                     1.002             5.957
    z-score: willing to harm economy              Std. (0-1)    -0.011                                                  (0.021)                     0.086             -0.003

Notes: Table reports OLS estimates of Equation 6, but replaces Hotspot dummy with a "Highest death rate in 2018" dummy. Highest death rate is defined as dummy that equals
one for respondents who reside in a region with a death rate in 2018 that put the region at or above the 75th percentile within the country. The results are based on the sample from
COVID-19 and Civil Liberties survey. Column (1) reports the outcome variables. The “z-score" at the bottom of each panel is an inverse-covariance-weighted index as described in
Anderson (2008). Column (2) reports the scale of each outcome variable. Column (5) reports the difference in unconditional mean of the control group of each outcome variable
between China and US respondents. Column (6) reports the unconditional mean of the outcome variable of respondents in the control group. The following covariates are included
in each specification: country FE, date FE, treatment group dummies, geographic controls (11 individual hotspot city dummies: New York City, Seattle, Detroit, and New Orleans
for USA, Munich for Germany, Bergamo and Milan for Italy, Paris for France, London for U.K., Wuhan for China, and Daegu for South Korea), respondent demographic controls
(male dummy, income bracket FE, age bracket FE, employment status FE, college degree dummy, political right dummy, political neutral dummy, risk preference, time preference,
the “leave-one-out" number of times R left home during the past 3 days, the “leave-one-out" number of times R washed hands during the past 24 hours, and “leave-one-out"
number of household members), disease controls (cardiovascular, diabetes, chronic lung disease, tobacco use, obesity, and any other medical conditions), time since the first case
of COVID-19 at region/state level, the distance to the nearest hotspot, and “leave-one-out" version of knowing someone contracted with COVID-19 at admin 1 geographical level.
Number of observations is: 16055 for Panel A; 16055, 15973, 15973, 16047, 15965 for Panel B; 16055, 16055, 16055, 12506, 12506, 12506, 12506 for Panel C; 15973 for Panels D and E;
15973, 15973, 15973, 16055, 15973 for Panel F. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *, **, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                                                     A.26
                         Appendix Table B.13: Quasiexperimental Results for Policy Questions

                                                                                                      Spec. 1                    Spec. 2
                                                                                                   Health Risk        Health Risk (HR(2)ij ) Gap b/w     Mean of
                   Outcome Variables                                       Scale                   (HR(1)ihj )              X Hotspot       China and US dept. var
                       (1)                                                  (2)                    (3)        (4)         (5)            (6)                 (7)             (8)
 Panel A: Binary Version
 Unwilling to accept: track sick people                                   Binary                  -0.009 (-0.006) -0.023**            (-0.010)             0.058           0.248
 Unwilling to accept: track everyone                                      Binary                -0.013** (-0.006) -0.026**            (-0.011)             0.034           0.271
 Unwilling to accept: close national border                               Binary                  -0.006 (-0.006) -0.012              (-0.011)             0.160           0.258
 Unwilling to accept: recommend stay home                                 Binary                -0.013** (-0.006) -0.023**            (-0.011)             0.147           0.263
 Unwilling to accept: arrest if outside home                              Binary                -0.016** (-0.006) -0.025**            (-0.011)             0.068           0.276
 Unwilling to accept: close schools                                       Binary                  -0.006 (-0.006) -0.016              (-0.011)             0.149           0.263
 Unwilling to accept: close restaurants etc.                              Binary                 -0.011* (-0.006) -0.029***           (-0.011)             0.129           0.266
 Unwilling to accept: close all businesses                                Binary                  -0.009 (-0.006) -0.022**            (-0.011)             0.128           0.269
 Unwilling to accept: measures cut income                                 Binary               -0.018*** (-0.006) -0.034***           (-0.011)             0.027           0.277
 Unwilling to accept: measures 2x unemp. rate                             Binary               -0.017*** (-0.006) -0.039***           (-0.011)             0.132           0.266
 Unwilling to accept: measures 3x unemp. rate                             Binary               -0.022*** (-0.006) -0.042***           (-0.011)             0.094           0.268
 Panel B: Normalized Version
 Unwilling to accept: track sick people       Min.                    lives saved (0-100) -0.339 (-0.250) -0.748*                     (-0.452)             23.798          11.605
 Unwilling to accept: track everyone          Min.                    lives saved (0-100) -0.301 (-0.247) -0.584                      (-0.466)             25.165          12.823
 Unwilling to accept: close national border   Min.                    lives saved (0-100) -0.518** (-0.257) -0.853*                   (-0.487)             24.906          10.789
 Unwilling to accept: recommend stay home Min.                        lives saved (0-100) -0.541** (-0.250) -0.917*                   (-0.473)             24.729          11.052
 Unwilling to accept: arrest if outside home  Min.                    lives saved (0-100) -0.684*** (-0.261) -1.153**                 (-0.490)             25.381          12.779
 Unwilling to accept: close schools           Min.                    lives saved (0-100) -0.600** (-0.250) -1.164**                  (-0.459)             25.342          11.119
 Unwilling to accept: close restaurants etc.  Min.                    lives saved (0-100) -0.623** (-0.246) -1.240***                 (-0.447)             24.422          10.975
 Unwilling to accept: close all businesses    Min.                    lives saved (0-100) -0.546** (-0.248) -0.957**                  (-0.463)             24.295          11.316
 Unwilling to accept: measures cut income     Min.                    lives saved (0-100) -0.485* (-0.273) -0.879*                    (-0.499)             27.768          14.032
 Unwilling to accept: measures 2x unemp. rate Min.                    lives saved (0-100) -0.586** (-0.264) -1.017**                  (-0.483)             27.547          12.862
 Unwilling to accept: measures 3x unemp. rate Min.                    lives saved (0-100) -0.623** (-0.270) -1.003**                  (-0.502)             28.748          13.669
 Panel C: Raw Version
 Unwilling to accept: track sick people       Min.                    lives saved (0-100)       1.434***   (-0.506)      1.066        (-0.900)             -4.164          49.587
 Unwilling to accept: track everyone          Min.                    lives saved (0-100)        0.778     (-0.523)     -0.050        (-0.931)             -7.816          55.903
 Unwilling to accept: close national border   Min.                    lives saved (0-100)       1.309**    (-0.558)      1.032        (-0.931)              8.581          42.801
 Unwilling to accept: recommend stay home Min.                        lives saved (0-100)        0.689     (-0.561)      0.059        (-0.942)              9.315          42.921
 Unwilling to accept: arrest if outside home  Min.                    lives saved (0-100)        -0.197    (-0.576)     -1.144        (-0.995)             -4.773          53.468
 Unwilling to accept: close schools           Min.                    lives saved (0-100)        1.127*    (-0.589)      0.487        (-0.957)             10.610          42.667
 Unwilling to accept: close restaurants etc.  Min.                    lives saved (0-100)        0.610     (-0.566)     -0.349        (-0.938)              8.323          42.929
 Unwilling to accept: close all businesses    Min.                    lives saved (0-100)        1.037*    (-0.560)      0.208        (-0.910)              7.255          44.611
 Unwilling to accept: measures cut income     Min.                    lives saved (0-100)        0.131     (-0.513)     -0.901        (-0.879)             -5.144          60.885
 Unwilling to accept: measures 2x unemp. rate Min.                    lives saved (0-100)        -0.029    (-0.537)     -1.262        (-0.874)              4.720          52.185
 Unwilling to accept: measures 3x unemp. rate Min.                    lives saved (0-100)        -0.084    (-0.542)     -1.129        (-0.903)              4.014          56.305


Notes: Table reports OLS estimates of Equation 1 for Column (3) and Equation 6 for Column (5). The results are based on the sample from COVID-19 and Civil Liberties survey.
Column (1) reports the outcome variables. Outcome variables in Panel A are binary “minimum-lives saved" variables as described in 2.4.2. Outcome variables in Panel B are
“minimum-lives saved" variables normalized by the perceived number of (future) COVID-19 related deaths. Outcome variables in Panel C are the raw “minimum-lives saved"
variables. Health Risk indices, HR(1)ihj and HR(2)ij , follow the main definitions as described in Section 4.1.1 respectively, while Hotpot follows the definition as described
in Section 4.1.2. Columns (3) and (5) reports β in Equations 1 and 6, respectively. Column (7) reports the difference in unconditional mean of the control group of each outcome
variable between China and US respondents. Column (8) reports the unconditional mean of the outcome variable of respondents in the control group. The following covariates are
included in each specification: country FE, date FE, treatment group dummies, geographic controls (11 individual hotspot city dummies: New York City, Seattle, Detroit, and New
Orleans for USA, Munich for Germany, Bergamo and Milan for Italy, Paris for France, London for U.K., Wuhan for China, and Daegu for South Korea), respondent demographic
controls (male dummy, income bracket FE, age bracket FE, employment status FE, college degree dummy, political right dummy, political neutral dummy, risk preference, time
preference, the “leave-one-out" number of times R left home during the past 3 days, the “leave-one-out" number of times R washed hands during the past 24 hours, and “leave-one-
out" number of household members), disease controls (cardiovascular, diabetes, chronic lung disease, tobacco use, obesity, and any other medical conditions), time since the first
case of COVID-19 at region/state level, the distance to the nearest hotspot, and “leave-one-out" version of knowing someone contracted with COVID-19 at admin 1 geographical
level. The number of observations of Spec. 1 is: 16,045 in Panel A; 16,045 in Panel B; 16,130 in Panel C;. The number of observations of Spec. 2 is: 15,973 in Panel A; 15,973 in Panel
B; 16,055 in Panel C; Robust standard errors in parentheses. *, **, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                                                      A.27
        Appendix Table B.14: Heterogeneity Analysis: Quasiexperimental Results Using Spec. 2

                                                              Dependent Variable: z-score: Willingness to Give Up Rights
                                (1)         (2)         (3)      (4)    (5)     (6)     (7)      (8)      (9)     (10)                                      (11)             (12)

                                    PANEL A: SOCIOECONOMIC AND HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS

                                  Income               Received                                      USA Only: Econ.     Having                                Living Alone
                                 ≤50th pct            College Educ               Employed              Vulnerable    Partner/Spouse                           in a Household
                                No          Yes         No          Yes         No          Yes          No           Yes          No           Yes          No               Yes
HR(2)ij X Hotspot 0.123*** 0.060 0.045 0.112*** 0.049 0.106*** 0.195*** 0.145* 0.103** 0.070** 0.079***                                                                    0.182**
                  (0.033) (0.038) (0.048) (0.030) (0.051) (0.030) (0.047) (0.080) (0.042) (0.033) (0.028)                                                                  (0.073)

No. Obs                        7451        8604        6164        9891        6003        10052       3895          1276         6634         9421        13814             2241

                                        PANEL B: POLITICAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CHARACTERISTICS

                                  Pol. Aff:             West Only:                Media                 Satisfied with DEU Only: Born KOR Only: Migrated
                                   Right                 Populist                 Distrust              Federal Govt in East Germany    from N. Korea
                                No          Yes         No          Yes         No          Yes          No           Yes          No           Yes          No               Yes
HR(2)ij X Hotspot 0.096*** 0.047 0.111** 0.159** 0.099*** 0.088 0.077** 0.087** -0.013 0.119       0.045                                                                    -0.086
                  (0.029) (0.059) (0.049) (0.062) (0.028) (0.056) (0.039) (0.034) (0.115) (0.293) (0.062)                                                                  (0.083)

No. Obs                       12390        3665        6077        3521       12055        4000        7305          8750         1053          215          728              225

                                   PANEL C: DEMOGRAPHIC AND GEOGRAPHICAL CHARACTERISTICS
                                                            Age                                        USA Only:      In First Month                         West only: Cases:
                                    Male                   Over 45              In Hotspot            White vs. Black Since First Case                          Post-Peak
                                No          Yes         No          Yes         No          Yes           –            –           No           Yes          No               Yes
HR(2)ij X Hotspot -0.039 0.109*** 0.153*** 0.096* 0.000                                    0.000 0.155*** 0.071 0.069** 0.133 0.184***                                      0.083
                  (0.057) (0.037) (0.035) (0.052) (.)                                       (.) (0.051) (0.130) (0.027) (0.122) (0.042)                                    (0.062)

No. Obs                        8281        7774        8906        7149       13411        2644        3424           718        12056         3933         6101             5033


Notes: Table reports OLS estimates of Equation 6 on willingness to give up rights and freedom by different binary covariates. The results are based on the sample from COVID-19
and Civil Liberties survey. Health Risk Index, HR(2)ij , follows the main definitions as described in Section 4.1.1 and Hotspot follows the definition as described in Section 4.1.2.
The dependent variable is an inverse-covariance-weighted index as described in Anderson (2008), which combines the following outcome variables: willing to give up own rights,
willing to give up others’ rights. Each binary covariate is defined as following: Income ≤ 50th pct: 1 if R’s household income is less than the 50th percentile, or 0 otherwise;
Received College Educ: 1 if R received any college education, or 0 otherwise; Employed: 1 if R is currently employed, or 0 otherwise; USA Only: Econ. Vulnerability: 1 if R’s score
of economic vulnerability coded based on occupation is greater than the 75th percentile (only applies to respondents in USA); Having Partner/Spouse: 1 if R has a partner/spouse;
Living Alone in q Household: 1 if R lives alone in the household, or 0 otherwise; Pol. Aff: Right: 1 if R’s political affiliation is right-wing or conservative (this variable does not
apply to Chinese respondents); West only Populist: 1 if R voted for populist parties or candidates (Donald Trump in USA, Boris Johnson in GBR, AfD in DEU, Lega Movimento or
5 stelle in ITA, Marine Le Pen, François Asselineau, or Nicolas Dupont-Aignan in FRA; only applies to western countries); Media Distrust: 1 if R’s level of trust in Media in general
is less than 3 on a scale of 1 to 5; Satisfied with Federal Govt: 1 if R’s level of satisfaction with the federal government is greater than 3 on a scale of 1 to 5; DEU only: Born in East
Germany: 1 if R was born in East Germany; KOR only: Migrated from N. Korea: 1 if R or any of R’s family members had migrated from North Korea to South Korea during the
Korean War; Male: 1 if R is male; Age over 45: 1 if R’s age is over 45; In Hotspot: 1 if R lives in one of the hotspot areas described in Section 4.1.2; USA only Race: White vs. Black:
1 if R’s race is African American/Black, or 0 if White/Caucasian; In First Month Since First case: 1 if R was in the first month since the first COVID-19 case was detected in R’s
region/area at admin level 1 (or at county level for USA); West only: Cases: Post-peak: 1 if R was surveyed after the peak of COVID-19 case at admin level 1 for ITA, GBR, FRA
and at county level for USA and DEU. Regression includes the following controls: country FE, date FE, treatment group dummies, geographic controls (11 individual hotspot city
dummies: New York City, Seattle, Detroit, and New Orleans for USA, Munich for Germany, Bergamo and Milan for Italy, Paris for France, London for U.K., Wuhan for China, and
Daegu for South Korea), respondent demographic controls (male dummy, income bracket FE, age bracket FE, employment status FE, college degree dummy, political right dummy,
political neutral dummy, risk preference, time preference, the “leave-one-out" number of times R left home during the past 3 days, the “leave-one-out" number of times R washed
hands during the past 24 hours, and “leave-one-out" number of household members), disease controls (cardiovascular, diabetes, chronic lung disease, tobacco use, obesity, and any
other medical conditions), time since the first case of COVID-19 at region/state level, distance to the nearest hotspot, and “leave-one-out" version of knowing someone contracted
with COVID-19 at admin 1 geographical level. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                                                         A.28
                     Appendix Table B.15: Experimental Treatment Effects for Policy Questions

                                                                                            Cilvil Liberties Public Health Civil Liberties= Gap b/w    Mean of
                  Outcome Variables                                     Scale                 Treatment       Treatment     Public Health China and US dept. var
                       (1)                                               (2)                  (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)            (7)                 (8)            (9)
 Panel A: Binary Version
 Unwilling to accept: track sick people                                Binary              0.027** (0.011)       -0.000   (0.010)          0.013               0.058          0.248
 Unwilling to accept: track everyone                                   Binary              0.029** (0.012)       -0.005   (0.011)          0.003               0.034          0.271
 Unwilling to accept: close national border                            Binary               0.008 (0.011)         0.000   (0.010)          0.488               0.160          0.258
 Unwilling to accept: recommend stay home                              Binary               0.008 (0.011)        -0.000   (0.010)          0.465               0.147          0.263
 Unwilling to accept: arrest if outside home                           Binary               0.017 (0.011)         0.007   (0.011)          0.359               0.068          0.276
 Unwilling to accept: close schools                                    Binary               0.014 (0.011)        -0.000   (0.010)          0.179               0.149          0.263
 Unwilling to accept: close restaurants etc.                           Binary               0.013 (0.011)        -0.004   (0.011)          0.133               0.129          0.266
 Unwilling to accept: close all businesses                             Binary               0.006 (0.011)        -0.007   (0.011)          0.258               0.128          0.269
 Unwilling to accept: measures cut income                              Binary              0.026** (0.012)        0.004   (0.011)          0.056               0.027          0.277
 Unwilling to accept: measures 2x unemp. rate                          Binary              0.022** (0.011)       -0.000   (0.010)          0.043               0.132          0.266
 Unwilling to accept: measures 3x unemp. rate                          Binary              0.030*** (0.011)       0.012   (0.011)          0.102               0.094          0.268
 Panel B: Normalized Version
 Unwilling to accept: track sick people       Min.                 lives saved (0-100)       0.569    (0.364)    0.212    (0.386)          0.359              23.798         11.605
 Unwilling to accept: track everyone          Min.                 lives saved (0-100)       0.511    (0.398)    0.144    (0.411)          0.377              25.165         12.823
 Unwilling to accept: close national border   Min.                 lives saved (0-100)       0.248    (0.308)    0.142    (0.353)          0.745              24.906         10.789
 Unwilling to accept: recommend stay home Min.                     lives saved (0-100)       0.013    (0.320)    0.139    (0.367)          0.712              24.729         11.052
 Unwilling to accept: arrest if outside home  Min.                 lives saved (0-100)       0.228    (0.369)    0.219    (0.408)          0.982              25.381         12.779
 Unwilling to accept: close schools           Min.                 lives saved (0-100)       0.330    (0.345)    0.336    (0.380)          0.985              25.342         11.119
 Unwilling to accept: close restaurants etc.  Min.                 lives saved (0-100)       0.479    (0.338)    0.378    (0.370)          0.782              24.422         10.975
 Unwilling to accept: close all businesses    Min.                 lives saved (0-100)       0.322    (0.351)    0.291    (0.379)          0.932              24.295         11.316
 Unwilling to accept: measures cut income     Min.                 lives saved (0-100)      0.883**   (0.397)    0.287    (0.410)          0.155              27.768         14.032
 Unwilling to accept: measures 2x unemp. rate Min.                 lives saved (0-100)      0.834**   (0.380)    0.392    (0.392)          0.273              27.547         12.862
 Unwilling to accept: measures 3x unemp. rate Min.                 lives saved (0-100)      0.921**   (0.389)    0.530    (0.405)          0.338              28.748         13.669
 Panel C: Raw Version
 Unwilling to accept: track sick people       Min.                 lives saved (0-100) 3.125*** (0.897) -1.078 (0.852)                     0.000              -4.164         49.587
 Unwilling to accept: track everyone          Min.                 lives saved (0-100) 2.257** (0.900) -1.736** (0.852)                    0.000              -7.816         55.903
 Unwilling to accept: close national border   Min.                 lives saved (0-100) 0.457 (0.887) 0.298 (0.855)                         0.859               8.581         42.801
 Unwilling to accept: recommend stay home Min.                     lives saved (0-100) 0.896 (0.897) 0.332 (0.858)                         0.532               9.315         42.921
 Unwilling to accept: arrest if outside home  Min.                 lives saved (0-100) 0.660 (0.922) -0.031 (0.864)                        0.449              -4.773         53.468
 Unwilling to accept: close schools           Min.                 lives saved (0-100) 1.042 (0.931) 0.066 (0.882)                         0.296              10.610         42.667
 Unwilling to accept: close restaurants etc.  Min.                 lives saved (0-100) 0.810 (0.881) 0.167 (0.844)                         0.472               8.323         42.929
 Unwilling to accept: close all businesses    Min.                 lives saved (0-100) 0.323 (0.865) 0.098 (0.823)                         0.794               7.255         44.611
 Unwilling to accept: measures cut income     Min.                 lives saved (0-100) 2.580*** (0.889) -0.654 (0.831)                     0.000              -5.144         60.885
 Unwilling to accept: measures 2x unemp. rate Min.                 lives saved (0-100) 2.824*** (0.861) 0.366 (0.796)                      0.004               4.720         52.185
 Unwilling to accept: measures 3x unemp. rate Min.                 lives saved (0-100) 3.311*** (0.886) 1.074 (0.819)                      0.011               4.014         56.305


Notes: Table reports OLS estimates of treatment effects The results are based on the sample from COVID-19 and Civil Liberties survey. Column (1) reports the outcome variables.
Outcome variables in Panel A are binary “minimum-lives saved" variables as described in 2.4.2. Outcome variables in Panel B are “minimum-lives saved" variables normalized
by the perceived number of (future) COVID-19 related deaths. Outcome variables in Panel C are the raw “minimum-lives saved" variables. Column (2) reports the scale of each
outcome variable. Column (3) reports the treatment effect of Civil Liberties Treatment, and Column (5) reports the treatment effect of Public Health Liberties Treatment. Column
(7) reports p-value of the joint significant test of the differential effects of civil liberties treatment and public health treatment. Column (8) reports the difference in unconditional
mean of the control group of each outcome variable between China and US respondents. Column (9) reports the unconditional mean of the outcome variable of respondents in
the control group. The following covariates are included in each specification: country FE, date FE, treatment group dummies, geographic controls (11 individual hotspot city
dummies: New York City, Seattle, Detroit, and New Orleans for USA, Munich for Germany, Bergamo and Milan for Italy, Paris for France, London for U.K., Wuhan for China,
and Daegu for South Korea), respondent demographic controls (male dummy, income bracket FE, age bracket FE, employment status FE, college degree dummy, political right
dummy, political neutral dummy, risk preference, time preference, the “leave-one-out" number of times R left home during the past 3 days, the “leave-one-out" number of times R
washed hands during the past 24 hours, and “leave-one-out" number of household members), disease controls (cardiovascular, diabetes, chronic lung disease, tobacco use, obesity,
and any other medical conditions), time since the first case of COVID-19 at region/state level, the distance to the nearest hotspot, and “leave-one-out" version of knowing someone
contracted with COVID-19 at admin 1 geographical level. The number of observations: 16,045 in Panel A; 16,045 in Panel B; 16,130 in Panel C. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*, **, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                                                        A.29
                               Appendix Table B.16: Heterogeneity Analysis: Treatment Effects

                                                                     Dependent Variable: z-score: Willingness to Give Up Rights
                                      (1)          (2)         (3)      (4)     (5)      (6)      (7)     (8)      (9)     (10)                                 (11)           (12)

                                        PANEL A: SOCIOECONOMIC AND HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS

                                         Income                Received                                     USA Only: Econ.     Having                            Living Alone
                                        ≤50th pct             College Educ              Employed              Vulnerable    Partner/Spouse                       in a Household
                                       No          Yes         No          Yes         No          Yes         No          Yes          No          Yes          No             Yes
Civil Liberties Treatment -0.152***              -0.037 -0.134*** -0.037 -0.102** -0.062* -0.069 -0.129                               -0.010 -0.141*** -0.123***              0.078
                           (0.040)              (0.036) (0.041) (0.035) (0.043) (0.034) (0.046) (0.086)                              (0.042) (0.035) (0.029)                 (0.068)
Public Health Treatment -0.021                    0.015   -0.025   0.016 -0.002 0.006      0.024 -0.045                                0.002   -0.000 -0.013                  0.064
                           (0.034)              (0.033) (0.037) (0.031) (0.040) (0.029) (0.046) (0.084)                              (0.038) (0.031) (0.026)                 (0.062)

No. Obs                              7451         8604        6164         9891       6003       10052        3895        1276         6634        9421        13814           2241

                                            PANEL B: POLITICAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CHARACTERISTICS

                                         Pol. Aff:              West Only:                Media               Satisfied with DEU Only: Born KOR Only: Migrated
                                          Right                  Populist                 Distrust            Federal Govt in East Germany    from N. Korea
                                       No          Yes         No          Yes         No          Yes         No          Yes          No          Yes          No             Yes
Civil Liberties Treatment -0.081** -0.092* -0.068* -0.106**                         -0.056*    -0.151*** -0.083** -0.077*             -0.141 -0.183   0.000                   0.000
                          (0.032) (0.050) (0.038) (0.050)                           (0.030)     (0.053) (0.036) (0.039)              (0.100) (0.204)   (.)                     (.)
Public Health Treatment -0.005      0.013   0.004   0.005                            0.031       -0.063 -0.043     0.054              -0.061 -0.182 -0.050                    0.165
                          (0.028) (0.048) (0.037) (0.049)                           (0.027)     (0.046) (0.033) (0.033)              (0.095) (0.218) (0.065)                 (0.103)

No. Obs                              12390        3665        6077         3521      12055        4000        7305        8750         1053         215          728            225

                                       PANEL C: DEMOGRAPHIC AND GEOGRAPHICAL CHARACTERISTICS
                                                                   Age                                        USA Only:      In First Month                     West only: Cases:
                                            Male                  Over 45               In Hotspot           White vs. Black Since First Case                      Post-Peak
                                       No          Yes         No          Yes         No          Yes          –           –           No          Yes          No             Yes
Civil Liberties Treatment 0.001 -0.158*** -0.037 -0.122*** -0.076**                              -0.099 -0.064   0.004 -0.108*** -0.032 -0.094**                             -0.087**
                          (0.037) (0.039) (0.036) (0.039) (0.030)                               (0.062) (0.050) (0.099) (0.033) (0.047) (0.036)                              (0.043)
Public Health Treatment 0.054* -0.053      0.037   -0.030 0.020                                  -0.093 0.021    0.059   -0.010   0.020  0.054                                -0.054
                          (0.032) (0.035) (0.032) (0.035) (0.026)                               (0.060) (0.050) (0.101) (0.028) (0.047) (0.036)                              (0.042)

No. Obs                              8281         7774        8906         7149      13411        2644        3424         718        12056        3933         6101           5033



Notes: Table reports OLS estimates of the effects of civil liberties and public health treatment. The results are based on the weighed sample from the COVID-19 and Civil Liberties
Survey. The dependent variable is an inverse-covariance-weighted index as described in Anderson (2008), which combines the following outcome variables: willing to give up
own rights, willing to give up others’ rights. Each binary covariate is defined as following: Income ≤ 50th pct: 1 if R’s household income is less than the 50th percentile, or 0
otherwise; Received College Educ: 1 if R received any college education, or 0 otherwise; Employed: 1 if R is currently employed, or 0 otherwise; USA Only: Econ. Vulnerability:
1 if R’s score of economic vulnerability coded based on occupation is greater than the 75th percentile (only applies to respondents in USA); Having Partner/Spouse: 1 if R has a
partner/spouse; Living Alone in q Household: 1 if R lives alone in the household, or 0 otherwise; Pol. Aff: Right: 1 if R’s political affiliation is right-wing or conservative (this
variable does not apply to Chinese respondents); West only Populist: 1 if R voted for populist parties or candidates (Donald Trump in USA, Boris Johnson in GBR, AfD in DEU,
Lega Movimento or 5 stelle in ITA, Marine Le Pen, François Asselineau, or Nicolas Dupont-Aignan in FRA; only applies to western countries); Media Distrust: 1 if R’s level of trust
in Media in general is less than 3 on a scale of 1 to 5; Satisfied with Federal Govt: 1 if R’s level of satisfaction with the federal government is greater than 3 on a scale of 1 to 5; DEU
only: Born in East Germany: 1 if R was born in East Germany; KOR only: Migrated from N. Korea: 1 if R or any of R’s family members had migrated from North Korea to South
Korea during the Korean War; Male: 1 if R is male; Age over 45: 1 if R’s age is over 45; In Hotspot: 1 if R lives in one of the hotspot areas described in Section 4.1.2; USA only Race:
White vs. Black: 1 if R’s race is African American/Black, or 0 if White/Caucasian; In First Month Since First case: 1 if R was in the first month since the first COVID-19 case was
detected in R’s region/area at admin level 1 (or at county level for USA); West only: Cases: Post-peak: 1 if R was surveyed after the peak of COVID-19 case at admin level 1 for ITA,
GBR, FRA and at county level for USA and DEU. Regression includes the following controls: country FE, date FE, treatment group dummies, geographic controls (11 individual
hotspot city dummies: New York City, Seattle, Detroit, and New Orleans for USA, Munich for Germany, Bergamo and Milan for Italy, Paris for France, London for U.K., Wuhan for
China, and Daegu for South Korea), respondent demographic controls (male dummy, income bracket FE, age bracket FE, employment status FE, college degree dummy, political
right dummy, political neutral dummy, risk preference, time preference, the “leave-one-out" number of times R left home during the past 3 days, the “leave-one-out" number of
times R washed hands during the past 24 hours, and “leave-one-out" number of household members), disease controls (cardiovascular, diabetes, chronic lung disease, tobacco
use, obesity, and any other medical conditions), time since the first case of COVID-19 at region/state level, distance to the nearest hotspot, and “leave-one-out" version of knowing
someone contracted with COVID-19 at admin 1 geographical level. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level,
respectively.




                                                                                         A.30
C     Treatment Scripts
Below we reproduce each script in detail.

C.1   Civil Liberties Treatment Script
"As the entire world is fighting against COVID-19, countries such as South Korea and China stand out as
examples that have successfully contained the outbreak.
The figures on the next screen show that the number of new cases of COVID-19 in these countries has
decreased to close to 0 during the past few weeks.
[Page break]
South Korea and China experienced COVID-19 early on.
[Graph showing case rates over time in China and South Korea. This graph shows only the evolution of
cases in the pre-peak period.]
[Page break]
The epidemic reached a peak in both countries.
[Graph showing case rates over time in China and South Korea. This graph shows the evolution of cases in
the pre-peak and peak periods.]
[Page break]
Then the epidemic was quickly controlled.
[Graph showing case rates over time in China and South Korea. This graph shows the evolution of cases in
the pre-peak, peak and post-peak periods.]
[Page break]
To achieve such success in containing COVID-19, these countries have rolled out perhaps the most aggressive
disease containment efforts in history.
[Page break]
Among others, the following policies have been implemented to control COVID-19 in these countries:
[The bullet points below are uncovered one at a time, and each is accompanied by a picture.]

    • People need a government-issued permit to leave home;
    • Individuals who do not comply with quarantine orders could face one year in jail;
    • The government uses artificial intelligence (AI) to tag whether citizens have high risk of contagion,
      based on smartphone locations, online behavior, and credit card activity;
    • The government posts information about the activities and locations of individuals who tested posi-
      tive for COVID-19 on social media;
    • Government officials go door to door for health checks, and force individuals who are suspected to
      be ill into quarantine.

[Page break]
Information about the patients is collected and publicly shared by the government in stunning detail.
Such information, obtained by the government to fight the COVID-19 epidemic, can potentially be used in
many ways beyond the crisis itself.
For example, in South Korea, people used publicly released information to identify COVID-19 patients, and
harassed them and their family members.


                                                   A.31
[Picture]
[Page break]
[Picture]
We are currently facing perhaps the biggest crisis of our generation. While we must act quickly and deci-
sively, we should also take into account the long-term consequences of our actions.
Policies that could help successfully fight the COVID-19 epidemic, such as a large increase in government
surveillance, may be abused and may remain in place even after the epidemic ends.
[Page break]
[Picture]
’In many cases, the fear and panic have allowed governments to impose quite drastic measures which can
be very difficult to roll back. Once you have a system implemented, they become normalized.’ - Human
Rights Watch
The decisions we and our government take during the COVID-19 crisis may shape our nation and society
for years to come."
[Page break]

C.2    Public Health Treatment Script
"COVID-19 is a respiratory virus without a cure or a vaccine. Respiratory viruses are highly contagious.
On average, each individual who has COVID-19 will infect about two to three more people. That might not
sound like a big number, but the key is the number is bigger than one, and that can lead to a lot of spread
in a short amount of time. The animation on the next screens illustrates this.
[Page break]
Each pink dot represents a person who has the COVID-19 infection. The first infected person quickly infects
3 more people...
[Graph showing a simple graphical explanation of exponential disease spread.]
[Page break]
... then the infection quickly spreads:
[Graph showing a simple graphical explanation of exponential disease spread.]
[Page break]
A big problem with infections occurring so fast is that many people will get very sick at the same time.
[Page break]
This is a huge problem because hospitals will quickly be overwhelmed.
This is shown below in the epidemic curve. The epidemic curve plots the number of COVID-19 cases on the
vertical axis and time on the horizontal axis.
At the height of the epidemic curve, the number of patients who need care far exceeds the capacity of hos-
pitals.
[Graph showing epidemic curves]
This strain on our healthcare system affects not only COVID-19 patients but anyone who needs planned or
unplanned acute medical care.
[Page break]
This is what overcrowding and strain in hospitals looks like - it leads to shortages and preventable deaths.
Critically ill patients crowded in improvised spaces in Italy.


                                                   A.32
[Picture showing a hospital with limited hospital capacity]
Patients waiting on the floor in a hospital in Spain.
[Picture showing a hospital with limited hospital capacity]
[Page break]
Many people with other medical problems will not be able to get the care they need.
Many doctors and nurses may get the virus and therefore cannot take care of patients.
Those in the hospital may die without family members around because of fear of contagion.
[Page break]
There are a few key public health measures governments can do to slow down the epidemic:
   • (1) Testing widely for COVID-19; and tracking the location and social contacts of anyone who tests
     positive for COVID-19.
   • (2) Isolating individuals who are positive for COVID-19 for a long period of time and ensuring they
     do not spread the disease to others.
   • (3) Requiring individuals to stay at home and not go to work to reduce community spread of the
     virus.
   • (4) Promoting good hygiene at home, at work and in public spaces.

[Page break]
[Graphic showing how public health measures such as social distancing can prevent exponential disease
spread.]
[Page break]
These measures can help reduce the number of people who are sick at the same time and they can delay the
epidemic.
[Graphic showing how public health measures such as social distancing can flatten the epidemic curve and
reduce the burden on the healthcare system.]
[Page break]
Delaying the epidemic is important because it allows time for researchers to develop vaccines and cures and
hospitals to get more equipment to treat those who are ill."
[Page break]




                                                   A.33
D     Health Risk Scores
D.1     Mathematica’s COVID-19 Risk Score
According to (Hu et al., 2020), Mathematica 19 & Me COVID-19 risk scoare is constructed as:

                                                       Disease Burden of COV ID-19i    50
            M athematica Risk Scorei = log10 (                                      )∗    + 50                      (1)
                                                          Disease Burden of F lu       3

where
        Disease Burden of COV ID-19i = P r(COV ID-19 Inf ectioni ) ∗ [P r(COV ID-19 Hospitalizationi )
                                                                                                                    (2)
                                             + P r(COV ID-19 ICU Admissioni ) + P r(COV ID-19 Deathi )]

If an individual, i, has any flu-like symptoms,

                                                                  P r(COV ID-19j )
                       P r(COV ID-19 Inf ectioni ) =                                                                (3)
                                                             P r(COV ID-19j ) + P r(F lu)

where j is an indicator for the county, where an individual i lives. P r(COV ID-19j ) is a total num-
ber of COVID-19 cases at county j normalized by the county population, and P r(F lu) is calculated
as total number of symptomatic flu illnesses during 2018-2019 normalized by (total U.S. popula-
tion * total number of weeks of flu season).50
If an individual, i, does not have any flu-like symptoms,

                                                                Exposure Odds Ratioi
                           P r(COV ID-19 Inf ectioni ) =                                                            (4)
                                                              1 + Exposure Odds Ratioi

where

                                               P r(Exposurei )
             Exposure Odds Ratioi =                              ∗ Risk M itigating Behaviorsi                      (5)
                                             1 − P r(Exposurei )

Risk M itigating Behaviorsi refers to the odds ratio of preventing an infectious disease by washing
hands and/or by wearing PPE.51 In Equation 5,

                            P r(Exposurei ) = 1 − (1 − T (τ, ρj ))N um. of Contactsi                                (6)

where T (τ, ρj ), a transmission probability, is a constant τ , which describes the transmissibility of
household contact, multiplied by the proxy for local prevalence, ρj .52 ρj refers to the prevalence
of active cases of the individual’s county j. It takes into account any underreported cases and is



    50
       Total number of symptomatic flu illnesses, 35,520,883, during 2018-2019 is obtained from https://www.cdc.gov/
flu/about/burden/index.html. Total U.S. population is 329,450,000. Total number of weeks of flu season is assumed as
26 week. Therefore, P r(F lu) is approximately equal to .00414687.
    51
       The odds ratio of preventing an infectious disease by washing hands is 0.45 and by wearing PPE is 0.32 (Jefferson
et al., 2008).
    52
       The household transmissibility is equal to 0.105 obtained from Burke (2020)


                                                         A.34
normalized by the population of county j. In Equation 6,

                            N um. of Contactsi = Direct Expi + Indirect Expi ∗ τ                                          (7)

where Direct Expi refers to a level of direct exposure, which is equal to the number of people the
individual come into contact within a week. Indirect Expi refers to a level of indirect exposure,
which is equal to the number of people who the individual’s household member(s) come(s) in
contact with.
    In Equation 2, P r(COV ID-19 Hospitalizationi ), P r(COV ID-19 ICU Admissioni ), and
P r(COV ID-19 Deathi ) refer to the probability of COVID-19-associated hospitalization, ICU ad-
mission, and death, respectively. Each of them is calculated as:

                                                                                                  Odds Ratios
         P r(COV ID-19 Hospitalizationi , ICU Admissioni , or Deathsi ) =                                                 (8)
                                                                                                1 + Odds Ratios

where odds ratios are varied by age, sex, and pre-existing medical conditions based on medical
literature (Killerby et al. (2020); Novel et al. (2020); Simonnet et al. (2020); and Williamson et al.
(2020)).53
    Disease Burden of F lu in Equation 1 refers to the average disease burden of flu, which is equal
to:

  Disease Burden of F lu = P r(F lu) ∗ P r(F lu Hospitalization) + P r(F lu ICU Admission) + P r(F lu Deaths) (9)

 where P r(F lu Hospitalization) is a total number of flu-associated hospitalizations normalized
by a total number of flu cases. P r(F lu ICU Admission) is an ICU admission rate multiplied by
P r(F lu Hospitalization). P r(F lu Death) is a total number of flu associated deaths normalized
by a total number of flu cases.54 . In Equation 1, “50" means treating COVID-19 as equal disease
burden as flu, which can be replaced with “100" to consider COVID-19 as 1000 times worse than
flu, or with “0" to consider COVID-19 as 1/1,000 times of the disease burden of flu.


D.2     Health Risk Scores, HR(1)ihj and HR(2)ij
We construct our health risk scores, HR(1)ihj and HR(2)ij , following the basic formulation of the
Mathematica Index as described in Equation 2 but using modified measures of P r(COV ID-19 Inf ectioni )
and P r(COV ID-19 Deathi ):

                                                                             0                                 0
             HR(1)ihj or HR(2)ij = P r(COV ID-19 Inf ectioni ) ∗ P r(COV ID-19 Deathi )                                  (10)




    53
       See https://19andme.covid19.mathematica.org/ and https://github.com/mathematica-mpr/covid_risk_score for
a detailed description of the method.
    54
       A total number of flu associated hospitalizations is 490,561, and a total number of flu associated deaths is 34,157 (ob-
tained from https://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/burden/index.html. ICU admission rate, 0.075, is obtained from Beumer
et al. (2019).


                                                            A.35
                                                                  0
D.2.1     Formulation of Pr(COVID-19 Infectioni )

In Equation 10,
                                                                                                   0
                                                        Exposure Odds Ratioi
                                                          0
                        P r(COV ID-19 Inf ectioni ) =                        0                         (11)
                                                      1 + Exposure Odds Ratioi
                                              0
for an individual i. Exposure Odds Ratioi is the modified version of Exposure Odds Ratioi , which
is:
                                                                      0
                                   0 P r(Exposurei )                               0
            Exposure Odds Ratioi =                   0 ∗ Risk M itigating Behaviors−i                  (12)
                                   1 − P r(Exposurei )

where

                                          0                                                    0
                          P r(Exposurei ) = 1 − (1 − T (τ, ρ))N um. of Contacts−i                      (13)

τ is the same as the one in Equation 6, which is a constant term of describing the transmissibil-
ity of household contact. ρ is a proxy for local prevalence measured by a leave-one-out measure
of knowing anyone infected with COVID-19 stratified by the administrative level 1 geographical
region. Therefore,

                                                  T (τ, ρ) = τ ∗ ρ                                     (14)

      In Equation 10,

                                                                          0
                                       N um. of Contacts−i = κi + λi                                   (15)

where κi is a leave-one-out number of times having left home during the past 3 days, and λi is a
leave-one-out number of household members by sex, age group, and country.
      In Equation 12, we use modified Risk M itigating Behaviors−i , which is:

                                                                              0     γi
                             Risk M itigating Behaviors−i = 1 −                                        (16)
                                                                                  max(γ)

where γi is a leave-one-out number of times having washed hands during the past 24 hours by sex,
age group, and country, and max(γ) is the maximum number of γ across all countries.


                                                              0
D.2.2     Formulation of Pr(COVID-19 Deathi )

In Equation 10,
                                                                                           0
                                                     Deaths Odds Ratioi
                                                      0
                          P r(COV ID-19 Deathi ) =                      0                              (17)
                                                   1 + Deaths Odds Ratioi


                                                              A.36
                                                            0
for an individual i. To calculate Deaths Odds Ratioi , we use (fully adjusted) hazard ratios by age
group, sex, income, and various medical conditions from Williamson et al. (2020). To convert
hazard ratios into odds ratios, we use the following equations referenced from Shor et al. (2017):

                                                   1 − eHR∗ln(1−r)
                                           RR =                                                            (18)
                                                         r

Or

                                                         OR
                                        RR =                                                               (19)
                                                [(1 − r) + (r ∗ OR)]

where RR is the relative risk, OR is the odds ratio, HR is the hazard ratio, r is the death rate for the
reference group. Therefore,

                                                    RR ∗ (1 − r)
                                            OR =                                                           (20)
                                                     1 − RR ∗ r

We use fully adjusted death hazard ratios by age group (i.e. 18-39, 40-49, 50-59, 60-69, 70-79, and
80 or above) and convert them into death odds ratios using Equation 20 above. Using a multi-
plicative model described below, we adjust the individual’s age group-based death odds ratio by
multiplying the relevant death odds ratio based on the individual’s demographic characteristics
(male and income) and medical conditions (obesity, cardiovascular disease, tobacco use, chronic
lung disease, diabetes, or any other medical condition):

     Deaths Odds Ratioi = DORi,age ∗ DORi,income ∗ DORi |1male=1 ∗ DORi |1obesity=1 ∗ DORi |1smoke=1
                       0



                           ∗ DORi |1copd=1 ∗ DORi |1cvd=1 ∗ DORi |1diabetes=1 ∗ DORi |1other=1
                                                                                                           (21)
Where, for individual i, DORi,age is the age-group related death odds ratio based on the individ-
ual’s age. DORi,income is the income-group related death odds ratio based on the individual’s re-
ported household income55 . DORi |1male=1 is the death odds ratio for being male. DORi |1obesity=1
is the death odds ratio for having obesity. DORi |1smoke=1 is the death odds ratio for being a current
tobacco user. DORi |1copd=1 is the death odds ratio for having a chronic lung disease. DORi |1cvd=1
is the death odds ratio for having a cardiovascular disease. DORi |1diabetes=1 is the death odds ratio
for having diabetes. DORi |1other=1 is the death odds ratio for having any other medical condition.




     55
    Income group is divided into four groups within each country: HH income ≤ 25th percentile, 25th percentile <
HH income ≤ 50th percentile, 50th percentile < HH income ≤ 75th percentile, HH income > 75th percentile.


                                                     A.37
