                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

           THE LIQUIDITY SENSITIVITY OF HEALTHCARE CONSUMPTION:
                 EVIDENCE FROM SOCIAL SECURITY PAYMENTS

                                            Tal Gross
                                         Timothy Layton
                                           Daniel Prinz

                                      Working Paper 27977
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27977


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020



We are grateful to Anikó Bíró, Amitabh Chandra, Rena Conti, Salama Freed, Andrew Goodman-
Bacon, Jon Gruber, Ben Handel, Anupam Jena, Michael McWilliams, Tom Mroz, Joe Newhouse,
Matt Notowidigdo, Analisa Packham, Maria Polyakova, Elena Prager, Mark Shepard, Liyang
Sun, Amanda Starc, Justin Sydnor, Boris Vabson, and seminar participants at Duke Fuqua, the
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Harvard Medical School, the University of Hong Kong, the
Whistler Health Economics Summit, the BU-Harvard-MIT Health Economics Seminar, Georgia
State University, APPAM, ASHEcon, the Notre Dame Health Economics Conference, the
Annual Health Economics Conference at the University of California, San Francisco, the Annual
Southeastern Health Economics Study Group at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville, the
Hungarian Economic Association Annual Conference, the Midwest Health Economics
Conference at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, and the International Online Public Finance
Seminar for useful feedback. Julia Yates provided superb research assistance. Research reported
in this publication was supported by the National Institute on Aging of the National Institutes of
Health under Award Number P30AG012810 through the National Bureau of Economic Research
Center for Aging and Health Research. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and
does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27977.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Tal Gross, Timothy Layton, and Daniel Prinz. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Liquidity Sensitivity of Healthcare Consumption: Evidence from Social Security Payments
Tal Gross, Timothy Layton, and Daniel Prinz
NBER Working Paper No. 27977
October 2020
JEL No. G5,H0,I1,I13

                                           ABSTRACT

Some consumers lack the cash needed to pay for medical care. As a result, they either delay care
until they can pay for it or they forgo the care altogether. To test for such a possibility, we study
the distribution of monthly Social Security checks among Medicare Part D enrollees. When
Social Security checks are distributed, prescription fills increase by 6-12 percent. In that sense,
drug consumption of low-income Medicare recipients is "liquidity sensitive." We then study
recipients who transition onto a program that eliminates copayments. When those recipients do
not face copayments, their drug consumption becomes less liquidity sensitive. That finding
implies that, beyond risk protection, generous insurance also provides recipients with the ability
to consume healthcare when they need it rather than when they have cash. Further, we find that
recipients whose drug consumption is most liquidity sensitive exhibit price elasticities of demand
that are twice the size of the average elasticity, suggesting that more-generous insurance causes
recipients both to re-time prescription filling and also to start filling prescriptions that they
otherwise would not fill. We present a stylized model that uses this finding to call into question
the conventional interpretation of demand-response to price as solely inefficient moral hazard.


Tal Gross                                         Daniel Prinz
Questrom School of Business                       National Bureau of Economic Research
595 Commonwealth Ave.                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Boston, MA 02215                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                          dprinz@g.harvard.edu
talgross@bu.edu

Timothy Layton
Harvard Medical School
Department of Health Care Policy
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
layton@hcp.med.harvard.edu
There exists broad agreement among economists that health insurance ought to in-
volve some form of cost sharing: copayments, coinsurance rates, or deductibles. The-
ory suggests that cost sharing can limit moral hazard (Zeckhauser, 1970), and em-
pirical evidence confirms that cost sharing reduces spending (Manning et al., 1987;
Aron-Dine et al., 2013; Shigeoka, 2014; Brot-Goldberg et al., 2017). Indeed, moti-
vated by that evidence, high-deductible health insurance plans have become increas-
ingly common in the United States. Over only ten years, the share of firms offering
such plans increased from 4 percent to nearly 30 percent (Kaiser Family Foundation,
2018). Among lower-income Americans, even some state Medicaid programs have
introduced cost-sharing mechanisms for some services or prescription drugs (Kaiser
Family Foundation, 2019).
    Those cost-sharing mechanisms may introduce a particular challenge for low-
income consumers. A large literature suggests that many low-income households
wait to consume until their income arrives. Olafsson and Pagel (2018), for instance,
find that low-income consumers purchase 70 percent more goods on days when they
receive their paychecks. That finding is consistent with many other studies: con-
sumption responds to both predictable and unanticipated changes in income.1 One
might call such a pattern “liquidity sensitivity:” consumers often delay many of their
purchases until their income arrives.
    Liquidity sensitivity may be especially problematic in the context of healthcare.
In healthcare, consumers are advised to purchase treatments at a time determined by
medical necessity, not determined by the arrival of their income. And yet, a third of
Americans report that in the past year they “skipped filling a prescription due to its
cost” (Goetz, 2018). That pattern is not entirely driven by the uninsured. Among
Americans who report being in poor health but are covered by health insurance, 16
percent report that in the past year they “delayed medical care due to cost.”2
    There exist, however, no empirical studies that provide credible evidence of liq-
uidity sensitivity in healthcare. And yet, such evidence could lead to substantial
implications for policy. If consumers often delay welfare-enhancing healthcare until
their income arrives, then such behavior alone would suggest that insurance con-
tracts should be more generous than they should be in the absence of such behavior.
The optimal insurance contract is typically viewed as one trading off risk protection
   1
     See the work of Parker (1999), Souleles (1999), Stephens (2003), Johnson et al. (2006), Agarwal
et al. (2007), Parker et al. (2013), Agarwal and Qian (2014), Gross and Tobacman (2014), Baugh
and Wang (2018), and Gross et al. (2020).
   2
     Authors’ calculations based on the 2017 National Health Interview Survey.


                                                 1
against moral hazard (Zeckhauser, 1970). That formulation may be incomplete for
liquidity-sensitive households. In the presence of liquidity sensitivity, an additional
benefit of generous insurance coverage must be considered: more-generous coverage
allows consumers to avoid having to delay their healthcare until the receipt of their
income. With generous coverage, recipients can consume healthcare when they need
it, rather than waiting for their income to arrive.3
     In this paper, we provide empirical evidence of liquidity sensitivity in healthcare
consumption.4 Specifically, we estimate how the prescription fills of Medicare recip-
ients are affected by income receipt. To do so, we study the distribution of Social
Security checks. Since 1997, Social Security recipients have received their monthly
checks on a pre-determined schedule based on the day of the month that they were
born. This system allows researchers to compare Social Security recipients who just
received their check to recipients who are quasi-randomly assigned to receive their
checks a week or two later.5 We compare the prescription-drug purchases of each
Medicare recipient around the day they receive their checks to the healthcare con-
sumption of two control groups. First, we study similar Medicare recipients who
receive their checks on a different date. Second, we study Medicare recipients who
are enrolled in a program that fully subsidizes their copayments. These comparisons
allow us to isolate the effect of receiving Social Security checks on the consumption
of Medicare-covered drugs.
     The results, first and foremost, reject the hypothesis that the receipt of income
has no effect on healthcare consumption. Prescription drug fills for low-income Medi-
care Part D recipients who face small copayments of only $2–$5 increase by over 10
percent on the day they receive their Social Security checks. We observe that effect
overall, for all drugs, and also for drugs for which short-term non-adherence can have
important health consequences: blood thinners, insulin, anti-psychotics, and anti-
seizure medications. We also observe this effect for a recipient’s first fill of a drug,
not just for refills, implying that recipients are not only delaying purchases but also
consumption. By constrast, when recipients enroll in a different part of the program
that provides zero out-of-pocket prices, their fills exhibit no such increase on the day
   3
      Ericson and Sydnor (2018) and Malani and Jaffe (2018) develop theoretical models of this.
   4
      We use the phrase “liquidity sensitivity” throughout the paper, rather than referring to liquidity
constraints. We do so because the results indicate that drug consumption is “sensitive” to liquid-
ity, but they do not prove the existence of a binding constraint. Section 4 discusses the possible
mechanisms driving the results.
    5
      Stephens (2003), Evans and Moore (2011), Leary and Wang (2016), and Baugh and Wang (2018)
use the distribution of Social Security checks to study outcomes other than healthcare consumption.


                                                   2
they receive their checks. Further, a particular feature of the Social Security check-
distribution schedule provides an additional source of variation: two-thirds of checks
arrive 28 days after the previous check, and the remaining one-third of checks arrive
35 days after the previous check. Among recipients facing positive copayments, we
find a larger increase in prescriptions filled when checks arrive after 35 days rather
than after 28 days. We also find a clear gradient in the size of the effect by income:
Medicare recipients who live in the lowest-income ZIP Codes increase their prescrip-
tion fills when they receive their Social Security checks by roughly five times more
than those living in the highest-income ZIP Codes.
    We then assess the extent to which more-generous insurance coverage lessens liq-
uidity sensitivity. To do so, we study transitions in which Medicare recipients move
onto more-generous forms of prescription-drug coverage via the Low Income Subsidy
(LIS) program. We study recipients who move from facing full or subsidized copay-
ments that average around $7–8 per prescription fill to facing no copayment at all.
We use those transitions both to estimate recipients’ price elasticity of demand for
prescriptions and to study how more-generous coverage affects liquidity sensitivity.
    That exercise suggests that higher copayments lead to greater liquidity sensitivity.
Medicare recipients are more likely to fill prescriptions on the day they receive their
Social Security checks when they face copayments versus when they do not. These
findings suggest an additional benefit of full insurance for low-income recipients. The
traditional view is that full insurance reduces the risk that consumers face by reducing
the difference in their wealth across healthy and sick states of the world. This result
suggests another benefit: full insurance eliminates liquidity sensitivity.
    Finally, we use the transition to more-generous coverage to estimate a price elastic-
ity of demand. Low-income recipients are price sensitive: they exhibit an overall price
elasticity of demand of −0.064. We then stratify recipients by the extent to which
their drug consumption prior to transitioning to more-generous coverage exhibited
sensitivity to liquidity. In particular, we divide recipients into groups based on the
share of their Wednesday fills that occur on their Social Security payday. We show
that this measure is a good proxy for a recipient’s liquidity sensitivity. We find that
the most liquidity-sensitive recipients exhibit a demand-response to more-generous
coverage that is twice as large as the demand-response exhibited by other recipients.
This is true for overall drug consumption and for consumption of high-value drugs
that physicians believe are especially important for patient health.
    These results indicate that liquidity-sensitive recipients do not solely respond to


                                           3
more-generous coverage by smoothing their consumption over time – they also re-
spond to more-generous coverage by consuming more drugs. They increase their
drug consumption in response to more-generous coverage by much more than other
recipients with similar incomes but whose consumption does not exhibit liquidity sen-
sitivity. Such a pattern is consistent with a model in which liquidity sensitivity acts
as a friction that prevents consumers from purchasing drugs that they value more
than the price, driving a wedge between their demand curve for drugs and their val-
uation of those drugs. That model implies that the conventional interpretation of
a demand-response to more-generous insurance is incomplete. Typically, economists
interpret a demand response as evidence of moral hazard, that is, inefficient over-
consumption. Instead, this model suggests that more-generous insurance has two
opposing effects for liquidity-sensitive recipients. First, more-generous coverage re-
laxes the liquidity-related friction that otherwise causes consumers to under-consume
drugs. Second, more-generous coverage lowers the price of drugs below the cost of
the drug, potentially causing consumers to “over-consume” drugs.
    Those two effects must be compared in order to assess the optimal generosity of
coverage. To illustrate this trade-off, we use our estimates to construct two market-
level demand curves for prescription drugs. The first is the actual, realized demand
curve in the market. The second is a “frictionless” demand curve that describes de-
mand for prescription drugs were the liquidity-sensitive recipients not to face liquidity-
related frictions. Using those demand curves, we estimate the deadweight loss due
to more-generous coverage under the conventional model and, alternatively, a model
incorporating liquidity sensitivity. That exercise requires strong assumptions about
homogeneity of preferences between liquidity-sensitive and liquidity-insensitive recip-
ients and a lack of other frictions faced by the insensitive recipients. Nevertheless,
it suggests that liquidity-related frictions partially offset the deadweight loss due to
moral hazard.
    This paper contributes to research that documents the relationship between the
timing of income and consumption. Previous studies have demonstrated that con-
sumers often change their behavior after income shocks, even when those income
shocks are anticipated. Some studies have exploited the distribution of Social Secu-
rity checks, as we do. Stephens (2003), for instance, documents that the distribution
of Social Security checks affects total consumption, while Leary and Wang (2016) and
Baugh and Wang (2018) focus on financial outcomes, such as the takeup of payday
loans. Evans and Moore (2011) demonstrate that the distribution of Social Security


                                            4
checks increases short-run mortality. Other studies explore how the arrival of pay-
checks and government benefits affect food consumption (Shapiro, 2005; Beatty et al.,
2019), retailers’ responses (Hastings and Washington, 2010; Cheng and Beatty, 2016;
Goldin et al., 2019), hospitalizations (Dobkin and Puller, 2007), crime (Foley, 2011),
financial decision-making (Carvalho et al., 2016), and aggregate economic activity
(Berniell, 2019). Still other studies focus on income shocks that are less anticipated,
such as tax rebates and fiscal-stimulus payments. Such studies also uncover signif-
icant effects of income receipt on consumption and financial outcomes (Gross and
Souleles, 2002; Johnson et al., 2006; Stephens, 2006; Agarwal et al., 2007; Bertrand
and Morse, 2009; Agarwal and Qian, 2014; Baugh et al., 2014; Kaplan and Violante,
2014; Carvalho et al., 2016; Baker and Yannelis, 2017; Zhang, 2017; Vellekoop, 2018;
Gelman et al., 2019).
    This paper is also related to a growing literature on the optimal design of health
insurance in particular and social insurance more generally. Most closely related to
this paper, Ericson and Sydnor (2018) and Malani and Jaffe (2018) explore theoretical
models of health insurance and liquidity constraints. Baicker et al. (2015) discuss op-
timal cost-sharing mechanisms when healthcare consumption is shaped by behavioral
biases, similar to the liquidity-related frictions we document. A related issue is the
“access motive” for health insurance: the idea that health insurance not only protects
against financial risks but also makes otherwise-unaffordable healthcare accessible (de
Meza, 1983; Nyman, 1999). Finally, our paper contributes to a growing literature on
health insurance and consumer financial outcomes such as bankruptcy (Mahoney,
2015; Dobkin et al., 2018) and debt (Barcellos and Jacobson, 2015; Mazumder and
Miller, 2016; Hu et al., 2018; Goldsmith-Pinkham et al., 2020), as well as recent work
on demand for health insurance among low-income households (Finkelstein et al.,
2019). These studies grapple with how the traditional economic model of insurance
ought to incorporate new findings from the consumption literature and behavioral
economics.
    As described in Section 4.1, below, the behavior this paper documents may be
driven by either straightforward liquidity constraints or, alternatively, behavioral bi-
ases. To the extent that the results are driven by the latter, then this paper is
related to a growing literature on behavioral biases and health insurance. Much of
the research focuses on plan choice and switching costs (Abaluck and Gruber, 2011;
Ketcham et al., 2012; Handel, 2013; Polyakova, 2016). Several related studies also
explore the demand for drugs under Medicare Part D more generally (Einav et al.,


                                           5
2015, 2018) and general demand responses to cost sharing (Chandra et al., 2010;
Brot-Goldberg et al., 2017). This paper’s results illustrate a mechanism that may
be at play in many of those studies. Consumers often make decisions that seem self-
defeating. For instance, they cut back on both high-value and low-value healthcare
and some forgo insurance coverage altogether. One specific friction at play in gener-
ating these results may be liquidity sensitivity. Indeed, Section 4.3, below, shows that
liquidity sensitivity drives a small, but non-trivial fraction of this type of behavior.
    Beyond health insurance, as Chetty and Finkelstein (2013) highlight, most of the
previous studies on liquidity and social insurance focus on unemployment insurance
(Hansen and Imrohoroglu, 1992; Gruber, 1997; Card et al., 2007; Chetty, 2008; Cen-
teno and Novo, 2009; LaLumia, 2013). This paper explores how those issues should
be considered in the context of health insurance and provides evidence that they are
empirically important.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 provides background
on the Social Security benefit schedule, the Medicare Part D program, and the data
we use. We then present our empirical results in two pieces. First, Section 2 de-
scribes how the distribution of Social Security checks affects overall prescription drug
purchases. Second, Section 3 describes how Medicare recipients who have their co-
payments eliminated change the pattern in which they fill their prescriptions. Finally,
Section 4 describes the implications of the results for the optimal structure of health
insurance and Section 5 concludes.


1     Background and Data

This section provides background on the setting we study and the data we use. We
first review how Social Security checks are distributed. We then describe Medicare
Part D and the utilization data we study.

1.1   The Distribution of Social Security Checks

Since 1997, Social Security benefits have been distributed to recipients according to a
schedule that is based on recipients’ dates of birth. Recipients with birthdays on the
1st through the 10th of the month receive their checks on the second Wednesday of
each month; recipients with birthdays on the 11th through 20th of the month receive
their checks on the third Wednesday of each month; and recipients with birthdays on
the 21st through 31st of the month receive their checks on the fourth Wednesday of


                                           6
each month. The only deviations occur when federal holidays fall on Wednesdays. In
those rare cases, payments are made one day early.
    Two-thirds of checks arrive 28 days after the previous check, but one-third of
checks arrive 35 days after the previous check.6 Checks would always arrive after 28
days were all months to have precisely 28 days. The irregular structure of the calendar
leads to occasional five-week gaps between the second, third, or fourth Wednesday
of one month and the corresponding Wednesday of the next month. For example, in
2019 recipients received their paychecks after five weeks in February, June, August,
and November.7
    Since March of 2013, all Social Security recipients have been required to receive
their benefits electronically, via direct deposit. Even before that law went into effect,
most recipients relied on direct deposit. In early 2012, 94 percent of Social Security
checks were distributed via direct deposit (O’Carroll, 2012). The funds thus flow
electronically from the Social Security Administration to recipients’ banks. Banks
then make the funds available to recipients on their scheduled paydays. However,
there exists one complication. Some banks provide recipients with the funds the day
before their official payday.8 As a result, below, we find some response to Social
Security paychecks the day before payments are supposed to be distributed.

1.2    Medicare Part D

To study prescription drug consumption, we use data on a 20-percent sample of re-
cipients enrolled in Medicare Part D, a federal program which provides insurance for
prescription drugs to elderly and disabled Americans. In Medicare Part D, recipi-
ents choose among private plans, but the federal government provides subsidies for
premiums and cost sharing depending on recipients’ income.
    We rely on several datasets for our analysis: the Medicare recipient Summary
File (100 percent), the Medicare Part D Drug Event File (20 percent), and the Medi-
care Inpatient (100 percent), Outpatient (100 percent), MedPAR (100 percent), and
Carrier (20 percent) claims data. Those datasets cover the years 2006 through 2015.
We observe recipients’ exact dates of birth in the Summary File which allows us to
   6
     Supplemental Security Income (SSI) payments are made on the first of the month; those who
are eligible for both Social Security and SSI and those who were receiving benefits prior to May 1997
are paid on the third of the month.
   7
     Appendix Figure A1 presents the flyer, distributed by the SSA, that publicized the 2019 check-
distribution schedule.
   8
     We verified this phenomenon in discussions with experts at the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau.


                                                 7
define the three Social Security payday groups described above. We also observe each
recipient’s geographic location (state, county, and ZIP Code), as well as whether they
enroll in Medicare Parts A, B, C, and D. Importantly, we observe, for each month,
whether they receive premium and copayment subsidies via the Medicare Part D Low
Income Subsidy (LIS) program.
     The LIS program subsidizes premiums and copayments to varying degrees. We
divide recipients into three main categories. First, there are recipients who face
no copayments. That group consists of individuals enrolled both in Medicare and
Medicaid. These individuals receive full premium subsidies and are not required to
pay a copayment when filling a prescription. We call this group the “no-copay group.”
Second, there are recipients who face subsidized copayments. These recipients are
sufficiently low income to qualify for subsidized copayments, but not Medicaid. This
group actually consists of two separate categories. Some recipients are sufficiently
low income to face heavily subsidized copayments: about $2 for generic drugs and
about $5 for branded drugs. Other recipients have slightly higher incomes and so
receive smaller subsidies. For simplicity, we combine all recipients receiving partial
copayment subsidies into one group we refer to as the “subsidized-copay” group.9
Finally, third, there are all other recipients not enrolled in the LIS program, who face
full copayments. We call this last group the “full-copay group.”10
     Table 1 presents summary statistics for these three groups. The no-copay group
fills slightly more prescriptions than the groups paying copayments. That difference
may reflect a demand response to the lower out-of-pocket prices. But, of course,
the difference could be driven by differences in health status across these groups,
other differences in recipients’ characteristics, or some combination of factors. The
difference in out-of-pocket prices across the groups paying some copayments is clear
in the table, with the average annual out-of-pocket spending equal to approximately
$183 in the subsidized-copay group, and $551 in the full-copay group.
     Two other patterns in Table 1 are noteworthy. First, we observe substantially
more people in the full-copay group versus the other groups: over 3.7 million people
in 2015 in the full-copay group, versus well under a million in the other two groups,
combined. In the empirical results, below, this leads to much narrower confidence
   9
    Appendix C presents the main results for those two sub-groups separately.
  10
    There exists an additional group of recipients who pay zero copays and zero premiums. This
group consists of Medicaid-Medicare-enrolled individuals who are institutionalized. For this group,
copays are fully paid by the Medicare program. We exclude from the sample recipients in this
group, since they are institutionalized and thus have limited discretion over the timing of their
prescription-drug fills.


                                                8
intervals for estimates based on the full-copay group than for estimates based on the
other groups.
     Second, note that the average copayment faced by those in the subsidized-copay
group is remarkably low: an average of $4.45 per script. The 99th percentile of the
out-of-pocket-cost distribution is only $25.67, and more than 90 percent of fills cost
less than $9. The small magnitude of the out-of-pocket costs these recipients face
is important in interpreting some of the results below. Even though these recipients
face relatively small out-of-pocket costs, some still seem to wait until their payday to
fill their prescriptions.




                                           9
                               Table 1. Summary Statistics

                                              No       Subsidized        Full
                                             Copay       Copay          Copay
              Number of beneficiaries
              in 20% sample in 2006 213,080               20,305       479,900

              Number of beneficiaries
              in 20% sample in 2015 678,447              143,779      3,788,347

              Mean total scripts
              per year                       52.48        44.08         29.11

              Mean out-of-pocket
              spending per year                $0        $183.38       $550.67

              Mean out-of-pocket
              spending per script              $0         $4.45         $20.19

              Mean share filling
              a script each day              0.064        0.058         0.048

              Share male                     0.367        0.392         0.447

              Average age                    70.35        70.31         70.71

              Average number of
              chronic conditions              4.40         3.99          3.64

              Share white                    0.578        0.693         0.883

This table presents summary statistics for the copay groups used in the analysis below.
For more details, see Section 1.



2    Overall Liquidity Effects for Prescription Drugs

This section explores how the distribution of monthly Social Security checks affects
Medicare-covered prescription-drug purchases. We first examine the total number of
scripts filled on Social Security paydays. We then examine how the effect varies for
different types of drugs and demographic groups.




                                               10
2.1    Unadjusted Means

We first study the effect of Social Security checks on prescription drug fills in the raw
data. We assign each prescription-drug fill to “event time,” that is, to days relative
to the nearest date upon which the recipient receives their Social Security check. For
each event day, we then calculate the logarithm of total scripts filled for those who
receive their checks on the second Wednesday of each month. We subtract from that
value the corresponding log-count for the same day for those who receive their checks
on the fourth Wednesday of each month. Finally, we calculate the average of that
difference for each event day. This calculation has the advantage of differencing out
day-of-the-week-specific effects.11
    Figure 1 presents the average differences by event day for the no-copay group and
the subsidized-copay group.12 The diamond-shaped markers plot the results of this
exercise for the subsidized-copay group. That plot suggests no major differences until
the day before Social Security checks are distributed, when the number of scripts
begins to increase for those approaching payday.13 The largest differential increase
occurs on the day deposits are made. The number of scripts increases by roughly 11
percent on that day. The series then returns back to baseline within several days.
    As a point of comparison, the figure presents the same exercise for the no-copay
group. The circular-shaped markers in Figure 1 plot the re-centered time series for
those recipients. For that group, there is no differential change in prescriptions filled
when checks are distributed. Importantly, these recipients still receive Social Security
checks on the same schedule—the key difference is that they are not required to pay
copayments.
  11
      Day-of-week effects are large: the number of scripts filled on Sunday is 11 percent lower than
the number of scripts filled on Wednesday.
   12
      Appendix Figure A4 presents the same analysis when the outcome is the share of recipients
filling a script. Appendix Figure A5 presents the same analysis for the full-copay group. Appendix
Figure A11 presents the same analysis separately for 28-day wait and 35-day wait periods.
   13
      The effects we observe on the day prior to the check-disbursement date are consistent with
discussions we had with experts at the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, who indicated that
many banks make these funds available to recipients on the day prior to the actual deposit date.




                                                11
Figure 1. The Effect of Social Security Checks on Total Scripts: Re-Centered Time
Series

                  Log total scripts in relevant
                  payday group relative to other payday groups
            .15

                                                               Subsidized-copay group

             .1



            .05



              0                                                No-copay group




           -.05
                  -10    -8     -6       -4    -2      0       2     4      6       8      10
                                      Days since check-distribution
  This figure plots mean differences in the logarithm of the number of prescriptions filled for
  the no-copay group and the subsidized-copay group. For each copay group and event day, we
  calculate the difference in these outcomes across recipients who are nearest to receiving a check
  and those who are two weeks from their check. For more details, see Section 2.1.


    Appendix Figure A5 presents the same analysis for Medicare recipients who face
full copayments. The figure demonstrates the same pattern over time for the full-
copayment group, but the magnitude of the increase in prescription fills is roughly
half the magnitude as that in Figure 1 for the subsidized-copay group. For the full-
copayment group, total scripts increase by roughly 6 percent on the check-disbursement
date.

2.2   Regression Approach

We next develop a regression specification. To do so, we rely on the non-parametric
results in Figure 1 to guide us in choosing the appropriate model. That figure suggests
that Social Security checks only affect prescription fills over a short, three-day period.
We thus specify an event-study model that evaluates the effects of Social Security
checks within five days of the distribution of the checks.
   The regression compares utilization across 31 birthday groups, with each group


                                                 12
defined by the day of month of the Medicare recipient’s birthday.14 Denote the drug
consumption on calendar-day t by birthday group g ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 31} as Ytg . We assign
each birthday group an event time for each calendar day, with event time, τ , ranging
from −5 to 5, relative to the group’s nearest check date. We then estimate the
event-study regression:

                                                  5
                                                  X
                                                               τ
                              Ytg = αt + αg +            βτ · Itg + εtg .                        (1)
                                                 τ =−5

        τ
Here, Itg is an indicator function equal to one if calendar-day t is τ days away from
the date of Social Security check receipt for those in birthday group g. In addition,
αt and αg are full sets of calendar-day and birthday group fixed effects, respectively.
    This regression amounts to a standard event-study specification tracking the con-
sumption of birthday groups over time. To account for auto-correlation, we cluster the
standard errors at the level of the birthday group. The objects of interest from this
regression are the βτ ’s: coefficients that trace out the effect of Social Security checks
on behavior just before and just after the checks arrive, using birthday groups with
different check-disbursement dates to difference out any day-of-week, day-of-month,
and day-of-year effects.
    Figure 2 presents estimates of the βτ ’s for the subsidized-copayment group when
the outcome of interest is the logarithm of the number of scripts filled.15 The point es-
timates suggest a statistically significant effect of Social Security checks. The number
of prescriptions filled begins increasing on day −1, hits a maximum on payday, and
then declines. The magnitude of the day-zero estimate, β0 , suggests an 11-percent
increase in scripts.
  14
     The day of the month in which each recipient was born is the level of variation: the SSA matched
those 31 groups to dates on which to distribute checks. And so we cluster the standard errors on
those 31 groups (Abadie et al., 2017).
  15
     Appendix Figure A7 presents the same analysis when the outcome is the logarithm of the number
of recipients filling a script. Appendix Figure A8 presents the same event-study figure for the full-
copayment group. Appendix Figure A9 presents a version of the event-study figure that extends
more days past the check-distribution dates.




                                                 13
Figure 2. The Effect of Social Security Checks on Total Scripts: Event-Study Esti-
mates

             Event-study estimate
      .15


                                                            Subsidized-copay group


        .1




      .05




                                                            No-copay group
        0

              -5      -4      -3      -2      -1        0        1      2      3      4       5
                                     Days since check-distribution
  This figure plots estimates of equation (1), event-study estimates of the logarithm of total scripts
  filled for each event-time day relative to check receipt for the no-copay group and the subsidized-
  copay group. The vertical lines across each marker plot 95-percent confidence intervals based
  on standard errors that are clustered at the level of the birthday group. For more details, see
  Section 2.2.


     Figure 3 plots estimates of β0 (the check-disbursement day effect) from equation
(1) when the logarithm of total fills is the outcome of interest. The figure plots those
estimates for each of three groups: those who face no copayments, those who face
subsidized copayments, and those who face full copayments. For the group that does
not pay copayments, we estimate a precise zero effect: the confidence interval rules
out increases in fills larger than 0.4 percent. The effects for the other two groups are
both economically and statistically significant: we estimate an increase in prescription
fills of 11.3 percent for the subsidized-copay group and an increase of 6.1 percent for
the full-copay group.




                                                   14
Figure 3. The Change in Scripts Filled on Social Security Payday Across Copay
Groups and Length of Time Between Checks



            No-Copay Group


                                                                               28-Day Wait

   Subsidized-Copay Group
                                                                                  35-Day Wait



           Full-Copay Group



                                 0                .05             .1              .15
                                     Increase in scripts on check-distribution day

This figure plots estimates of β0 from equation (1): the event-study coefficient for check-
distribution day when the outcome is the logarithm of the total scripts filled by copay group
(no-copay group, subsidized-copay group, and full-copay group) and by the days since the last
check (28-day wait and 35-day wait). The horizontal lines along each marker plot 95-percent
confidence intervals based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of the birthday
group. For more details, see Section 2.2.


    Figure 3 also presents effects across the two different kinds of Social Security
payments: those that arrive after a 28-day wait and those that arrive after a 35-day
wait.16 We observe a larger increase in prescription-drug fills when it has been longer
since recipients’ last check was sent. For the subsidized-copay group, for instance,
we observe an effect of 10.6 percent for checks arriving after a 28-day wait versus an
effect of 12.4 percent for checks arriving after a 35-day wait.
    It is natural to investigate the “missing mass” in scripts that would account for
the increase on Social Security check-distribution days. Unfortunately, such an inves-
tigation would require much more statistical power than is available in this setting.
For new scripts, We observe a 6-percent increase in new fills for the full-copay group
on check-distribution day.17 Suppose that increase stemmed from consumers delaying
their filling equally across five other days. In that case, we would expect a 6/5 = 1.2
percent decrease in fills on those days. We do not have sufficient statistical power to
  16
     Appendix Figure C1 presents the same results but for two sub-groups that comprise the
subsidized-copayment group.
  17
     We focus here on new scripts, because that avoids an additional complication. The time series
for all fills tends to peak 30 days after the consumers’ previous fill, because they have used up their
pills. New fills does not involve that re-filling dynamic.


                                                  15
detect such an effect.

2.3    Heterogeneous Effects

A remaining question involves treatment-effect heterogeneity. How does the effect of
Social Security checks differ by the importance or expense of the drug in question?
Are effects larger for certain groups of recipients? To address these questions, we
estimate equation (1) separately for different types of drugs.
    Figure 4 plots the estimated increase in scripts on the day that checks are dis-
tributed, among the subsidized-copay group, across different types of drugs.18 The
first two rows suggest that, on Social Security paydays, fills increase more for branded
drugs than for generic drugs. Next, we stratify drugs by whether or not they involve
a large out-of-pocket cost for recipients.19 The results suggest a larger effect of So-
cial Security checks for expensive drugs. Since branded drugs are typically more
expensive, these two patterns are consistent with one another.
    The next two rows present estimates that stratify drug purchases by whether
the purchase is a recipient’s first fill of the drug, or whether it is a refill of their
prescription. The results indicate a significant effect for both refills and initial fills.
The delay of a prescription refill does not necessarily imply that the recipient is going
without drugs: they may be splitting pills or consuming from a stockpile of pills. But
the delay of a first prescription fill implies that the recipient is going without drugs.20
    Importantly, these results suggest that the distribution of Social Security checks
increases the actual consumption of drugs. Of course, we only observe the filling
of prescriptions, not the swallowing of pills. That said, if first prescription fills are
delayed, consumption must be foregone. Similarly, the next two rows of Figure 4 show
an effect of Social Security checks on both drugs that are taken routinely (chronic
drugs) and also drugs that are taken for short episodes (acute drugs).21 The figure
suggests a statistically significant effect of Social Security checks for both types of
  18
      Appendix Figure A10 presents estimates for the full-copay group.
  19
      For each drug, we calculate the average out-of-pocket cost for all Medicare recipients. We then
categorize a drug as expensive if the average out-of-pocket cost is above the mean of this variable.
   20
      Appendix Figure A11a further explores this issue. It plots actual scripts filled against “expected”
scripts filled. “Expected scripts filled” is the number of prescriptions that would occur on that day
if all recipients with a prior prescription consumed one pill per day and then filled the script as soon
as they were out of pills. The figure shows a clear spike in actual fills on check-distribution day but
no spike in expected fills on that day. This suggests that the effect of any one Social Security check
is not a mechanical consequence of the last month’s prescriptions.
   21
      We define a drug as “chronic” if the median number of fills of the drug in a year among people
with at least one fill of the drug is greater than 2 (Einav and Finkelstein, 2018).


                                                   16
drugs. The effect on acute drugs is particularly troubling: the use of acute drugs
is typically more medically urgent and patients are unlikely to have pills leftover
from previous prescriptions. If consumers were simply re-timing purchases but not
consumption, we might expect to see no effect for acute drugs.

                  Figure 4. Heterogeneous Effects Across Types of Drugs


            Generic
             Brand

         Low Cost
         High Cost

               Refill
        First Script

            Chronic
              Acute

        Anti-biotics
  Anti-depressants
   Anti-psychotics
       Anti-seizure
                HIV
           Inhalers
             Insulin
            Opioids
              Plavix
            Statins
          Warfarin
                        -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12 .14 .16 .18
                               Increase in scripts on check-distribution day
This figure plots estimates of β0 from equation (1): the event-study coefficient for check-distribution
day when the outcome is the logarithm of scripts filled for a particular type of drug. The sample
for this figure is restricted to the subsidized-copay group. The horizontal lines through each marker
plot 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of the
birthday group. For more details, see Section 2.2.


    The last set of rows in Figure 4 present estimates of the effect of Social Security
checks on prescription fills for particular drugs. We interviewed a panel of physicians
and asked for examples of common drugs that lead to severe, short-term consequences
if patients do not adhere to their prescriptions. The physicians suggested the following
drugs: blood thinners (Warfarin and Plavix) – used to prevent stroke among patients
at high risk for blood clots; antiretrovirals (HIV) – used to keep HIV from progressing
to AIDS; anti-psychotics – used to treat psychotic disorders such as bipolar disorder
and schizophrenia; anti-seizure medications – used to prevent seizures among patients
who are particularly vulnerable to them; anti-biotics – drugs typically used to treat
acute infections that could spread and do much more harm; insulin – used to regulate
blood sugar among diabetics; statins – drugs used to lower cholesterol levels and

                                                  17
thereby decrease the risk for heart attacks and strokes; and inhaler-based medications
– typically used in emergency situations when breathing becomes difficult for patients
with asthma or COPD. We add to this list one more class of drugs, opioid pain-killers.
Opioids are an interesting case study, because delaying consumption of opioids leads
to the recurrence of pain and thus may be extremely salient to patients.
    Overall, Figure 4 suggests some heterogeneity in the effect of Social Security checks
across these drugs. Prescription fills for HIV antiretrovirals exhibit no statistically
significant effect. Blood thinners, insulins, statins, and inhalers exhibit the largest
effects. Those effects are troubling to physicians: these drugs tend to be seen as
high value by physicians and important for the health of the patient. Indeed, physi-
cians believe that, among patients at high risk for a stroke, skipping blood-thinning
medications can lead to a life-threatening stroke (e.g., Cummings et al., 2013). Skip-
ping insulin prescriptions can also have short-term medical consequences, and the
absence of an inhaler-based medication at the time of an acute respiratory event
can lead to hospitalization. Many other drugs, such as anti-seizure medications,
anti-depressants, anti-psychotics, and anti-biotics involve statistically significant, but
smaller effects, ranging from around 2 percent (anti-psychotics) to around 9 percent
(anti-depressants). Finally, the estimated effects for opioids are indeed smaller than
the estimated effects for many other drugs, perhaps indicating that the salience of
the effects of non-adherence plays a role in the decision to delay or forgo filling pre-
scriptions during low-liquidity periods.22
    We next assess whether different types of recipients are more likely to drive the
increase in fills on Social Security paydays. Figure 5 presents estimates of the effect
of Social Security check receipt for a variety of sub-groups of recipients. We observe
smaller effects for White recipients relative to non-White recipients, though both
groups exhibit large effects and the difference is not statistically significant. Further,
we find effects for recipients with a variety of chronic health conditions. Recipients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), heart disease, and diabetes all
exhibit large check effects. Effects are slightly smaller but still clinically significant
for recipients with depression and cancer. recipients with Alzheimer’s Disease exhibit
smaller effects still, consistent with the possibility that those patients are more likely
to have children or other care-takers managing their prescriptions. Overall, these
results indicate that the effects we observe are not solely driven by healthy recipients,
but also by recipients with a variety of chronic health conditions.
 22
      Appendix Figure A10 presents results for the high-copay group, showing largely similar patterns.


                                                  18
            Figure 5. Heterogeneous Effects Across Recipient Characteristics


              White


          Non-White




         Alzheimer's


             Cancer


              COPD


         Depression


           Diabetes


       Heart Disease


                       0    .02    .04     .06     .08     .1      .12    .14                     .16
                              Increase in scripts on check-distribution day


These figures plot estimates of β0 from equation (1): the event-study coefficient for check-
distribution day when the outcome is the logarithm of scripts filled for groups of particular
beneficiaries. We divide beneficiaries by race (white or non-white), and the chronic conditions
of COPD, Heart Disease, Diabetes, Depression, Alzheimer’s, and Cancer. The sample is re-
stricted to the subsidized-copay group. The horizontal lines across each marker plot 95-percent
confidence intervals based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of the birthday
group. For more details, see Section 2.2.


    Appendix Figure A10 presents analogous results for the high-copay group. Sim-
ilarly, for that group, all types of recipients exhibit statistically significant increases
in prescription fills on Social Security paydays. The major difference we observe for
the high-copay group is the size of the disparity in the effects between white and non-
white recipients. For white recipients, the effect of Social Security check receipt is
just under 6 percent. For non-white recipients, the effect is around 11 percent, almost
twice as large. That pattern highlights a difference between the full-copay group and
the subsidized-copay group. When we restrict the sample to the subsidized-copay
group, we limit the sample to recipients who are low income. For the full-copay
group, on the other hand, there is substantial heterogeneity in income.




                                                19
                          Figure 6. Heterogeneous Effects By Income

                     Increase in scripts on check-distribution day

                .1



               .08



               .06



               .04



               .02
                      1   2   3   4   5   6   7     8   9    10   11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20
                                                  Median income ventile



This figure plots estimates of β0 from equation (1), the estimated event-study coefficient on
check-distribution day for the logarithm of total scripts filled, by ventile of median income for
each recipient’s ZIP Code of residence. The sample is restricted to the full-copay group. The
vertical lines through each marker plot 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors
that are clustered at the level of the birthday group. For more details, see Section 2.2.


    Figure 6 investigates the role of income in the full-copay group further. The
figure divides the full-copay group by ventiles of income and plots estimates of β0
from equation (1). As a proxy for household income, we link every ZIP Code of
residence in the data to the median household income as measured by the 2006–2010
American Community Survey. The figure suggests a clear gradient, with larger effects
of Social Security checks for recipients living in lower-income ZIP Codes. The payday
effect for the lowest-income ventile (just under 10 percent) is five times as large as the
payday effect for the highest-income ventile (roughly 2 percent).23 The lowest-income
ZIP Codes in the full-copay group thus exhibit an effect that is almost as large as the
effect exhibited by the entire subsidized-copay group. Such a pattern indicates that
  23
     Unsurprisingly, Figure 6 suggests that liquidity sensitivity is more widespread in lower-income
areas than in higher-income areas. The figure also suggests statistically significant evidence for
liquidity sensitivity in relatively high-income areas. That finding, though perhaps surprising, is
consistent with the previous literature. For instance, Olafsson and Pagel (2018) find that households
in the bottom income quartile spend 70 percent more on days when they receive their income, and
that households in the top income quartile spend 40 percent more on days when they receive their
income.



                                                            20
liquidity sensitivity is also present among recipients not enrolled in the LIS, especially
those with low incomes.
     It is important to recognize that interpreting Figures 3, 4, 5, and 6 is a non-trivial
task. On the one hand, the figures exhibit patterns that are intuitive. For instance,
expensive drugs are more difficult for low-income consumers to purchase, and so
it is unsurprising that we find larger effects of Social Security checks on expensive
drugs. At the same time, the estimates capture treatment effects based on different
populations, and the populations differ from each other in observed and unobserved
ways. One explanation for the larger effects for more-expensive drugs is the higher
out-of-pocket price. An alternative explanation is that those who take those drugs
are simply more liquidity-sensitive than those who take less-expensive drugs.
     Regardless, these results indicate a high level of sensitivity to liquidity across many
Medicare recipients. The effects do not seem to be driven solely by healthy recipients
or by low-value drugs with questionable therapeutic benefit. Instead, the effects are
driven by medically vulnerable recipients and by drugs for which non-adherence can
have severe short-term consequences. Such recipients seem to be delaying or forgoing
filling prescriptions until they receive their Social Security checks.
     The results suggest that the consumption of healthcare is liquidity sensitive. That
liquidity sensitivity may be due to behavioral frictions that make it psychologically
difficult to expend resources when cash is scarce, even when the desired goods or
services have important health consequences. The liquidity sensitivity may, alterna-
tively, be driven by straightforward liquidity constraints. Section 4.1 discusses these
two possible mechanisms in more detail.


3        The Effects of More-Generous Coverage on Low-Income
         Households

The results above suggest an increase in prescription drug fills when consumers who
face copayments receive their Social Security checks. This section studies what occurs
when those consumers experience a change in the copayments they face, transitioning
from a group that faces copayments to the no-copayment group or vice-versa.24 We
    24
    Many recipients transitioning between copayment groups also experience a change in their pre-
mium subsidy. Such a change in the subsidy could affect drug utilization via an income effect.
Appendix B.3 tests for that possibility by studying transitions involving the lowest-income recipi-
ents in the subsidized-copayment group. Premiums are fully subsidized for those recipients. As a
result, those recipients experience a decrease in copayments with no change in premiums when they



                                                21
leverage these transitions as a way to assess how liquidity sensitivity relates to the
generosity of health insurance. More-generous coverage may allow some recipients
to consume healthcare when they need it rather than having to wait for their Social
Security checks to arrive. This section tests for such a possibility.
    To do so, we identify all recipients who switch from a copay group (subsidized
or full) to the no-copay group or vice-versa between 2007 and 2015. We restrict
the sample to recipients continuously enrolled in Medicare Part D for at least one
year before the transition and at least one year after. That restriction allows us to
observe pre- and post-transition consumption patterns. We also remove from the
sample those recipients who were in the no-copayment group at some point during
the 24 months prior to the transition, and we limit the sample to those who were
continuously enrolled in the no-copayment group for 24 months after the transition.
Appendix Figure A12 plots the time series of enrollment across copayment groups
for our sample of recipients, before and after the transition. The figure shows that
around half of the recipients transition from the subsidized-copay group and half from
the full-copayment group.25
    One concern with studying transitions across copayment groups is that the tran-
sitions may be endogenous. Some recipients may apply for the LIS program because
they anticipate needing more prescription drugs. In addition, the transitions can
sometimes be triggered by health events, such as a hospitalization. Hospital staff
may help a recipient enroll in the LIS program or in Medicaid. The health event
would then confound our analysis.
    Appendix B.1 discusses this issue. Several patterns in the data suggest that
endogenous transitions do not drive the results. First, we estimate similar elasticities
when we study transitions to the no-copayment group as when we study transitions
from the no-copayment group. And that pattern is reassuring, because transitions
to the no-copayment group are more likely to be endogenous than transitions out of
the no-copayment group.26 In addition, Appendix B.1 demonstrates that transitions
are moved to the no-copayment group. The estimates suggest elasticities that are almost identical to
the elasticities we estimate for other recipients, suggesting that income effects are unlikely to drive
our findings.
   25
      Appendix Figure A13 plots the same time series for transitions from the no-copay group to
either the full-copay group or subsidized-copay group.
   26
      While entry to the LIS program (the transition to the no-copay group) requires the recipient
to fill out an application, exits from the LIS program (the transition from the no-copay group) are
typically triggered by a change in the recipient’s income. A change in income is reported to the
Social Security Administration (SSA) by the Internal Revenue Service. When the change in income
is observed, SSA attempts to contact the recipient to redetermine eligibility. If the recipient can


                                                  22
between the full-copay group and the subsidized copay-group are likely not triggered
by health events. Reassuringly, we find similar elasticities of demand by studying
those transitions.
    We study transitions in coverage in three steps. First, we study how changes
in the generosity of insurance affect utilization, estimating an overall price elasticity
of demand. Second, we study how changes in generosity affect liquidity sensitivity.
Third, we study how the two phenomena interact: we assess whether those who
exhibit the most liquidity sensitivity are more or less price sensitive.

3.1    The Effect of Lower Copayments on Demand

We first study how changes in copayments affect the demand for prescription drugs.
Figure 7 plots mean out-of-pocket payments per script and total monthly scripts
before and after recipients transition from either copayment group (the full-copayment
group or the subsidized-copayment group) to the no-copayment group. The first panel
shows a clear drop in average out-of-pocket payments when recipients transition to
the no-copay group. Average out-of-pocket payments per script decrease from roughly
$7 to zero.
    The second panel of Figure 7 provides evidence that, in response to lower out-
of-pocket costs, recipients consume more drugs. Recipients increase their drug con-
sumption throughout this sample period. This is not surprising: drug consumption
increases with age. But there is a clear shift in consumption upon a recipient’s tran-
sition to the no-copay group. Recipients who switch groups fill an extra 0.3 scripts
per month, an increase of a little less than 10 percent from baseline. After that level
shift, the previous trend continues.
show that she is still eligible, she remains in the LIS program. If the recipient cannot show that she is
still eligible—or if she simply does not return the re-determination paperwork—then she is removed
from the program. It is possible that recipients who have overcome a health shock will take that
paperwork less seriously. But this seems unlikely: the LIS program is valuable to all recipients given
its large premium and copayment subsidies. More importantly, even if there were to be selection
out of the program based on healthcare needs, our examination of these transitions relies on the
exogeneity of the timing of exit from the LIS program. The timing of those exits is unlikely to be
related to changes in health given that the timing of removal is based on a bureaucratic schedule
rather than any action of the recipient.




                                                   23
Figure 7. Re-Centered Time Series For Recipients who Switch From A Copay Group
to the No-Copay Group

              (a) Out-of-Pocket Per Script                                                (b) Monthly Total Scripts

        Average out-of-pocket payment per script                                   Average monthly scripts
    8                                                                        3.4



    6
                                                                             3.2


    4

                                                                              3
    2



    0                                                                        2.8

        -12    -9       -6      -3       0      3      6       9   12              -12    -9       -6      -3       0      3      6       9   12
                    Months since switch from copay to no-copay                                 Months since switch from copay to no-copay



 These figures describe prescription-drug expenditures for recipients who transition from either
 the full-copay group or the subsidized-copay groups to the no-copay group. Panel (a) plots the
 average out-of-pocket spending per script and Panel (b) plots the average monthly total scripts.
 For more details, see Section 3.2.


   Figure 8 shows the response of recipients who make the opposite transition, mov-
ing from the no-copay group to a group that faces copayments. Those recipients
experience a change that is the mirror image of that cataloged in Figure 7, though
the trends in Figure 8 are noisier, because fewer recipients leave the no-copay group.
Average out-of-pocket payments increase from $0 to around $7 and utilization de-
creases by roughly 0.3 scripts per month.




                                                                        24
Figure 8. Re-Centered Time Series For Recipients who Switch From the No-Copay
Group to a Copay Group

                  (a) Out-of-Pocket Per Script                                            (b) Monthly Total Scripts

            Average out-of-pocket payment per script                               Average monthly scripts
                                                                             3.8
       10

                                                                             3.6



                                                                             3.4
       5

                                                                             3.2



                                                                              3
       0
            -12    -9       -6      -3       0      3      6       9   12          -12    -9       -6      -3       0      3      6       9   12
                        Months since switch from no-copay to copay                             Months since switch from no-copay to copay



  These figures describe prescription-drug expenditures for recipients who transition from the
  no-copay group to either the subsidized-copay group or the full-copay group. Panel (a) plots
  the average out-of-pocket spending per script and Panel (b) plots the average monthly total
  scripts. For more details, see Section 3.2.


   Table 2 summarizes Figures 7 and 8 by presenting estimates of the following
regression:
                log(Yict ) = αi + γt + β × 1{t − sc ≥ 0} + εict .          (2)

For each recipient i in cohort c of recipients who transition copayment groups in the
same calendar month sc , we study their out-of-pocket payments and overall number
of fills in each calendar month t. We include a fixed effect for each recipient, αi , and
a fixed effect for each calendar month, γt . The parameter of interest in equation (2)
is β, which captures the change in the outcome of interest after recipients transition
to the other copayment group.27
  27
    Appendix Figures A14 and A15 present event-study estimates, showing similar patterns to those
presented in Figures 7 and 8 but with standard errors. Appendix D examines the robustness of these
estimates under a number of different estimation strategies.




                                                                        25
                  Table 2. Effect of Changes in Generosity of Coverage

                                       (1)        (2)                  (3)
                                    Log Total Log Out-of
                                                                   Elasticity
                                    Scripts   -Pocket

                          A. Transition from Copay to No Copay

                     Post           0.0808∗∗∗      -1.2690∗∗∗      -0.0636∗∗∗
                     Transition     (0.0028)        (0.0087)        (0.0022)

                     Mean              2.97              6.76
                     N              1,103,232         1,103,232    1,103,232

                          B. Transition from No Copay to Copay

                     Post           -0.0640∗∗∗        1.3096∗∗∗    -0.0489∗∗∗
                     Transition      (0.0033)         (0.0156)      (0.0019)

                     Mean             3.73             0.00
                     N               579,264          579,264       579,264
  This table presents estimates of the impact of switching to the no-copay group from the copay
  groups (top panel) and vice versa (bottom panel) on the outcomes listed. Standard errors
  in parentheses clustered on cohort of recipients transitioning copay groups for the first two
  columns. Standard errors are based on the delta method for the elasticity estimation in the third
  column. The data is limited to 12 months before and 12 months after the switch. Recipient-
  specific fixed effects and year-times-month-specific fixed effects not shown. These coefficients
  come from estimating equation (2). The means listed are the means of the given dependent
  variable one month before the transition across copayment groups. For more details, see Section
  3.2. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


    The top panel of Table 2 presents estimates of equation (2) for recipients who
transition from a group that faces copayments to the no-copayment group. The
change in out-of-pocket payments and utilization together suggest a price elasticity
of demand of −0.06. This elasticity is similar to previous estimates (Einav et al.,
2015).
    The bottom panel of Table 2 suggests a similar pattern, in reverse, for those
who switch from the no-copayment group to a copayment-facing group. The implied
elasticity is −0.05. The patterns across the two types of transitions—some copay
to no copay and no copay to some copay—are roughly mirror images of each other.
When recipients experience a decrease in copayments, utilization increases, and the

                                                 26
opposite occurs when recipients experience an increase in copayments. That mirror-
image pattern is reassuring; if there were a confounding factor associated with these
transitions, we would expect the confound to affect one direction more than the other.
And yet, we estimate similar elasticities based on recipients transitioning to the no-
copayment group and those transitioning from the no-copayment group.
    Appendix Table A4 reports elasticity estimates for the high-value drugs analyzed
in Figure 4. Prior work has shown that consumption of high-value drugs is just as
price sensitive as consumption of other drugs, suggesting that consumers respond
to higher prices in ways that may be inappropriate (Brot-Goldberg et al., 2017).
Appendix Table A4 is consistent with this prior work: the price elasticity of demand
for high-value drugs is also around −0.05, almost identical to the overall elasticity.
This suggests that small changes in prices have big effects on the consumption of
these drugs, even though physicians believe these drugs to be especially important
for recipients’ health.

3.2    The Effect of Lower Copayments on Payday Filling

This section tests how changes in the generosity of insurance affect “payday filling,”
the likelihood that recipients fill their prescriptions when their Social Security checks
arrive. To do so, we calculate the share of each recipient’s Wednesday fills that
occur on their Social Security payday.28 We calculate the share of Wednesday fills
occurring on Social Security paydays for each quarter and each cohort of recipients
who transition from a group that faces copayments to the no-copay group. (We
define a cohort as including all recipients who switch groups in a given quarter.) If
recipients fill prescriptions on a schedule unrelated to their Social Security paydays,
then roughly 23 percent of their Wednesday fills should occur on their Social Security
payday. That number comes from a simple calculation: there are 12 Social Security
checks sent each year, and either 52 or 53 Wednesdays in the year. If, however, some
recipients delay filling scripts until their paychecks arrive, then the share of their
Wednesday fills that occur on their payday would rise above 23 percent.
    Figure 9 plots this measure for recipients who transition into the no-copay group.
Prior to the transition into the no-copay group, recipients fill roughly 24–25 percent
of their Wednesday fills on their Social Security payday. In the months immediately
following their transition to near-full insurance, however, the share drops sharply to
  28
     We focus on the share of Wednesday fills that occur on payday, because there are day-of-the-week
effects in prescription-filling behavior.


                                                 27
roughly 22–23 percent. More-generous insurance, it seems, reduces the propensity
for recipients to fill their scripts on their Social Security payday. Appendix Table A2
presents estimates of a regression in which the share of Wednesday fills on payday is
the outcome of interest. The estimates suggest that that measure decreases by 2.6
percentage points (10.3 percent) when recipients transition into the no-copay group.29

Figure 9. The Share of Recipients Filling Scripts on Their Social Security Payday
Before and After They Transition to the No-Copayment Group


                           Share of Wednesday fills on payday
                     .26



                     .25



                     .24



                     .23



                     .22

                           -12   -10    -8   -6   -4   -2    0    2   4     6    8  10   12
                                       Quarters since switch from copay to no-copay

  This figure plots the share of Wednesday prescription fills that fall on Social Security payday
  for each quarter relative to the quarter that recipients switched copay groups. The estimates
  are for recipients who switched from either the full-copay or subsidized-copay group to the
  no-copay group. For more details, see Section 3.2.


    These results are consistent with those presented in Section 2: they suggest no
effect of Social Security checks on prescription fills for those in the no-copayment
group. But the results go further in that they show that a given recipient changes
how she fills prescriptions in response to more-generous coverage. It appears that
when recipients are given full insurance, they start filling their prescriptions when
they want or need the medicine rather than when they receive their Social Security
checks.
  29
    The pattern for recipients who transition from the no-copayment group is exceedingly noisy.
That might be a result of the small sample size: we observe roughly half as many transitions from
the no-copayment group as transitions to the no-copayment group. Nonetheless, Appendix Table
A2 also presents estimates for those transitions.




                                                       28
3.3    The Interaction Between Price Sensitivity and Liquidity Sensitivity

The results above demonstrate that prescription fills are both liquidity sensitive and
price sensitive among low-income recipients. A remaining question regards the rela-
tionship between those two findings. This section tests how price sensitivity compares
across recipients who demonstrate varying levels of liquidity sensitivity.
    We focus on recipients who transition to the no-copay group. We stratify those
recipients by the share of their Wednesday fills that occurred on their Social Security
paydays before the transition. Appendix E demonstrates that recipients in the top
two deciles of this measure are indeed liquidity sensitive while the prescription fills
of recipients in other deciles of this measure exhibit much less sensitivity to Social
Security checks.

Figure 10. Comparison of Elasticities Across Recipients’ Propensity to Fill on Social
Security Paydays

                     Estimated price elasticity of demand
                 0



              -.02



              -.04



              -.06



              -.08



               -.1
                       All       1        2       3           4        5        6      7   8   9   10
                                                            Decile of payday filling



This figure presents estimated price elasticities of demand when recipients are divided into
deciles based on the proportion of their Wednesday prescription fills that fall on their Social
Security payday. The sample is restricted to recipients who switch from either the full-copay
group or the subsidized-copay group to the no-copay group one year before and after their
switch. These coefficients come from estimating an individual-level version of equation (2).
Standard errors are based on the delta method. For more details, see Section 3.3.


    Figure 10 presents estimates of the price elasticity of demand across this proxy for
liquidity sensitivity. For each decile, the figure plots an estimate of the price elasticity

                                                                 29
of demand based on the recipients’ transition to the no-copay group.30 The figure
suggests that nearly all deciles exhibit roughly the same price elasticity of demand,
with the exception of the last two deciles. Recipients in the top decile exhibit a price
elasticity of demand that is roughly twice as large as the elasticity of demand exhibited
by other recipients. Recipients in the ninth decile also exhibit higher price sensitivity
than others, though the difference is not as large. In that way, Figure 10 suggests
that those recipients who are liquidity sensitive are also the most price sensitive.31
Appendix Figure B4 also shows a similar pattern for recipients transitioning from the
full-copayment group to the subsidized-copayment group.
    Appendix Figure A16 repeats this exercise for the set of high-value drugs analyzed
in Figure 4. The figure suggests that liquidity-sensitive recipients are much more sen-
sitive to price, even for these drugs, which physicians believe are critical for patients’
health.
    This section’s results shed some light on the overall effect of Social Security checks
described in Section 2. Section 2 demonstrates that recipients increase their prescrip-
tion fills on their Social Security paydays. But the exercises in that section do not
distinguish between two potential mechanisms. First, liquidity-sensitive recipients
may solely re-time their drug consumption based on when their check arrives. Alter-
natively, liquidity-sensitive recipients may not consume as many drugs as they would
if they did not face liquidity-related frictions. Figure 10 suggests that both mecha-
nisms are relevant. Recipients respond to lower copayments by increasing the number
of drugs they purchase, and liquidity-sensitive recipients respond even more. This is
true for drug consumption overall, and for high-value drugs that physicians believe
to be especially important for recipients’ health. Thus, the results of Section 2 are
likely not solely a matter of re-timing; rather, liquidity-sensitive Medicare recipients
demand fewer drugs than they otherwise would. We next consider the positive and
normative implications of that finding.
  30
     Appendix Table A3 presents regression estimates for each decile, the estimated price-elasticity of
demand along with the change in out-of-pocket payments and change in utilization. We separate out
recipients with no Wednesday fills (and thus no share of Wednesday fills on payday) and recipients
with zero payday fills but with some Wednesday fills.
  31
     One alternative explanation for these results might be that the recipients in the top decile
are also more likely (relative to the other deciles) to come from the full-copayment group rather
than the subsidized-copayment group and thus have a larger demand-response because they face
a larger price change. To address this possibility, Appendix B.2 presents the results separately
for recipients transitioning from the full-copayment group and recipients transitioning from the
subsidized-copayment group. We find identical patterns, with the top decile always having an
elasticity around twice as large as the other deciles.



                                                  30
4     Implications for Health Insurance

This section assesses the implications of this paper’s results for the economics of health
insurance. First, we consider potential mechanisms behind the results. Second, we
discuss the implications of the results for the value of insurance. Third, we assess
implications for the conventional view of moral hazard.

4.1   Potential Mechanisms

The results in Section 2 imply that, for some recipients, it is more costly to fill
prescriptions at the end of a pay period than at the beginning of a pay period. We
posit three potential explanations for that pattern: increasing returns to shopping,
liquidity constraints, and mental accounting.
     A first potential explanation is that consumers tend to do all of their shopping
at once for the sake of returns to scale. For instance, suppose that some consumers
have to pay a bus fare in order to travel to the pharmacy. In that case, they may
choose to visit the pharmacy at the same time as they do their other shopping. And
thus, they would delay filling their prescriptions until they were prepared to purchase
many other goods, as well.
     Such an explanation is easy to reject. We find no effect of Social Security checks
for the no-copay group. Those consumers still receive Social Security checks, and
they, presumably, still face the same potential returns to scale from shopping – they
still have to pay a fare for the bus. Nevertheless, the prescription fills of that group
do not exhibit liquidity sensitivity.
     A second explanation is that some Medicare recipients are liquidity constrained.
At the end of each pay period, some recipients have little cash on hand. Those con-
sumers may face a steep price to access additional liquidity. They may, for instance,
face high interest rates from lenders, or have maxed out their credit cards. Such
consumers then have no choice but to wait for their next Social Security check before
they can fill their prescriptions.
     On the one hand, the results above are consistent with such an explanation. The
consumption literature suggests that lower-income consumers are more likely to be
liquidity constrained (Olafsson and Pagel, 2018), and indeed, Figure 6, above, suggests
that the effects of Social Security checks on prescription fills are driven by lower-
income Medicare recipients. Moreover, more-expensive purchases are more likely to
be unattainable for liquidity-constrained consumers, and Figure 4, above, suggests


                                           31
that the effects of Social Security checks are larger for more-expensive drugs.
    On the other hand, it is surprising that the small copayments faced by the
subsidized-copay group ($2–$5 per prescription in many cases) would pose such an
obstacle.32 Thus, we cannot reject a third, alternative explanation: the liquidity
sensitivity we observe may be driven by behavioral biases. In particular, Medicare
recipients may delay filling their prescriptions based on a type of mental accounting
(Thaler, 1985, 1999). They may not be truly liquidity constrained, so much as that
the mental account that they devote to medical expenses may be empty. Unlike liq-
uidity constraints, mental accounting does not imply large financial costs to accessing
the cash necessary for copayments; rather, it implies large psychological costs.33
    In summary, we cannot reject either liquidity constraints or mental accounting as
the mechanism driving the income-timing effects we document. It is possible that
both mechanisms are empirically relevant, though for different recipients.
    Importantly, those two explanations lead to different implications for policy. If
liquidity constraints are responsible for the liquidity sensitivity that we observe, then
providing recipients with access to short-term credit against their future Social Se-
curity checks may be beneficial. If mental accounting is the explanation, however, it
is less clear how short-term credit will affect recipients’ behavior. Instead, moving
from monthly Social Security payments to smaller, weekly payments may be an ap-
propriate policy response. By setting payments such that recipients are more likely
to have cash on hand at any given point in time, policymakers can help recipients
avoid the psychological constraints related to the end of the pay period and fill their
prescriptions on time.34

4.2    The Consumption-Smoothing Benefits of Insurance

Regardless of whether liquidity constraints or mental accounting drive the effects
we document, the results suggest a benefit of insurance that is often not discussed.
Typically, insurance is viewed as providing risk protection at the expense of moral
hazard. Generous insurance also provides an additional benefit: it allows healthcare
consumption to be less liquidity sensitive.
  32
     The exact copayments change each year. In 2006, most recipients in the subsidized-copay group
paid $2 for generic drugs and $5 for branded drugs; in 2015, those copayments were $2.65 and $6.60,
respectively.
  33
     Baicker et al. (2015) discuss optimal cost-sharing mechanisms when healthcare consumption is
shaped by behavioral biases.
  34
     Interestingly, Shapiro (2005) and others have made a similar policy recommendation for the
distribution of food stamps.


                                                32
    That benefit can be seen in the results above. Low-income Medicare recipients
exhibit liquidity sensitivity, but those who face no copayments do not. When recip-
ients enter the LIS program and their copayments are eliminated, their healthcare
consumption becomes less liquidity sensitive. In other words, when consumers are
provided with more-generous insurance, their healthcare consumption becomes less
dependent on the timing of their income.
    The results thus suggest the need for a new framework to evaluate cost sharing
for low-income households. The conventional framework evaluates policies as trading
off the costs of moral hazard relative to the benefits of risk protection. This paper’s
results suggest an additional benefit of generous coverage: consumption smoothing.
The consumption-smoothing benefits of generous coverage are especially important for
low-income populations, and may also have clinical value in cases where the benefits
of drug consumption decline in the time since the prescription was written.
    Ericson and Sydnor (2018) study how rational consumers choose health insurance
plans when they are liquidity constrained. Liquidity-constrained households value
plans that require premiums to be paid at short intervals rather than in lump sums.
That preference is driven not by risk aversion but due to the financing role of insur-
ance. Our results provide the first empirical evidence—of which we are aware—for
that financing role.

4.3     Implications for the Price Elasticity of Demand for Healthcare

Section 3.3 demonstrates that those who are most liquidity sensitive respond the most
to lower copayments. We next explore the implications of that result.

4.3.1    Differential Response by the Liquidity Sensitive

Figure 10 indicates that those who are most likely to time their drug consumption
against their income exhibit the highest elasticity of demand. Indeed, their elasticities
are more than two times the elasticity of the average recipient. As a first approach to
interpret this result, we make a strong assumption regarding homogeneity. Suppose
that there are two types of Medicare recipients: the “payday fillers” who tend to time
their drug consumption against their Social Security checks, and all other Medicare
recipients. We assume that the payday fillers would exhibit the same price elasticity
as other recipients if they did not face liquidity-related frictions (whether financial or
psychological). In other words, we assume that all recipients have the same individual


                                           33
demand curve for prescription drugs, and only frictions related to liquidity lead the
payday fillers to a different demand curve.
    Under that assumption, the elimination of those liquidity-related frictions would
shift the price elasticity of demand for payday fillers to the average elasticity of
demand for all other recipients. Such a shift would then lower the overall elasticity of
demand by 15 percent.35 In that sense, 15 percent of the overall estimate of demand
response is not attributable to moral hazard, but rather to the liquidity effects we
document.
    Granted, such a calculation is based on a strong assumption of homogeneity. We
can, instead, consider a type of bounding exercise. Suppose that payday fillers would
exhibit an elasticity of demand at least as large as that of the average recipient if they
did not face liquidity-related frictions.36 In that case, 15 percent is an upper bound
for the portion of the demand response that is driven by liquidity sensitivity.
    An additional approach to understand the implications of the differential demand-
response to cost sharing involves a focus on high-value drugs. Appendix Figure A16
studies only the consumption of high-value drugs and shows that liquidity-sensitive
recipients are much more price sensitive than other recipients. The average price elas-
ticity of demand for high-value drugs across all deciles of payday filling is −0.039. If
liquidity-sensitive recipients were excluded from that sample, the overall price elastic-
ity of demand would fall to −0.035. That represents a 10-percent reduction in price
sensitivity for high-value drugs.
    That contrast for high-value drugs is intriguing. A demand response for high-
value drugs is potentially irrational (Baicker et al., 2015; Brot-Goldberg et al., 2017).
These drugs are especially important for recipients’ health, and so it is surprising that
demand is not inelastic. The larger elasticity for liquidity-sensitive Medicare recipients
raises the question of whether liquidity sensitivity is one mechanism behind this price
sensitivity.

4.3.2    A Simple Theoretical Framework for Liquidity Sensitivity

This paper’s results suggest that liquidity-sensitive recipients are disproportionately
responsible for high levels of price sensitivity. What are the implications of that
finding? The theoretical and empirical literature on health insurance typically in-
  35
     The elasticity of demand for all recipients is −0.041; the elasticity of demand for those in deciles
1 through 8 is −0.035.
  36
     That assumption implies that the payday fillers’ “frictionless” demand curves are weakly flatter
than the demand curve of the non-payday fillers, making them more price sensitive.


                                                   34
terprets a demand response to cost sharing as evidence of moral hazard. That in-
terpretation, however, assumes that demand for healthcare reflects consumers’ val-
uation of healthcare. If consumers face financial or psychological constraints that
prevent them from shifting money over time, then demand and valuation may diverge
and a demand-response to more-generous insurance cannot be interpreted as solely
a welfare-reducing moral-hazard effect.37 Instead, the demand-response to more-
generous insurance also reflects the relaxation of liquidity-related frictions that pre-
viously prevented recipients from consuming drugs that they value more than their
cost. We offer a simple, graphical framework to illustrate how these frictions affect
conventional welfare analysis.
    Baicker et al. (2015) model the welfare consequences of more-generous health in-
surance coverage when consumers are constrained by behavioral frictions. We build
on their model in order to consider how the welfare consequences of more-generous
coverage differ between the conventional, frictionless model and a model that incor-
porates liquidity-related frictions.
    Figure 11 illustrates the model graphically. The first panel describes the con-
ventional view on moral hazard. The panel plots the market demand curve for pre-
scription drugs. That demand curve represents consumers’ true valuation for the
drugs. The efficient quantity is Q∗ , determined by the intersection of the demand
and marginal cost curves.38 At this quantity, consumers value the marginal prescrip-
tion drug at exactly the marginal cost. First, consumers face a high copayment, pH ,
which is below the marginal cost of prescription drugs. As a result, when faced with
high copayments, consumers purchase a quantity of drugs QH > Q∗ . And QH exceeds
the efficient quantity because the price falls below the marginal cost, resulting in con-
sumers purchasing drugs that they value less than the marginal cost. The deadweight
loss from this over-consumption of prescription drugs is equal to the area of triangle
ABE.
  37
    Chetty (2008) makes this point in the context of unemployment insurance.
  38
    The correct definition of marginal cost in this setting is somewhat unclear. The marginal cost of
producing drugs is often close to zero, much lower than the price of those drugs. To conduct a full
welfare analysis, one must also consider drug manufacturer market power, the presence of “rebates”
to pharmacy benefit managers, the incentives for drug development and innovation, so on and so
forth. In the empirical section below, we sidestep these issues and specify the marginal cost as the
observed average payment for the drug in the claims data.




                                                 35
Figure 11. A Simple Framework For How Liquidity Sensitivity Affects Demand for
Prescription Drugs

                  (a) Conventional View                                      (b) Incorporating Liquidity
 Price                                                    Price



                                                          Frictionless
                                                          Demand



                                                          Realized       I
 Demand                                                   Demand


              A       B       C                                          A       H   B       C
                                              Marginal                                                     Marginal
                                              Cost                                                         Cost

                                                                                 F

                                              pH                                                           pH
                  E                                                              E
                                                                                             G


                                              pL                                                           pL
                          D                                                              D


                                               Quantity                                                    Quantity
          ∗       QH       QL                                                 ∗   QH     QL
          Q                                                                  Q


 These figures comprise a simple framework for modelling the relationship between liquidity, the
 purchase of prescription drugs, and consumer welfare.


    Next, consumers are put on a more-generous insurance plan that lowers the out-of-
pocket cost of prescription drugs to pL . In response, the quantity of drugs consumed
increases from QH to QL . The lower copayments lead to yet more over-consumption:
consumers fill more prescriptions that they value less than marginal cost. This is the
standard moral-hazard effect, and it leads to a welfare loss. The additional deadweight
loss from moving from pH to pL is equal to the area of the trapezoid BCDE.
    The second panel of Figure 11 adds a complication to this standard view. Suppose
that consumers face a liquidity-related friction. Consumer behavior is still modeled
with the same “realized demand” curve, but this curve no longer describes consumers’
true underlying valuation for prescription drugs. Instead, a second “frictionless”
demand curve describes their true valuation of drugs in the absence of liquidity-
related frictions. In that sense, the liquidity-related friction drives a wedge between
consumers’ valuation of the drug and what they actually purchase. Now, the efficient
quantity of drugs, Q∗ , is higher than before; it is the quantity that sets the consumers’
valuation (as illustrated by the frictionless, not the realized, demand curve) just equal
to marginal cost. Further, the deadweight loss from moving from pH to pL is now
smaller than it had been in the first panel. While the quantities purchased at pH
and pL are the same as before, consumer valuations of those quantities are now

                                               36
higher. In the conventional case, the deadweight loss from moving from pH to pL is
equal to BCDE. In the case with liquidity frictions, the deadweight loss is equal to
BCGF . The trapezoid DEF G represents the difference between these two measures
of deadweight loss.
    In that sense, Figure 11 suggests that the conventional view of moral hazard
overstates the welfare loss from inefficient over-consumption under generous coverage.
The conventional view is incomplete for low-income consumers who are more likely
to be liquidity sensitive. Like behavioral frictions more broadly, liquidity-related
frictions may cause consumers to under-consume drugs that they value more than
the price.
    Given the empirical setting of Section 3, we are focused on transitions from high
copayments, pH , to low copayments, pL . But it is also worth noting that Figure 11 also
speaks to the transition from uninsured status to insurance with high copayments.
The conventional view, in the first panel of Figure 11, suggests a deadweight loss
of ABE when gaining high-copayment insurance. The right-hand side of Figure
11, however, suggests a much smaller deadweight loss, BF H, because the efficient
amount of drug consumption no longer occurs when consumers face a price equal to
the marginal cost.39 In this model, health insurance no longer solely generates moral
hazard in exchange for risk protection, it also allows recipients to consume medical
care that they would otherwise forgo due to liquidity-related frictions.

4.3.3    A Simple Calibration

The empirical results in Section 3 allow us to take that theoretical model one step
further. We use the empirical estimates to infer the demand curves described by
Figure 11. In particular, we observe the quantity of prescription drugs that Medicare
recipients fill when in a copayment group, and then the quantity they fill when shifted
onto the no-copayment group. We also observe the average out-of-pocket payments
for both groups. Those estimates comprise two price-quantity pairs, which we use to
estimate a linear demand curve.40
    We begin by constructing the “realized” demand curve, the demand curve observed
  39
     Further, the deadweight loss BF H will be offset by a welfare gain from consumers purchasing
drugs between points A, where consumers are under-consuming, and H, the efficient level.
  40
     In practice, demand curves may not be globally linear. However, for our calculations to be
valid, we only require local linearity between the two price-quantity points. In this setting, those
two points are relatively “close” to one another, thus the linear approximation may be reasonable.




                                                37
for all recipients who fill scripts.41 The estimates in Appendix Table A3 indicate that
the transition to the no-copay group decreases the average number of scripts filled
by 6 percent from a baseline of 3.52. In addition, the average out-of-pocket price
decreases to zero from a baseline of $7.60.
    Unlike the realized demand curve, we do not actually observe the “frictionless”
demand curve. In order to construct it, we make additional assumptions. First,
we assume that the recipients in deciles 1 through 8 of Figure 10 face no liquidity-
related frictions and so the demand curve they exhibit is their “frictionless demand.”
Indeed, Appendix E demonstrates that those recipients do not exhibit increases in
prescription fills on payday. Second, we make the strong assumption that, in the
absence of liquidity-related frictions, recipients in deciles 9 and 10 would exhibit the
same demand curve as recipients in deciles 1 through 8. In other words, we assume
that the two groups have similar preferences over drugs, but that recipients in deciles 9
and 10 act differently solely due to liquidity-related frictions. We note that these two
assumptions are strong, in that they require the realized demand curve for recipients
in deciles 1 through 8 to reflect the actual valuation of drugs, effectively assuming
away any other behavioral frictions or mistakes. That requirement is unlikely to hold
in practice, and thus we see this exercise as a useful illustration of how liquidity-related
frictions may impact welfare and not as a definitive welfare analysis.
    Using those two demand curves, we can calculate the key areas from Figure 11.
First, we calculate area BCDE, the deadweight loss due to marginal drug consump-
tion under the conventional view of moral hazard.42 That area is approximately $19.
Second, we calculate the area BCF G, the deadweight loss associated with marginal
drug consumption stemming from lower copayments once accounting for liquidity-
related frictions. That area is approximately $17. Those two numbers together sug-
gest that the deadweight loss when considering liquidity frictions is roughly 9 percent
lower than the deadweight loss estimated via the conventional approach. The first
row of Table 3 presents those numbers.
  41
     For this exercise, we use the measure of liquidity sensitivity developed in Section 3.3, the share
of Wednesday fills filled on payday. We restrict the sample to recipients who have a non-zero and
non-missing value for that measure, because we use that measure to construct the “frictionless”
demand curve.
  42
     This calculation requires the marginal cost in addition to the two demand curves. We set the
marginal cost equal to $60, the average cost of prescription drugs purchased by recipients transition-
ing to the no-copayment group. Note that a lower (higher) marginal cost would result in a larger
(smaller) reduction in deadweight loss from incorporating liquidity-related frictions.




                                                  38
                              Table 3. Estimates of Deadweight Loss

                      Conventional        Accounting for Liquidity   Liquidity Share
                     (Area BCDE)              (Area BCF G)         (F EDG / BCDE)
        Overall            $18.6                       $16.9                          0.09
       Decile 10           $21.6                       $10.0                          0.54

       This table presents estimates of deadweight loss based on the model presented in Sec-
       tion 4.3.2. The first column presents estimates of deadweight loss due to moral hazard
       (“Conventional”) when Medicare recipients experience a drop in the copayments they
       face. The second column presents an estimate of deadweight loss due to moral hazard,
       but also accounting for the liquidity-related frictions that distort the recipients’ healthcare
       consumption.


    The second row of Table 3 presents a parallel exercise. While the first row studies
the market as a whole, the second row focuses on those who are most liquidity sen-
sitive. We calculate the demand curve implied by the behavior of the most liquidity-
sensitive consumers: those in the top decile of the proxy introduced in Figure 10. We
then assume, as above, that those consumers would exhibit a demand curve identical
to the one exhibited by deciles 1 through 8. Given these assumptions, the wedge
between the realized and frictionless demand curves for this highly liquidity-sensitive
group is, unsurprisingly, larger than the overall market-level wedge. Focusing on this
group alone, incorporating liquidity-related frictions into the model accounts for over
50 percent of the deadweight loss that would be calculated for these consumers under
the conventional model.
    Taken literally, such an exercise suggests that the true deadweight loss of moral
hazard is lower once one accounts for liquidity-related frictions. The difference is non-
trivial, although far from the entire deadweight loss is eliminated. The conventional
view of moral hazard is unquestionably important—these results simply raise the
possibility that liquidity sensitivity also matters, especially for certain consumers.
Liquidity-related issues should be considered when designing insurance contracts for
low-income populations.43
    Of course, the model on which we rely here is a highly stylized and simplified
version of the model developed by Baicker et al. (2015). The calculation rests on
strong assumptions, especially the assumption that the realized demand curve for
  43
    Other behavioral frictions—over-confidence, self-control problems, projection bias, and so on—
also matter, further complicating the optimal insurance contract and obfuscating the role of, and
even the definition of, moral hazard.



                                                     39
recipients in deciles 1 through 8 represents the true valuation for recipients in deciles
9 and 10. Despite the heroic nature of those assumptions, we present this exercise
to illustrate how liquidity sensitivity causes the conventional method for calculating
deadweight loss to be misleading. Ultimately, this exercise is more suggestive than
conclusive. Future researchers ought to develop more-robust models that can estimate
how accounting for liquidity sensitivity can shift deadweight loss and, for that matter,
optimal copayments. Our goal here is to show that the implications could potentially
be substantial and thus encourage further research in this area.


5    Conclusion

The results above suggest that Medicare Part D recipients delay the purchase of
prescription drugs until their Social Security checks arrive. We estimate a 10–12-
percent increase in prescription fills among low-income recipients facing subsidized
copayments on the day that their checks arrive. Even among the general Part-D
population that receives no subsidies, prescription fills increase by roughly 6 percent
on Social Security paydays.
    Those increases in prescription fills upon payday diminish when recipients’ copay-
ments are reduced. In addition, we use the transition to lower copayments to estimate
a price-elasticity of demand. Recipients who tend to fill their prescriptions on their
Social Security paydays exhibit a much higher elasticity of demand.
    The results thus suggest that discussions over cost-sharing mechanisms need to
go beyond the traditional trade-off between moral hazard and risk protection. Some
low-income consumers exhibit healthcare consumption that is “liquidity sensitive,”
and so cost sharing leads to additional complications for them.
    Future research ought to explore the direct policy implications of liquidity-sensitive
healthcare consumption. Insurers could provide financing options or alternative ways
of collecting copayments. Copayments for outpatient and inpatient visits are often
handled after the fact—the patient is sent a bill—and one might argue that prescrip-
tion fills ought to be handled similarly. In addition, one could argue that those who
are liquidity sensitive and also at high risk for adverse events would benefit from a
reduction in the cost sharing they face.
    More generally, this paper emphasizes an additional benefit of full insurance. Full
insurance not only reduces the uncertainty faced by consumers. It also allows low-
income recipients’ consumption to be less sensitive to their liquidity. Liquidity sensi-


                                           40
tivity may be even more of an issue for other populations beyond Medicare recipients.
For instance, consider adults who lack stable employment and thus face volatile in-
comes. That population does not have to wait a few weeks for a Social Security
check—they may wait months for work. For them, full insurance allows the smooth-
ing of healthcare consumption between employed and unemployed states. But for
any population, the timeliness of healthcare consumption can have medical conse-
quences. And so making healthcare consumption less liquidity sensitive ought to be
a worthwhile policy goal.




                                         41
References
Abadie, Alberto, Susan Athey, Guido W Imbens, and Jeffrey Wooldridge,
 “When Should You Adjust Standard Errors for Clustering?,” Working Paper 24003,
 National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.

Abaluck, Jason and Jonathan Gruber, “Choice Inconsistencies Among the El-
 derly: Evidence from Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program,” American
 Economic Review, 2011, 101 (4), 1180–1210.

Agarwal, Sumit and Wenlan Qian, “Consumption and Debt Response to Unan-
 ticipated Income Shocks: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Singapore,”
 American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (12), 4205–4230.

  , Chunlin Liu, and Nicholas S Souleles, “The Reaction of Consumer Spend-
  ing and Debt to Tax Rebates Evidence from Consumer Credit Data,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 2007, 115 (6), 986–1019.

Aron-Dine, Aviva, Liran Einav, and Amy Finkelstein, “The RAND Health
 Insurance Experiment, Three Decades Later,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
 2013, 27 (1), 197–222.

Baicker, Katherine, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Joshua Schwartzstein, “Be-
 havioral Hazard in Health Insurance,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130
 (4), 1623–1667.

Baker, Scott R. and Constantine Yannelis, “Income Changes and Consump-
 tion: Evidence from the 2013 Federal Government Shutdown,” Review of Economic
 Dynamics, 2017, 23 (1), 99–124.

Barcellos, Silvia and Mirielle Jacobson, “The Effects of Medicare on Medical
 Expenditure Risk and Financial Strain,” American Economic Journal: Economic
 Policy, 2015, 7 (4), 41–70.

Baugh, Brian and Jialan Wang, “When Is It Hard to Make Ends Meet?,” Mimeo,
 2018.

  , Itzhak Ben-David, and Hoonsuk Park, “Disentangling Financial Con-
  straints, Precautionary Savings, and Myopia: Household Behavior Surrounding
  Federal Tax Returns,” Working Paper 19783, National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search 2014.

Beatty, Timothy K.M., Marianne P. Bitler, Xinzhe Huang Cheng, and
 Cynthia van der Werf, “SNAP and Paycheck Cycles,” Southern Economic Jour-
 nal, 2019, 86 (1), 18–48.

Berniell, Inés, “Pay Cycles: Individual and Aggregate Effects of Paycheck Fre-
 quency,” Mimeo, 2019.

                                      42
Bertrand, Marianne and Adair Morse, “What Do High–Interest Borrowers Do
 with Their Tax Rebate?,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (2), 418–423.

Brot-Goldberg, Zarek C., Amitabh Chandra, Benjamin R. Handel, and
 Jonathan T. Kolstad, “What Does a Deductible Do? The Impact of Cost–
 Sharing on Health Care Prices, Quantities, and Spending Dynamics,” Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (3), 1261–1318.

Card, David, Raj Chetty, and Andrea Weber, “Cash–on–Hand and Compet-
 ing Models of Intertemporal Behavior: New Evidence from the Labor Market,”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (4), 1511–1560.

Carvalho, Leandro S., Stephan Meier, and Stephanie W. Wang, “Poverty
 and Economic Decision–Making: Evidence from Changes in Financial Resources at
 Payday,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (2), 260–284.

Centeno, Mário and Álvaro A. Novo, “Reemployment Wages and UI Liquid-
 ity Effect: A Regression Discontinuity Approach,” Portuguese Economic Journal,
 2009, 8 (1), 45–52.

Chandra, Amitabh, Jonathan Gruber, and Robin McKnight, “Patient cost-
 sharing and hospitalization offsets in the elderly,” American Economic Review,
 2010, 100 (1), 193–213.

Cheng, Xinzhe Huang and Timothy K.M. Beatty, “Food Price Variation over
 the SNAP Benefit Cycle,” Mimeo, 2016.

Chetty, Raj, “Moral Hazard vs. Liquidity and Optimal Unemployment Insurance,”
 Journal of Political Economy, 2008, 116 (2), 173–234.

   and Amy Finkelstein, “Social Insurance: Connecting Theory to Data,” in
  Alan J. Auerbach, Raj Chetty, Martin Feldstein, and Emmanuel Saez, eds., Hand-
  book of Public Economics, Volume 5, Elsevier, 2013, pp. 111–193.

Cummings, Doyle M, Abraham J Letter, George Howard, Virginia J
 Howard, Monika M Safford, Valerie Prince, and Paul Muntner, “Med-
 ication adherence and stroke/TIA risk in treated hypertensives: results from the
 REGARDS study,” Journal of the American Society of Hypertension, 2013, 7 (5),
 363–369.

de Meza, David, “Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care,” Journal
  of Health Economics, 1983, 2 (1), 47–54.

Dobkin, Carlos, Amy Finkelstein, Ray Kluender, and Matthew J. No-
 towidigdo, “The Economic Consequences of Hospital Admissions,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 2018, 108 (2), 308–52.



                                       43
   and Steven L. Puller, “The Effects of Government Transfers on Monthly Cycles
  in Drug Abuse, Hospitalization and Mortality,” Journal of Public Economics, 2007,
  91 (11), 2137–2157.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Maria Polyakova, “Private provision of
  social insurance: drug-specific price elasticities and cost sharing in Medicare Part
  D,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2018, 10 (3), 122–53.

  , , and Paul Schrimpf, “The Response of Drug Expenditure to Non–Linear
  Contract Design: Evidence from Medicare Part D,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2015, 130 (2), 841–899.

   and , “Moral Hazard in Health Insurance: What We Know and How We Know
  It,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2018, 16 (4), 957–982.

Ericson, Keith Marzilli and Justin R. Sydnor, “Liquidity Constraints and the
  Value of Insurance,” Working Paper 24993, National Bureau of Economic Research
  2018.

Evans, William N. and Timothy J. Moore, “The Short–Term Mortality Con-
 sequences of Income Receipt,” Journal of Public Economics, 2011, 95 (11–12),
 1410–1424.

Finkelstein, Amy, Nathaniel Hendren, and Mark Shepard, “Subsidizing
  Health Insurance for Low-Income Adults: Evidence from Massachusetts,” Ameri-
  can Economic Review, 2019, 109 (4), 1530–67.

Foley, C. Fritz, “Welfare Payments and Crime,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
  2011, 93 (1), 97–112.

Gelman, Michael, Shachar Kariv, Matthew D. Shapiro, Dan Silverman,
 and Steven Tadelis, “How Individuals Respond to a Liquidity Shock: Evidence
 from the 2013 Government Shutdown,” Journal of Public Economics, 2019, Forth-
 coming.

Goetz,   Thomas, “Health Insurance Aside, Americans Still Strug-
 gle To Pay for Their Medications,” https://www.goodrx.com/blog/
 health-insurance-aside-americans-still-struggle-to-pay-for-their-medications/
 2018.

Goldin, Jacob, Tatiana Homonoff, and Katherine Meckel, “Issuance and
 Incidence: SNAP Benefit Cycles and Grocery Prices,” Mimeo, 2019.

Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul, Maxim Pinkovskiy, and Jacob Wallace, “Medi-
 care and the Geography of Financial Health,” Mimeo, 2020.




                                         44
Gross, David B. and Nicholas S. Souleles, “Do Liquidity Constraints and In-
 terest Rates Matter for Consumer Behavior? Evidence from Credit Card Data,”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002, 117 (1), 149–185.

Gross, Tal and Jeremy Tobacman, “Dangerous Liquidity and the Demand for
 Health Care Evidence from the 2008 Stimulus Payments,” Journal of Human Re-
 sources, 2014, 49 (2), 424–445.

  , Matthew J. Notowidigdo, and Jialan Wang, “The Marginal Propensity
  to Consume Over the Business Cycle,” American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
  nomics, 2020, 12 (2), 351–384.

Gruber, Jonathan, “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment In-
 surance,” American Economic Review, 1997, 87 (1), 192–205.

Handel, Benjamin R, “Adverse selection and inertia in health insurance markets:
 When nudging hurts,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (7), 2643–82.

Hansen, Gary D. and Ayse Imrohoroglu, “The Role of Unemployment Insurance
 in an Economy with Liquidity Constraints and Moral Hazard,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 1992, 100 (1), 118–142.

Hastings, Justine and Ebonya Washington, “The First of the Month Effect:
 Consumer Behavior and Store Responses,” American Economic Journal: Economic
 Policy, 2010, 2 (2), 142–162.

Hu, Luojia, Robert Kaestner, Bhashkar Mazumder, Sarah Miller, and
 Ashley Wong, “The Effect of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
 Medicaid Expansions on Financial Well-Being,” Journal of Public Economics, 2018,
 163, 99–112.

Johnson, David S., Jonathan A. Parker, and Nicholas S. Souleles, “House-
  hold Expenditure and the Income Tax Rebates of 2001,” American Economic Re-
  view, 2006, 96 (5), 1589–1610.

Kaiser Family Foundation, “Employer Health Benefits,” http://files.kff.org/
 attachment/Report-Employer-Health-Benefits-Annual-Survey-2018 2018.

  ,     “Medicaid     and     CHIP   Eligibility,     Enrollment,    and    Cost
  Sharing    Policies    as    of  January      2019:       Findings   from    a
  50-State           Survey,”          https://www.kff.org/report-section/
  medicaid-and-chip-eligibility-enrollment-and-cost-sharing-policies-as-of-january-2
  2019.

Kaplan, Greg and Giovanni L. Violante, “A Model of the Consumption Re-
 sponse to Fiscal Stimulus Payments,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (4), 1199–1239.



                                       45
Ketcham, Jonathan D, Claudio Lucarelli, Eugenio J Miravete, and
 M Christopher Roebuck, “Sinking, swimming, or learning to swim in Medi-
 care Part D,” American Economic Review, 2012, 105 (2), 2639–73.

LaLumia, Sara, “The EITC, Tax Refunds, and Unemployment Spells,” American
  Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2013, 5 (2), 190–223.

Leary, Jesse B. and Jialan Wang, “Liquidity Constraints and Budgeting Mistakes:
  Evidence from Social Security Recipients,” Mimeo, 2016.

Mahoney, Neale, “Bankruptcy as Implicit Health Insurance,” American Economic
 Review, 2015, 101 (4), 710–46.

Malani, Anup and Sonia Jaffe, “The Welfare Implications of Health Insurance,”
 Working Paper 24851, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.

Manning, Willard G., Joseph P. Newhouse, Naihua Duan, Emmett B.
 Keeler, and Arleen Leibowitz, “Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical
 Care: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,” American Economic Review,
 1987, 77 (3), 251–277.

Mazumder, Bhashkar and Sarah Miller, “The effects of the Massachusetts health
 reform on household financial distress,” American Economic Journal: Economic
 Policy, 2016, 8 (3), 284–313.

Nyman, John A., “The Value of Health Insurance: The Access Motive,” Journal
 of Health Economics, 1999, 18 (2), 141–152.

O’Carroll, Patrick, “Hearing on the Direct Deposit of Social Secu-
 rity Benefits,” https://oig.ssa.gov/newsroom/congressional-testimony/
 hearing-direct-deposit-social-security-benefits, Social Security Admin-
 istration Office of the Inspector General 2012.

Olafsson, Arna and Michaela Pagel, “The Liquid Hand-to-Mouth: Evidence
 from Personal Finance Management Software,” Review of Financial Studies, 2018,
 31 (11), 4398–4446.

Parker, Jonathan A., “The Reaction of Household Consumption to Predictable
 Changes in Social Security Taxes,” American Economic Review, 1999, 89 (4), 959–
 973.

  , Nicholas S. Souleles, David S. Johnson, and Robert McClelland, “Con-
  sumer Spending and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 2013, 103 (6), 2530–2553.

Polyakova, Maria, “Regulation of insurance with adverse selection and switching
 costs: Evidence from Medicare Part D,” American Economic Journal: Applied
 Economics, 2016, 8 (3), 165–95.

                                      46
Shapiro, Jesse M., “Is there a Daily Discount Rate? Evidence from the Food Stamp
  Nutrition Cycle,” Journal of Public Economics, 2005, 89 (2), 303–325.

Shigeoka, Hitoshi, “The Effect of Patient Cost Sharing on Utilization, Health, and
  Risk Protection,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (7), 2152–2184.

Souleles, Nicholas S., “The Response of Household Consumption to Income Tax
  Refunds,” American Economic Review, 1999, 89 (4), 947–958.

Stephens, Melvin Jr., “‘3rd of tha Month:’ Do Social Security Recipients Smooth
  Consumption Between Checks?,” American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (1), 406–
  422.

  , “Paycheque Receipt and the Timing of Consumption,” Economic Journal, 2006,
  116 (513), 680–701.

Thaler, Richard H., “Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice,” Marketing Sci-
 ence, 1985, 4 (3), 177–266.

  , “Mental Accounting Matters,” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 1999, 12
  (3), 183–206.

Vellekoop, Nathanael, “Explaining Intra–Monthly Consumption Patterns: The
 Timing of Income or the Timing of Consumption Commitments?,” Working Paper
 237, SAFE 2018.

Zeckhauser, Richard, “Medical Insurance: A Case Study of the Tradeoff Between
  Risk Spreading and Appropriate Incentives,” Journal of Economic Theory, 1970, 2
  (1), 10–26.

Zhang, C. Yiwei, “Consumption Responses to Pay Frequency: Evidence from ‘Ex-
 tra’ Paychecks,” Advances in Consumer Research, 2017, 45, 170–174.




                                       47
A      Appendix Tables and Figures

    Appendix Table A1. Summary Statistics for Transitions Across Copay Groups

                                    (1)               (2)           (3)             (4)
                                                               Full-Copay to    Subsidized-
                              Copay            No-Copay to
                                                               Subsidized-      Copay to
                              to No-Copay      Copay
                                                               Copay            Full-Copay
    Number of beneficiaries
    in 20% sample                 45,968            24,136         13,838          11,853

    Mean total scripts
    per year                      38.74              45.18          40.80           38.68

    Mean out-of-pocket
    spending per year            $218.94            $254.28       $386.00         $372.88

    Mean out-of-pocket
    spending per script           $6.66              $6.30         $10.64          $10.30

    Mean share filling
    a script each day             0.0044            0.0045         0.0049          0.0042

    Share male                    0.348              0.365          0.316           0.444

    Average age                   71.11              70.60          71.39           70.70

    Average number of
    chronic conditions             3.76              3.88           3.98            3.73

    Share white                   0.692              0.681         0.767            0.707

This table presents summary statistics for recipients who switch copay groups. For more
details, see Section 3.2.




                                               48
     Appendix Table A2. Effect of Changes in the Generosity of Coverage on the Share of Wednesday Fills that Occur on Social
     Security Payday

                                         (1)          (2)             (3)           (4)          (5)             (6)
                                                   Subsidized                                No-Copay to
                                    Copay                        Full-Copay     No-Copay                    No-Copay to
                                                   -Copay to                                 Subsidized
                                    to No-Copay                  to No-Copay    to Copay                    Full-Copay
                                                   No-Copay                                  -Copay
                  Post Transition    -0.0258∗∗∗     -0.0253∗∗∗    -0.0243∗∗∗     -0.0227∗       -0.0050         -0.0170
                                      (0.0021)       (0.0034)      (0.0036)      (0.0108)      (0.0078)        (0.0144)

                   Mean                   0.25          0.25          0.25           0.22          0.23            0.22
                   N                     8,939         8,822         8,867          1,023          901            1,004
                 This table presents regressions in which the outcome is the share of Wednesday prescriptions filled on the
                 recipient’s Social Security payday. The first column studies transitions from either copay group to the
                 no-copay group while the second and third columns study transitions from either copay group to the no-
49




                 copay group respectively. The fourth column studies transitions from the no-copay group to either copay
                 group while the fifth and sixth columns study transitions from the no-copay group to either copay group,
                 respectively. Each observation consists of a recipient-month. Standard errors in parentheses. These
                 coefficients come from estimating equation (2). Cohort-specific fixed effects and calendar-month-specific
                 fixed effects not shown. For more details, see Section 3.2. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
Appendix Table A3. The Effect of Changes in Generosity of Coverage Across Deciles
of Share of Wednesday Fills on Payday for Transitions to the No-Copay Group

                                          (1)                    (2)                  (3)
                                    Log Total Scripts      Log Out-of-Pocket       Elasticity
     All                                0.08076∗∗∗             -1.26905∗∗∗        -0.06364∗∗∗
                                        (0.00280)               (0.00867)          (0.00224)
     All excl. Zero or Missing          0.05943∗∗∗             -1.45435∗∗∗        -0.04086∗∗∗
                                        (0.00252)               (0.00910)          (0.00173)
     Decile 1                           0.05186∗∗∗             -1.48130∗∗∗        -0.03501∗∗∗
                                        (0.00684)               (0.01697)          (0.00460)
     Decile 2                           0.05171∗∗∗             -1.48616∗∗∗        -0.03480∗∗∗
                                        (0.00569)               (0.01572)          (0.00392)
     Decile 3                           0.05250∗∗∗             -1.51336∗∗∗        -0.03469∗∗∗
                                        (0.00623)               (0.01813)          (0.00408)
     Decile 4                           0.04749∗∗∗             -1.52003∗∗∗        -0.03125∗∗∗
                                        (0.00750)               (0.01935)          (0.00503)
     Decile 5                           0.05026∗∗∗             -1.47676∗∗∗        -0.03404∗∗∗
                                        (0.00581)               (0.01534)          (0.00397)
     Decile 6                           0.04921∗∗∗             -1.54714∗∗∗        -0.03181∗∗∗
                                        (0.00792)               (0.01802)          (0.00519)
     Decile 7                           0.06594∗∗∗             -1.44231∗∗∗        -0.04572∗∗∗
                                        (0.00644)               (0.01853)          (0.00462)
     Decile 8                           0.05631∗∗∗             -1.51936∗∗∗        -0.03706∗∗∗
                                        (0.00665)               (0.01394)          (0.00442)
     Decile 9                           0.07541∗∗∗             -1.36370∗∗∗        -0.05530∗∗∗
                                        (0.00638)               (0.01575)          (0.00484)
     Decile 10                          0.09538∗∗∗             -1.19704∗∗∗        -0.07968∗∗∗
                                        (0.00636)               (0.01724)          (0.00571)
     Zero                               0.12181∗∗∗             -0.98734∗∗∗        -0.12337∗∗∗
                                        (0.00536)               (0.01313)          (0.00578)
     Missing                            0.19245∗∗∗             -0.15497∗∗∗        -1.24187∗∗∗
                                        (0.00719)               (0.00692)          (0.07993)

This table presents estimates of equation (2) across deciles of the proportion of Wednesday fills that
fall on a recipient’s Social Security payday. The sample is restricted to recipients who switch from
either the full-copay group or the subsidized-copay group to the no-copay group, 12 months before
and 12 months after their switch. The first row presents estimates for all beneficiaries. The second
row presents results for recipients with at least one Wednesday fill on a payday. The subsequent rows
present estimates for recipients who have at least one Wednesday fill on a payday and are in the given
decile of the proportion of Wednesday fills on payday. The final rows presents results for recipients
who have no Wednesday fills on payday or no Wednesday fills. Standard errors in parentheses
clustered on cohort of recipients transitioning copay groups for the first two columns. Standard
errors are based on the delta method for the elasticity estimation in the third column. Recipient-
specific fixed effects and year-times-month-specific fixed effects not shown. For more details, see
Section 3.2. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.


                                                 50
        Appendix Table A4. Effect of Changes in Generosity of Coverage

                                     (1)        (2)                 (3)
                                  Log Total Log Out-of
                                                                Elasticity
                                  Scripts   -Pocket

                       A. Transition from Copay to No Copay

                  Post            0.0433∗∗∗      -0.8191∗∗∗     -0.0529∗∗∗
                  Transition      (0.0018)        (0.0068)       (0.0023)

                  Mean               0.79              5.16
                  N               1,103,232         1,103,232   1,103,232

                        B. Transition from No Copay to Copay

                  Post            -0.0464∗∗∗        0.9008∗∗∗   -0.0515∗∗∗
                  Transition       (0.0016)         (0.0079)     (0.0014)

                  Mean              1.08             0.00
                  N                579,264          579,264      579,264
This table presents estimates of the impact of switching to the no-copay group from the copay
groups (top panel) and vice versa (bottom panel) on the outcomes listed. Scripts are restricted
to the high value drugs of Plavis, Warfarin, HIV, Anti-psychotics, Anti-seizure, Anti-biotics,
Insulin, Statins, Anti-depressants and Inhalers. Standard errors in parentheses clustered on
cohort of recipients transitioning copay groups for the first two columns. Standard errors are
based on the delta method for the elasticity estimation in the third column. The data is limited
to 12 months before and 12 months after the switch. Recipient-specific fixed effects and year-
times-month-specific fixed effects not shown. These coefficients come from estimating equation
(2). The means listed are the means of the given dependent variable one month before the
transition across copayment groups. For more details, see Section 3.2. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05,
∗∗∗
    p < 0.01




                                               51
    Appendix Figure A1. Schedule of Social Security Benefit Payments 2019




                         Schedule of Social Security Benefit Payments 2019
                   JANUARY 2019                      FEBRUARY 2019                           MARCH 2019
              S  M T W T F S                      S M T W T F S                         S      T W T F S
                                                                                               M
                     1 2 3 4 5                                   1 2                                    1 2
               6 7 8 9 10 11 12                   3 4 5 6 7 8 9                          3 4 5 6 7 8 9
              13 14 15 16 17 18 19               10 11 12 13 14 15 16                   10 11 12 13 14 15 16
              20 21 22 23 24 25 26               17 18 19 20 21 22 23                   17 18 19 20 21 22 23
              27 28 29 30 31                     24 25 26 27 28                         24 25 26 27 28 29 30
                                                                                        31
                    APRIL 2019                         MAY 2019                                       JUNE 2019
              S  M T W T              F S         S    MT W T             F S           S      M       T W T
                                                                                                          S                  F
                 1 2 3 4               5 6                1 2             3 4                              1
               7 8 9 10 11            12 13       5 6 7 8 9              10 11          2 3 4 5 6 7 8
              14 15 16 17 18          19 20      12 13 14 15 16          17 18           9 10 11 12 13 14 15
              21 22 23 24 25          26 27      19 20 21 22 23          24 25          16 17 18 19 20 21 22
              28 29 30                           26 27 28 29 30          31             23 24 25 26 27 28 29
                                                                                        30
                    JULY 2019                         AUGUST 2019                             SEPTEMBER 2019
              S  M T W T F S                      S    MT W T F               S         S     M T W T F S
                 1 2 3 4 5 6                                  1 2              3         1    2 3 4 5 6 7
               7 8 9 10 11 12 13                  4 5 6 7 8 9                 10         8     9 10 11 12 13 14
              14 15 16 17 18 19 20               11 12 13 14 15 16            17        15    16 17 18 19 20 21
              21 22 23 24 25 26 27               18 19 20 21 22 23            24        22    23 24 25 26 27 28
              28 29 30 31                        25 26 27 28 29 30            31        29    30


                  OCTOBER 2019                       NOVEMBER 2019                             DECEMBER 2019
              S  M T W T F S                      S M T W T F S                         S     M T W T F S
                    1 2 3 4 5                                    1 2                     1    2 3 4 5 6 7
               6 7 8 9 10 11 12                   3 4 5 6 7 8 9                          8     9 10 11 12 13 14
              13 14 15 16 17 18 19               10 11 12 13 14 15 16                   15    16 17 18 19 20 21
              20 21 22 23 24 25 26               17 18 19 20 21 22 23                   22    23 24 25 26 27 28
              27 28 29 30 31                     24 25 26 27 28 29 30                   29    30 31


                   Benefits paid on    Birth date on                                                    If you don’t receive your
                                                           Supplemental Security Income (SSI)           payment on the expected
                  Second Wednesday        1st – 10th       Social Security benefits prior to            date, please allow
                                                           May 1997; or if receiving both Social        three additional mailing
                  Third Wednesday        11th – 20th                                                    days before contacting
                                                           Security and SSI, Social Security is
                  Fourth Wednesday       21st – 31st       paid on the third                            Social Security.

                                                                                                             Social Security Administration
                                                                                                                    Publication No. 05-10031
                                                                                             ICN 456100 | Unit of Issue — HD (one hundred)
                                                                                                           July 2018 (Recycle prior editions)
                                                   SocialSecurity.gov                     Schedule of Social Security Benefit Payments 2019
                                                                                           Produced and published at U.S. taxpayer expense




This figure shows the 2019 schedule of Social Security payments. For more details, see Section
1.1.




                                                              52
Appendix Figure A2. Comparison of Elasticities Across Recipients’ Propensity to Fill
on Social Security Paydays, Transitions from the Subsidized-Copay Group Only

                      Estimated price elasticity of demand
                 0



              -.02



              -.04



              -.06



              -.08



                -.1

                        All     1      2       3      4       5      6        7   8   9   10
                                                   Decile of payday filling



This figure presents estimated price elasticities of demand when recipients are divided into
deciles based on the proportion of their Wednesday prescription fills that fall on their Social
Security payday. The sample is restricted to recipients who switch from the subsidized-copay
group to the no-copay group one year before and after their switch. These coefficients come
from estimating an individual-level version of equation (2). Standard errors are based on the
delta method. For more details, see Section 3.3.




                                                         53
Appendix Figure A3. Comparison of Elasticities Across Recipients’ Propensity to Fill
on Social Security Paydays, Transitions from the Full-Copay Group Only

                      Estimated price elasticity of demand
                 0



              -.02



              -.04



              -.06



              -.08



                -.1
                        All     1      2       3      4       5      6        7   8   9   10
                                                   Decile of payday filling



This figure presents estimated price elasticities of demand when recipients are divided into
deciles based on the proportion of their Wednesday prescription fills that fall on their Social
Security payday. The sample is restricted to recipients who switch from the full-copay group
to the no-copay group one year before and after their switch. These coefficients come from
estimating an individual-level version of equation (2). Standard errors are based on the delta
method. For more details, see Section 3.3.




                                                         54
       Appendix Figure A4. Re-Centered Time Series: Share of Recipients



                        Share of recipients filling a script in relevant
                        payday group relative to other payday groups
                 .006                                         Subsidized-copay group




                 .004



                 .002



                    0
                                                              No-copay group



                -.002
                        -10   -8    -6    -4     -2   0     2     4        6    8      10
                                         Days since check-distribution

This figure plots the share of recipients filling prescriptions for each event-time day relative to
check receipt for the no-copay group and the subsidized-copay group. For each copay group
and event day, we calculate the difference in these outcomes across recipients who are nearest to
receiving a check and those who are two weeks from their check. For more details, see Section
2.1.




                                                 55
    Appendix Figure A5. Re-Centered Time Series for the Full-Copay Group

                                     (a) Logarithm of Total Scripts


                         Log total scripts in relevant
                         payday group relative to other payday groups
                                                                Full-copay group
                  .06



                  .04



                  .02



                    0
                                                                No-copay group


                 -.02
                         -10   -8     -6    -4     -2   0     2     4        6     8   10
                                           Days since check-distribution


                         (b) Share of Beneficiaries Who Fill a Script By Day


                          Share of recipients filling a script in relevant
                          payday group relative to other payday groups
                 .003
                                                                Full-copay group


                 .002



                 .001



                    0
                                                                No-copay group


                 -.001
                         -10    -8    -6    -4     -2   0     2     4        6     8   10
                                           Days since check-distribution


These figures plot measures of prescription drug consumption for each event-time day relative
to check receipt for the no-copay group and the full-copay group. Panel (a) plots the share
of beneficiaries who fill a script. Panel (b) plots the logarithm of total scripts filled. For each
copay group and event day, we calculate the difference in these outcomes across recipients who
are nearest to receiving a check and those who are two weeks from their check. For more details,
see Section 2.1.


                                                    56
Appendix Figure A6. The Effect of Social Security Checks on Total Scripts: A Re-
Centered Time Series

                  (a) Social Security Checks that Arrive after a 28-Day Wait


                         Log total scripts in relevant
                         payday group relative to other payday groups
                                                              Subsidized-copay group
                    .1




                  .05




                    0
                                                              No-copay group




                  -.05
                         -10   -8   -6    -4     -2   0     2     4       6     8      10
                                         Days since check-distribution


                   (b) Social Security Checks that Arrive after 35-Day Wait


                         Log total scripts in relevant
                         payday group relative to other payday groups
                  .15
                                                              Subsidized-copay group



                    .1



                  .05



                    0

                                                              No-copay group


                  -.05
                         -10   -8   -6    -4     -2   0     2     4       6     8      10
                                         Days since check-distribution


 These figure plot the logarithm of the number of prescriptions filled for each event-time day
 relative to check receipt for the no-copay group and the subsidized-copay group. Panel (a)
 plots the effect for 28-day waits. Panel (b) plots the effect for 35-day waits. For each copay
 group and event day, we calculate the difference in these outcomes across recipients who are
 nearest to receiving a check and those who are two weeks from their check. For more details,
 see Section 2.1.
                                                 57
Appendix Figure A7. Event-Study Estimates: Logarithm of the Number of Recipients
Filling a Script

                    Event-study estimate
                                                           Subsidized-copay group

              .08



              .06



              .04



              .02


                                                           No-copay group
                0

                     -5    -4    -3    -2    -1        0        1      2      3     4   5
                                      Days since check-distribution

  This figure plots event-study estimates of the logarithm of the number of recipients filling
  any script for each event-time day relative to check receipt for the no-copay group and the
  subsidized-copay group. The vertical lines across each marker plot 95-percent confidence inter-
  vals based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of the birthday group. For more
  details, see Section 2.2.




                                                  58
     Appendix Figure A8. Event-Study Estimates for the Full-Copay Group

                         (a) Logarithm of Beneficiaries Who Fill a Script

                   Event-study estimate
             .05
                                                            Full-copay group



             .04


             .03


             .02


             .01

                                                            No-copay group

               0

                    -5    -4     -3    -2     -1        0        1      2      3   4   5
                                      Days since check-distribution


                                  (b) Logarithm of Total Scripts

                   Event-study estimate
                                                            Full-copay group

             .06




             .04




             .02



                                                            No-copay group

               0

                    -5    -4     -3    -2     -1        0        1      2      3   4   5
                                      Days since check-distribution


These figures plot event-study estimates of prescription drug consumption for each event-time
day relative to check receipt for the no-copay group and the subsidized-copay group. Panel (a)
plots estimates of regression (1) when the outcome is the logarithm of the share of beneficiaries
who fill a script. Panel (b) plots estimates of equation (1) when the outcome is the logarithm of
the total scripts filled. The vertical lines across each marker plot 95-percent confidence intervals
based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of the birthday group. For more details,
see Section 2.2.
                                                   59
Appendix Figure A9. The Effect of Social Security Checks on Total Scripts: Event-
Study Estimates With Wider Time Horizon

             Event-study estimate
      .15


                                                           Subsidized-copay group


        .1




      .05



                                                                No-copay group

        0


             -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1            0    1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10
                                     Days since check-distribution
  This figure plots estimates of equation (1), event-study estimates of the logarithm of total scripts
  filled for each event-time day relative to check receipt for the no-copay group and the subsidized-
  copay group. The vertical lines across each marker plot 95-percent confidence intervals based
  on standard errors that are clustered at the level of the birthday group. For more details, see
  Section 2.2.




                                                  60
       Appendix Figure A10. Heterogeneous Effects for the Full-Copay Group
                                                 (a) Across Types of Drugs



                             Generic
                              Brand

                           Low Cost
                           High Cost

                                Refill
                         First Script

                             Chronic
                               Acute

                          Anti-biotics
                    Anti-depressants
                     Anti-psychotics
                         Anti-seizure
                                  HIV
                             Inhalers
                               Insulin
                              Opioids
                                Plavix
                              Statins
                            Warfarin
                                           -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12 .14 .16 .18
                                                  Increase in scripts on check-distribution day




                                           (b) Across Beneficiary Characteristics


                                  White


                              Non-White




                             Alzheimer's


                                 Cancer


                                  COPD


                              Depression


                                Diabetes


                           Heart Disease


                                            0    .02    .04     .06     .08     .1      .12    .14   .16
                                                   Increase in scripts on check-distribution day




Both panels plot estimated event-study coefficients on check-distribution day for the logarithm
of total scripts filled by subgroup. All samples are restricted to the full-copay group. All
coefficients come from estimating equation (1). “Expected scripts filled” is the number of
prescriptions that would occur on that day if all recipients with a prior prescription consumed
one pill per day and then filled the script as soon as they were out of pills. The horizontal
lines through each marker plot 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors that
are clustered at the level of the birthday group. For more details, see Section 2.2.




                                                                61
Appendix Figure A11. Re-Centered Time Series for the Subsidized-Copay Group,
Total Scripts and Expected Refills Based on Prior Fills

                               (a) Logarithm of Total Scripts: 28-Day Wait


                         Log scripts in relevant
                         payday group relative to other payday groups
                                                                Log Total Scripts

                    .1
                                                                       Log Expected Scripts



                  .05




                    0




                  -.05
                         -10     -8   -6    -4     -2   0     2     4       6       8    10
                                           Days since check-distribution


                               (b) Logarithm of Total Scripts: 35-Day Wait


                         Log scripts in relevant
                         payday group relative to other payday groups
                  .15                                           Log Total Scripts



                    .1


                  .05


                    0                                                  Log Expected Scripts



                  -.05


                   -.1
                         -10     -8   -6    -4     -2   0     2     4       6       8    10
                                           Days since check-distribution


 These figures plot measures of prescription drug consumption for each event-time day relative
 to check receipt for the subsidized-copay group. Panel (a) plots the logarithm of total scripts
 and expected scripts filled for 28-day waits. Panel (b) plots the logarithm of total scripts and
 expected scripts filled for 35-day waits. For each copay group and event day, we calculate the
 difference in these outcomes across recipients who are nearest to receiving a check and those
 who are two weeks from their check. For more details, see Section 2.1.
                                                    62
Appendix Figure A12. Re-Centered Time Series For Recipients who Switch from
Either Copayment Group to the No-Copayment Group

                      (a) No-Copay Group                                                 (b) Subsidized-Copay Group

         Enrollment in no-copay group                                              Enrollment in subsidized-copay group
    1                                                                         1



   .75                                                                       .75



    .5                                                                        .5



   .25                                                                       .25



    0                                                                         0
         -36   -30   -24 -18 -12 -6       0   6   12 18 24        30   36          -36   -30   -24 -18 -12 -6       0   6   12 18 24        30   36
                     Months since switch from copay to no-copay                                Months since switch from copay to no-copay




                     (c) Full-Copay Group                                                              (d) Part D

         Enrollment in full-copay group                                            Enrollment in part-D
    1                                                                         1



   .75                                                                       .75



    .5                                                                        .5



   .25                                                                       .25



    0                                                                         0
         -36   -30   -24 -18 -12 -6       0   6   12 18 24        30   36          -36   -30   -24 -18 -12 -6       0   6   12 18 24        30   36
                     Months since switch from copay to no-copay                                Months since switch from copay to no-copay



 These figures plot the enrollment patterns of recipients who switch from the subsidized-copay
 group or the full-copay group to the no-copay group over time. Panel (a) describes enrollment
 in the no-copay group; Panel (b) describes enrollment in the subsidized-copay group; Panel (c)
 describes enrollment in the full-copay group; and Panel (d) describes enrollment in Medicare
 Part D overall. For more details, see Section 3.2.




                                                                        63
Appendix Figure A13. Re-Centered Time Series For Recipients who Switch from the
No-Copayment Group to Either Copayment Group

                      (a) No-Copay Group                                                 (b) Subsidized-Copay Group

         Enrollment in no-copay group                                              Enrollment in subsidized-copay group
    1                                                                         1



   .75                                                                       .75



    .5                                                                        .5



   .25                                                                       .25



    0                                                                         0
         -36   -30   -24 -18 -12 -6       0   6    12 18 24       30   36          -36   -30   -24 -18 -12 -6       0   6    12 18 24       30   36
                     Months since switch from no-copay to copay                                Months since switch from no-copay to copay




                     (c) Full-Copay Group                                                              (d) Part-D

         Enrollment in full-copay group                                            Enrollment in part-D
    1                                                                         1



   .75                                                                       .75



    .5                                                                        .5



   .25                                                                       .25



    0                                                                         0
         -36   -30   -24 -18 -12 -6       0   6    12 18 24       30   36          -36   -30   -24 -18 -12 -6       0   6    12 18 24       30   36
                     Months since switch from no-copay to copay                                Months since switch from no-copay to copay



 These figures plot the enrollment patterns of recipients who switch to the full-copay or the
 subsidized-copay group from the no-copay group over time. Panel (a) describes enrollment in
 the no-copay group; Panel (b) describes enrollment in the subsidized-copay group; Panel (c)
 describes enrollment in the full-copay group; and Panel (d) describes enrollment in Medicare
 Part D overall. For more details, see Section 3.2.




                                                                        64
Appendix Figure A14. Event-Study Estimates of the Effect of Switching from Either
Copay Group to the No-Copay Group

                                                     (a) Total Scripts                                                                                                           (b) Out-of-Pocket
            Total Scripts                                                                                                                      Out-of-Pocket
  .6                                                                                                                                      2



                                                                                                                                          0
  .4


                                                                                                                                          -2

  .2

                                                                                                                                          -4


   0
                                                                                                                                          -6



  -.2                                                                                                                                     -8
            -12     -11    -10    -9    -8    -7    -6    -5    -4    -3    -2    -1    0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11        -12    -11   -10   -9   -8   -7   -6   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11
                                                    Months since switch from copay to no-copay                                                                                   Months since switch from copay to no-copay




 These figures present event-study estimates of the impact of switching to the no-copay group
 from the full-copay group or the subsidized-copay group. Panel(a) presents estimates when the
 outcome of interest is total scripts; Panel (b) presents estimates when the outcome of interest is
 the portion of spending that is out-of-pocket. Standard errors clustered on cohort of recipients
 transitioning copay groups. For more details, see Section 3.2.



Appendix Figure A15. Event-Study Estimates of the Effect of Switching from the
No-Copay Group to Either Copay Group

                                                     (a) Total Scripts                                                                                                           (b) Out-of-Pocket
             Total Scripts                                                                                                                     Out-of-Pocket
        0                                                                                                                                 15




                                                                                                                                          10
   -.5


                                                                                                                                           5


    -1
                                                                                                                                           0




  -1.5                                                                                                                                    -5
              -12    -11    -10    -9    -8    -7    -6    -5    -4    -3    -2    -1   0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11         -12   -11   -10   -9   -8   -7   -6   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11
                                                    Months since switch from no-copay to copay                                                                                   Months since switch from no-copay to copay




 These figures present event-study estimates of the impact of switching from the no-copay group
 to the subsidized-copay group or the full-copay group. Panel (a) presents estimates when
 the outcome is total scripts; Panel (b) presents estimates when the outcome is the portion of
 spending that is out-of-pocket. For more details, see Section 3.2.




                                                                                                                                     65
Appendix Figure A16. Comparison of Elasticities Across Recipients’ Propensity to
Fill Prescriptions for High-Value Drugs on Social Security Paydays

                      Estimated price elasticity of demand
               -.02




               -.04




               -.06




               -.08
                        All     1      2       3      4       5      6        7   8   9   10
                                                   Decile of payday filling



This figure presents estimated price elasticities of demand when recipients are divided into
deciles based on the proportion of their Wednesday prescription fills that fall on their Social
Security payday. Fills are restricted to the high value drugs of Plavis, Warfarin, HIV, Anti-
psychotics, Anti-seizure, Anti-biotics, Insulin, Statins, Anti-depressants and Inhalers. The
sample is restricted to recipients who switch from either the full-copay group or the subsidized-
copay group to the no-copay group one year before and after their switch. These coefficients
come from estimating an individual-level version of equation (2). Standard errors are based on
the delta method. For more details, see Section 3.3.




                                                         66
B     Appendix: Other Transitions Across Copayment Groups

Section 3 studies recipients who transition from the groups that face copayments
to the no-copayment group and vice-versa. Recipients, of course, undergo a variety
of transitions: no-copayment group to subsidized-copayment group, full-copayment
group to subsidized-copayment group, and so on. This appendix first assesses the pos-
sibility that some of those transitions are confounded by other health-related events.
It then presents evidence that any confounding health-related events likely do not
affect the main conclusions of Section 3.

B.1    Potential Confounding Across Different Types of Transitions

As described in Section 3, it is possible that transitions between copayment groups are
endogenous, driven by other time-varying factors that affect the need for healthcare.
In particular, in order to enroll in the LIS, a recipient needs to complete an application.
Recipients may be more likely to undergo that ordeal if they have just experienced
a health shock. Such a pattern would then make it difficult to differentiate between
the effects of lower copayments and the effects of the health shock.
    To assess the possibility of such a phenomenon, we measure the risk of hospitaliza-
tion as recipients transition from one copayment group to another. Appendix Figure
B1 presents average hospitalization rates by month since a recipient switched groups.
Each panel presents means for a different transition.
    The first panel of the figure suggests a spike in hospitalization rates when recipients
transition to the no-copay group. That pattern is unsurprising: recipients transition
onto the no-copay group when they enroll in Medicaid. Enrollment in Medicaid some-
times occurs when an individual has a health shock that results in a hospitalization.
Hospital staff often help these patients enroll in Medicaid both because it helps the
patients and because it reduces the hospital’s exposure to bad debt.
    We next investigate whether that spike in hospitalizations upon transition to the
no-copayment group affects the results above. In particular, we test how potentially
confounding changes in health might affect (1) the finding that payday filling decreases
when recipients enroll in more-generous coverage (Section 3.2) and (2) the finding that
those who are most liquidity sensitive respond most to lower copayments (Section
3.3). Figure B1 suggests several approaches to determine the extent to which any
confounding from contemporaneous health shocks is problematic for those results.



                                            67
Appendix Figure B1. Event-Study Estimates of the Effect of Switching Copay Groups
on the Number of Inpatient Stays

                           (a) Copay Group to                                                                                             (b) No-Copay Group to
                            No-Copay Group                                                                                                     Copay Group
             Inpatient Stays                                                                                                      Inpatient Stays
     .025

      .02                                                                                                                 .025
     .015                                                                                                                  .02

      .01                                                                                                                 .015

                                                                                                                           .01
     .005
                                                                                                                          .005
        0
                                                                                                                             0
     -.005
                                                                                                                          -.005
      -.01
                                                                                                                           -.01
     -.015                                                                                                                -.015

      -.02                                                                                                                 -.02
             -12 -11 -10   -9   -8   -7   -6   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11           -12 -11 -10   -9   -8   -7   -6   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11
                                 Months since switch from copay to no-copay                                                                           Months since switch from no-copay to copay




(c) Full-Copay Group to the                                                                                                       (d) Subsidized-Copay Group to
Subsidized-Copay Group                                                                                                                  Full-Copay Group
             Inpatient Stays                                                                                                      Inpatient Stays
     .025                                                                                                                 .025

      .02                                                                                                                  .02

     .015                                                                                                                 .015

      .01                                                                                                                  .01

     .005                                                                                                                 .005

        0                                                                                                                    0

     -.005                                                                                                                -.005

      -.01                                                                                                                 -.01

     -.015                                                                                                                -.015

      -.02                                                                                                                 -.02
             -12 -11 -10   -9   -8   -7   -6   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11           -12 -11 -10   -9   -8   -7   -6   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11
                       Months since switch from full-copay to subsidized-copay                                                              Months since switch from subsidized-copay to full-copay




 These figures present event-study estimates of the impact of switching on the number of inpa-
 tient stays. Panel (a) presents estimates for recipients who switch from either the full-copay
 or the subsidized-copay to the no-copay group. Panel (b) presents estimates for recipients who
 switch from the no-copay group to the subsidized-copay group or the full-copay group. Panel
 (c) presents estimates for recipients who switch from the full-copay group to the subsidized-
 copay group. Panel (d) presents estimates for recipients who switch from the subsidized-copay
 group to the full-copay group. Standard errors clustered on cohort of recipients transitioning
 copay groups. For more details, see Section 3.2.


“Reverse” Transitions. Section 3 presents a first approach. It studies transi-
tions not only onto the no-copayment group but also from the no-copayment group.
Reassuringly, both transitions lead to roughly similar estimates for the elasticity of


                                                                                                                     68
demand (Table 2).
    That pattern is reassuring because transitions out of the no-copayment group are
less likely to be confounded by time-varying changes in health. Appendix Figure B1
suggests only a short-lived, noisy increase in hospitalizations around those transitions.
Moreover, such transitions are more likely to be driven by administrative processes
rather than individual decisions. “Reverse” transitions out of the LIS program and
out of Medicaid are determined by bureaucratic “eligibility re-determination” pro-
cesses, involving updates to SSA records and the failure of recipients to submit re-
determination paperwork. It is possible that healthier recipients are more likely to
complete such paperwork, but the timing of removal from the program would still
be exogenous. It is also possible that both eligibility and health are affected by a
positive income shock; however, it would take several months, possibly even a full
year, before such an income shock would result in removal from the LIS or Medicaid
programs. The fact that the elasticities are similar in both directions suggests that
any confounding from health shocks for the transitions to the no-copayment group
are unlikely to be particularly important for patterns of recipient drug consumption.

Appendix Figure B2. The Share of Recipients Filling Scripts on Payday Before and
After Changes in Generosity, Omitting Recipients with Hospitalizations within 5
Months of Transition


                           Share of Wednesday fills on payday
                     .26



                     .25



                     .24



                     .23



                     .22

                           -12   -10    -8   -6   -4   -2    0    2   4     6    8  10   12
                                       Quarters since switch from copay to no-copay

  This figure plots the share of Wednesday prescription fills that fall on Social Security payday
  for each month relative to the month that recipients switched copay groups. The estimates are
  for recipients who switch from either the full-copay or subsidized-copay group to the no-copay
  group. The sample excludes recipients with hospitalizations within 2 months before and after
  the switch. For more details, see Section 3.2.


                                                       69
Appendix Figure B3. Comparison of Elasticities Across Recipients’ Propensity to Fill
on Social Security Paydays, Beneficiaries with no Hospitalizations

                     Estimated price elasticity of demand
                 0



              -.02



              -.04



              -.06



              -.08



               -.1
                       All       1        2       3           4        5        6      7   8   9   10
                                                            Decile of payday filling



This figure presents estimated price elasticities of demand when recipients are divided into
deciles based on the proportion of their Wednesday prescription fills that fall on their Social
Security payday. The sample is restricted to recipients who switch from either the full-copay
group or the subsidized-copay group to the no-copay group one year before and after their
switch. The sample also excludes beneficiaries with hospitalizations within 2 months before
and after the switch. These coefficients come from estimating an individual-level version of
equation (2).Standard errors are based on the delta method. For more details, see Section 3.3.


Drop recipients with Hospitalizations. A second approach is to re-estimate
our main regressions after eliminating from the sample those who experience a hos-
pitalization within five months of the transition. Appendix Table B1 presents re-
gression estimates based on the transition from groups that face copayments to the
no-copayment group, and vice-versa. Further, Appendix Figures B2 and B3 present
versions of Figures 9 and 10 for this restricted sample. The patterns that appear in
the main text also exist for that restricted sample.

Transitions from the Full-Copayment Group to the Subsidized-Copayment
Group. Finally, a third approach is to study a different transition altogether. Ap-
pendix Figure B1 suggests little change in hospitalizations when recipients transition
from the full-copay group to the subsidized-copay group, or vice-versa. We thus study
that transition next.


                                                                 70
    Appendix Table B2 presents estimates of equation (2) for recipients who tran-
sition between the full-copay group and the subsidized-copay group. The elasticity
estimated from transitions onto the subsidized-copay group is −0.092 and the elastic-
ity estimated from transitions out of the subsidized-copay group is −0.138. Both are
larger than the elasticities we estimated using transitions to and from the no-copay
group.

Appendix Table B1. Effect of Changes in Generosity of Coverage, Omitting Recipients
with Hospitalizations within 5 Months of Transition

                                      (1)        (2)                 (3)
                                   Log Total Log Out-of
                                                                 Elasticity
                                   Scripts   -Pocket

                           A. Switch from Copay to No-Copay

                    Post            0.0660∗∗∗     -1.2516∗∗∗     -0.0528∗∗∗
                    Transition      (0.0028)       (0.0092)       (0.0022)

                    Mean              2.82            6.67
                    N                990,360         990,360       990,360

                           B. Switch from No-Copay to Copay

                    Post           -0.0652∗∗∗        1.2773∗∗∗   -0.0510∗∗∗
                    Transition      (0.0038)         (0.0142)     (0.0024)

                    Mean              3.55            0.00
                    N                540,216         540,216       540,216
  This table presents estimates of the impact of switching to the no-copay group from the copay
  groups (top panel) and vice versa (bottom panel) on the outcomes listed. Standard errors
  in parentheses clustered on cohort of recipients transitioning copay groups for the first two
  columns. Standard errors are based on the delta method for the elasticity estimation in the
  third column. The data is limited to 12 months before and 12 months after the switch. The
  sample also excludes beneficiaries with hospitalizations within 2 months before and after the
  switch. Recipient-specific fixed effects and year-times-month-specific fixed effects not shown.
  These coefficients come from estimating equation (2). The means presented presented are
  the means of the given dependent variable one month before the transition across copayment
  groups. For more details, see Section 3.2. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                71
Appendix Table B2. Effect of Changes in Generosity of Coverage - 12 Months Be-
fore/After Transition, Transitions between Full and Subsidizied Copayment Groups

                                       (1)        (2)                  (3)
                                    Log Total Log Out-of
                                                                   Elasticity
                                    Scripts   -Pocket

                     A. Switch from Full-Copay to Subsidized-Copay

                     Post           0.0613∗∗∗       -0.6702∗∗∗     -0.0915∗∗∗
                     Transition     (0.0042)         (0.0084)       (0.0066)

                     Mean             3.18             14.13
                     N               332,112          332,112        332,112

                     B. Switch from Subsidized-Copay to Full-Copay

                     Post           -0.0719∗∗∗        0.5204∗∗∗    -0.1382∗∗∗
                     Transition      (0.0068)         (0.0173)      (0.0132)

                     Mean             3.32              3.78
                     N               284,472          284,472        284,472
  This table presents estimates of the impact of switching to the subsidized-copay group from the
  full-copay group (top panel) and vice versa (bottom panel) on the outcomes listed. The data
  is limited to 12 months before and 12 months after the switch. Standard errors in parentheses
  clustered on cohort of recipients transitioning copay groups for the first two columns. Standard
  errors are based on the delta method for the elasticity estimation in the third column. Recipient-
  specific fixed effects and year-times-month-specific fixed effects not shown. These coefficients
  come from estimating Equation (2). The means presented presented are the means of the given
  dependent variable one month before the transition across copayment groups. For more details,
  see Section 3.2. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


    Appendix Figure B4 presents a version of Figure 10 for recipients who transition
from the full-copay group to the subsidized-copay group. The figure suggests the
same pattern as in the main text: liquidity-sensitive recipients exhibit the greatest
price sensitivity.

   All of these exercises suggest that the findings in Section 3 are not driven by
confounding factors. We find similar price elasticities of demand when we study
transitions either into or out of the no-copayment group. We find similar patterns
when we restrict the sample to recipients who were not hospitalized. And we reach


                                                 72
similar conclusions when we study transitions that are not accompanied by changes
in hospitalization rates: the transitions between the subsidized-copay group and the
full-copay group.

Appendix Figure B4. Comparison of Elasticities Across Recipients’ Propensity to
Fill on Social Security Paydays, Transitions between Full and Subsidized Copayment
Groups

                     Estimated price elasticity of demand
                 0

              -.02

              -.04

              -.06

              -.08

               -.1

              -.12

              -.14

              -.16
                       All       1        2       3           4        5        6      7   8   9   10
                                                            Decile of payday filling



This figure presents estimated price elasticities of demand when recipients are divided into
deciles based on the proportion of their Wednesday prescription fills that fall on their Social
Security payday. The sample is restricted to recipients who switch from the full-copay group
to the subsidized-copay group one year before and after their switch. These coefficients come
from estimating an individual-level version of equation (2). Standard errors are based on the
delta method. For more details, see Section 3.3.


B.2    Disaggregating Transitions to the No-copayment Group

Section 3.3 shows that the recipients who exhibit the most liquidity sensitivity prior
to their transition to the no-copayment group have elasticities around two-times the
size of other recipients. One explanation for this result is that the recipients in the
top decile of our measure of liquidity sensitivity are disproportionately more likely
(relative to other recipients) to come from the full-copayment group, and elasticities
are larger when a recipient experiences a larger price change. To address that concern,
we present versions of Figure 10 separately for recipients transitioning to the no-
copayment group from the full-copayment group and recipients transitioning to the

                                                                 73
no-copayment group from the subsidized-copayment group. Appendix Figures A2
and A3 present those estimates. The figures suggest the same pattern as in the main
text: the recipients in the top decile of liquidity sensitivity have an elasticity that is
around twice as large as the elasticity for other recipients.

B.3    Changes in Premiums When Transitioning Across Copayment Groups

Section 3 focuses on transitions between the copayment groups and the no-copayment
group. One complication is that some of those transitions involve a change in not only
copayments, but also premiums. The subsidized-copayment group pays no premiums
for Medicare Part D, whereas the full-copayment group pays a small premium. In
order to assess the degree to which the change in premiums affects the results, we
study recipients who switch from the most-generous subsidized-copayment group to
the no-copayment group. That transition involves a reduction in copayments but no
change in premiums.

Appendix Table B3. Effect of the Switch from the Most-Generous Subsidized-Copay
Group to the No-Copay Group - 12 Months Before/After Transition

                                       (1)        (2)                  (3)
                                    Log Total Log Out-of
                                                                   Elasticity
                                    Scripts   -Pocket

                     Post            0.0685∗∗∗      -1.1097∗∗∗     -0.0618∗∗∗
                     Transition      (0.0226)        (0.0489)       (0.0209)

                     Mean              3.22            5.88
                     N                 5,208           5,208          5,208
  This table presents estimates of the impact of switching to the no-copay group from the lowest
  subsidized-copay group. The data is limited to 12 months before and 12 months after the
  switch. Standard errors in parentheses clustered on cohort of recipients transitioning copay
  groups for the first two columns. Standard errors are based on the delta method for the
  elasticity estimation in the third column. For the first two columns, the natural logarithm of
  one plus the given dependent variable is the outcome of interest. Recipient-specific fixed effects
  and year-times-month-specific fixed effects not shown. These coefficients come from estimating
  equation (2). The means listed are the mean of the given dependent variable one month before
  the transition across copayment groups. Each observation consists of a person-calendar-month.
  For more details, see Section 3.2. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


   Table B3 presents estimates of equation (2) when applied to that transition. The


                                                 74
estimates suggest a price elasticity of demand that is similar to what is presented in
the main text. We thus conclude that the potential income effect from changes in
premiums has relatively little impact on the main results, and that instead the effect
of changes in copayments dominates.




                                         75
C    Appendix: The Two Subsidized-Copayment Groups

For simplicity, this paper describes Medicare Part D recipients as being comprised of
three groups: those who face no copayments, those who face subsidized copayments,
and those who face full copayments. There are two complications. First, there exists
an additional group of recipients who pay zero copayments and zero premiums. This
group consists of Medicaid-Medicare-enrolled individuals who are institutionalized.
For this group, copayments are fully paid by the Medicare program rather than
the Medicaid program. We exclude those recipients from the analysis sample, since
they are institutionalized and thus have limited discretion over the timing of their
prescription-drug fills.
    A second complication is that the subsidized-copayment group actually consists of
two sub-categories. First there are the lowest-income recipients, who face extremely
low copayments. In 2015, those recipients were charged $2.65 copays for generic
drugs and $6.60 copays for branded drugs. Second, there are slightly higher-income
recipients who face smaller subsidies. Also in 2015, those recipients face an average
out-of-pocket price of scripts of roughly $7.31, compared to an average of $2.74 for
recipients in the “lowest-income subsidized-copayment group.”
    The main text combines these two sub-groups into one for the sake of simplicity.
Nevertheless, we can estimate the effect of Social Security checks for both of these
sub-groups separately. Appendix Table C1 presents summary statistics for these two
sub-groups. Appendix Figure C1 presents estimates of β0 from equation (1) estimated
separately for these two groups. Both sub-groups exhibit statistically significant ef-
fects of Social Security checks. The effects are largest for the higher-income sub-group:
total prescriptions purchased increases by over 13 percent on Social Security check
days for that group. That pattern is unsurprising for two reasons. First, despite
having higher income, that sub-group still has very low income relative to the general
population. Second, that sub-group faces higher copayments than the other subgroup.




                                           76
Appendix Table C1. Summary Statistics for the Two Subsidized-Copayment Sub-
Groups

                                            Lowest-income,         Higher-income,
                                           Subsidized copay       Subsidized copay
         Number of beneficiaries
         in 20% sample in 2006                   14,006                  6,299

         Number of beneficiaries
         in 20% sample in 2015                  102,406                 41,373

         Mean total scripts
         per year                                 43.23                  46.06

         Mean out-of-pocket
         spending per year                      $124.49                $320.24

         Mean out-of-pocket
         spending per script                      $3.04                  $7.71

         Mean share filling
         a script each day                        0.056                  0.064

         Share male                               0.400                  0.373

         Average age                              70.21                  70.58

         Average number of
         chronic conditions                        3.93                  4.14

         Share white                              0.660                  0.776

This table presents summary statistics for the two sub-groups that receive subsidized
copayments. For more details, see Appendix C.




                                                77
          Appendix Figure C1. Changes in Scripts Filled by Group and Wait



                                  Increase in scripts on check-distribution day


                                            28-Day Wait
                  Lower Income
               Subsidized-Copay
                          Group
                                                 35-Day Wait




                 Higher Income
               Subsidized-Copay
                          Group




                                  .08       .1            .12    .14        .16     .18




This figure presents the estimated event-study coefficient for check-distribution day when the
outcome is the logarithm of the total scripts filled by the subsidized-copay group and by length
of wait (28-day wait or 35-day wait). The horizontal lines along each marker plot 95-percent
confidence intervals based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of the birthday
group. These coefficients come from estimating equation (1). For more details, see Section 2.2.




                                                   78
D    Appendix: Robustness of Copayment Group Transition
     Results

This section examines the robustness of the estimates from Section 3.1. The ta-
bles presented here offer alternate versions of Table 2 and alternative estimations of
equation (2).
    Table D1 extends our estimation sample to 24 months before and 24 months after
transitions. As the top panel shows, the elasticity implied by transitions to the no-
copayment group (−0.067) is almost identical to the elasticity estimated with the
narrower window presented in the main text (−0.064). The bottom panel of Table
D1 shows that the elasticity implied by transitions out of the no-copayment group
with the longer time window (−0.055) is also similar to the elasticity estimated with
the narrower window (−0.049).




                                         79
Appendix Table D1. Effect of Changes in Generosity of Coverage, 24 Months Before
and After Transitions

                                       (1)        (2)                 (3)
                                    Log Total Log Out-of
                                                                  Elasticity
                                    Scripts   -Pocket

                            A. Switch from Copay to No-Copay

                    Post            0.0845∗∗∗      -1.2692∗∗∗     -0.0666∗∗∗
                    Transition      (0.0021)        (0.0079)       (0.0018)

                    Mean               2.97              6.76
                    N               2,206,464         2,206,464   2,206,464

                            B. Switch from No-Copay to Copay

                    Post            -0.0723∗∗∗        1.3149∗∗∗   -0.0550∗∗∗
                    Transition       (0.0030)         (0.0230)     (0.0014)

                    Mean               3.73              0.00
                    N               1,158,528         1,158,528   1,158,528
  This table presents estimates of the impact of switching to the no-copay group from the copay
  groups (top panel) and vice versa (bottom panel) on the outcomes listed. The data is limited
  to 24 months before and 24 months after the switch. Standard errors in parentheses clustered
  on cohort of recipients transitioning copay groups for the first two columns. Standard errors
  are based on the delta method for the elasticity estimation in the third column. Recipient-
  specific fixed effects and year-times-month-specific fixed effects not shown. These coefficients
  come from estimating equation (2). The means presented presented are the means of the given
  dependent variable one month before the transition across copayment groups. For more details,
  see Section 3.2. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


   Table D2 adds a control group to the estimation. We expect recipients who never
transition across copayment groups to be different from those who do. Thus, instead
of using recipients who never transition as a control group, we use recipients who
transition two years later. The top panel of the table suggests that this paper’s main
results are stable when a control group is introduced: the implied elasticity is −0.059
here versus −0.064 in Table 2 using full-to-subsidized transitions and −0.053 versus
−0.049 in Table 2 using subsidized-to-full transitions. Results with a control group
and with the longer time window around the transition are reported in Table D3.



                                                 80
Appendix Table D2. Effect of Changes in Generosity of Coverage, 12 Months Before
and After Transitions With Control Group

                                       (1)        (2)                  (3)
                                    Log Total Log Out-of
                                                                   Elasticity
                                    Scripts   -Pocket

                            A. Switch from Copay to No-Copay

                     Post            0.0769∗∗∗      -1.2975∗∗∗     -0.0593∗∗∗
                     Transition      (0.0028)        (0.0101)      (0.0022) )

                     Mean              3.00              6.98
                     N              1,911,063         1,911,063     1,911,063

                            B. Switch from No-Copay to Copay

                     Post           -0.0718∗∗∗        1.3409∗∗∗    -0.0536∗∗∗
                     Transition      (0.0044)         (0.0260)      (0.0028)

                     Mean               3.74            0.00
                     N                775,020         775,020        775,020
  This table presents estimates of the impact of switching from the subsidized-copay group or
  the full-copay group to the no-copay group (top panel) and vice versa (bottom panel) on
  the outcomes listed. The data includes a control group of switchers two-years before their
  switch.The data is limited to 12 months before and 12 months after the switch. Standard
  errors in parentheses clustered on cohort of recipients transitioning copay groups for the first
  two columns. Standard errors are based on the delta method for the elasticity estimation in
  the third column. Recipient-specific fixed effects and year-times-month-specific fixed effects not
  shown. These coefficients come from estimating Equation (2). The means presented presented
  are the means of the given dependent variable one month before the transition across copayment
  groups. For more details, see Section 3.2. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                 81
Appendix Table D3. Effect of Changes in Generosity of Coverage, 24 Months Before
and After Transitions with Control Group

                                      (1)        (2)                 (3)
                                   Log Total Log Out-of
                                                                 Elasticity
                                   Scripts   -Pocket

                           A. Switch from Copay to No-Copay

                    Post           0.0870∗∗∗      -1.2844∗∗∗     -0.0677∗∗∗
                    Transition     (0.0024)        (0.0119)       (0.0020)

                    Mean              2.96              6.76
                    N              2,813,598         2,813,598   2,813,598

                           B. Switch from No-Copay to Copay

                    Post           -0.0703∗∗∗        1.3437∗∗∗   -0.0523∗∗∗
                    Transition      (0.0038)         (0.0207)     (0.0023)

                    Mean              3.74              0.00
                    N              1,354,702         1,354,702   1,354,702
  This table presents estimates of the impact of switching from the subsidized-copay group or
  the full-copay group to the no-copay group (top panel) and vice versa (bottom panel) on the
  outcomes listed. The data includes a control group of switchers two-years before their switch.
  The data is limited to 24 months before and 24 months after the switch. Standard errors
  in parentheses clustered on cohort of recipients transitioning copay groups for the first two
  columns. Standard errors are based on the delta method for the elasticity estimation in the
  third column. Recipient-specific fixed effects and year-times-month-specific fixed effects not
  shown. These coefficients come from estimating Equation (2). The means presented presented
  are the means of the given dependent variable one month before the transition across copayment
  groups. For more details, see Section 3.2. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


    Finally, motivated by the trend observed in the second panel of Figure 7, Ap-
pendix Table D4 adds time trends with different slopes before and after the transi-
tions. The top panel suggests that the implied elasticity is somewhat smaller, −0.033
versus −0.067 in Table 2 for transitions into the no-copayment group and somewhat
larger, −0.077 versus −0.049 for transitions out of the no-copayment group. Table
D5 presents results with a time trend but the larger window of 2 years before and
after the transition, showing elasticities very close to those in the main text.



                                                82
Appendix Table D4. Effect of Changes in Generosity of Coverage, 12 Months Before
and After Transitions With Time Trend

                                       (1)        (2)                  (3)
                                    Log Total Log Out-of
                                                                   Elasticity
                                    Scripts   -Pocket

                            A. Switch from Copay to No-Copay

                     Post           0.0407∗∗∗      -1.2520∗∗∗      -0.0325∗∗∗
                     Transition     (0.0023)        (0.0081)        (0.0019)

                     Mean              2.97              6.76
                     N              1,103,232         1,103,232    1,103,232

                            B. Switch from No-Copay to Copay

                     Post           -0.3236∗∗∗        4.1856∗∗∗    -0.0773∗∗∗
                     Transition      (0.0531)         (0.0975)      (0.0109)

                     Mean             3.73             0.00
                     N               579,264          579,264       579,264
  This table presents estimates of the impact of switching from the subsidized-copay group or
  the full-copay group to the no-copay group (top panel) and vice versa (bottom panel) on the
  outcomes listed. The data is limited to 12 months before and 12 months after the switch.
  Standard errors in parentheses clustered on cohort of recipients transitioning copay groups
  for the first two columns. Standard errors are based on the delta method for the elasticity
  estimation in the third column. Includes calendar time interacted with switcher cohort fixed
  effect controls. Recipient-specific fixed effects and year-times-month-specific fixed effects not
  shown. These coefficients come from estimating Equation (2). The means presented presented
  are the means of the given dependent variable one month before the transition across copayment
  groups. For more details, see Section 3.2. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                 83
Appendix Table D5. Effect of Changes in Generosity of Coverage, 24 Months Before
and After Transitions with Time Trend

                                       (1)        (2)                 (3)
                                    Log Total Log Out-of
                                                                  Elasticity
                                    Scripts   -Pocket

                            A. Switch from Copay to No-Copay

                    Post            0.0605∗∗∗      -1.2631∗∗∗     -0.0479∗∗∗
                    Transition      (0.0019)        (0.0079)       (0.0016)

                    Mean               2.97              6.76
                    N               2,206,464         2,206,464   2,206,464

                            B. Switch from No-Copay to Copay

                    Post            -0.0802∗∗∗        1.3341∗∗∗   -0.0602∗∗∗
                    Transition       (0.0033)         (0.0217)     (0.0015)

                    Mean               3.73              0.00
                    N               1,158,528         1,158,528   1,158,528
  This table presents estimates of the impact of switching from the subsidized-copay group or the
  full-copay group to the no-copay group (top panel) and vice versa (bottom panel) on the out-
  comes listed. The data is limited to 24 months before and 24 months after the switch.Standard
  errors in parentheses clustered on cohort of recipients transitioning copay groups for the first
  two columns. Standard errors are based on the delta method for the elasticity estimation in
  the third column. Includes calendar time interacted with switcher cohort fixed effect controls.
  Recipient-specific fixed effects and year-times-month-specific fixed effects not shown. These
  coefficients come from estimating Equation (2). The means presented presented are the means
  of the given dependent variable one month before the transition across copayment groups. For
  more details, see Section 3.2. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                 84
E    Appendix: Share of Wednesday Fills on Paydays as Signal
     of Liquidity Sensitivity

Sections 3.2 and 3.3 focus on one particular proxy for liquidity sensitivity: the share
of each recipient’s Wednesday fills that occur on their Social Security payday. This
section provides evidence that that proxy is indeed correlated with liquidity sensitiv-
ity.
     Appendix Figure E1 plots estimated effects of Social Security checks by deciles of
this proxy. We calculate the proxy for all years other than the year that we calculate
the effect of Social Security checks. That approach prevents this exercise from falling
into a circular logic, testing for an effect of Social Security checks by decile of the
effect of those checks.
     The figure suggests a clear relationship between the share of Wednesday fills that
occur on payday and liquidity sensitivity. There is a positive association between pay-
day filling and the share of Wednesday fills that occur on payday. For the subsidized-
copay group, recipients in the tenth decile exhibit an increase in scripts on Social
Security paydays that is greater than 100 percent. For the full-copay group, those in
the tenth decile exhibit a nearly 50-percent increase in fills. That pattern motivates
our focus in Section 3 on this top decile of recipients as the “constrained” group.
     There also exists a positive association for the no-copay group, but the association
is much smaller than for the other groups. Moreover, the positive association for
the no-copay group may be somewhat spurious in that it reflects underlying auto-
correlation in the tendency for a recipient to fill their scripts on a given Wednesday
of the month over time.
     Finally, Figure E2 offers a placebo test: we plot payday effects by decile of the
share of Wednesday fills that occur on the Wednesday before payday. Unlike Figure
E1, this false proxy is not associated with payday effects.




                                           85
         Appendix Figure E1. Heterogeneous Effects Across Share Filling Deciles
                     (a) Subsidized-Copay Group                                                            (b) Full-Copay Group

               Increase in scripts on check-distribution day                                       Increase in scripts on check-distribution day
    Decile 1                                                                            Decile 1

    Decile 2                                                                            Decile 2

    Decile 3                                                                            Decile 3

    Decile 4                                                                            Decile 4

    Decile 5                                                                            Decile 5

    Decile 6                                                                            Decile 6

    Decile 7                                                                            Decile 7

    Decile 8                                                                            Decile 8

    Decile 9                                                                            Decile 9

   Decile 10                                                                           Decile 10

               -.2         0           .2          .4            .6          .8                    -.2         0           .2          .4          .6   .8




                                                                 (c) No-Copay Group

                                                        Increase in scripts on check-distribution day
                                             Decile 1

                                             Decile 2

                                             Decile 3

                                             Decile 4

                                             Decile 5

                                             Decile 6

                                             Decile 7

                                             Decile 8

                                             Decile 9

                                            Decile 10

                                                        -.2           0           .2        .4            .6          .8




All panels plot estimated event-study coefficients on check-distribution day for the logarithm
of total scripts filled by share of Wednesday fills that fall on payday. Panel (a) restricts to
the subsidized-copay group. Panel (b) restricts to the full-copay group. Panel (c) restricts to
the no-copay group. All coefficients come from estimating Equation (1). The horizontal lines
through each marker plot 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors that are
clustered at the level of the birthday group. For more details, see Section 2.2.




                                                                               86
Appendix Figure E2. Falsification Test: Effects Across Psuedo-Share Filling Deciles
                     (a) Subsidized-Copay Group                                                            (b) Full-Copay Group

               Increase in scripts on check-distribution day                                       Increase in scripts on check-distribution day
    Decile 1                                                                            Decile 1

    Decile 2                                                                            Decile 2

    Decile 3                                                                            Decile 3

    Decile 4                                                                            Decile 4

    Decile 5                                                                            Decile 5

    Decile 6                                                                            Decile 6

    Decile 7                                                                            Decile 7

    Decile 8                                                                            Decile 8

    Decile 9                                                                            Decile 9

   Decile 10                                                                           Decile 10

               -.2         0           .2           .4            .6          .8                   -.2         0           .2          .4          .6   .8




                                                                 (c) No-Copay Group

                                                        Increase in scripts on check-distribution day
                                             Decile 1

                                             Decile 2

                                             Decile 3

                                             Decile 4

                                             Decile 5

                                             Decile 6

                                             Decile 7

                                             Decile 8

                                             Decile 9

                                            Decile 10

                                                        -.2            0        .2          .4            .6          .8




All panels plot estimated event-study coefficients on check-distribution day for the logarithm
of total scripts filled by share of Wednesday fills that fall on Wednesday before payday. Panel
(a) restricts to the subsidized-copay group. Panel (b) restricts to the full-copay group. Panel
(c) restricts to the no-copay group. All coefficients come from estimating Equation (1). The
horizontal lines through each marker plot 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard
errors that are clustered at the level of the birthday group. For more details, see Section 2.2.




                                                                               87
