                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE LONG-RUN EFFECTS OF THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT:
A PRE-COMMITTED RESEARCH DESIGN OVER THE COVID-19 RECESSION AND RECOVERY

                                       Jeffrey Clemens
                                       Drew McNichols
                                        Joseph J. Sabia

                                      Working Paper 27999
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27999


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




  Sabia acknowledges support from the Center for Health Economics and Policy Studies at San
  Diego State University, including grant support from the Charles Koch Foundation and the
  Troesh Family Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
  necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
  peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
  official NBER publications.

  © 2020 by Jeffrey Clemens, Drew McNichols, and Joseph J. Sabia. All rights reserved. Short
  sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
  provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Long-Run Effects of the Affordable Care Act: A Pre-Committed Research Design Over
the COVID-19 Recession and Recovery
Jeffrey Clemens, Drew McNichols, and Joseph J. Sabia
NBER Working Paper No. 27999
October 2020
JEL No. H51,H53,I13

                                         ABSTRACT

The long-run costs and benefits of social insurance expansions may not be realized until a
program has been in place through a cycle of boom, bust, and recovery. In the case of the
Affordable Care Act (ACA), the arrival of the program's inaugural bust and recovery have been
hastened by the COVID-19 pandemic. In this context, our analysis begins by developing two
facts. First, during the pre-pandemic boom, we show that the ACA's effects had largely stabilized
by 2016. Second, we develop a new fact involving variations in the ACA's effects across
industries. Specifically, we show that the ACA’s effects differed dramatically across industries
with lower versus higher levels of pre-ACA insurance coverage, and that this difference cannot
be explained by differences in workers’ incomes or other observable characteristics, nor by
geographic differences in pre-ACA uninsured rates. Finally, we set the stage for pre-committed
analyses of the ACA's effects over the remainder of the current cycle of boom, bust, and
recovery. In so doing, we seek to advance the use of pre-committed research designs in
observational settings.

Jeffrey Clemens                                 Joseph J. Sabia
Department of Economics                         San Diego State University
University of California, San Diego             Department of Economics
9500 Gilman Drive #0508                         Center for Health Economics
La Jolla, CA 92093                              & Policy Studies
and NBER                                        5500 Campanile Drive
jeffclemens@ucsd.edu                            San Diego, CA 92182
                                                and IZA & ESSPRI
Drew McNichols                                  jsabia@sdsu.edu
San Diego State University
Center for Health Economics
& Policy Studies
5500 Campanile Drive
San Diego, CA 92182
dmcnichols@ucsd.edu
1     Introduction

A primary goal of social insurance programs is to cushion households against otherwise

uninsurable shocks. The Affordable Care Act (ACA), for example, improves insurance access

for those who lose jobs during recessions. Because recessions occur irregularly, the ACA’s

benefits cannot be fully understood until we observe its performance during an economic

downturn. Similarly, the distortions created by social insurance programs may take years to

fully unfold. A cycle of boom, bust, and recovery is likely necessary before workers and firms

respond fully to the ACA’s inducements and implicit taxes.

    Because of adjustment frictions, it is important for comprehensive analyses of social

insurance programs to adopt a long-run perspective. To date, however, evaluations of the

ACA’s impacts have necessarily been short-run in nature. This reflects the fact that the U.S.

experienced a 128-month economic expansion that began nearly a year prior to the adoption

of the ACA and continued through February 2020. In this paper, we set the stage for pre-

committed analyses of the ACA’s effects over the dramatic churn linked to the ongoing

COVID-19 pandemic.

    Prior research on the ACA has focused on three dimensions along which the law sought

to expand insurance coverage. The first is the Dependent Coverage Mandate, which allowed

young adults ages 18 and older to remain on their parents’ employer-sponsored private health

insurance until age 26. The second is state Medicaid expansions to individuals in households

with incomes up to 138 percent of the Federal poverty line. The third involves a mix of

regulations, mandates, and subsidies that have reshaped the non-group insurance market

and, to a lesser extent, the landscape of employer coverage offerings.


                                              1
   Research on the ACA’s short-run effects have found its impacts on insurance coverage

to be substantial (Akosa Antwi et al., 2013; Kaestner et al., 2017; Courtemanche et al.,

2017; Frean et al., 2017; Soni et al., 2017). Additional analyses have found evidence of

positive impacts on beneficiaries’ financial well-being (Brevoort et al., 2017; Hu et al., 2018)

and access to health care (Ghosh et al., 2017; Courtemanche et al., 2018a; Wherry and

Miller, 2016), while effects on health outcomes are modest in some studies (Courtemanche

et al., 2018b; Wherry and Miller, 2016) and more substantial in others (Miller et al., 2019).

Intriguingly, there has been relatively little evidence of impacts of Medicaid expansion on

either employer insurance offerings (Frean et al., 2017) or households’ labor supply (Kaestner

et al., 2017; Duggan et al., 2019; Moriya et al., 2016; Mathur et al., 2016; Duggan et al., 2020).

These latter findings are surprising in that they imply smaller effects than were projected by

the Congressional Budget Office (Elmendorf, 2010, 2011; Harris and Mok, 2015; Ellis, 2015).

Specifically, CBO projected that several million individuals would, on net, lose employer

provided coverage (Elmendorf, 2010) and that the ACA might reduce the number of employed

persons by around 800,000 (Elmendorf, 2011). It is not yet knowable, however, whether this

discrepancy reflects forecasting errors or the short-run nature of existing analyses.

   This paper proceeds with three objectives. First, we update existing analyses of the short-

to medium-run effects of the ACA’s key provisions. Second, we explore a new dimension of

heterogeneity in the impact of the ACA’s key provisions: insurance coverage rates in the

industries in which workers are employed. Third, we lay the groundwork for pre-committed

analyses of the ACA’s long-run effects.

   Using data from the American Community Survey (ACS), we begin by extending exist-

ing analyses of the ACA’s relatively short- to medium-run effects through 2018. Our initial

                                                2
analysis focuses on the ACA’s Medicaid expansions. Consistent with Kaestner et al. (2017),

Miller et al. (2019), and Ghosh et al. (2017), we find that Medicaid expansions have resulted

in substantial increases in Medicaid coverage, moderately less coverage purchased through in-

surance exchanges, and modestly less employer coverage. On net, this combination of impacts

delivers non-trivial declines in the likelihood that individuals lack insurance coverage. We

observe that the short-to-medium-run effects of Medicaid expansions appeared to stabilize

by 2016, with little additional change between 2016 and 2018.

   Next, we augment prior work through a focus on variations in insurance coverage across

industries. Past work has focused primarily on individuals with low levels of education or on

geographic regions with low levels of coverage at baseline. We show that Medicaid expansions

also had substantial impacts on coverage among individuals in industries with low baseline

coverage rates. Importantly, differential impacts on low-coverage (relative to high-coverage)

industries persist after re-weighting our samples of high- and low-coverage industries to match

on individual-level income, education, other observable characteristics, and core-based statis-

tical area (CBSA)-specific uninsured rates. That is, to shed evidence on whether differences

in the ACA’s impacts across industries were driven by observable differences in individu-

als’ characteristics, we apply several sets of weights generated through a Coarsened Exact

Matching procedure (Iacus et al., 2012). We find that substantial differences in the impact

of Medicaid expansions remain after we re-weight based on sets of variables that include all

key variables from prominent analyses of heterogeneity in the ACA’s effects. This analysis

thus documents a new dimension of heterogeneity in the ACA’s impacts on the insurance

landscape. Variations across industries may be quite important for documenting the ACA’s

long-run effects, as the COVID-19 recession has come with substantial, industry-level varia-

                                              3
tions in the degree of economic disruption.

   We also extend analyses of ACA provisions that took force nationally. This portion of

our analysis, which uses sub-state variations in regions’ exposure to the ACA’s key provi-

sions, most directly follows the approach taken by Courtemanche et al. (2017, 2018b). These

earlier analyses of sub-state dimensions of the ACA’s effects have long provided evidence of

substantial insurance gains associated with the ACA’s full set of provisions. Through 2018,

we find that rates of uninsurance were reduced by roughly 45 percent in states that expanded

Medicaid and 15 percent in states that had not expanded Medicaid. While most of these

gains had materialized by 2016, modest additional gains accrued in 2017 and 2018.

   Our final objective is to set the stage for analyses of the ACA’s long-run effects. In doing

so, we seek to make progress in the development of pre-committed research designs in non-

experimental contexts. The COVID-19 pandemic creates circumstances that are uniquely

suitable for designing pre-committed analyses of the “long-run” effects of the ACA’s key

provisions. By “long-run” effects, we refer to effects that capture the adjustment of insurance

and labor markets following a period of substantial churn. The COVID-19 pandemic has

severed employment relationships on an unprecedented scale. The “shape” and precise timing

of recovery are uncertain. An initial employment recovery occurred in May and June of 2020,

and to a lesser extent in July, August, and September. While employment rates are likely

to remain below pre-pandemic levels for an extended period of time, substantial recovery

towards those levels will likely continue over the last months of 2020 and first half of 2021.

   Our pre-committed analyses take a standard “event-study” structure. That is, we pre-

commit to updating analyses that dynamically track the effects of the ACA’s provisions over

time. Within this structure, our pre-committed analyses relate to specific, empirically testable

                                               4
hypotheses. With respect to the ACA’s benefits, for example, we hypothesize that low-

education individuals will experience smaller increases in their probability of being uninsured

during the pandemic if they live in states that enacted ACA Medicaid expansions. While

the direction of this effect may be fully expected, its magnitude is in need of quantification.

With respect to the ACA’s costs, we hypothesize that the bust and recovery associated

with the pandemic will lead to greater declines in employer insurance offerings in states

that enacted ACA Medicaid expansions. We further hypothesize that these effects will be

particularly large in industries and geographic areas that are disproportionately impacted

by both COVID-19 and the initial implementation of the ACA.

   As detailed below, the tests of our pre-specified hypotheses will involve comparisons of

coefficients within our event study specifications. We will treat the 2020 calendar year as a

year of substantial economic downturn, and the 2021 and 2022 calendar years as years of

recovery and/or returns towards pre-pandemic conditions. Key sensitivity checks within our

pre-specified research design will involve controls for the severity of the COVID-19 pandemic

itself. That is, we pre-commit to running a set of specifications that will investigate whether

our long-run estimates of the effects of Medicaid expansions are sensitive to controlling for

heterogeneity in the COVID-19 pandemic’s direct impacts on health and economic well-being.

Finally, we pre-commit to exploring heterogeneity in the long-run effects of the ACA by the

magnitudes of industry-specific employment shocks caused by the COVID-19 epidemic.

   Methodologically, our paper advances the use of pre-committed research designs in ob-

servational studies. Recent overviews of key developments in empirical methods have em-

phasized both pre-analysis plans and transparency in research methods (Currie et al., 2020;

Christensen and Miguel, 2018). Christensen and Miguel (2018) note that pre-specified ob-

                                              5
servational studies are exceedingly rare, but that “it would be desirable in our view for more

prospective observational research to be conducted in a prespecified fashion.”1 To the best

of our knowledge, this paper advances the first pre-analysis plans for asssessing the long-run

effects of major entitlement program reforms.

    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background on key provisions of the

ACA. Section 3 describes the data we analyze. Section 4 presents our basic empirical method-

ology. Section 5 presents our estimates of the effects of the ACA’s Medicaid expansions

through 2018. Section 6 lays out the empirical tests we commit to running in future years as

we investigate the ACA’s effects over the course of the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent

recovery. In Section 7 we conclude.




2       Background

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) substantially reshaped the U.S.

insurance landscape. While the ACA was passed and signed into law in March 2010, several

of its most impactful provisions took effect in January 2014.2 These include expansions to

states’ Medicaid programs, subsidies for purchasing non-group coverage, community-rating

regulations, and tax penalties for failure to acquire insurance. An employer-side mandate,

also linked to financial penalties, first took effect in 2015.

    The ACA’s Medicaid expansions are the law’s most readily studied component. The

ACA’s Medicaid provisions expanded eligibility to all individuals in households with in-
    1
      In the economics literature, the sparse available examples are concentrated in the minimum wage liter-
ature. They include an early pre-specified analysis by Neumark (2001), as well as more recent analyses by
Clemens and Strain (2017) and by Neumark and Yen (2020).
    2
      The Dependent Coverage Mandate (DCM) was adopted in September 2010.



                                                     6
comes less than 138 percent of the federal poverty line. As of August 2020, 12 states had

declined to implement Medicaid expansions, while 38 states and the District of Columbia had

moved forward. Among the expansion states, 24 had implemented their Medicaid expansions

as of January 2014. The others moved forward in later years. We present this variation in the

timing of states’ Medicaid expansions in Figure 1. The Congressional Budget Office’s (El-

mendorf, 2010) initial forecast estimated that, if implemented nationwide, these expansions

would extend coverage to roughly 16 million individuals as of 2018.

   The ACA’s other primary tool of coverage expansion is its subsidies for the purchase of

insurance in the individual marketplace (i.e., the “insurance exchanges”). These provisions

are also substantial. The Congressional Budget Office’s (Elmendorf, 2010) initial forecast

estimated that these subsides, coupled with regulation of the individual market, would extend

coverage to roughly 23 million individuals as of 2018. This element of the ACA is more

difficult to study than the Medicaid expansion due to the national level of its implementation.

The subsidies do, however, have a steep income gradient. For individuals with incomes just

above the poverty line, subsidies for purchasing a so-called “Silver” plan exceed 80 percent of

such a plan’s full premium in many geographic markets. The subsidies phase out as incomes

rise to 400 percent of the poverty line. This income gradient creates substantial variations

in the ACA’s impacts across geographic areas, demographic groups, and industries.

   Like the exchange subsidies, the ACA’s individual and employer mandates were also im-

plemented nationally. The individual-level mandate was implemented in 2014. The penalties

associated with the mandate rose in magnitude from 2014 through 2016. The mandate was

repealed as of 2019, however, through the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. The employer man-

date took effect in 2015 and, in contrast with the individual mandate, has not been repealed.

                                              7
The employer mandate’s rules are complex and its implementation somewhat opaque. Its key

feature is that substantial penalties apply to large firms whose employees make use of the

law’s subsidies and who have not offered their employees an insurance benefit that qualifies

as “affordable.”

    The national nature of the ACA’s subsidies and mandates make it difficult to study their

effects. Existing studies have made progress by exploiting their differential bite on areas with

low levels of coverage at baseline (Courtemanche et al., 2017, 2018b; Duggan et al., 2019;

Frean et al., 2017). As detailed below, we follow the approach taken by these past studies.

Further, we add analyses that exploit variations in the ACA’s effects across industries.




3     Data

The primary data source we use in our analysis is the American Community Survey (ACS).

The ACS is the largest household survey data set with consistent documentation of individ-

uals’ insurance coverage throughout our analysis sample. We pool data from the years 2011

through 2018 and track the relationship between the ACA’s key provisions and 4 distinct

variables that relate to insurance coverage. These include indicator variables for whether an

individual is covered by (i) Medicaid, (ii) employer provided insurance, (iii) other forms of

private insurance, or (iv) for whether the individual is uninsured.

    We focus our analysis on sub-groups of the population who are disproportionately likely

to be impacted by the ACA’s Medicaid expansions. Following much of the prior literature

(Courtemanche et al., 2017; Kaestner et al., 2017), the first sub-sample on which we focus

consists of individuals with no more than a high school education. The second sub-sample


                                               8
on which we focus is new to the literature on the ACA’s effects. We add to the literature by

analyzing insurance coverage among individuals employed in industries that had low rates

of employer insurance coverage at baseline (2011-2013). In particular, we focus on industries

in the lowest quartile of the coverage distribution. In Appendix Tables A.1 through A.4, we

document the industries that fall into the lowest (Table A.1) through highest (Table A.1)

quartile of insurance coverage rates in 2011-2013, prior to the implementation of the ACA’s

major provisions. In the lowest quartile of pre-ACA employer insurance coverage (25.0% to

57.5%), we find industries including child day care services, sporting goods, grocery stores,

clothing stores, florists, beer and liquor stores, construction, home health care services, and

warehousing. By contrast, in the upper quartile of coverage (pre-ACA employer insurance

coverage rate of 78.4% to 92.0%), we find public utilities, elementary and secondary educa-

tion, hospitals, finance and insurance, and scientific research and development.

   We use several sets of ACS variables as controls. These include demographic characteris-

tics, such as age and education. We also consider controls for other aspects of the households

in which each individual resides. Finally, we consider macroeconomic and labor market data

that proxy for the overall condition of a state’s labor market. Specifically, we control for

state-level unemployment rates (obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics), log income

per capita (from the Bureau of Economic Analysis), and a median house price index (from

the Federal Housing Finance Agency).

   The primary policy variation in our analysis is driven by the ACA. The Kaiser Family

Foundation is our source of data on the dates on which each state enacted an ACA Medicaid

expansion. In some specifications, we use baseline (2013) rates of insurance coverage to

capture a sub-state dimension of the ACA’s potential impact. In these specifications, we

                                              9
follow the approach of Courtemanche et al. (2017, 2018b).

    Finally, we are interested in variations driven by the labor market churn associated with

COVID-19. As has been documented by Kahn et al. (2020), COVID-19’s impact on labor

demand exhibits variations both across industries and across states. Variation across indus-

tries is of interest in our analysis as a source of substantial labor market churn. However,

variation across states is also a potential threat to our identification strategy, as detailed

below. We thus consider control variables related to state-specific COVID-19 case and death

rates (collected by the New York Times).3




4       Methodology

We present estimates of the ACA’s effects from standard program evaluation models. The

first is the basic difference-in-differences model described by equation (1).



                   Yi,s,t = βMedicaid Expansions,t + States α1 + Timet α2

                        + Xi,s,t γ + εi,s,t ,                                                  (1)



where i indexes individuals, s indexes states, and t indexes years. Medicaid Expansions,t is

set equal 1 for all state-year combinations during which an ACA Medicaid expansion was in

effect, and equal to 0 otherwise.

    Our baseline specification includes state and time fixed effects (the vectors α1 , and α2 ).

The coefficient of interest, β, is therefore a difference-in-differences estimator of the effect of
    3
    State-level COVID-19 case and mortality data are available at: https://github.com/nytimes/
covid-19-data



                                                10
Medicaid expansions on the outcome, Y . The fixed effects in equation (1) control for time-

varying shocks at the national level as well as baseline differences in outcomes across states.

The identifying assumption is that the outcome of interest would have followed similar trends

across states if not for differences in their Medicaid expansion status.

   We further control for a range of other factors (Xi,s,t ) that may have shaped insurance

coverage during the time period covered by our analysis. To control for variation across states

in the evolution of macroeconomic well-being, such as differences in economic recoveries fol-

lowing the Great Recession, we add controls for state-level unemployment rates (obtained

from the BLS), per capita income (from the BEA), and a median house price index (from the

FHFA). These controls are important because incomes and the generosity of employer insur-

ance benefits tend to fluctuate with economic conditions, and the latter may be correlated

with states’ Medicaid expansion decisions.

   We also present estimates using the event-study specification described by equation (2).


                               X
             Yi,s,t,e(s,t) =           δe 1{Medicaid Expansion}s,t × 1{Event Year}e(s,t)
                               e6=−1


                         + States α1 + Timet α2 + Xi,s,t γ + εi,s,t .                      (2)



Equation (2) differs from equation (1) in terms of the manner in which we specify the pol-

icy variation. The subscript e corresponds with “event time,” meaning the number of years

before or after a state implements a Medicaid expansion. In the summation, the omitted in-

teraction between the Medicaid expansion indicator variable and the time dummy variables

corresponds with the year prior to the implementation of a state’s Medicaid expansion (i.e.,



                                                      11
the year for which e(s, t) = −1). Each δt can thus be described as a difference-in-differences

style estimate of changes in insurance coverage rates in states that enacted Medicaid expan-

sions relative to those that did not. Each estimate captures a differential change from year

e relative to the omitted time period year e(s, t) = −1.

   The event-study specification provides a standard check for the potential relevance of

divergent pre-existing trends. Specifically, we can learn about the presence of divergent pre-

existing trends by inspecting the estimates of δt for event years preceding the implementation

of Medicaid expansions. It will tend to be reassuring if the pre-implementation δt coefficients

are economically and statistically indistinguishable from 0. The smaller the confidence inter-

vals on these estimates, the stronger the test.

   A third specification we estimate uses variation in the ACA’s impact across core-based

statistical areas (CBSAs). The specification was developed by Courtemanche et al. (2017)

and used for additional analysis in Courtemanche et al. (2018a,b). Using the event-study

specification below, the basic idea is to use variation in baseline (2013) uninsured rates at

the level of the CBSA to estimate the effects of the ACA’s nationally implemented provisions:


                        X
    Yi,a,s,t,e(s,t) =           γt Uninsureda,s × 1{Medicaid Expansion}s,t × 1{Event Year}e(s,t)
                        e6=−1
                        X
                  +             θt Uninsureda,s × 1{Event Year}e(s,t)
                        e6=−1
                        X
                  +             δt 1{Medicaid Expansion}s,t × 1{Event Year}e(s,t)
                        e6=−1


                  + Areaa,s α1 + Timet α2 + Xs,t φ + εi,s,t                                        (3)




                                                       12
    In equation (3), a indexes the CBSA and Areaa,s is a set of dummy variables for each

CBSA. As described by Courtemanche et al. (2017), the effects of ACA features other than

the Medicaid expansion are estimated by θt . These are the coefficients on the interaction

between Uninsureda,s and the event-year dummy variables (1{Event Year}e(s,t) ). In states

that enacted Medicaid expansions, the additional effect of the expansion is estimated by γt .

These are the coefficients on the interaction between Uninsureda,s , 1{Medicaid Expansion}s,t ,

and the event-year dummy variables (1{Event Year}e(s,t) ). We follow Courtemanche et al.

(2017) in presenting both the coefficients themselves and linear combinations that capture

the effects of the ACA’s provisions at the mean level of Uninsureda,s , which is 20.5 percent.

    Our goal in estimating equation (3) is to identify the causal effects of the ACA’s key

provisions on insurance coverage. As with our estimate of β from equation (1), the key as-

sumption we must make for θt and γt to identify the ACA’s effects has a “parallel trends”

flavor. We must assume that baseline rates of uninsurance are not correlated with differen-

tial trends in our outcomes of interest. While we cannot test this assumption directly we

can, once again, conduct two sets of checks. We investigate robustness to the inclusion of

plausibly relevant covariates and we confirm that trends were parallel prior to the ACA’s

implementation.




5     Results

In this section we discuss our results. In section 5.1 we present time series on the evolution

of key outcomes. In section 5.2 we present estimates of the effects of the ACA’s Medicaid

expansions using the basic difference-in-differences model of equations (1) and (2). In section


                                              13
5.3 we present estimates of equation (3), which attempts to capture the effects of the ACA’s

full set of provisions.



5.1    Time Series Figures

In this section we present time series on the evolution of insurance coverage. We focus on

coverage rates among individuals in groups that were most directly affected by the ACA’s

key provisions. To provide suggestive initial evidence on the impact of the ACA’s Medi-

caid expansions, we present separate time series for individuals in states that implemented

Medicaid expansions versus those that did not.

   Figure 2 is organized as follows. The four panels in the first row present data on insur-

ance coverage among individuals with no more than a high school education. Each panel

corresponds with a different type of insurance coverage. The second row presents data on

insurance coverage among individuals who were employed in industries with relatively low

rates of coverage at baseline.

   It is clear that Medicaid coverage did indeed expand far more in states that enacted

Medicaid expansions than in states that did not. Among individuals with no more than

a high school education, Medicaid coverage rose by roughly 7 percentage points between

2013 and 2016; in states that did not expand Medicaid it changed negligibly. We see similar

changes in Medicaid coverage among individuals employed in industries that had insurance

rates in the lowest quartile of the coverage distribution at baseline (measured in 2011-2013).

   Differential changes in coverage for individuals employed in industries with high versus

low rates of coverage at baseline may reflect contributions from a broad set of the ACA’s



                                             14
provisions. Among individuals who lacked coverage at baseline, for example, those with the

lowest incomes may be eligible for the ACA’s Medicaid expansions. Many more, who earn

incomes in excess of Medicaid eligibility thresholds, became eligible for subsidized coverage.

Those with higher incomes would face higher penalties for failing to acquire coverage. Finally,

as of 2015 these individuals’ employers would risk incurring penalties if they failed to provide

access to “affordable” coverage, as defined by the ACA.

    In panel A of Figure 3, we present four time series on the fraction of individuals with any

source of insurance coverage. The four time series are associated with the four quartiles of

the distribution of workers as divided on the basis of their industries’ baseline (2011-2013)

coverage rates. Coverage gains after 2013 are much larger for individuals in industries that

had lower rates of coverage at baseline. The scatter plot in Panel B shows the correlation

between coverage changes and baseline coverage rates at the level of 4-digit industry codes.

The negative correlation between coverage gains and baseline coverage rates is remarkably

strong.

    As presented in Figure 3, we have taken no steps to isolate the relevance of industry

coverage offerings from other factors. That is, the patterns we observe in Figure 3 might

be explained by correlations between industry and worker or locational characteristics that

have been explored in past research on the ACA’s effects. We thus take our analysis of the

ACA’s impact across industries a step further by using a coarsened exact matching (CEM)

procedure.4 We use this procedure as an approach to accounting for the fact that individuals
   4
     We implement the coarsened exact matching (CEM) procedure described in Iacus et al. (2012) using the
Stata package developed by Blackwell et al. (2009). This procedure increases balance between our samples
of individuals in industries with high baseline coverage rates relative to those in industries with low base-
line coverage rates. Among the low baseline coverage industries, individuals with high education and high
income are less common. The CEM procedure up-weights individuals with less common characteristics. We
create CEM weights to match both high early coverage to low early coverage and low early coverage to high


                                                     15
in industries with low baseline coverage rates also tend, on average, to have lower levels of

education and lower levels of earnings than those in industries with high baseline coverage

rates. Because there is substantial variation in both coverage and demographic characteristics

across those employed in various industries, we can reweight samples to match “high” and

“low” baseline coverage industries on these other characteristics.

    In addition to presenting results that reweight by demographic characteristics, we present

results that reweight by demographics plus average industry earnings, and by demograph-

ics plus average industry earnings plus geographic differences in baseline coverage rates.

We do this so that our reweightings incorporate the primary demographic and geographic

dimensions along which past work has analyzed heterogeneity in the ACA’s effects.

    In Figure 4, we present time series that have been reweighted using the exact coarsened

matching procedure. In panels A and D of Figure 4, we reweight to account for education

levels, average weeks of work, average hours worked per week, and annual income. In panels

B and E, we add industry earnings to the set of characteristics on which we match. In panels

C and F, we add geographic variations in baseline (2013) uninsured rates measured at the

CBSA level. In panels A, B, and C, we re-weight the characteristics of individuals in the

top quartile of the industry-specific insurance coverage distribution to match those in the

bottom quartile. In panels D, E, and F we re-weight individuals in the bottom quartile
early coverage. Our first CEM procedure matches on 4 individual-level dimensions, namely personal income,
education, weeks worked last year, and hours per week worked last year. We also provide estimates where we
match on a 5th dimension, average industry earnings, as well as a 6th dimension, geographic variations in
uninsured rates prior to the implementation of the ACA’s Medicaid expansions and exchange subsidies. The
patterns of weights associated with our 4-dimensional, 5-dimensional, and 6-dimensional CEM re-weightings
are presented in tables A.6, A.7, and A.8, respectively. In each of these tables, Panel I illustrates how individ-
uals with relatively high socioeconomic status (e.g., high incomes and high levels of education) are assigned
low weights when reweighting the high baseline coverage sample to look more like the low baseline coverage
sample. Conversely, Panel II of each table illustrates how individuals with relatively high socioeconomic
status are assigned high weights when reweighting the low baseline coverage sample to look more like the
high baseline coverage sample.


                                                       16
of the industry-specific insurance coverage distribution to match those in the top quartile.

The figures are strongly suggestive that the ACA’s full set of provisions had substantially

larger effects on industries with low baseline coverage rates than on those with high baseline

coverage rates. Reweighting with respect to demographic differences, differences in industry

earnings, and geographic differences in baseline coverage rates has only a modest impact

on the size of the differential coverage gains for individuals in industries with low rates of

coverage at baseline.

   Across Figures 2, 3, and 4, it is apparent that overall rates of insurance coverage rose

substantially during our sample period. In our low-education samples, the fraction with-

out insurance declined by roughly 9 percentage points averaged across the expansion and

non-expansion states. In our sample selected on the basis of industry, the fraction without

insurance also declined by an average of roughly 9 percentage points.

   Finally, while coverage gains through Medicaid expansions were partially offset through

other sources of coverage, overall coverage gains were greater in expansion states relative to

non-expansion states. In both of the samples we analyze, the fraction uninsured declined by

roughly 4 percentage points more in states that expanded their Medicaid programs. Also

in both samples, this 4 percentage point relative gain is roughly half the magnitude of the

relative increase in Medicaid coverage. This primarily reflects the fact that individuals in

states that did not expand Medicaid were moderately more likely to obtain coverage with

the assistance of subsidies through the ACA’s exchanges.




                                             17
5.2    Estimates of the Effects of the ACA’s Medicaid Expansions

       on Insurance Coverage Through 2018

In this section we present estimates of the effects of the ACA’s Medicaid expansions using the

basic difference-in-differences models of equations (1) and (2). Figure 5 presents estimates

of equation (2). The panels are organized in the same order as the panels of Figure 2.

   The estimates in Figure 5 are in line with what one would tend to predict by looking

at the time series in Figure 2. Among those with no more than a high school education,

Medicaid expansions generated an additional 4 to 5 percentage point decline in the fraction

uninsured within 3 years of the expansion’s implementation. The equivalent figure for those

employed in industries with low baseline coverage rates is just under 4 percentage points. As

in the time series figures, these declines are driven by relative increases in Medicaid coverage

that are on the order of 8 percentage points, coupled with moderate offsets in coverage

through employers or through subsidized exchange coverage. The exchange coverage offset

is relatively modest for the sample selected on the basis of education. This is related to the

fact that a non-trivial fraction of the individuals in this sample are not employed, and thus

do not have incomes sufficiently high to qualify for subsidies on the exchanges. Among the

individuals employed in industries with low baseline coverage rates, by contrast, the vast

majority have incomes that make them eligible for subsidies. In all cases, we find that the

effects of the Medicaid expansions stabilize around two years after enactment (2016 for most

Medicaid expansion states).

   An examination of event-study analyses for those with a college education or more (Ap-

pendix Figure A.5, Panel I) and employed in industries in the highest quartile of baseline


                                              18
insurance coverage (Panel II) reflect much smaller impacts of state Medicaid expansions for

these groups. This is expected, as individuals with higher education and working in indus-

tries with higher baseline coverage rates are far less likely to live in households with incomes

less than 138 percent of the Federal poverty line. Notably, the effects that we detect for

individuals with a college education or more are in line with what we would expect given

the poverty rates of such individuals. For example, for those with a college degree or more,

the poverty rate according to 2018 census data was 4.4 percent, while the estimated effect

of the Medicaid expansion is approximately 2 percentage points. This is roughly the same

ratio we find for those with a high school education or less, who have a poverty rate of 16.1

percent and for whom the estimated effect of Medicaid expansion on Medicaid coverage was

roughly 8 percentage points.

   Tables 2 and 3 present estimates of equation (1), which summarize the effects of states’

Medicaid expansions in a single coefficient. The estimates are as one would expect based on

Figures 2 and 3. For both the low education and low baseline coverage samples, Medicaid

expansions generate a 7 percentage point gain in Medicaid coverage and a 2.5 to 4 percentage

point decline in the fraction uninsured, depending on the sample and precise specification.

The columns of each table reveal that these results are quite robust to whether the specifi-

cations include controls for the demographic characteristics of the individuals in the sample

and proxies for variations in states’ economic conditions. We find no evidence that these re-

sults are contaminated by sample selection bias, as state Medicaid expansions are not found

to be systematically related to education, employment, or baseline (2013) industry-specific

insurance coverage rates (see Appendix Table A.5).

   Table 4 presents additional evidence on the relevance of industries’ baseline coverage

                                              19
rates. In contrast with our earlier evidence on variations in coverage gains across industries,

the analysis in Table 4 focuses on the effects of Medicaid expansions rather than on the

effects of the ACA as a whole. All estimates in the table are of equation (1). Panels A and B

contrast the effects of ACA Medicaid expansions on individuals in industries with low baseline

coverage rates (panel A) to those in industries with high baseline coverage rates (panel B).

Comparisons of column 1 to columns 2 through 4 reveal the extent to which estimates

are sensitive to reweighting the samples using the coarsened exact matching procedures

discussed in sub-section 5.1. In each instance, we reweight the sample of individuals from

high baseline coverage industries to more closely resemble the sample from low baseline

coverage industries.5 Note that as we move from columns (1) through (4), the number of

observations for each regression falls as we apply CEM weights to assure common support.

Few observations are lost as we move from column 1 to column 2. This reflects the fact

that, on key individual-level covariates, individuals employed in industries with low versus

high baseline coverage rates share nearly complete common support. The sample declines

considerably when moving from column 2 to column 3. This reflects the fact that average,

industry-wide earnings is our primary matching variable along which individuals employed

in industries with low versus high baseline coverage rates lack widespread common support.

    The estimates in Table 4 reveal that Medicaid expansions had greater effects on individ-
   5
     For our analysis of Medicaid expansions, reweighting the sample of individuals from high baseline
coverage industries to more closely resemble the sample from low baseline coverage industries is the only
direction in which reweighting makes sense. The reason for this is that individuals with middle or high
levels of income are ineligible for Medicaid whether a state expanded Medicaid or not. Because the vast
majority of individuals in industries with high baseline coverage rates have middle or high levels of income,
reweighting the low baseline coverage sample yields a sample that, on a weighted basis, is largely ineligible
for the program under analysis. By contrast, reweighting the high baseline coverage sample yields a sample
with more potential exposure to Medicaid expansions. This allows us to answer the question of interest: do
individuals with similarly high levels of potential eligibility, as determined primarily by income, experience
weaker effects of Medicaid expansion if they are employed in an industry that had a high rate of employer
coverage at baseline?


                                                     20
uals in industries with low rates of coverage at baseline relative to those in industries with

high rates of coverage at baseline. Within the table, the most consistent and most important

finding pertains to overall coverage. Whether we apply our reweighting methodolologies or

not, we find that Medicaid expansions led overall coverage to rise just over two percentage

points more among individuals in industries with low baseline coverage rates than among

individuals in industries with high baseline coverage rates. When we apply no reweighting,

the estimated effects of Medicaid expansions are a 3.3 percentage point gain in coverage

for those in low baseline coverage industries and a 0.5 percentage point gain in coverage

for those in high baseline coverage industries. The differential gain is thus 2.8 percentage

points. When we apply our most extensive reweighting (column 4), the estimated effects are

a 2.2 percentage point gain in coverage for those in low baseline coverage industries and

a 0.2 percentage point gain in coverage for those in high baseline coverage industries. The

differential gain is thus 2.0 percentage points.

   What sources of coverage account for the differential effect of Medicaid expansions on

individuals in industries with low rates of coverage at baseline relative to those in industries

with high rates of coverage at baseline? Our estimates uniformly suggest that Medicaid cov-

erage per se is an important source of the differential gain. The increase in Medicaid coverage

for those in low baseline coverage industries exceeds the increase in Medicaid coverage for

those in industries with high baseline coverage by at least 1 percentage point in each of our

specifications. The evidence is mixed on whether there are additional contributions from

other sources of coverage. While there is clearly a role for coverage through Medicaid per se,

the evidence does not support taking a strong stand on the full set of sources underlying the

overall differential coverage gains.

                                              21
   The findings in Table 4 represent an important contribution to the existing literature by

documenting a new dimension along which the ACA had heterogeneous bite. Our analysis

thus far has shown that individuals in industries with low rates of coverage at baseline ben-

efited disproportionately from both Medicaid expansions and from the full set of provisions

in the Affordable Care Act. Our reweighting procedures ensure that these results are not

driven by a broad set of individuals’ observable economic and demographic characteristics.

This includes their income, education, weeks worked last year, hours per week worked last

year, average earnings in their industry of employment, and geographic differences in baseline

coverage rates. The analysis thus shows that baseline coverage in an individual’s industry

of employment is a novel, empirically relevant dimension of the ACA’s impacts. That is, it

is a dimension not captured by prior analyses of heterogeneity in the ACA’s impacts across

geographic areas and across socioeconomic groups.



5.3    Estimates of the Overall Effects of the ACA’s Through 2018

In this section, we present estimates of equation (3), which attempts to capture the effects of

the ACA’s full set of provisions. As discussed in section 4, estimates of equation (3) capture

variations in coverage gains both across states and within states. Estimates of variations in

within-state coverage gains are generated using variations in the ACA’s potential impact

across commuting areas. As shown in Table 5, the estimates suggest that both the ACA’s

Medicaid expansions and other provisions had substantial impacts on coverage.

   The interpretation of the estimates in Table 5 is somewhat subtle. Consider the estimates

in rows 2 and 3 of column 3. The estimate in row 2 implies that in states that did not im-



                                              22
plement Medicaid expansions, a 10 percentage point lower baseline coverage rate predicts

a 1.55 percentage point larger coverage gain after the ACA’s key provisions went into ef-

fect. The estimate in row 3 implies that this differential coverage gain was an additional 2.9

percentage points larger in states that enacted Medicaid expansions. One way to interpret

these estimates is to say that implementation of the full ACA (including the Medicaid ex-

pansions) reduced baseline differentials in the fraction uninsured by roughly 44 percent (0.15

plus 0.29). The entries in panel B convert the estimates from panel A into percentage point

gains in coverage estimated at the mean level of the baseline fraction uninsured. Estimated

at this mean of 20.3 percent, the gain in non-expanding states was roughly 3 percentage

points while the gain in expanding states was roughly 9 percentage points.

    The estimates in Table 5 are subject to more identification threats than our earlier

estimates. In particular, it is crucial to make use of event-study estimators to check whether

areas with relatively low baseline coverage rates were experiencing more rapid coverage

gains prior to the implementation of the ACA’s key provisions. The event-study estimates,

as presented in Figures 11 and 12, reveal that this was not the case. This is consistent with

the analysis of Courtemanche et al. (2017, 2018a,b) in support of this estimation framework.




6     Pre-Analysis Plan

In this section, we lay out our pre-analysis plan, including the specific hypotheses we pro-

pose to test. Our pre-committed analyses will occur within the “event-study” estimation

frameworks described by equations (2) and (3). In one sense, the analysis is straightforward,

as it involves updating estimates that dynamically track the effects of the ACA’s provisions


                                             23
over time. Within this structure, our pre-committed analyses relate to specific, empirically

testable hypotheses.

   Our hypotheses involve key dimensions of the ACA’s benefits and costs. With respect to

the ACA’s benefits, we hypothesize that low-education individuals and those last employed in

low-coverage industries will experience smaller increases in their probability of being unin-

sured during the pandemic if they live in states that enacted ACA Medicaid expansions.

With respect to the ACA’s costs, we hypothesize that, in COVID-19’s wake, low-education

individuals and those employed in low-coverage industries will become less likely to have

employer provided insurance in states that enacted Medicaid expansions than in those that

did not. We further hypothesize that these effects will be particularly large in industries and

geographic areas that are disproportionately impacted by both COVID-19 and the initial

implementation of the ACA. Finally, while the focus of our analysis is on the long-run ef-

fects of the ACA on insurance coverage, in our pre-committed analysis we extend our set of

outcomes to include employment.

   Figures 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 illustrate our key hypotheses. For ease of exposition, we

limit the samples underlying these figures to states that never expanded their Medicaid pro-

grams and states that implemented Medicaid expansions in 2014. Because the “treatment”

states in these samples implemented their Medicaid expansions during the same year, event

time corresponds perfectly with calendar time. To date, ACS data have only been released

through 2018. Estimates for 2019 through 2022 are thus hypothetical. The hypotheses we

commit to testing involve the equality of coefficients associated with calendar years 2020,

2021, and 2022 relative to calendar years 2018 and 2019. As illustrated in the figures, our key

hypotheses involve additional impacts of Medicaid expansion on coverage for our samples of

                                              24
individuals with no more than a completed high school education or who are employed in

industries with low coverage rates at baseline.

   The economic content of our hypotheses relate to the long-run dynamic effects of the

ACA’s key provisions. The key challenge for our pre-committed analyses is that variations

in exposure to the ACA, as captured by our initial analyses, may also be correlated with

variations in exposure to COVID-19. For our purposes, spatial correlation between ACA

exposure and the pandemic’s direct impact are a potential source of bias. Bias could also

result from spatial correlations between ACA exposure and subsequent state-level policy

changes. Designing robustness analyses that will test the relevance of these potential threats

to identification requires applying subject matter knowledge. Importantly, the pandemic

or policy environment may take turns for which it is not possible to pre-specify a fully

satisfactory set of robustness checks. It is thus necessary to pre-specify a measure of discretion

to account for unpredictable developments through additional robustness analyses.

   Through September 2020, there were substantial variations in the COVID-19 pandemic’s

direct impacts on population health. Appendix Figure A.1 shows variation across states in

cumulative COVID-19 cases per 100,000 individuals (panel A) and in COVID-19-related

mortality rates (panel B). Spikes in new cases also varied substantially across time (panel C)

with the largest outbreaks occurring in the Northeast coming first (March-April), followed

by the South and Southwest (May-July), and then the Midwest (August-September). These

geographic dimensions of the pandemic are relevant for our purposes because they reveal

the extent to which Medicaid expansion states (Figure 1) are correlated with states hardest

hit by COVID-19 (Appendix Figure A.1). While there is some evidence that states with

the highest cumulative COVID-19 case and mortality rates were less likely to enact ACA

                                               25
Medicaid expansions, there is substantial variation in COVID-19’s bite across both expansion

and non-expansion states.

   In Appendix Figure A.2, we show cross-state variation in the peak decline in monthly

employment over the period from January 2020 through August 2020. Again, while those

states that were hardest hit by the COVID-19-related recession were more likely to expand

Medicaid, there is substantial, overlapping variation in employment shocks across expansion

and non-expansion states. In summary, there is sufficient spatial heterogeneity in the depth

of COVID-19’s health and employment shocks in both expansion and non-expansion states

to permit us to disentangle the long-run effects of the ACA from the short-run effects of

COVID-19 per se.

   In light of the data discussed above, a key component of our pre-committed analysis is

that we will investigate the robustness of our results to controlling for variations in both

the health and employment impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our controls for the pan-

demic’s severity will attempt to balance between standard conserves of both “under-“ and

“over-“ controlling. To construct controls for health shocks, we will interact measures of

cumulative cases and cumulative deaths per capita with a sparse set time dummy variables.

More specifically, the time dummy variables will include an indicator for 2020 and a single

indicator for all subsequent years (namely 2021 and 2022). The case count and death rate

variables will be continuous, time varying values corresponding with cumulative per capita

counts as of the end of each calendar year. Controlling for this set of interactions will allow

for the possibility that outbreaks of differing sizes impacted our outcomes of interest and that

this relationship may evolve from 2020 to later years. We will similarly interact measures of

each state’s peak employment decline, in percent terms, the time dummy variables described

                                              26
above. Here again, the resulting control variables will allow for the possibility that outbreak-

induced employment declines had impacts that evolved from 2020 through subsequent years.

The strength of the conclusions we can draw will depend in part on the robustness of our

estimates as we introduce control variables along these lines.

   A final analysis of interest involves making use of cross-industry variations in the amount

of labor market churn that has resulted from COVID-19. In our pre-committed analyses, we

are interested in understanding the long run effects of the ACA’s key provisions. We define

this to mean the effects as they emerge following a period of substantial churn. Beyond the

overall churn associated with COVID-19, variations in COVID-19’s impacts across industries

may also be informative. Analyzing such variations requires making a subtle distinction

between variations of interest and sources of potential bias.

   With respect to COVID-19’s impacts, what constitutes a potential source of bias and what

constitutes a variation of interest for our purposes? As noted above, variations in COVID-19’s

impacts across the geographic areas that constitute our “treatment” and “control” groups

(e.g., states that did vs. did not enact Medicaid expansions), is a potential threat to the

validity of our estimation frameworks. Variations of this sort motivate the control variables

discussed above. Variation in COVID-19’s impact across industries within our treatment and

control groups, however, is of potential interest.

   Across lower-paid, lower-coverage industries, there have been substantial variations in the

COVID-19 pandemic’s impacts. The pandemic’s effects on restaurants, hotels, and drinking

establishments, for example, has been remarkably large. The pandemic’s effects on grocery

stores, other essential retail, and retail trade more broadly, by contrast, has been less pro-

nounced. Across the Leisure and Hospitality supersector as a whole, for example, employment

                                              27
declined (as measured using the Current Employment Statistics data) from 16.9 million in

February to 8.5 million in April, or by 50 percent. Across the Retail Trade sector, by con-

trast, employment declined from 15.6 million in February to 13.3 million in April, or by 15

percent. In Appendix Figure A.3, we show monthly declines in employment for three in-

dustry sectors in the lowest quartile of insurance coverage: grocery stores, food service and

drinking places, and leisure and hospitality using data from the Current Employment Statis-

tics survey. We demonstrate that the COVID-19 epidemic hit the food service/drinking and

leisure/hospitality sectors much harder than grocery stores, as the latter were classified as

essential businesses during COVID-19-related shutdowns. During the recovery from COVID-

19, it will thus of interest to compare the effects of Medicaid expansions on employees in the

Leisure and Hospitality sector relative to employees in industries that have similar earnings

profiles, but that experienced less severe disruption from COVID-19.

   Our approach to analyzing the implications of variations in churn across industries will

begin with the event-study specifications described by equations (2) and (3). Specifically, we

will estimate equations (2) and (3) separately on each 3-digit and 4-digit NAICS industry

code. For each industry, we will then calculate the change in the estimated impact of the

ACA’s Medicaid expansions (equation (2)) or of all ACA provisions (equation (3)) between

2019 and later years. We will then investigate how these estimates of the additional, long-

run effects of the ACA’s provisions relate to the amount of churn each industry experienced

due to the pandemic. Our estimates of the amount of industry-specific churn will make use

of high quality employment counts from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages.

In comparing industries that experienced different degrees of churn, it will be important to

either control for or match on each industry’s average earnings so that our estimates are not

                                             28
contaminated by cross-industry variations in workers’ exposure to the ACA’s key provisions.

    The uncertainties facing the design of this final piece of analysis are substantial. While it

is presently possible to sketch an analysis plan with the above level of detail, we anticipate

that this last piece of analysis may encounter hurdles that it is difficult for us to anticipate.

This portion of our long-run study may thus require more discretion than our relatively

straightforward updates to the event-study frameworks that are familiar from the existing

literature on the ACA’s effects.




7     Conclusions

Our analysis in this paper has pursued two objectives. First, we have updated and expanded

on existing analyses of the short- to medium-run effects of the ACA’s key provisions on

insurance coverage. This analysis yields two findings. In the context of the early-to-mid-

2010s economic expansion, we find that the ACA’s impacts on insurance markets had largely

stabilized as of 2016. Estimated effects evolved quite modestly over subsequent years. Our

second finding is that the ACA had significantly heterogeneous effects across industries.

Specifically, we show that the ACA had greater effects on individuals employed in industries

with low rates of employer coverage at baseline. Further, we use a coarsened exact matching

procedure to show that this finding cannot be explained by observable differences in the

income, education, or other key characteristics of these industries’ employees relative to the

employees of industries with higher baseline coverage rates. We thus provide novel evidence

that the ACA can be interpreted as filling gaps in the pre-existing landscape of employer-

driven coverage.


                                               29
   Second, we lay the groundwork for pre-committed analyses of the ACA’s long-run ef-

fects. The COVID-19 pandemic creates circumstances that are perhaps uniquely suitable for

designing pre-committed analyses of the “long-run” effects of the ACA’s key provisions. Be-

cause the COVID-19 pandemic has severed employment relationships on an unprecedented

scale, it will provide evidence on the ACA’s capacity to help those who lose jobs to main-

tain insurance coverage. The post-pandemic recovery will provide additional evidence on the

ACA’s effects on both employment and employer coverage following a period of substantial

churn.

   Through our development of a pre-analysis plan, we seek to make progress in the devel-

opment of pre-committed research designs in non-experimental contexts. Pre-commitment

plans have the methodological benefit of increasing transparency and reducing the threat

of specification search (Christensen and Miguel, 2018). We highlight that pre-committed

research designs may be particularly feasible and valuable for long-run analyses. Their feasi-

bility arises out of the possibility of pre-specifying the extension of event-study designs that,

given recent trends in research methods (Currie et al., 2020), researchers are likely to carry

out for short- and medium-run analyses. The value of such efforts may be high, as the threat

of specification search becomes increasingly worrisome in analyses of long-run effects.




                                               30
References
Akosa Antwi, Y., A. S. Moriya, and K. Simon (2013). Effects of federal policy to insure
  young adults: Evidence from the 2010 affordable care act’s dependent-coverage mandate.
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (4), 1–28.

Blackwell, M., S. Iacus, G. King, and G. Porro (2009). Cem: Coarsened exact matching in
  stata. The Stata Journal 9 (4), 524–546.

Brevoort, K., D. Grodzicki, and M. B. Hackmann (2017). Medicaid and financial health.
  NBER Working Paper 24002 .

Christensen, G. and E. Miguel (2018). Transparency, reproducibility, and the credibility of
 economics research. Journal of Economic Literature 56 (3), 920–80.

Clemens, J. and M. R. Strain (2017). Estimating the employment effects of recent minimum
  wage changes: Early evidence, an interpretative framework, and a pre-commitment to
  future analysis. NBER Working Paper 23084 .

Courtemanche, C., J. Marton, B. Ukert, A. Yelowitz, and D. Zapata (2017). Early impacts
  of the affordable care act on health insurance coverage in medicaid expansion and non-
  expansion states. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 36 (1), 178–210.

Courtemanche, C., J. Marton, B. Ukert, A. Yelowitz, and D. Zapata (2018a). Early effects
  of the affordable care act on health care access, risky health behaviors, and self-assessed
  health. Southern Economic Journal 84 (3), 660–691.

Courtemanche, C., J. Marton, B. Ukert, A. Yelowitz, and D. Zapata (2018b). Effects of the
  affordable care act on health care access and self-assessed health after 3 years. INQUIRY:
  The Journal of Health Care Organization, Provision, and Financing 55, 1–10.

Currie, J., H. Kleven, and E. Zwiers (2020). Technology and big data are changing economics:
 Mining text to track methods. NBER Working Paper 26715 .

Duggan, M., G. S. Goda, and E. Jackson (2019). The effects of the affordable care act
 on health insurance coverage and labor market outcomes. National Tax Journal 72 (2),
 261–322.

Duggan, M., G. S. Goda, and G. Li (2020). The effects of the affordable care act on the near
 elderly: Evidence for health insurance coverage and labor market outcomes. In Tax Policy
 and the Economy, Volume 35. University of Chicago Press.

Ellis, P. (2015). Budgetary and economic effects of repealing the affordable care act. Con-
  gressional Budget Office.

Elmendorf, D. (2011). Cbo’s analysis of the major health care legislation enacted in march
  2010: Statement before the subcommittee on health, committee on energy and commerce,
  us house of representatives. Washington (DC): Congressional Budget Office.


                                             31
Elmendorf, D. W. (2010). H. r. 4872, reconciliation act of 2010. Congressional Budget
  Office Letter to the Honorable Nancy Pelosi (March 18).
Frean, M., J. Gruber, and B. D. Sommers (2017). Premium subsidies, the mandate, and
  medicaid expansion: Coverage effects of the affordable care act. Journal of Health Eco-
  nomics 53, 72–86.
Ghosh, A., K. Simon, and B. D. Sommers (2017). The effect of state medicaid expansions
 on prescription drug use: evidence from the affordable care act. NBER Working Paper
 23044 .
Harris, E. and S. Mok (2015). How cbo estimates the effects of the affordable care act on
  the labor market. Congressional Budget Office.
Hu, L., R. Kaestner, B. Mazumder, S. Miller, and A. Wong (2018). The effect of the affordable
 care act medicaid expansions on financial wellbeing. Journal of Public Economics 163,
 99–112.
Iacus, S. M., G. King, and G. Porro (2012). Causal inference without balance checking:
  Coarsened exact matching. Political Analysis, 1–24.
Kaestner, R., B. Garrett, J. Chen, A. Gangopadhyaya, and C. Fleming (2017). Effects of
 aca medicaid expansions on health insurance coverage and labor supply. Journal of Policy
 Analysis and Management 36 (3), 608–642.
Kahn, L. B., F. Lange, and D. G. Wiczer (2020). Labor demand in the time of covid-19:
 Evidence from vacancy postings and ui claims. NBER Working Paper 27061 .
Mathur, A., S. N. Slavov, and M. R. Strain (2016). Has the affordable care act increased
 part-time employment? Applied Economics Letters 23 (3), 222–225.
Miller, S., S. Altekruse, N. Johnson, and L. R. Wherry (2019). Medicaid and mortality: New
 evidence from linked survey and administrative data. NBER Working Paper 26081 .
Moriya, A. S., T. M. Selden, and K. I. Simon (2016). Little change seen in part-time
 employment as a result of the affordable care act. Health Affairs 35 (1), 119–123.
Neumark, D. (2001). The employment effects of minimum wages: Evidence from a pre-
  specified research design. Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society 40 (1),
  121–144.
Neumark, D. and M. Yen (2020). Effects of recent minimum wage policies in california and
  nationwide: Initial results from a pre-specified analysis plan. IZA Working Paper 13062 .
Soni, A., M. Hendryx, and K. Simon (2017). Medicaid expansion under the affordable care
  act and insurance coverage in rural and urban areas. The Journal of Rural Health 33 (2),
  217–226.
Wherry, L. R. and S. Miller (2016). Early coverage, access, utilization, and health effects
 associated with the affordable care act medicaid expansions: A quasi-experimental study.
 Annals of Internal Medicine 164 (12), 795–803.

                                             32
8      Figures and Tables

                                               Figure 1
                           Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA)
                                 State Medicaid Expansions, 2011-2018




Notes: This figure illustrates the roll-out of ACA state Medicaid expansions. Data sourced from the Kaiser Family Foundation.




                                                            33
                                                                             Figure 2
                                                           Expansion vs. Non-Expansion States, 2011-2018

                                                  Panel I: Individuals with High School Degree or Less
                      (a)                                       (b)                                          (c)                                          (d)
               Medicaid Coverage                          Employer Coverage                          Individual Coverage                               Uninsured




           Panel II: Individuals Employed in Industries in Lowest Quartile of Pre-Treatment Insurance Coverage
34




                       (e)                                        (f )                                        (g)                                         (h)
                Medicaid Coverage                          Employer Coverage                          Individual Coverage                              Uninsured




     Notes: This figure illustrates the coverage rates for different types of insurance among individuals with a high school degree or less (panel I), and among individuals employed
     in industries in the lowest quartile of employer coverage rates between 2011 and 2013 (panel II). The dark line is the coverage rate among expansion states, while the light grey
     line is the coverage rate among control states. The main data source is the American Community Survey.
                                              Figure 3
                   Changes in the Probability of Having Coverage across Industries
                                                   (a)
                         Time Series on Insurance Coverage across Industry Groups




                                                 (b)
                      Base Employer Coverage and Changes in Coverage of Any Type




Notes: Panel A plots time series on insurance coverage across industry groupings defined on the basis of baseline coverage rates.
Specifically, industries are divided into quartiles of the distribution of employer coverage rates at baseline, as estimated using
data from the ACS. Appendix Tables A.1 through A.4 list the industries in each quartile. The scatterplot in Panel B plots
changes in coverage rates against the baseline employer coverage rate. Each dot represents a distinct 4-digit industry code.




                                                               35
                                                                      Figure 4
                                          Any Coverage by Industry Baseline Coverage Rate Quartiles Over Time

                                             Panel I: Weighting High Coverage to Match Low Coverage
                           (a)                                                        (b)                                                       (c)
                       CEM 4 Weights                                              CEM 5 Weights                                             CEM 6 Weights
36




                                             Panel II: Weighting Low Coverage to Match High Coverage
                            (d)                                                       (e)                                                       (f )
                        CEM 4 Weights                                             CEM 5 Weights                                             CEM 6 Weights




     Notes: This figure illustrates changes in insurance coverage for individuals employed in industries in the first and fourth quartiles of baseline (2011-2013) employer coverage
     rates. In each panel, a coarsened exact matching procedure has been applied to match reweight samples for the first and fourth quartiles so that they match on selected economic
     and demographic characteristics. The matching procedure is described in the text in section 5.1. In Panel I, observations from the highest quartile are reweighted to match
     observations in the lowest quartile. In Panel II, observations from the lowest quartile are reweighted to match observations in the highest quartile. All weighting procedures
     match on income, education, weeks worked last year, and hours per week worked last year. CEM 5 and 6 also match on and average industry earnings. CEM 6 also matches on
     geographic variations in baseline uninsurance rate.
                                                                           Figure 5
                                                        Event-Study Analysis of State Medicaid Expansion

                                                 Panel I: Individuals with High School Degree or Less
                      (a)                                      (b)                                         (c)                                        (d)
               Medicaid Coverage                         Employer Coverage                         Individual Coverage                             Uninsured
37




           Panel II: Individuals Employed in Industries in Lowest Quartile of Pre-Treatment Insurance Coverage
                       (e)                                       (f )                                      (g)                                         (h)
                Medicaid Coverage                         Employer Coverage                        Individual Coverage                              Uninsured




     Notes: Weighted least squares estimates generated using data from the 2011-2018 American Community Survey. Grey lines represent the 95 percent confidence intervals.
     Demographic controls include indicators for non-Hispanic white, black, Hispanic, female, and educational attainment (less than high school, high school degree, some college,
     and college degree). Economic controls include state-level per-capita income, the unemployment rate, and a housing price index. The estimates in this figure are the primary
     coefficients of interest from equation (2), as described in detail in the main text.
                                       Figure 6
     Pre-Committed Event-Study Design, 2014 Medicaid Expansion States and Medicaid
                                       Coverage
                                                                                      (b)
                       (a)                                       Individuals Employed in Industries in Lowest
   Individuals with High School Degree or Less                   Quartile of Pre-Treatment Insurance Coverage




                                                                                      (d)
                        (c)                                      Individuals Employed in Industries in Highest
      Individuals with College Degree or More                    Quartile of Pre-Treatment Insurance Coverage




Notes: This figure presents weighted least squares estimates generated using data from the 2011-2018 American Community
Survey. Grey lines represent 95 percent confidence intervals. The estimates in the figure are the primary coefficients of interest
from equation (2), as described in detail in the main text. The shaded region of the figure presents actual estimates for years
extending from 2011 through 2018. The unshaded region presents hypothetical future estimates, including illustrations of our
hypotheses regarding the ACA’s implications for insurance coverage during the labor market’s recovery from the COVID-19
pandemic.




                                                               38
                                      Figure 7
    Pre-Committed Event-Study Design, 2014 Medicaid Expansion States and Employer
                                      Coverage
                                                                                      (b)
                       (a)                                       Individuals Employed in Industries in Lowest
   Individuals with High School Degree or Less                   Quartile of Pre-Treatment Insurance Coverage




                                                                                      (d)
                        (c)                                      Individuals Employed in Industries in Highest
      Individuals with College Degree or More                    Quartile of Pre-Treatment Insurance Coverage




Notes: This figure presents weighted least squares estimates generated using data from the 2011-2018 American Community
Survey. Grey lines represent 95 percent confidence intervals. The estimates in the figure are the primary coefficients of interest
from equation (2), as described in detail in the main text. The shaded region of the figure presents actual estimates for years
extending from 2011 through 2018. The unshaded region presents hypothetical future estimates, including illustrations of our
hypotheses regarding the ACA’s implications for insurance coverage during the labor market’s recovery from the COVID-19
pandemic.




                                                               39
                                      Figure 8
    Pre-Committed Event-Study Design, 2014 Medicaid Expansion States and Individual
                                      Coverage
                                                                                      (b)
                       (a)                                       Individuals Employed in Industries in Lowest
   Individuals with High School Degree or Less                   Quartile of Pre-Treatment Insurance Coverage




                                                                                      (d)
                        (c)                                      Individuals Employed in Industries in Highest
      Individuals with College Degree or More                    Quartile of Pre-Treatment Insurance Coverage




Notes: This figure presents weighted least squares estimates generated using data from the 2011-2018 American Community
Survey. Grey lines represent 95 percent confidence intervals. The estimates in the figure are the primary coefficients of interest
from equation (2), as described in detail in the main text. The shaded region of the figure presents actual estimates for years
extending from 2011 through 2018. The unshaded region presents hypothetical future estimates, including illustrations of our
hypotheses regarding the ACA’s implications for insurance coverage during the labor market’s recovery from the COVID-19
pandemic.




                                                               40
                                      Figure 9
    Pre-Committed Event-Study Design, 2014 Medicaid Expansion States and Uninsured
                                                                                      (b)
                       (a)                                       Individuals Employed in Industries in Lowest
   Individuals with High School Degree or Less                   Quartile of Pre-Treatment Insurance Coverage




                                                                                      (d)
                        (c)                                      Individuals Employed in Industries in Highest
      Individuals with College Degree or More                    Quartile of Pre-Treatment Insurance Coverage




Notes: This figure presents weighted least squares estimates generated using data from the 2011-2018 American Community
Survey. Grey lines represent 95 percent confidence intervals. The estimates in the figure are the primary coefficients of interest
from equation (2), as described in detail in the main text. The shaded region of the figure presents actual estimates for years
extending from 2011 through 2018. The unshaded region presents hypothetical future estimates, including illustrations of our
hypotheses regarding the ACA’s implications for insurance coverage during the labor market’s recovery from the COVID-19
pandemic.




                                                               41
                                     Figure 10
 Pre-Committed Event-Study Design, 2014 Medicaid Expansion States and Probability of
                                    Employment
                                                                                      (b)
                       (a)                                       Individuals Employed in Industries in Lowest
   Individuals with High School Degree or Less                   Quartile of Pre-Treatment Insurance Coverage




                                                                                      (d)
                        (c)                                      Individuals Employed in Industries in Highest
      Individuals with College Degree or More                    Quartile of Pre-Treatment Insurance Coverage




Notes: This figure presents weighted least squares estimates generated using data from the 2011-2018 American Community
Survey. Grey lines represent 95 percent confidence intervals. The estimates in the figure are the primary coefficients of interest
from equation (2), as described in detail in the main text. The shaded region of the figure presents actual estimates for years
extending from 2011 through 2018. The unshaded region presents hypothetical future estimates, including illustrations of our
hypotheses regarding the ACA’s implications for employment during the labor market’s recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.




                                                               42
                                          Figure 11
                       DDD Event-Study Analysis of State Medicaid Expansion
                           (a)                                                         (b)
                    Medicaid Coverage                                            Employer Coverage




                           (c)                                                            (d)
                   Individual Coverage                                                 Uninsured




Notes: This figure presents weighted least squares estimates generated using data from the 2011-2018 American Community
Survey. Grey lines represent 95 percent confidence intervals. The estimates in the figure are from equation (3), as described
in detail in the main text. The shaded region of the figure presents actual estimates for years extending from 2011 through
2018. The unshaded region presents hypothetical future estimates, including illustrations of our hypotheses regarding the ACA’s
implications for insurance coverage during the labor market’s recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.




                                                             43
                                      Figure 12
      Full effect of ACA from DDD Event-Study Analysis of State Medicaid Expansion
                           (a)                                                         (b)
                    Medicaid Coverage                                            Employer Coverage




                           (c)                                                            (d)
                   Individual Coverage                                                 Uninsured




Notes: This figure presents weighted least squares estimates generated using data from the 2011-2018 American Community
Survey. Grey lines represent 95 percent confidence intervals. The estimates in the figure are from equation (3), as described
in detail in the main text. The shaded region of the figure presents actual estimates for years extending from 2011 through
2018. The unshaded region presents hypothetical future estimates, including illustrations of our hypotheses regarding the ACA’s
implications for insurance coverage during the labor market’s recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.




                                                             44
                                                                 Table 1
                                      Descriptive Statistics, American Community Survey, 2011-2018

                                              Individuals with High School                              Individuals Employed in Industries with
                                                     Degree or less                                     Low Pre-Treatment Insurance Coverage
                                        Medicaid Expanding       Non-Expanding                         Medicaid Expanding      Non-Expanding
                                              States                  States                                  States                States
                                         Pre-        Post-       Pre-       Post-                        Pre-       Post-      Pre-       Post-
                                        Expand      Expand     Expand Expand                           Expand      Expand    Expand Expand
                                           (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)                (5)            (6)            (7)           (8)
     Dependent Variables
     Medicaid Coverage                    0.128           0.220          0.088         0.098             0.125          0.219           0.086         0.095
     Employer Coverage                    0.523           0.535          0.462         0.500             0.458          0.481           0.375         0.423
     Individual Coverage                  0.078           0.092          0.069         0.107             0.113          0.127           0.099         0.147
     Uninsured                            0.288           0.175          0.388         0.304             0.316          0.191           0.440         0.338
     Control Variables
     Age                                  41.1            41.3           41.0          41.0              40.1            40.5           40.0          40.2
45




     Less than HS                        0.266           0.266          0.291         0.275             0.188            0.185          0.221        0.205
     HS Degree                            0.734           0.734          0.709         0.725             0.350           0.344          0.351        0.353
     Some College                        0.000           0.000          0.000         0.000             0.320            0.316          0.310        0.311
     College or More                      0.000           0.000          0.000         0.000             0.142           0.154          0.118         0.131
     Non-Hispanic White                  0.591           0.536          0.538         0.510             0.612            0.562         0.559         0.534
     Hispanic                             0.238           0.287         0.255          0.274            0.222            0.264          0.252        0.272
     African American                    0.116           0.111          0.175         0.180             0.101           0.098          0.151         0.153
     Female                               0.409           0.405         0.404          0.397            0.380            0.387          0.374        0.379
     Housing Price Index                  363.4           443.3         260.7          318.7            367.5            453.1          261.1        321.0
     Unemployment Rate                   7.745           5.092          7.877         4.762             7.732            5.081         7.867         4.749
     Per-Capita Income                   46,131          53,543         40,096        45,134            46,385          53,979         40,183        45,246

     N                                 1,065,095       1,272,536       474,431       745,610            740,790        920,611        311,213       516,377
     N otes: Descriptive statistics generated from the 2011 through 2018 American Community Survey. Estimates are weighted using population weights. Low
     pre-treatment coverage industries are defined as industries in the bottom quartile of mean employer-sponsored health insurance by industry between 2011
     and 2013. Unemployment rate is collected from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Per-capita income is collected from the U.S. Bureau of Economic
     Analysis. Housing price index is collected from the Federal Housing Finance Agency.
                                       Table 2
        Difference-in-Differences Estimates of the Relationship Between State
Medicaid Expansion and Health Insurance Coverage, Individuals with No More than a
                          Completed High School Education


                                                       (1)                (2)                           (3)
                                                               Panel I: Medicaid Coverage
  Medicaid Expansions ×Postt                       0.067***                 0.067***                0.062***
                                                    (0.009)                  (0.010)                 (0.007)

                                                              Panel II: Employer Coverage
  Medicaid Expansions ×Postt                       -0.013**                -0.013***                -0.012***
                                                    (0.005)                 (0.005)                  (0.004)

                                                              Panel III: Individual Coverage
  Medicaid Expansions ×Postt                       -0.013**                 -0.013**                -0.016***
                                                    (0.005)                  (0.005)                 (0.005)

                                                                   Panel IV: Uninsured
  Medicaid Expansions ×Postt                      -0.040***                -0.040***                -0.034***
                                                   (0.013)                  (0.013)                  (0.006)

  Observations                                    5,786,647                5,786,647                5,786,647

  State Year FE                                        Y                        Y                        Y
  Demographic Controls                                                          Y                        Y
  Economic Controls                                                                                      Y
  N otes: * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1%. Weighted least
  squares estimates generated using data from the 2011-2018 American Community Survey. Standard errors are
  clustered at the state level. Demographic controls include indicators for non-Hispanic white, black, Hispanic,
  female, and educational attainment (less than high school, high school degree, some college, and college degree).
  Economic controls include state-level per-capita income, unemployment rate, and housing price index. The
  estimates in this table are the primary coefficients of interest from equation (1), as described in detail in the
  main text. Low education is defined as individuals with a high school degree or less.




                                                         46
                                       Table 3
        Difference-in-Differences Estimates of the Relationship Between State
                Medicaid Expansion and Health Insurance Coverage,
          Individuals in Low Pre-Treatment Insurance Coverage Industries


                                                     (1)                (2)                           (3)
                                                             Panel I: Medicaid Coverage
Medicaid Expansions ×Postt                       0.073***                 0.072***                0.066***
                                                  (0.009)                  (0.009)                 (0.007)

                                                            Panel II: Employer Coverage
Medicaid Expansions ×Postt                      -0.019***                -0.018***                -0.015***
                                                 (0.005)                  (0.005)                  (0.003)

                                                            Panel III: Individual Coverage
Medicaid Expansions ×Postt                      -0.020***                -0.020***                -0.023***
                                                 (0.007)                  (0.007)                  (0.006)

                                                                 Panel IV: Uninsured
Medicaid Expansions ×Postt                       -0.033**                 -0.034**                -0.028***
                                                  (0.013)                  (0.014)                 (0.007)

Observations                                    4,335,289                4,335,289                4,335,289

State Year FE                                        Y                        Y                        Y
Demographic Controls                                                          Y                        Y
Economic Controls                                                                                      Y
N otes: * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1%. Weighted least
squares estimates generated using data from the 2011-2018 American Community Survey. Standard errors are
clustered at the state level. Demographic controls include indicators for non-Hispanic white, black, Hispanic,
female, and educational attainment (less than high school, high school degree, some college, and college degree).
Economic controls include state-level per-capita income, unemployment rate, and housing price index. The
estimates in this table are the primary coefficients of interest from in equation (1), as described in detail in
the main text. Low pre-treatment coverage industries are defined as industries in the bottom quartile of mean
employer-sponsored health insurance by industry between 2011 and 2013




                                                       47
                                    Table 4
     Difference-in-Differences Estimates of the Relationship Between State
             Medicaid Expansion and Health Insurance Coverage,
    Individuals in Low Pre-Treatment Insurance Coverage Industries Versus
       Individuals in High Pre-Treatment Insurance Coverage Industries

                                      (1)                 (2)                  (3)                  (4)
                                      ACS                CEM 4                CEM 5                CEM 6
                                     Weights             Weights              Weights              Weights

                                     Panel I: Low Pre-ACA Industry Coverage Sample,
Insurance Type
                                      Sensitivity of Estimates to CEM Weights Ensuring Common Support

Medicaid Coverage                   0.073***             0.069***            0.063***              0.061***
                                     (0.009)              (0.008)             (0.008)               (0.008)
Employer Coverage                  -0.019***            -0.018***            -0.017***            -0.017***
                                    (0.005)              (0.005)              (0.005)              (0.004)
Individual Coverage                -0.020***            -0.020***            -0.018***            -0.016***
                                    (0.007)              (0.006)              (0.006)              (0.006)
Uninsured                           -0.033**             -0.029**            -0.026**              -0.027**
                                     (0.013)              (0.013)             (0.012)               (0.010)
Observations                        4,335,289           4,314,526            2,791,758            2,436,391
                                   Panel II: High Pre-ACA Industry Coverage Sample,
                                         Change in Estimates when Sample Reweighted to Approximate
                                                     Low Pre-ACA Industry Coverage Sample

Medicaid Coverage                   0.019***             0.044***            0.042***              0.047***
                                     (0.002)              (0.006)             (0.007)               (0.007)
Employer Coverage                    -0.005*            -0.017***              -0.016              -0.021**
                                     (0.003)             (0.005)              (0.011)               (0.010)
Individual Coverage                -0.007***            -0.010***            -0.024***            -0.019***
                                    (0.002)              (0.003)              (0.007)              (0.007)
Uninsured                             -0.005               -0.013              0.006                 -0.002
                                     (0.004)              (0.010)             (0.010)               (0.008)
Observations                        3,254,381           3,250,821            1,895,427            1,778,054
N otes: * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1%. Weighted
least squares estimates generated using data from the 2011-2018 American Community Survey. Standard
errors are clustered at the state level. The estimates in this table are the primary coefficients of interest
from equation (1), as described in detail in the main text. Low pre-treatment coverage industries are
defined as industries in the bottom quartile of mean employer-sponsored health insurance by industry
between 2011 and 2013. CEM 4 weights are generated to balance personal income, education, weeks
worked last year, and hours per week worked last year across individuals in high and low baseline coverage
industries. CEM 5 and 6 weights incrementally add average industry earnings and CBSA uninsured rates
as additional matching dimensions.



                                                       48
                                          Table 5
      Difference-in-Difference-in-Differences Estimates of the Relationship Between
          Affordable Care Act Implementation and Health Insurance Coverage


                                          (1)                  (2)                   (3)                        (4)
                                        Medicaid             Employer             Individual
                                        Coverage             Coverage              Coverage               Uninsured
Medicaid Expansions                     -0.016**             -0.022***                0.000                 0.030**
×Postt                                   (0.008)              (0.007)                (0.013)                (0.013)

Postt ×Uninsuredas                        0.007                 0.018                0.121*                 -0.155**
                                         (0.024)               (0.022)               (0.063)                 (0.059)

Medicaid Expansions                     0.326***                0.061                 -0.064               -0.292***
×Postt ×Uninsuredas                      (0.042)               (0.039)               (0.073)                (0.066)

Implied effects of ACA at pre-treatment uninsured rates

ACA without                               0.001                 0.004                0.025*                 -0.032**
Medicaid Expansion                       (0.005)               (0.005)               (0.013)                 (0.012)

Medicaid Expansion                      0.068***                0.013                 -0.013               -0.061***
                                         (0.009)               (0.008)               (0.015)                (0.014)

Full ACA (with                          0.070***               0.017**             0.012***                -0.093***
Medicaid Expansion)                      (0.008)               (0.008)              (0.004)                 (0.006)

Observations                           13,545,825           13,545,825            13,545,825              13,545,825

Area and Year FE                             Y                     Y                    Y                        Y
Demographic Controls                         Y                     Y                    Y                        Y
Economic Controls                            Y                     Y                    Y                        Y
N otes: * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1%. Weighted least squares
estimates generated using data from the 2011-2018 American Community Survey. Standard errors are clustered at the
state level. Demographic controls include indicators for non-Hispanic white, black, Hispanic, female, and educational
attainment (less than high school, high school degree, some college, and college degree). The estimates in this table are
the primary coefficients of interest from equation (3), as described in detail in the main text. Entries presented below the
laboe “Implied effects of ACA at pre-treatment uninsured rates” are linear combinations of the coefficients presented
earlier in the table. The pre-treatment uninsured rates used in this calculations are calculated at the local area level
using 2013 ACS data, as described in greater detail in the main text.




                                                            49
                                            Appendix
                                      Figure A.1
                      COVID-19 Cases and Deaths Per Capita by State
                        (a)                                                             (b)
             Cumulative Cases per Capita                                    Cumulative Deaths per Capita




                                              (c)
                               Average Growth in Cases per Capita
                     March and April                                                  May and June




                                             July to Current




Notes: Panels (a) and (b) illustrate cumulative COVID-19 cases and deaths per capita on September 15th as
reported by the New York Times. Panel (c) illustrates average daily new cases per capita for 3 windows.




                                                      50
                                              Figure A.2
                               Variation in Employment Decreases by State




Notes: This figure illustrates the maximum employment decrease experienced by each state. Employment decreases are
measured as the monthly change in the employment relative to the ratio in January of 2020. These values range from a
decrease of 9% to a decrease of 24% . The monthly employment data used are collected from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.



                                              Figure A.3
                              Variation in Employment Decreases by Sector




Notes: This figure illustrates monthly deviations in employment by sectors of employment with respect to January 2020.
These data come from the Current Employment Statistics survey provided by U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics retrieved from
FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.




                                                           51
                                                                           Figure A.4
                                                           Expansion vs. Non-Expansion States, 2011-2018

                                                     Panel I: Individuals with College Degree or More
                      (a)                                       (b)                                         (c)                                         (d)
               Medicaid Coverage                          Employer Coverage                         Individual Coverage                              Uninsured
52




          Panel II: Individuals Employed in Industries in Highest Quartile of Pre-Treatment Insurance Coverage
                       (e)                                       (f )                                       (g)                                          (h)
                Medicaid Coverage                         Employer Coverage                         Individual Coverage                               Uninsured




     Notes: This figure illustrates the coverage rates for different types of insurance among individuals with a college degree or more (panel I), and among individuals employed
     in industries in the highest quartile of coverage between 2011 and 2013 (panel II). The dark line is the coverage rate among expansion states, while the light grey line is the
     coverage rate among control states. The main data source is the American Community Survey.
                                                                           Figure A.5
                                                          Event-Study Analysis of State Medicaid Expansion

                                                      Panel I: Individuals with College Degree or More
                      (a)                                        (b)                                          (c)                                          (d)
               Medicaid Coverage                           Employer Coverage                          Individual Coverage                               Uninsured
53




          Panel II: Individuals Employed in Industries in Highest Quartile of Pre-Treatment Insurance Coverage
                       (e)                                        (f )                                         (g)                                          (h)
                Medicaid Coverage                          Employer Coverage                           Individual Coverage                               Uninsured




     Notes: Weighted least squares estimates generated using data from the 2011-2018 American Community Survey. Grey lines represent the 95 percent confidence intervals.
     Demographic controls include indicators for non-Hispanic white, black, Hispanic, female, and educational attainment (less than high school, high school degree, some college,
     and college degree). Economic controls include state-level per-capita income, unemployment rate, and housing price index. The estimates in this figure are the primary coefficients
     of interest from equation (2), as described in detail in the main text.
                                    Table A.1
    First (Lowest) Quartile of Industries By Employer Coverage Rate 2011-2013
                Early
NIACS
              Coverage         Industry Label
 Code
                Rate
4853          28.77            Taxi and Limousine Service
7224          29.39            Drinking Places (Alcoholic Beverages)
8140          31.27            Private Households
1140          31.70            Fishing, Hunting and Trapping
5617          32.42            Services to Buildings and Dwellings
1110          35.44            Crop Production
1133          36.69            Logging
4533          37.22            Used Merchandise Stores
5613          37.70            Employment Services
4470          37.77            Gasoline Stations
1120          39.76            Animal Production and Aquaculture
7220          39.79            Food Services and Drinking Places
8123          39.93            Drycleaning and Laundry Services
8114          41.24            Personal and Household Goods Repair and Maintenance
1150          41.31            Support Activities for Agriculture and Forestry
8121          41.55            Personal Care Services
6216          42.68            Home Health Care Services
6243          42.83            Vocational Rehabilitation Services
8111          42.93            Automotive Repair and Maintenance
3150          45.02            Apparel Manufacturing
4531          47.34            Florists
8120          48.95            Personal and Laundry Services
2300          49.27            Construction
4452          49.32            Specialty Food Stores
4453          50.68            Beer, Wine, and Liquor Stores
6244          51.98            Child Day Care Services
5616          51.98            Investigation and Security Services
7211          52.08            Traveler Accommodation
7110          52.32            Performing Arts, Spectator Sports, and Related Industries
4230          52.99            Merchant Wholesalers, Durable Goods
4510          53.28            Sporting Goods, Hobby, Musical Instrument, and Book Stores
5122          53.44            Sound Recording Industries
4840          53.49            Truck Transportation
4530          53.57            Miscellaneous Store Retailers
4870          53.65            Scenic and Sightseeing Transportation
5614          54.22            Business Support Services
3140          54.26            Textile Product Mills
4930          54.37            Warehousing and Storage
8113          54.59            Commercial and Industrial Machinery Repair and Maintenance
4543          54.82            Direct Selling Establishments
3118          55.42            Bakeries and Tortilla Manufacturing
3160          55.57            Leather and Allied Product Manufacturing
4483          55.90            Jewelry, Luggage, and Leather Goods Stores
8112          56.27            Electronic and Precision Equipment Repair and Maintenance
4482          56.75            Shoe Stores
4520          57.19            General Merchandise Stores
4451          57.38            Grocery Stores
4481          57.44            Clothing Stores
6242          57.44            Community Food and Housing, and Emergency and Other Relief Services
3210          57.49            Wood Product Manufacturing
N otes: This table lists industries in the bottom quartile of employer sponsored health insurance from 2011 to 2013.




                                                        54
                                      Table A.2
         Second Quartile of Industries By Employer Coverage Rate 2011-2013
                Early
NIACS
              Coverage         Industry Label
 Code
                Rate
6213          57.50            Offices of Other Health Practitioners
5414          57.51            Specialized Design Services
4200          57.54            Wholesale Trade
4413          58.00            Automotive Parts, Accessories, and Tire Stores
4542          58.03            Vending Machine Operators
5310          58.04            Real Estate
6230          58.17            Nursing and Residential Care Facilities
4420          58.73            Furniture and Home Furnishings Stores
4511          59.19            Sporting Goods, Hobby, and Musical Instrument Stores
3370          59.28            Furniture and Related Product Manufacturing
4243          59.33            Apparel, Piece Goods, and Notions Merchant Wholesalers
4512          59.92            Book Stores and News Dealers
5610          60.06            Administrative and Support Services
6231          60.41            Nursing Care Facilities (Skilled Nursing Facilities)
3211          60.43            Sawmills and Wood Preservation
5410          60.58            Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services
4232          60.79            Furniture and Home Furnishing Merchant Wholesalers
5320          60.92            Rental and Leasing Services
3133          61.06            Textile and Fabric Finishing and Fabric Coating Mills
3100          61.26            Manufacturing
6241          61.42            Individual and Family Services
7130          61.54            Amusement, Gambling, and Recreation Industries
5121          61.83            Motion Picture and Video Industries
4532          61.94            Office Supplies, Stationery, and Gift Stores
4460          62.34            Health and Personal Care Stores
7210          62.60            Accommodation
3116          62.80            Animal Slaughtering and Processing
6212          62.86            Offices of Dentists
5620          62.92            Waste Management and Remediation Services
4412          62.93            Other Motor Vehicle Dealers
3131          63.05            Fiber, Yarn, and Thread Mills
4541          63.20            Electronic Shopping and Mail-Order Houses
3113          63.23            Sugar and Confectionery Product Manufacturing
3114          63.60            Fruit and Vegetable Preserving and Specialty Food Manufacturing
4880          64.30            Support Activities for Transportation
3390          64.31            Miscellaneous Manufacturing
4251          64.58            Wholesale Electronic Markets and Agents and Brokers
3132          65.22            Fabric Mills
4441          65.70            Building Material and Supplies Dealers
4442          66.01            Lawn and Garden Equipment and Supplies Stores
3328          66.19            Coating, Engraving, Heat Treating, and Allied Activities
4231          66.28            Motor Vehicle and Motor Vehicle Parts and Supplies Merchant Wholesalers
3212          66.34            Veneer, Plywood, and Engineered Wood Product Manufacturing
4411          66.52            Automobile Dealers
4431          66.59            Electronics and Appliance Stores
4244          67.40            Grocery and Related Product Merchant Wholesalers
3162          67.55            Footwear Manufacturing
8131          67.61            Religious Organizations
8122          68.13            Death Care Services
5615          68.39            Travel Arrangement and Reservation Services
N otes: This table lists industries in the second quartile of employer sponsored health insurance from 2011 to 2013.




                                                        55
                                        Table A.3
            Third Quartile of Industries By Employer Coverage Rate 2011-2013
                Early
NIACS
              Coverage         Industry Label
 Code
                Rate
4850          68.46            Transit and Ground Passenger Transportation
3270          69.68            Nonmetallic Mineral Product Manufacturing
4233          69.73            Lumber and Other Construction Materials Merchant Wholesalers
5412          69.90            Accounting, Tax Preparation, Bookkeeping, and Payroll Services
3231          69.90            Printing and Related Support Activities
5111          70.57            Newspaper, Periodical, Book, and Directory Publishers
3261          70.84            Plastics Product Manufacturing
3252          70.84            Resin, Synthetic Rubber, and Artificial and Synthetic Fibers and Filaments Manufacturing
8130          70.89            Religious, Grantmaking, Civic, Professional, and Similar Organizations
4240          70.91            Merchant Wholesalers, Nondurable Goods
3110          71.30            Food Manufacturing
7120          71.50            Museums, Historical Sites, and Similar Institutions
3271          71.59            Clay Product and Refractory Manufacturing
4461          71.65            Health and Personal Care Stores
4920          71.77            Couriers and Messengers
5416          71.90            Management, Scientific, and Technical Consulting Services
5418          72.05            Advertising, Public Relations, and Related Services
3327          72.15            Machine Shops; Turned Product; and Screw, Nut, and Bolt Manufacturing
3322          72.79            Cutlery and Handtool Manufacturing
3256          72.82            Soap, Cleaning Compound, and Toilet Preparation Manufacturing
2130          73.00            Support Activities for Mining
3320          73.25            Fabricated Metal Product Manufacturing
3272          73.27            Glass and Glass Product Manufacturing
1130          73.38            Forestry and Logging
3141          73.40            Textile Furnishings Mills
3366          73.53            Ship and Boat Building
4245          73.67            Farm Product Raw Material Merchant Wholesalers
6210          73.94            Ambulatory Health Care Services
6211          74.59            Offices of Physicians
4241          74.60            Paper and Paper Product Merchant Wholesalers
3315          74.63            Foundries
5411          74.69            Legal Services
2123          74.81            Nonmetallic Mineral Mining and Quarrying
5220          75.39            Credit Intermediation and Related Activities
4830          75.75            Water Transportation
6214          75.83            Outpatient Care Centers
3321          75.85            Forging and Stamping
5300          76.13            Real Estate and Rental and Leasing
3121          76.22            Beverage Manufacturing
3222          76.55            Converted Paper Product Manufacturing
6110          76.88            Educational Services
5182          77.00            Data Processing, Hosting, and Related Services
5150          77.04            Broadcasting (except Internet)
4236          77.17            Household Appliances and Electrical and Electronic Goods Merchant Wholesalers
3360          77.42            Transportation Equipment Manufacturing
5191          77.48            Other Information Services
3122          77.69            Tobacco Manufacturing
4237          78.33            Hardware, and Plumbing and Heating Equipment and Supplies Merchant Wholesalers
4234          78.38            Professional and Commercial Equipment and Supplies Merchant Wholesalers
4235          78.40            Metal and Mineral (except Petroleum) Merchant Wholesalers
N otes: This table lists industries in the third quartile of employer sponsored health insurance from 2011 to 2013.




                                                         56
                                      Table A.4
         Fourth (Highest) Quartile of Industries By Employer Rate 2011-2013
                Early
NIACS
              Coverage         Industry Label
 Code
                Rate
4238          78.47            Machinery, Equipment, and Supplies Merchant Wholesalers
3115          78.63            Dairy Product Manufacturing
3352          78.75            Household Appliance Manufacturing
3313          78.81            Alumina and Aluminum Production and Processing
3330          79.00            Machinery Manufacturing
3262          79.05            Rubber Product Manufacturing
3365          79.53            Railroad Rolling Stock Manufacturing
3253          79.74            Pesticide, Fertilizer, and Other Agricultural Chemical Manufacturing
5413          79.87            Architectural, Engineering, and Related Services
3350          79.91            Electrical Equipment, Appliance, and Component Manufacturing
4248          79.99            Beer, Wine, and Distilled Alcoholic Beverage Merchant Wholesalers
4860          79.99            Pipeline Transportation
3255          80.02            Paint, Coating, and Adhesive Manufacturing
3335          80.17            Metalworking Machinery Manufacturing
3331          80.22            Agriculture, Construction, and Mining Machinery Manufacturing
4247          80.23            Petroleum and Petroleum Products Merchant Wholesalers
3310          80.38            Primary Metal Manufacturing
3333          80.55            Commercial and Service Industry Machinery Manufacturing
3314          80.63            Nonferrous Metal (except Aluminum) Production and Processing
3391          80.85            Medical Equipment and Supplies Manufacturing
5240          81.70            Insurance Carriers and Related Activities
5415          81.74            Computer Systems Design and Related Services
4910          81.86            Postal Service
3340          82.12            Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing
2110          82.25            Oil and Gas Extraction
2121          82.31            Coal Mining
5170          82.59            Telecommunications
3241          82.86            Petroleum and Coal Products Manufacturing
3221          83.20            Pulp, Paper, and Paperboard Mills
6111          84.19            Elementary and Secondary Schools
5500          84.25            Management of Companies and Enterprises
2213          84.31            Water, Sewage and Other Systems
3341          84.55            Computer and Peripheral Equipment Manufacturing
5417          84.56            Scientific Research and Development Services
5200          84.78            Finance and Insurance
4810          84.96            Air Transportation
5221          85.50            Depository Credit Intermediation
6220          85.72            Hospitals
2122          85.75            Metal Ore Mining
3336          85.85            Engine, Turbine, and Power Transmission Equipment Manufacturing
3345          85.89            Navigational, Measuring, Electromedical, and Control Instruments Manufacturing
3250          86.29            Chemical Manufacturing
3364          87.99            Aerospace Product and Parts Manufacturing
3254          88.10            Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing
2212          88.26            Natural Gas Distribution
2200          89.16            Utilities
2211          89.35            Electric Power Generation, Transmission and Distribution
5112          89.95            Software Publishers
4820          90.05            Rail Transportation
2210          91.05            Utilities
N otes: This table lists industries in the top quartile of employer sponsored health insurance from 2011 to 2013.




                                                        57
                                      Table A.5
        Difference-in-Differences Estimates of the Relationship Between State
             Medicaid Expansion and Education and Employment Status


                                                     (1)               (2)               (3)
                                                       Panel I: High School Degree or less
Medicaid Expansions ×Postt                         0.001                    0.001                   0.002*
                                                  (0.001)                  (0.001)                  (0.001)

                                                                  Panel II: Employed
Medicaid Expansions ×Postt                         0.002                    0.002                    -0.001
                                                  (0.003)                  (0.003)                  (0.002)

                                              Panel III: Employed in a low Coverage Industry
Medicaid Expansions ×Postt                         -0.001                   -0.001                 -0.002**
                                                  (0.001)                  (0.001)                  (0.001)

Observations                                   15,287,904               15,287,904               15,287,904

State Year FE                                        Y                        Y                        Y
Demographic Controls                                                          Y                        Y
Economic Controls                                                                                      Y
N otes: * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1%. Weighted least
squares estimates generated using data from the 2011-2018 American Community Survey. Standard errors are
clustered at the state level. Demographic controls include indicators for non-Hispanic white, black, Hispanic,
female, and educational attainment (less than high school, high school degree, some college, and college degree).
Economic controls include state-level per-capita income, unemployment rate, and housing price index. The
estimates in this table are the primary coefficients of interest from equation (3), as described in detail in the
main text. Low pre-treatment coverage industries are defined as industries in the bottom quartile of mean
employer-sponsored health insurance coverage rates between 2011 and 2013




                                                       58
                                                                      Table A.6
                                                          4 Dimension CEM Weights Summary

                                                   Panel I: Weighting High Early Coverage to Match Low Early Coverage
                                                                       Means by CEM Weight Bins
     Weight Bin                  [0,0.25)       [0.25,0.5)       [0.5,0.75)      [0.75,1)         [1,1]           (1,2)         [2,4)         [4,8)        [8, 66]

     CEM weight                   0.148            0.367            0.629          0.863          1.000          1.403         2.783          5.390        10.614
     Hours per Week                 43               44               41             39             37             39            37             32            31
     Weeks Worked                  5.7              5.6              5.4            5.4            4.9             5.1           5.0           4.1           4.1
     Income                     108,618          58,424           46,086          42,220         31,098          31,847        22,767        12,816        10,258
     School                        21.3             20.5             19.2           18.7           17.0           18.0          16.8           15.8          12.9
     Industy Earnings            5,426            5,083            5,203           5,145          2,718          5,033         4,961         4,811         4,733
     Early Cov Rate              83.522           83.879           83.837         83.735         46.446         83.682        83.604         83.616        83.458
     High Early Cov              0.011            0.000            0.000          0.000           1.000          0.000         0.000          0.000         0.000
     Observations              1,209,769         529,762          363,792        289,725       4,314,526        433,471       280,633       131,228        28,445
59




                                                   Panel II: Weighting Low Early Coverage to Match High Early Coverage
                                                                        Means by CEM Weight Bins
     Weight Bin                  [0,0.25)       [0.25,0.5)       [0.5,0.75)      [0.75,1)         [1,1]           (1,2)         [2,4)         [4,8)        [8, 34]

     CEM weight                   0.156            0.359            0.615          0.874         1.000           1.365         2.726          5.713         9.387
     Hours per Week                 32               37               38             39            41              40             44            44            40
     Weeks Worked                  4.1              5.0              5.0            5.3           5.4              5.4           5.6           5.8           5.7
     Income                     12,160           21,883            29,117         34,825         66,390          44,013        58,401        94,612       127,752
     School                        14.7             16.7             17.6           18.3          19.6            18.8           20.2          20.9          21.1
     Industy Earnings            2,462            2,641            2,795           2,857         5,206           2,978         3,063         3,135         3,222
     Early Cov Rate              45.067           46.244           47.049         47.432        83.825          47.768        47.791         47.948        48.025
     Low Early Cov               0.002            0.000             0.000         0.000          1.000           0.000          0.000         0.000        0.000
     Observations              1,354,943        1,036,883         501,896        304,626       3,250,821        637,093       257,596       175,724       61,769

     N otes: This table provides means of matching variables by weight bin. The weights summarised in this table were constructed using the CEM matching
     procedure as described in the text in section 5.1. Columns 1 through 4 show descriptive statistics for individuals that received weight less than one while
     columns 6 through 9 show descriptive statistics for individuals that received weight greater than one. Column 5 shows descriptive statistics for individuals
     with high early coverage (panel I) or individuals with low early coverage (panel II). The 4 dimensions used for creating the CEM weights summarised in
     this table are hours worked per week last year, weeks worked last year, personal income, and years of schooling.
                                                                      Table A.7
                                                          5 Dimension CEM Weights Summary

                                                   Panel I: Weighting High Early Coverage to Match Low Early Coverage
                                                                       Means by CEM Weight Bins
     Weight Bin                  [0,0.25)       [0.25,0.5)      [0.5,0.75)       [0.75,1)         [1,1]          (1,2)          [2,4)        [4,8)       [8, 2,161]

     CEM weight                   0.024            0.352           0.617           0.860          1.000           1.366         2.866        5.517        31.701
     Hours per Week                 39               39              40              39             38              40            43           43            38
     Weeks Worked                  5.1              5.5             5.3             5.6            5.1             5.5           5.0          4.8           5.0
     Income                     54,594           60,990           33,213         36,718         35,735           38,733        44,705       45,990        34,027
     School                        18.9             20.0            19.0            18.0           17.1            16.9          16.0         15.4          17.4
     Industy Earnings            4,079             4,338           4,272          4,207          3,247           4,237          4,203        3,984         2,686
     Early Cov Rate              67.710           84.718          84.584          84.440         48.636          84.050        83.690       83.195        82.090
     High Early Cov              0.387            0.000           0.000           0.000           1.000           0.000         0.000        0.000         0.000
     Observations              3,966,309         246,058         156,375         100,021       2,791,758        180,743        82,067       30,108        27,912
60




                                                   Panel II: Weighting Low Early Coverage to Match High Early Coverage
                                                                        Means by CEM Weight Bins
     Weight Bin                  [0,0.25)       [0.25,0.5)      [0.5,0.75)       [0.75,1)         [1,1]          (1,2)          [2,4)        [4,8)       [8, 1,001]

     CEM weight                   0.019            0.349           0.614           0.869          1.000           1.405         2.843        5.166        19.160
     Hours per Week                 38               43              41              40             40              39            38           39            39
     Weeks Worked                  5.0              5.0             5.3             5.6            5.4             5.4           5.5          5.5           5.4
     Income                     44,600           44,549           41,739         36,041         52,918           34,922        57,077       75,158        51,003
     School                        17.7             15.9            16.9            16.9           19.5            18.4          19.8         20.3          20.0
     Industy Earnings            3,569             3,983           4,035          3,969          4,150           3,994          4,091        4,078         3,988
     Early Cov Rate              56.875           49.389          49.587          49.680         83.952          49.970        50.192       50.363        50.869
     Low Early Cov               0.306            0.000            0.000          0.000          1.000            0.000         0.000        0.000         0.000
     Observations              4,442,056         346,726         195,753         167,355       1,895,427        269,324       127,321       75,260        62,129

     N otes: This table provides means of matching variables by weight bin. The weights summarised in this table were constructed using the CEM matching
     procedure as described in the text in section 5.1. Columns 1 through 4 show descriptive statistics for individuals that received weight less than one while
     columns 6 through 9 show descriptive statistics for individuals that received weight greater than one. Column 5 shows descriptive statistics for individuals
     with high early coverage (panel I) or individuals with low early coverage (panel II). The 5 dimensions used for creating the CEM weights summarised in
     this table are hours worked per week last year, weeks worked last year, personal income, years of schooling, and average industry earnings.
                                                                     Table A.8
                                                         6 Dimension CEM Weights Summary

                                                  Panel I: Weighting High Early Coverage to Match Low Early Coverage
                                                                      Means by CEM Weight Bins
     Weight Bin                  [0,0.25)       [0.25,0.5)      [0.5,0.75)       [0.75,1)         [1,1]          (1,2)          [2,4)        [4,8)       [8, 887]

     CEM weight                   0.020            0.353           0.626           0.875          1.000           1.391         2.807        5.440       28.778
     Hours per Week                 38               39              39              40             39              40            42           42           38
     Weeks Worked                  5.0              5.5             5.3             5.6            5.2             5.5           5.0          5.0          5.1
     Income                     52,149           63,797           35,797         36,550         36,902           38,969        43,789       44,817       32,908
     School                        18.6             20.1            19.0            18.1           17.2            17.1          16.2         15.5         17.3
     Industy Earnings            3,969             4,339           4,325          4,173          3,320           4,236          4,194        3,984       2,769
     Early Cov Rate              65.965           84.693          84.600          84.364         48.904          84.079        83.712       83.236       82.173
     High Early Cov              0.438            0.000           0.000           0.000           1.000           0.000         0.000        0.000        0.000
     Observations              4,293,417         259,671         146,003         108,341       2,436,391        178,208        81,901       33,273       26,234
61




                                                  Panel II: Weighting Low Early Coverage to Match High Early Coverage
                                                                       Means by CEM Weight Bins
     Weight Bin                  [0,0.25)       [0.25,0.5)      [0.5,0.75)       [0.75,1)         [1,1]          (1,2)          [2,4)        [4,8)       [8, 356]

     CEM weight                   0.018            0.356           0.621           0.863          1.000           1.365         2.834        5.208       18.263
     Hours per Week                 38               42              40              40             40              40            39           39           40
     Weeks Worked                  4.9              5.0             5.4             5.6            5.4             5.5           5.5          5.5          5.5
     Income                     44,952           43,645           40,599         37,056         52,653           36,097        60,679       68,997       52,653
     School                        17.7             16.1            16.9            17.1           19.5            18.4          19.8         20.2         20.0
     Industy Earnings            3,595             3,964           4,043          3,941          4,148           4,000          4,090        4,043       3,981
     Early Cov Rate              57.387           49.396          49.660          49.663         83.996          49.974        50.213       50.401       50.846
     Low Early Cov               0.317            0.000            0.000          0.000          1.000            0.000         0.000        0.000        0.000
     Observations              4,631,439         315,037         201,302         138,144       1,778,054        255,463       125,489       66,658       51,853

     N otes: This table provides means of matching variables by weight bin. The weights summarised in this table were constructed using the CEM matching
     procedure as described in the text in section 5.1. Columns 1 through 4 show descriptive statistics for individuals that received weight less than one while
     columns 6 through 9 show descriptive statistics for individuals that received weight greater than one. Column 5 shows descriptive statistics for individuals
     with high early coverage (panel I) or individuals with low early coverage (panel II). The 6 dimensions used for creating the CEM weights summarised in
     this table are hours worked per week last year, weeks worked last year, personal income, years of schooling, average industry earnings, local area insurance
     rate.
