                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        HOSPITAL ALLOCATION AND RACIAL DISPARITIES IN HEALTH CARE

                                        Amitabh Chandra
                                         Pragya Kakani
                                         Adam Sacarny

                                       Working Paper 28018
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28018


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020

We thank Marcella Alsan, Andrew Bacon-Goodman, Janet Currie, Conrad Miller,
Aaron Schwartz, Jon Skinner, Chad Syverson, and seminar participants at ASHEcon,
AcademyHealth ARM, CEPRA, NBER Summer Institute, New York Academy of Medicine,
Hunter College, and the Dartmouth P01 Research Meeting for their helpful comments and advice.
We thank Maurice Dalton, Mohan Ramanujan, and Jean Roth for their assistance with CMS
data. We gratefully acknowledge support from the National Institute on Aging P01-
AG005842 (all) and T32- AG000186 (Kakani) as well as the Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality T32-HS000055 (Kakani). Kakani and Sacarny declare that they have no relevant
or material financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper. This research
was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of Harvard University, Columbia
University, and the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research, the National Institute on Aging, or the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w28018.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Amitabh Chandra, Pragya Kakani, and Adam Sacarny. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Hospital Allocation and Racial Disparities in Health Care
Amitabh Chandra, Pragya Kakani, and Adam Sacarny
NBER Working Paper No. 28018
October 2020
JEL No. D24,I11,I14

                                          ABSTRACT

We develop a simple framework to measure the role of hospital allocation in racial disparities in
health care and use it to study Black and white Medicare patients who are treated for heart attacks
– a condition where virtually everyone receives care, hospital care is highly effective, and
hospital quality has been validated. We report four facts. (1) Black patients receive care at lower-
performing hospitals than white patients, even when they live in the same hospital market or ZIP
code within a hospital market.(2) Over the past two decades, the gap in performance between
hospitals treating Black and white patients shrank by over two-thirds. (3) This progress is due to
more rapid performance improvement at hospitals that tended to treat Black patients, rather than
faster reallocation of Black patients to better hospitals. (4) Hospital performance improvement is
correlated with adoption of a high-return low-cost input, beta-blockers. Closing remaining
disparities in allocation and harnessing the forces of performance improvement, including
technology diffusion, may be novel levers to further reduce disparities.

Amitabh Chandra                                  Adam Sacarny
John F. Kennedy School of Government             Mailman School of Public Health
Harvard University                               Columbia University
79 JFK Street                                    722 West 168th Street
Cambridge, MA 02138                              New York, NY 10032
and NBER                                         and NBER
amitabh_chandra@harvard.edu                      ajs2102@columbia.edu

Pragya Kakani
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
pkakani@g.harvard.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28018
1    Introduction

    Black Americans experience considerable disparities in health outcomes in the U.S. relative to

other demographic groups. The overall age-adjusted death rate is 20% higher for non-Hispanic

Black Americans than their non-Hispanic white peers (Murphy et al., 2015). The causes behind

this gap are multifactorial and interrelated (Williams and Jackson, 2005). They include inequities

existing prior to health care delivery related to living conditions, like income and education (Cutler,

Deaton and Lleras-Muney, 2006; Braveman, Egerter and Williams, 2011); di↵erences in the quality

of care from a given health care provider due to communication and biases (Institutes of Medicine,

2003; Chandra and Staiger, 2010; Alsan, Garrick and Graziani, 2019); and di↵erences in the health

care providers patients use.

    This last source of racial disparities derives from allocation: Black and white patients are often

treated by di↵erent health care providers, some of which may have much higher (or lower) perfor-

mance. Health care providers that serve Black patients tend to have poorer patient outcomes and

report lacking the resources to deliver high-quality care (Bach and Schrag, 2004; Barnato et al.,

2005; Skinner et al., 2005; Jha et al., 2007). The allocative forces that generate these disparities

reflect historical and current inequities, including the long shadow of de jure hospital segrega-

tion, trust, and neighborhood segregation (Smith, 2005; Sarrazin, Campbell and Rosenthal, 2009;

Chandra, Frakes and Malani, 2017; Alsan and Wanamaker, 2018). Di↵erences in allocation may

derive from decisions made by patients and by agents acting on their behalf, including physicians,

ambulance drivers, and family members.

    Over time, patients tend to reallocate towards higher-performing hospitals (Chandra et al.,

2016). Whether these allocative forces exacerbate or reduce racial disparities over time is ambigu-

ous. Reallocation could be easier for better-resourced groups or it may be more feasible for groups

receiving care from low-performing hospitals because there is more room to improve. The role of

allocation in racial disparities is of central importance because it is a powerful driver of improving

outcomes: Chandra et al. (2016) found that reallocation to higher-performing hospitals accounted

for 1 percentage point of the increase in heart attack survival rates from 1996 to 2008, a similar

magnitude to that of breakthrough medical technologies.

    This study focuses on Black and white patients in Medicare experiencing an acute myocardial


                                                  1
infarction (AMI), or heart attack, between 1995 and 2014. Taking an allocation perspective derived

from the literature on firm productivity growth (Baily et al., 1992; Olley and Pakes, 1996; Foster,

Haltiwanger and Krizan, 2001, 2006; Bartelsman, Haltiwanger and Scarpetta, 2013), we first show

that during the 1990s, Black patients’ were treated at lower-performing hospitals relative to white

patients (Figure 1). Next, by reweighting white patients to have the same distribution of geography

as Black patients, we show that in the 1990s di↵erences in the hospital markets patients live

in explain 44% of the Black-white gap (we use 306 hospital referral regions to describe hospital

markets). Much of the 1990s disparity therefore derives from Black patients living in markets with

low-performing hospitals, a feature that would also hamper reallocation as a tool for disparity

reduction because it would require patients to travel long distances in search of better treatment.

Di↵erences in the ZIP codes patients live in (within hospital markets) explain a further 25% of

the gap. This component of the disparity may reflect di↵erences in where patients live in markets

relative to high-performing facilities and may be more amenable to reallocation. The remaining

32% reflects di↵erences in the performance of hospitals that white and Black patients are treated

at despite living in the same ZIP code. This component could encompass di↵erences by race in

where patients live within small areas areas as well as di↵ering beliefs about hospital performance

on the part of patients or agents acting on their behalf.

   By the 2010s we find that the gap in the performance of hospitals used by Black and white

AMI patients had shrunk by 70% (Figure 2). By this point in time, it was no longer the case that

di↵erences in the hospital markets that Black and white patients lived in contributed to the gap.

These findings suggest that Black-white disparities in heart attack care no longer emanate from

large-region di↵erences in where patients live (e.g. the North versus the South, or even Nashville

versus Memphis). Rather, more local di↵erences in where patients live and in the hospitals that

use now drive the observed but much smaller racial gap. The remaining gap is also potentially

actionable through allocation policies because it would not depend on emergency patients traveling

long distances to access better hospitals. Still, it is important not to view a change in the disparity

as automatically reflecting the force of reallocation to higher-performing hospitals. For example,

there may have been no change in where patients were treated, but greater improvement at the

hospitals where Black patients tended to receive care. Further investigation is required to demon-

strate whether reallocation or performance improvement is responsible for the narrowing disparity

                                                  2
uncovered by the static analyses.

    We next develop a dynamic decomposition framework to elucidate the economic forces behind

these trends. We find larger performance gains at hospitals used by Black patients than those

used by white patients at baseline. In fact, the entire closing of the gap results from di↵erential

performance improvement (Figure 3) – meaning that hospitals which tended to treat Black patients

raised their performance more than other hospitals. Under one-third of the convergence can be

attributed to di↵erential reallocation, where Black patients increased their use of higher performing

facilities at a faster rate than white patients. These findings show that in the AMI context, perfor-

mance improvement has acted as a force to improve outcomes and reduce disparities, highlighting

the potential importance of this channel in analyses of disparities in the health care system. The

framework we develop also represents a methodological contribution that can be applied to study

the role of allocation in disparities in many contexts such as education, employment, and criminal

justice.

    Finally, we investigate the role of technology in performance improvement by analyzing the

adoption of low- and high-cost AMI treatment technologies. Beta-blockers are inexpensive med-

ications that were known to substantially improve outcomes at the onset of our analysis period,

and we find that the use of these drugs grew more rapidly at hospitals that tended to treat Black

patients at baseline. Thus, the adoption of beta-blockers and other technologies for which they

are a surrogate, including better management, may have contributed to di↵erential performance

improvements (Bloom et al., 2012; McConnell et al., 2013; Skinner and Staiger, 2015; Bloom, Sadun

and Van Reenen, 2016). At the same time, we find that the adoption patterns of capital-intensive

technologies like cardiac catheterization are disparity-expanding. These findings allow us to con-

nect the literature on racial disparities to literatures on allocative forces as well as the productivity

of medical treatments.

    Our results are robust to a host of alternative approaches to measuring hospital performance.

They hold under richer or coarser controls for patient observables, suggesting that endogenous

selection of hospitals does not drive the results. Moreover, they are insensitive to whether we mea-

sure hospital performance for Black patients or white patients, ruling out alternative explanations

for our findings like hospitals addressing within-facility racial disparities in treatment rather than

improving performance for all patients.

                                                   3
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 covers our data and performance

measurement approach, Section 3 explains our static and dynamic decomposition frameworks,

Section 4 presents results, Section 5 provides evidence on the role of technology adoption, and

Section 6 concludes.



2     Setting, Data, and Measurement

2.1   Setting

    We examine Medicare beneficiaries with Fee-for-Service (FFS) coverage hospitalized for an AMI

between 1995-2014. This setting has a number of advantages for this study. One is that it essentially

removes insurance coverage as a determinant of patient allocation to hospitals. FFS Medicare

patients have access to the vast majority of hospitals and for most patients, there is no di↵erence in

the cost of going to a di↵erent hospital. Selection into the hospitalization data is also less of an issue

because AMI is an emergent condition requiring immediate treatment at a hospital – there is little

scope for patients to go untreated or undiagnosed. AMI also has validated hospital quality measures:

hospital measures of quality using risk-adjusted survival and calculated using observational data

correlate extremely well with quality measured from patients who are quasi-randomly assigned to

facilities (Hull, 2020; Doyle, Graves and Gruber, 2019). This research suggests that the rich patient

data in Medicare claims accounts for endogenous hospital selection well, yielding quality measures

with a strong signal of true performance. The rich data on AMI treatment also provides observable

measures of technology use like beta-blockers and cardiac catheterization that allow us to probe the

mechanisms underlying changes in hospital performance. Finally, allocative forces have been shown

to operate at a point in time and over time for heart attacks (Chandra et al., 2016), and there has

been technological progress that is tracked in data, allowing us to understand why hospitals are

improving (e.g. McClellan, McNeil and Newhouse, 1994; Cutler et al., 1998; Chandra and Staiger,

2007, 2020). Given the aforementioned reasons, we do not study allocation to physicians rather

than hospitals or allocation for common chronic diseases. While these sources of health care would

be important to study, analyses would su↵er from a lack of validated outcomes measures and the

potential selection into an office visit or hospital stay.

    We conduct point-in-time analyses during a baseline period (1995-1999) and an endline period


                                                    4
(2010-2014). Our over-time analyses consider changes from the baseline to endline period. Thus, for

each hospital, we measure allocation and performance in those two periods. In addition, we estimate

allocation and performance for intermediate periods (2000-2004 and 2005-2009) when visualizing

their evolution in figures. To conduct inference, we use a hospital-level bootstrap approach with

1000 replicates (Appendix Section D).


2.2      Data

       Our primary data source is Medicare hospitalization records for 100% of beneficiaries between

1995-2014 linked to enrollment records with demographic information about these individuals. To-

gether these data provide rich information about patients, including their race, location of residence,

the hospital at which they receive treatment, and their diagnoses.1 To define hospital markets, we

use Hospital Referral Regions (HRRs) from the Dartmouth Atlas. This market definition uses the

empirical patterns of where Medicare patients go for major surgeries to create 306 hospital markets

for the U.S. Lastly, to observe use of beta-blockers, which is not tracked in the claims, we link to

1994-1995 patient records abstracted for the Cooperative Cardiovascular Project (CCP), a large-

scale e↵ort to measure hospital quality, and publicly reported process of care measures from CMS

for 2010-2014 (see Appendix Section C.1).

       The initial sample consists of patients who were hospitalized for AMI during the study period,

omitting hospital stays within one year of a prior AMI admission to exclude return visits. Following

the literature, we call these hospitalizations index events. We limit our sample to patients age

66 and above with full FFS Medicare coverage during the year prior to admission and the year

subsequent to it (or until death if the patient dies during that year). Patients with Medicare

Advantage coverage and those with a lapse in full (Part A+B) coverage are omitted because they

are poorly observed in the data. We further restrict to events at short-term acute care or critical

access hospitals, because these are the hospitals that treat heart attack patients. Because we use

index events to estimate hospital performance, we require that the hospital have at least 25 events

during the relevant 5-year measurement period (1995-1999, 2000-2004, 2005-2009, or 2010-2014).
   1
    Because hospital identifiers in Medicare data may change over time, we use a longitudinal crosswalk provided
by Jonathan Skinner and the Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy and Clinical Practice to merge together all
identifiers that ever refer to the same facility. Hospitals that change identifiers are tracked as one facility; hospitals
that merge or de-merge are treated as one facility for the entire analysis period.



                                                            5
After imposing these restrictions, the result is the main analysis sample, which we use to estimate

hospital performance. To analyze allocation, we focus on hospitals that met this patient volume

threshold in the baseline period (1995-1999) and the endline period (2010-2014), yielding a balanced

panel; we later show that our findings are robust to adding hospitals that only meet this restriction

in one of the two periods.


2.3   Performance measurement

   To measure hospital performance, we estimate adjusted survival rates for hospitals in each of

the 5-year baseline and endline periods. Specifically, we calculate the 30-day survival rate of AMI

patients at the hospital after adjusting for patient comorbidities and demographic factors. We

describe our approach here and in more detail in Appendix Section A. Starting with the analysis

sample, we calculate hospital performance by estimating the following equation:


                                     siht = ↵t +   t Xiht   +   ht   + ✏iht ,                     (1)


where i indexes patients, h indexes hospitals, t indexes time period, siht is an indicator for whether

the patient survived 30 days from their hospital admission date, Xiht is a vector of comorbidity

and demographic indicators,     ht   are hospital fixed e↵ects, and ✏iht is a disturbance term. The

comorbidities consist of indicators for whether a patient had diagnoses for any of 23 conditions

during a hospital stay in the year prior to the admission and the demographic indicators are age-

race-sex interactions. This regression is estimated separately in each period.

   We then develop performance measures reflecting the expected 30-day survival for the average

Black and white patient at the given hospital and time period:


                                          B
                                        q̂ht  ↵t + ˆht + X̄tB ˆt
                                             =ˆ                                                   (2)

                                          W
                                        q̂ht  ↵t + ˆht + X̄tW ˆt ,
                                             =ˆ                                                   (3)


where X̄tB and X̄tW are the average comorbidity and demographic indicators for Black and white

patients in period t, respectively. Within a period, the measures from equations 2 and 3 are perfectly

correlated because each is a level-shift of the other. This model pools patients of all races when


                                                     6
estimating hospital performance. It allows Black and white patients to have di↵erent outcomes on

average, but does not allow for race-specific hospital e↵ects—such a model would be hampered by

the fact that 20% of hospitals do not treat a single Black patient and many others treat too few

Black patients to estimate a precise race-specific hospital e↵ect (Barnato et al., 2005; Chandra,

Frakes and Malani, 2017). Robustness analyses reported in Section 4.3 describe this assumption

in more detail and show that our results are robust to an alternative approach to performance

measurement that relaxes it. This approach highlights another key point about the forces we

analyze: they are are distinct from those which reduce racial disparities in outcomes within a given

hospital. This source of disparities is a crucial object of study but is not the focus of this work.2


2.4      Allocation measurement

       Using these data, we measure the allocation of Black and white patients to hospitals during

the baseline and endline periods. We define allocation as the national market share of the hospital

among patients in the given race group in the given time period:


                                        B     B
                                       ✓ht = Nht /NtB , ✓ht
                                                         W     W
                                                            = Nht /NtW .                                           (4)


2.5      Summary statistics

       Table 1 presents summary statistics on the patients and hospitals included in our main analyses.

Panel A describes Black and white patients in the baseline and endline periods. Overall, in both

periods, Black patients were more likely to be female, had a greater burden of illness as measured

by the comorbidities, and were younger. The number of heart attack patients decreased from

baseline to endline. This decline reflects reductions in AMI incidence during this period as well

as the rise of private insurance coverage in the Medicare program (Medicare Advantage), since

these patients are poorly observed in our data and are thus excluded (Jacobson, Damico and 2018,

2018; Yeh and Selby, 2010). Black patients had higher survival rates in both periods than their

white counterparts. This pattern is well-documented in AMI and other emergent conditions in the

above-65 population, and may be due to unobserved health status di↵erences by race among people
   2
    A recent analysis at the frontier of research on how disparities could arise from di↵erences in the quality of care
within providers comes from Alsan, Garrick and Graziani (2019), who consider the role of physician race in the quality
of health care for Black men.


                                                          7
who survive to older age as well as di↵erences in the use of medical procedures with short-term

risks of mortality (Barnato et al., 2005; Polsky et al., 2007, 2008; Thomas et al., 2011; Downing

et al., 2018; Huckfeldt et al., 2019).

    Panel B shows baseline and endline characteristics of the 2,712 hospitals in our main analyses.

We note large variations in performance across hospitals as operationalized by 30-day survival

adjusting for patient observables and measurement error (see Appendix Section A). In both periods

the standard deviation of survival rates across hospitals is 4 percentage points. To benchmark this

magnitude, we note that survival rates rose 5 percentage points for both groups of patients between

the baseline and endline periods. Thus going to a hospital with 1 standard deviation greater AMI

performance at a point in time yields a similar benefit to the average rise in performance nationally

over two decades.

    The remainder of Panel B shows statistics about the allocation of patients to hospitals. The

average hospital has hundreds of AMI patients during each 5 year period. Nearly every hospital

treats at least one white patient, but due to the smaller numbers of Black patients as well as

geographic segregation, 531 hospitals treat no Black patients at baseline and 592 treat no Black

patients at endline.



3    Analytical Approach: Static and Dynamic Decompositions

    Our main empirical analyses document and decompose disparities in the performance of hospi-

tals that Black and white patients use. We first study these disparities at a point-in-time, yielding a

static decomposition. Our approach draws on methods previously employed to study the firm-level

drivers of sector-wide productivity growth (Foster, Haltiwanger and Krizan, 2001; Foster, Halti-

wanger and Syverson, 2008; Baily et al., 1992). Our core insight is that just as one can decompose

productivity growth in a sector into changes in allocation across firms and productivity growth

within firms, so too can one decompose di↵erences in AMI outcomes between Black and white

patients into di↵erences in allocation across hospitals and performance di↵erences within hospitals.

This method also uses re-weighting to document the role of geography in the gap, building on re-

search that has decomposed the Black-white wealth gap as well as work studying the contributors

to wage inequality over time (Barsky et al., 2002; DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux, 1996). Finally, we


                                                  8
further extend the static approach to study how Black-white disparities evolve over time, leading

to a dynamic decomposition. We now review these decompositions in more detail.


3.1    Static decomposition

   In the static decomposition, we quantify the degree to which Black patients’ use of lower (or

higher) performing hospitals reduces (or raises) their average 30-day survival relative to white

patients in a given time period (baseline or endline). We can express the di↵erence in survival rates

between Black and white patients as:

                                           X                     X
                           q̄tB   q̄tW =          B B
                                                 ✓ht q̂ht               W W
                                                                       ✓ht q̂ht                   (5)
                                           h2H                   h2H
                                           X
                                                  W B              W
                                      =          ✓ht (q̂ht       q̂ht )           Withint         (6)
                                           h2H
                                           X
                                                   B         W B
                                      +          (✓ht       ✓ht )q̂ht ,           Betweent        (7)
                                           h2H


where q̄tB and q̄tW are the 30-day survival rates of Black and white patients in period t, qht
                                                                                            B and q W
                                                                                                   ht

are the performance measures for hospital h in period t for Black and white patients (i.e. expected
                                                                                 B and ✓ W are the
30-day survival rates at the hospital for the average Black and white patient), ✓ht     ht

national market share of hospital h in period t among Black and white patients, and H is the set

of hospitals.

   Equation 5 illustrates that the di↵erence in survival rates can be divided into two conceptually

distinct components. The within (Withint ) refers to the di↵erence in survival between Black and

white patients resulting from disparities in the performance of a given provider for Black versus

white patients. These race-specific performance di↵erences could arise for a variety of reasons

including biases or racism by providers and di↵erences in the prevalence of underlying unobserved

risk factors.

   The between term (Betweent ), or between-race gap, refers to the di↵erence in survival resulting

from hospital allocation, specifically, Black patients’ use of lower or higher performing hospitals

than white patients. In our analyses, this term is insensitive to the reference population we use for
                      B and q̂ W di↵er by a constant that drops from the summation. For ease of
performance because q̂ht      ht

expression we omit the superscript in the remainder of the text.

                                                             9
   In the empirical section we will decompose the between-race gap into three sub-components: (1)

between hospital market di↵erences that reflect di↵erences in the hospital markets where Black and

white patients live (defined as Dartmouth Hospital Referral Regions, or HRRs), (2) between ZIP

code di↵erences that measure di↵erences in the small areas, or more colloquially neighborhoods,

that Black and white patients live in within markets, and (3) within ZIP code di↵erences in the

hospitals Black and white patients use, even when they live in the same ZIP code. For ease of

exposition, we detail this method later alongside the results.


3.2     Dynamic decomposition

   We also develop a decomposition of the evolution of the between-race gap in hospital allocation

over time, or the change in Betweent . This dynamic decomposition complements the static decom-

position by showing the role of performance and allocation in driving changes in the gap that occur

over time. Two forces could contract disparities over time: (1) stronger performance improvement

at hospitals that historically tended to serve Black patients, and (2) stronger reallocation of Black

patients than white patients to historically better performing hospitals. To assess the relative con-

tribution of these two forces to a reduction of disparities in hospital performance, we note that the

first di↵erence of Betweent can be expressed as:

                       X
                              B          W
         Betweent =          ✓h,t   1   ✓h,t   1   ( q̂h,t )    Di↵erential Performance Improvement    (8)
                       h2H
                       X
                                B         W
                   +           ✓h,t      ✓h,t q̂h,t    1        Di↵erential Hospital Reallocation      (9)
                       h2H
                       X
                                B         W
                   +           ✓h,t      ✓h,t ( q̂h,t ),        Cross                                 (10)
                       h2H


where     is the first di↵erence operator. In practice, t is the endline period (2010-2014) and t       1

is the baseline period (1995-1999).

   The first term, di↵erential performance improvement, measures the relationship between the

Black-white market share di↵erence at baseline and the growth in hospital performance over time.

Specifically, its left side shows whether the hospital was relatively popular among Black or white

patients at baseline, while its right side captures the change in performance. Thus, the term

captures the change in the between-race gap explained by hospital performance growth, fixing


                                                           10
allocation at baseline values. A positive contribution from this term would imply that performance

grew more rapidly at hospitals that were historically relatively popular among Black patients.

    Di↵erential hospital reallocation, which appears next, has two parts. Its left side is a di↵erence-

in-di↵erence of Black vs. white market share at endline vs. baseline, and it shows whether Black

patients re-allocated at a faster rate to the given hospital than white patients. The right expression

is the hospital’s performance during the baseline period. A positive reallocation term would imply

that Black patients shifted towards historically better performing hospitals at a faster rate than

white patients.

    The first two terms associate a change over time with a baseline value. They thus fail to capture

the fact that reallocation over time and performance improvement over time could co-occur. The

cross term accounts for this final component of the change in the between-race gap. It captures

the change explained by stronger performance improvement at hospitals that had stronger relative

gains in Black patient market share over time.



4     Results

4.1    Static Decomposition

    Table 2 displays the static decomposition results. Our first key finding, shown in column

1 of the table, is that Black patients used hospitals with significantly lower performance than

white patients during the baseline period — that is, Betweent is negative. Specifically, Black

patients used hospitals with 1 percentage point lower expected survival rates than white patients on

average. Panel A of Figure 1 visualizes this result, plotting the distribution of hospital performance

among Black patients and white patients at baseline. The vertical bars indicate the means of the

distributions and are 1 percentage point apart, matching Table 2. To put the magnitude of this

result into context, reperfusion therapy for AMI – developed in the late 1980s, still used today,

and widely acknowledged to be a transformational treatment – increases survival by 2 percentage

points (Fibrinolytic Therapy Trialists’ Collaborative Group, 1994).

    We next quantify the contribution of geography using an inverse probability weighting approach,

where we re-weight white patients to match the contemporaneous geographic distribution of Black

patients at the hospital market (as given by HRRs) and ZIP code level. This method allows us to


                                                  11
account for di↵erences in the geographic distribution of the populations and assess how allocation

for Black and white patients compares among patients in the same market or neighborhood. We

so by developing the weighting function (c.f. Barsky et al., 2002):

                                              Pr (black|Z = z) Pr (white)
                                    ! (z) =                   ·           ,                                    (11)
                                              Pr (white|Z = z) Pr (black)

where z is a vector of covariates. ! (·) serves to reweight white patients such that their distribution

of z is equalized with that of Black patients. Thus, letting z be a vector of indicators for HRRs or

a vector of indicators for ZIP codes, we can define the reweighting functions !tHRR (·) and !tZIP (·)

which match distributions at the market and neighborhood level, respectively, in time t.

       Using the weights given by the ! (·) functions, we construct counterfactual hospital market
                                                      W,HRR
shares for white patients. The resulting objects are ✓ht    , which is the national market share

for hospital h in time t for white patients after reweighting them to have the same market-level
                                     W,ZIP
distribution as Black patients, and ✓ht    which has the same interpretation except that the

reweighting occurs at the more finely-grained neighborhood level.3

       We can decompose the between-race gap into three components:

                                    X⇣     W,HRR
                                                          ⌘
                                                       W
                    Betweent =            ✓ht         ✓ht   q̂ht        Between Markets                        (12)
                                    h2H
                                    X⇣     W,ZIP      W,HRR
                                                            ⌘
                                +         ✓h,t       ✓ht      q̂ht      Between ZIP Codes                      (13)
                                    h2H
                                    X⇣           W,ZIP
                                                       ⌘
                                           B
                                +         ✓ht   ✓ht      q̂ht .         Within ZIP Codes                       (14)
                                    h2H


       The remainder of Table 2 presents this decomposition. Nearly half (44%) of this disparity is

explained by di↵erences in the hospital markets that Black and white patients live in, which means

that just more than half (56%) of the disparity exists even when comparing patients in the same

market. 25% of the total gap is explained by neighborhood di↵erences in residence within a market.

The remainder, reflecting di↵erences in hospital choice among Black and white patients in the same

neighborhoods, is 32% of the total. Panels B-D of Figure 1 visualize these findings by sequentially
   3
    Because the weighting function is only defined in the support of the white patient geographic distribution, the
ZIP code weights for white patients are developed from the over 98% of Black patients who live in ZIP codes in which
there was at least one white patient.




                                                        12
reweighting white patients to match the geographic distribution of Black patients at finer levels of

geography and showing how the means, displayed as vertical bars, evolve. This approach visualizes

the disparity explained at the market level, depicting between-market di↵erences (Panel B); at the

neighborhood level, showing between-neighborhood di↵erences within the same market (Panel C);

and the remainder, depicting the within neighborhood di↵erences (Panel D).

   By the mid 2010s, we find that these disparities have shrunk substantially – the racial disparity

is less than one-third its level at baseline. Column 3 of Table 2 shows that at endline, black patients

use hospitals with 0.3 percentage points lower expected survival rates than white patients (Figure 2

visualizes this closure of the gap). The subsequent rows of the table show that the role of geography

also changes: only 5% of the disparity is now explained by market di↵erences in where Black and

white patients live, and the contribution is not statistically significant. ZIP code di↵erences play

a much larger relative role at this time period, explaining 46% of the disparity; the contribution

is about half its absolute value in percentage points at baseline and is significant at the 10% level.

The remaining half of the gap persists within market and ZIP code.

   Column 5 of Table 2 confirms that we reject the null hypothesis of no closing of the gap:

the change in Betweent from baseline to endline of 0.7 percentage points is highly statistically

significant. Moreover, it is mostly accounted by the declining contribution of market-level dif-

ferences. Given the difficulty patients would experience attempting to cross markets to access

higher-performing facilities during an emergency like AMI, it is hard to explain the totality of these

findings by patients re-allocating because they have become more elastic to hospital performance.

In the next section, we formally investigate the role of reallocation in this result and contrast it

with another mechanism we have identified: di↵erential performance improvement.


4.2   Dynamic Decomposition

   Table 3 displays the dynamic decomposition results. Here, we divide the total disparity reduc-

tion of 0.7 percentage points into the contributions of di↵erential performance improvement and

di↵erential hospital reallocation. We find that the former channel fully accounts for the disparity

reduction over time and its contribution is highly statistically significant. This result implies that

hospitals that tended to treat Black patients at baseline experienced stronger performance gains

than hospitals that tended to treat white patients. While we also find a role for the reallocation

                                                  13
channel – Black patients reallocating to hospitals with better performance at baseline at a faster

rate than white patients – it is quantitatively smaller than the role of di↵erential performance

improvement. Reallocation contributes 0.2 percentage points to the aggregate disparity reduction.

Finally, the negative cross term implies that hospitals improving performance over this time period

increased their relative share of white patients. This term contributes -0.2 percentage points to the

disparity.

   We visualize these results in Figure 3. Panel A graphs the between-race gap at baseline, endline,

and two intermediate periods. The change in the gap from baseline to endline is the quantity that

we decompose. The subsequent panels display counterfactuals in which we assume hospital market

shares (Panel B) or performance levels (Panel C) remain constant at baseline levels. The changes

in the gaps from baseline to endline visualized in these two panels are algebraically identical to the

di↵erential performance improvement and reallocation terms, respectively. Specifically, in Panel

B we fix market share but allow performance to evolve, isolating the component of the disparity

reduction due to performance changes alone. Panels A and B look strikingly similar, reflecting that

di↵erential performance improvement can account for the entire reduction. Similarly, in Panel C

we fix performance but allow market share to evolve, depicting the role of reallocation in disparity

reduction. Here, the gap attenuates only slightly, indicating that reallocation plays a much smaller

role than changes in performance.


4.3   Robustness

   We report the robustness of both our static and dynamic decomposition results to several

alternative specifications and measures to address concerns about selection, race-specific hospital

performance, MA penetration, and the role of hospital entry and exit. Our findings are highly

robust to these alternative approaches.

Selection Our measures of hospital performance could be biased if patients select hospitals on the

basis of unobserved health status. If this selection is correlated with hospital volume, one could ob-

serve a spurious relationship between performance and allocation leading to biased estimates of the

between-race gap. Though prior work has validated our approach (e.g. Hull, 2020; Doyle, Graves

and Gruber, 2019), as an additional falsification test of the selection on observables assumption

we consider the sensitivity of our findings to the richness of controls in the performance model

                                                 14
(Altonji, Elder and Taber, 2005; Oster, 2019). We try two alternative specifications with coarser

controls: no patient-level controls and demographic controls only (age/race/sex interactions); we

also test two additions to the main specification: adding interactions between the race and comor-

bidity variables, and a control for the type of AMI (see Appendix Section A). Our findings using

these alternative specifications are qualitatively unchanged from the main specification (Appendix

Tables A1 and A3), though the role of performance improvement is slightly larger when all patient

controls are omitted.

Race-Specific Performance Our model of hospital performance allows for di↵erences in patient

outcomes by race but assumes that the di↵erence does not vary by hospital. This assumption will

not bias our estimates if hospitals have idiosyncratic race gaps in their treatment quality or outcomes

due to, for example, provider prejudice. However, if Black patients disproportionately choose

hospitals that are (or become) relatively high-performing for Black patients, the decompositions

would overstate the race gap in performance and potentially misstate how it has evolved over time.

For example, if hospitals that were popular among Black patients were more likely to address within-

hospital disparities, raising performance more for Black patients than white patients, our analyses

might show a declining between-race gap that actually represents a declining within-hospital gap.

   We investigate this concern with an alternative model in which hospital performance is allowed

to di↵er by race. Augmenting the fixed e↵ects model to permit hospital-race e↵ects raises measure-

ment issues because only a handful of hospitals treat large numbers of Black and white patients

in both periods – under one-fifth treat at least 25 Black and 25 white patients at baseline and

endline – and many hospitals treat no Black patients at all. We estimate a random e↵ects model

in which hospital performance is drawn from a trivariate normal distribution: one hospital random

e↵ect and two hospital random slopes (for Black patients and non-Black non-white patients). This

model emits an estimate of the underlying variance-covariance matrix of the distribution which is

robust to measurement error from small samples of Black or white patients at the hospital level. It

also emits best linear unbiased predictions (BLUPs) of hospital performance for Black and white

patients. Appendix Section 2.3 describes the approach in more detail.

   The findings support our main approach and results. In Appendix Table A5, we show that

hospital performance for Black and white patients is highly correlated: 90% and 83% during the

baseline and endline periods, respectively. Such a high correlation limits the potential scope for

                                                  15
selection on race-specific performance. We use the BLUPs to re-estimate the decompositions with

the performance measure q̂ht replaced with predicted performance for Black or white patients.

The results, presented in Appendix Tables A2 and A4, are similar to those of our main approach

regardless of whether we use performance for Black or white patients. While the disparity at

baseline is somewhat smaller, it continues to attenuate substantially over time and this decline

is due to di↵erential performance improvement.4 These findings are inconsistent with declining

within-hospital gaps driving the over-time changes, since they are so similar for Black patient

performance and white patient performance.

Attrition to Medicare Advantage Patients who enter Medicare Advantage (MA), the private

insurance system in Medicare, are not observed in our data. MA penetration was increasing during

our study period and MA enrollees are disproportionately white and more likely to be healthy

(Brown et al., 2014); if marginal MA enrollees make di↵erent hospital choices than those in fee-

for-service Medicare, particularly if they tend to allocate toward high-performing hospitals, their

attrition from the sample could generate the declining race gaps we observe. To address this

concern, we repeat our analyses in markets with below median MA penetration in 2014 to limit

the potential for attrition to MA. The results are reported in Appendix Tables A2 and A4 and are

very similar to our main findings, suggesting that selection into MA is not driving the patterns we

report.

Entry and Exit To this point, all results have analyzed a balanced panel of hospitals, omitting

any role for hospital entry and exit. The productivity decomposition literature has emphasized the

importance of this channel (Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson, 2008; Melitz and Polanec, 2015), and

the entry of higher-performing facilities and the exit of lower-performing ones drives some of the

improvement in aggregate hospital performance over time (Chandra et al., 2016). To test whether

net entry expands or contracts disparities, we relax the requirement that hospitals treat at least 25

patients at baseline and endline and return those that only meet the threshold in one of the periods

to the sample. Accounting for entry and exit requires a more complex decomposition approach,

which we discuss in Appendix Section B. To summarize, an entry term reduces the Black-white gap
   4
     A similar pattern obtains from a random e↵ects model without race-specific random slopes and is presented in
the same tables. Unlike the main model of performance, BLUPs from random e↵ects models are shrunk toward the
mean. These results suggest that shrinkage drives the smaller disparity at baseline in the race-specific performance
model, rather than the race-specific slopes.



                                                        16
when entering hospitals are relatively popular among Black patients and have higher than average

performance; an exit term reduces the gap when, for example, exiting hospitals were relatively

popular among Black patients but have lower than average performance.

    We find results similar to those of our main analyses. The static decomposition in Appendix

Table A2 shows that at each point in time, the between-race gap is slightly larger with the unbal-

anced panel; the reduction in the gap over time is also slightly larger. Decomposing this change,

Appendix Table A4 shows that net entry plays a role in reducing disparities where, by design, it

previously could not (entry exacerbates the disparity but is is more than o↵set by exit). Di↵eren-

tial performance improvement continues to make the largest contribution to disparity reduction,

though the magnitude is somewhat less than in the main specification.



5    Technology Adoption as a Mechanism

    Earlier, we noted that di↵erential performance improvement can explain the totality of the

narrowing between-race gap in hospital performance. To understand this finding we explore the

adoption of new treatment technologies as a mechanism for improvement. The adoption patterns

of these technologies could play a key role in determining hospital performance, and through this

channel, racial disparities in care outcomes. Our framing draws on work showing that a dispro-

portionate share of survival gains come from the di↵usion of low-cost technologies that benefit

virtually all patients rather than high-cost interventions which exhibit diminishing returns (Chan-

dra and Skinner, 2012; Skinner and Staiger, 2015). In the years prior to the study period, the

technology frontier of AMI treatments moved forward dramatically as both types of interventions

di↵used through hospitals. Beta-blocker drugs provide an example of low-cost, high-benefit, TFP

raising AMI technology. Their value was established in a series of trials in the 1980s, and by the

beginning of the study period, guidelines recommended their use in nearly all AMI patients (Yusuf

et al., 1985; Lee, 2007). Cardiac catheterization, in contrast, is an example of a capital-intensive

intervention that requires costly and specialized labor inputs (Jencks et al., 2000; Jencks, Williams

and Coleman, 2009; Cutler et al., 1998). It enabled improved imaging of the heart as well as a

procedure called percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) to open blocked blood vessels.

    Rapid adoption of these technologies by hospitals with that were relatively popular among


                                                 17
Black patients could reduce the between-race gap. To test this hypothesis, we repeat the dynamic

decomposition replacing the hospital performance outcome with the use of beta-blockers, and sep-

arately, cardiac catheterization. We consider whether the results follow a pattern similar to our

main results: that Black patients tend to use hospitals with lower levels of technology adoption at

baseline compared to white patients; that this gap attenuates from baseline to endline; and that

the attenuation is explained by faster technology adoption at hospitals with relatively high Black

patient shares ex ante. Such patterns would support technology adoption as a mechanism for the

findings of the previous section.

   We develop and describe our two measures of adoption in more detail in Appendix Section C.1.

Briefly, we measure beta-blocker take-up as the share of AMI patients at the hospital who were

prescribed beta-blockers at discharge. CMS and accreditation agencies have used this metric as

an indicator of hospital quality. Like CMS, we do not risk-adjust this metric because the drugs

are thought to be appropriate for the vast majority of patients. We take it as a surrogate for

hospital use of low-cost technologies that generate large benefits including but not limited to beta-

blockers themselves. To measure high-cost technology adoption, we examine the use of cardiac

catheterization on the day of admission, adjusted for patient risk-factors – the clinical literature

suggests that only these catheterizations have a meaningful impact on survival (Hartwell et al.,

2005; Hochman et al., 2006; Likosky et al., 2018). We re-run the model specified in equations 1-3

with catheterization as the outcome, yielding hospital-level estimates of adoption at baseline and

endline.

   Table 4 presents decompositions of the measures. Takeup of both technologies rose substantially

from the baseline to endline periods. In column 1, we focus on beta-blockers, where the Black-white

gap was substantial at baseline. Compared to white patients, Black patients receive treatment at

hospitals with 1.7 percentage point lower rates of beta-blocker use at baseline but 0.2 percentage

points lower use at endline. The dynamic decomposition shows that over 90% of the closure of

the gap is due to di↵erential performance improvement: hospitals relatively popular among Black

patients were also faster to adopt the drug. Reallocation also contributes about 40% of the closure;

the excess over unity is o↵set by a negative cross term: there was some reallocation away from

hospitals that grew their use of beta-blockers.

   In contrast, the findings for catheterization in column 2 are the reverse: at baseline, Black

                                                  18
patients received treatment at hospitals with slightly higher cardiac catheterization rates than

white patients. This gap attenuates and flips over time – at endline white patients use hospitals

with higher cardiac catheterization rates. We found similar results when we measured high-cost

intervention in other ways: counting catheterizations on any day, counting catheterization or bypass

surgery, or counting bypass surgery alone. Results for aspirin, a low-cost technology with a racial

disparity at baseline that matched the high-cost measures in that it favored white patients, are also

similar to the findings for high-cost technologies (Appendix Table A6).5

        These results suggest that di↵usion of beta-blockers and technologies for which they serve as

surrogates attenuated disparities in the performance of hospitals used by Black and white patients.

On the other hand, the patterns of di↵usion for capital-intensive technologies like catheterization

expanded disparities. Our findings highlight the potential role of technology adoption in the evo-

lution of performance gaps between hospitals used by Black and white patients.



6        Conclusion

        We quantified the role of patient allocation in Black-white disparities in AMI treatment and

outcomes by analyzing nearly two decades of Medicare patients. We first showed that in the

1990s, Black patients tended to use hospitals with substantially worse patient outcomes during the

1990s – the survival rate of a typical patient was a percentage point lower at hospitals used by

Black patients than at hospitals used by white patients. Our work next highlighted the role of

geography in accounting for the racial gap. While this point has been recognized in the literature

(Baicker, Chandra and Skinner, 2005; Skinner et al., 2005), we add to it by developing a novel

reweighting approach to decompose the contributions of markets and neighborhoods. Di↵erences

in where Black and white patients live between markets drive a nontrivial share, nearly one-half,

of the gap in the 1990s. Yet by the same token, just over half of the disparity persists even within

markets. Of this gap, about half reflects patients living in di↵erent ZIP codes and the other half

reflects di↵erent hospital choices among patients in the same ZIP code. These findings reinforce
    5
    We also investigated if hospitals that tended to treat more Black patients experienced greater gains in the returns
to catheterization. Gains could occur if hospitals improved their skill at using the procedure or if they came to better
target it at patients who were likely to benefit. Hospitals with larger Black patient shares experienced lower returns to
catheterization at baseline. However, this gap persisted through endline, suggesting that di↵erential gains in returns
do not drive the findings we observe.



                                                           19
the research on place-based and person-based policies by highlighting the performance of hospitals

as important component of place and thus a potential focus of intervention (Bartik, 1991; Glaeser

and Gottlieb, 2009). Our work complements literature recognizing the importance of local areas

in impacting many economic outcomes such as educational attainment, intergenerational mobility,

and life expectancy (Chetty et al., 2016, 2018).

   Next, we found that between the 1990s and 2010s, the Black-white gap shrank by two-thirds.

We developed a dynamic decomposition framework to determine whether this trend was driven

by stronger reallocation of Black patients to better performing hospitals or stronger performance

improvement among hospitals treating disproportionately Black patients. Our framework can be

generalized to study the evolution of allocation-related disparities in other health care settings, like

physicians or nursing facilities, as well as non-health contexts like schools, employers, and judges.

   Given Chandra et al. (2016)’s findings that reallocation played an important role in improving

overall patient outcomes over time, one might have suspected that reallocation to better hospitals

acted to shrink the disparity, too. However, we did not find first-order evidence for that view, finding

instead that di↵erential performance improvement among hospitals that disproportionately treated

Black patients led to the narrowing between-race gap in hospital performance. Lastly, we demon-

strated that di↵usion of a low-cost technology, beta-blockers, followed a similar, disparity-reducing

path. This result suggests that take-up of beta-blockers and performance-improving strategies cor-

related with them may have been responsible for this progress. We note that our results do not

establish that the di↵usion of beta-blockers per se was responsible for improving outcomes at these

hospitals; instead, we follow Chandra and Skinner (2012), Skinner and Staiger (2015), and other

work in viewing beta-blockers as a surrogate for a variety of TFP-improving changes that can in-

clude superior management and leadership in the hospital (Bloom et al., 2012; Tsai et al., 2015;

Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen, 2016).

   More generally, our research connects a large literature on racial disparities in health care

with the economics of productivity (Baily et al., 1992; Foster, Haltiwanger and Krizan, 2006;

Melitz and Polanec, 2015) and the economics of medical innovation and di↵usion (Chandra and

Skinner, 2012; Chandra and Staiger, 2007; Skinner and Staiger, 2015). These connections raise the

question of whether performance improvement and reallocation could be harnessed to address the

disparities highlighted for AMI as well as disparities in other parts of the health care system with

                                                   20
similar features. The power of the di↵erential performance improvement channel over the past two

decades suggests that direct e↵orts to increase the performance of hospitals in markets that serve

a large share of Black patients can close the gap. These e↵orts would not change where patients

receive treatment but could directly resource the hospitals they use. This approach aligns with

Baicker, Chandra and Skinner (2005), who argued that place-based quality improvement e↵orts

could address racial disparities.

   While we showed that reallocation was a smaller force for stemming racial disparities in AMI,

there is still scope to use this channel going forward. In AMI, for example, about half of remaining

racial disparities originate from patients who live in the same ZIP code receiving treatment at

di↵erent hospitals. This finding points to the potential for reallocative policies like e↵orts to

change referral patterns or provider networks to close ongoing gaps. Hospital closure and entry,

which are powerful forces for improvement in other sectors, could also play a role here – though

the emergency nature of AMI necessitates more study of this channel.

   Our approach focused on hospital performance for the typical patient, abstracting away from

racial disparities in outcomes within the facility. By taking this approach, we are able to uncover a

surprising decline in the gap in the performance of hospitals used by Black and white patients. While

encouraging, this approach measures only one of the multitude of structural forces deteriorating

health outcomes for Black patients at the point of care. Another key force comes from biases and

discrimination on the part of practitioners. Regardless of whether they originate inside or outside

the hospital, these forces can persist even as “between” hospital disparities close. The dynamics of

disparities, whether arising within hospitals or from patient allocation between them, are a crucial

area for future research.




                                                 21
References
Alsan, Marcella, and Marianne Wanamaker. 2018. “Tuskegee and the Health of Black Men*.”
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(1): 407–455.

Alsan, Marcella, Owen Garrick, and Grant Graziani. 2019. “Does Diversity Matter for
 Health? Experimental Evidence from Oakland.” American Economic Review, 109(12): 4071–
 4111.

Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber. 2005. “Selection on Observed
 and Unobserved Variables: Assessing the E↵ectiveness of Catholic Schools.” Journal of Political
 Economy, 113(1): 151–184.

Bach, Peter B, and Deborah Schrag. 2004. “Primary Care Physicians Who Treat Blacks and
 Whites.” The New England Journal of Medicine, 351(6): 575–584.

Baicker, Katherine, Amitabh Chandra, and Jonathan Skinner. 2005. “Geographic Varia-
 tion in Health Care and the Problem of Measuring Racial Disparities.” Perspectives in Biology
 and Medicine, 48(1): 42–S53.

Baily, Martin Neil, Charles Hulten, David Campbell, Timothy Bresnahan, and
 Richard E. Caves. 1992. “Productivity Dynamics in Manufacturing Plants.” Brookings Pa-
 pers on Economic Activity. Microeconomics, 1992: 187–267.

Barnato, Amber E., F. Lee Lucas, Douglas Staiger, David E. Wennberg, and Amitabh
 Chandra. 2005. “Hospital-Level Racial Disparities in Acute Myocardial Infarction Reatment
 and Outcomes.” Medical Care, 43(4): 308–319.

Barsky, Robert, John Bound, Kerwin Ko’ Charles, and Joseph P Lupton. 2002. “Ac-
 counting for the Black–White Wealth Gap: A Nonparametric Approach.” Journal of the Amer-
 ican Statistical Association, 97(459): 663–673.

Bartelsman, Eric, John Haltiwanger, and Stefano Scarpetta. 2013. “Cross-Country Di↵er-
 ences in Productivity: The Role of Allocation and Selection.” The American Economic Review,
 103(1): 305–334.

Bartik, Timothy J. 1991. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?
 Kalamazoo, Michigan:W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Bloom, Nicholas, Christos Genakos, Ra↵aella Sadun, and John Van Reenen. 2012.
  “Management Practices Across Firms and Countries.” Academy of Management Perspectives,
  26(1): 12–33.

Bloom, Nicholas, Ra↵aella Sadun, and John Van Reenen. 2016. “Management as a Tech-
  nology?” National Bureau of Economic Research w22327, Cambridge, MA.

Braveman, Paula, Susan Egerter, and David R. Williams. 2011. “The Social Determinants
 of Health: Coming of Age.” Annual Review of Public Health, 32(1): 381–398.

Brown, Jason, Mark Duggan, Ilyana Kuziemko, and William Woolston. 2014. “How
 Does Risk Selection Respond to Risk Adjustment? New Evidence from the Medicare Advantage
 Program.” American Economic Review, 104(10): 3335–3364.


                                              22
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. 2020. “Beta-Blocker Prescribed at Discharge
 for AMI.” https://cmit.cms.gov/CMIT public/ReportMeasure?measureRevisionId=5.

Chandra, Amitabh, Amy Finkelstein, Adam Sacarny, and Chad Syverson. 2016. “Health
 Care Exceptionalism? Performance and Allocation in the US Health Care Sector.” American
 Economic Review, 106(8): 2110–2144.

Chandra, Amitabh, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2007. “Productivity Spillovers in Health Care:
 Evidence from the Treatment of Heart Attacks.” Journal of Political Economy, 115(1): 103–140.

Chandra, Amitabh, and Douglas O Staiger. 2020. “Identifying Sources of Inefficiency in
 Healthcare*.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(2): 785–843.

Chandra, Amitabh, and Douglas Staiger. 2010. “Identifying Provider Prejudice in Health-
 care.” National Bureau of Economic Research w16382, Cambridge, MA.

Chandra, Amitabh, and Jonathan Skinner. 2012. “Technology Growth and Expenditure
 Growth in Health Care.” Journal of Economic Literature, 50(3): 645–680.

Chandra, Amitabh, Michael Frakes, and Anup Malani. 2017. “Challenges To Reduc-
 ing Discrimination And Health Inequity Through Existing Civil Rights Laws.” Health A↵airs,
 36(6): 1041–1047.

Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Maggie Jones, and Sonya Porter.
 2018. “The Opportunity Atlas: Mapping the Childhood Roots of Social Mobility.” National
 Bureau of Economic Research w25147, Cambridge, MA.

Chetty, Raj, Michael Stepner, Sarah Abraham, Shelby Lin, Benjamin Scuderi,
 Nicholas Turner, Augustin Bergeron, and David Cutler. 2016. “The Association Be-
 tween Income and Life Expectancy in the United States, 2001-2014.” JAMA: The Journal of the
 American Medical Association, 315(16): 1750.

Cutler, David, Angus Deaton, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2006. “The Determinants of
 Mortality.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(3): 97–120.

Cutler, D. M., M. McClellan, J. P. Newhouse, and D. Remler. 1998. “Are Medical Prices
 Declining? Evidence from Heart Attack Treatments.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 113(4): 991–1024.

DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. “Labor Market Institu-
 tions and the Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach.” Econometrica,
 64(5): 1001–1044.

Downing, Nicholas S., Changqin Wang, Aakriti Gupta, Yongfei Wang, Sudhakar V.
 Nuti, Joseph S. Ross, Susannah M. Bernheim, Zhenqiu Lin, Sharon-Lise T. Nor-
 mand, and Harlan M. Krumholz. 2018. “Association of Racial and Socioeconomic Disparities
 With Outcomes Among Patients Hospitalized With Acute Myocardial Infarction, Heart Failure,
 and Pneumonia: An Analysis of Within- and Between-Hospital Variation.” JAMA Network Open,
 1(5): e182044–e182044.

Doyle, Joseph, John Graves, and Jonathan Gruber. 2019. “Evaluating Measures of Hospital
 Quality: Evidence from Ambulance Referral Patterns.” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
 101(5): 841–852.

                                             23
Fibrinolytic Therapy Trialists’ Collaborative Group. 1994. “Indications for Fibrinolytic
  Therapy in Suspected Acute Myocardial Infarction: Collaborative Overview of Early Mortality
  and Major Morbidity Results from All Randomised Trials of More than 1000 Patients.” The
  Lancet, 343(8893): 311–322.

Foster, Lucia, John C. Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan. 2001. “Aggregate Productivity
  Growth: Lessons from Microeconomic Evidence.” In New Developments in Productivity Analysis.
  , ed. Charles R. Hulten, Edward R. Dean and Michael J. Harper, 303–372. University of Chicago
  Press.

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. 2008. “Reallocation, Firm Turnover,
  and Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?” American Economic Review,
  98(1): 394–425.

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and C. J Krizan. 2006. “Market Selection, Reallocation,
  and Restructuring in the U.S. Retail Trade Sector in the 1990s.” Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 88(4): 748–758.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Joshua D. Gottlieb. 2009. “The Wealth of Cities: Agglomera-
 tion Economies and Spatial Equilibrium in the United States.” Journal of Economic Literature,
 47(4): 983–1028.

Hartwell, D, J Colquitt, E Loveman, A Clegg, H Brodin, N Waugh, P Royle, P
 Davidson, L Vale, and L MacKenzie. 2005. “Clinical E↵ectiveness and Cost-E↵ectiveness
 of Immediate Angioplasty for Acute Myocardial Infarction: Systematic Review and Economic
 Evaluation.” Health Technology Assessment, 9(17).

Hochman, Judith S., Gervasio A. Lamas, Christopher E. Buller, Vladimir Dzavik,
 Harmony R. Reynolds, Staci J. Abramsky, Sandra Forman, Witold Ruzyllo, Aldo P.
 Maggioni, Harvey White, Zygmunt Sadowski, Antonio C. Carvalho, Jamie M.
 Rankin, Jean P. Renkin, P. Gabriel Steg, Alice M. Mascette, George Sopko,
 Matthias E. Pfisterer, Jonathan Leor, Viliam Fridrich, Daniel B. Mark, and Genell L.
 Knatterud. 2006. “Coronary Intervention for Persistent Occlusion after Myocardial Infarction.”
 New England Journal of Medicine, 355(23): 2395–2407.

Huckfeldt, Peter, Jose Escarce, Neeraj Sood, Zhiyou Yang, Ioana Popescu, and Teryl
 Nuckols. 2019. “Thirty-Day Postdischarge Mortality Among Black and White Patients 65 Years
 and Older in the Medicare Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program.” JAMA Network Open,
 2(3): e190634–e190634.

Hull, Peter. 2020. “Estimating         Hospital    Quality   with   Quasi-Experimental   Data.”
 https://about.peterhull.net/wp.

Institutes of Medicine. 2003. Unequal Treatment: Confronting Racial and Ethnic Disparities in
  Health Care (with CD). Washington, D.C.:The National Academies Press.

Jacobson, Gretchen, Anthony Damico, and 2018. 2018. “A Dozen Facts About Medicare
  Advantage.” https://www.k↵.org/medicare/issue-brief/a-dozen-facts-about-medicare-advantage/.

Jencks, Stephen F., Mark V. Williams, and Eric A. Coleman. 2009. “Rehospitalizations
  among Patients in the Medicare Fee-for-Service Program.” New England Journal of Medicine,
  360(14): 1418–1428.

                                              24
Jencks, Stephen F., Timothy Cuerdon, Dale R. Burwen, Barbara Fleming, Peter M.
  Houck, Annette E. Kussmaul, David S. Nilasena, Diana L. Ordin, and David R.
  Arday. 2000. “Quality of Medical Care Delivered to Medicare Beneficiaries: A Profile at State
  and National Levels.” JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association, 284(13): 1670–
  1676.
Jha, Ashish K., E. John Orav, Zhonghe Li, and Arnold M. Epstein. 2007. “Concentration
  and Quality of Hospitals That Care for Elderly Black Patients.” Archives of Internal Medicine,
  167(11): 1177.
Lee, Thomas H. 2007. “Eulogy for a Quality Measure.” New England Journal of Medicine,
  357(12): 1175–1177.
Likosky, Donald S., Jessica Van Parys, Weiping Zhou, William B. Borden, Milton C.
  Weinstein, and Jonathan S. Skinner. 2018. “Association Between Medicare Expenditure
  Growth and Mortality Rates in Patients With Acute Myocardial Infarction: A Comparison
  From 1999 Through 2014.” JAMA Cardiology, 3(2): 114.
Marciniak, Thomas A., Edward F. Ellerbeck, Martha J. Radford, Timothy F. Kre-
 sowik, Jay A. Gold, Harlan M. Krumholz, Catarina I. Kiefe, Richard M. Allman,
 Robert A. Vogel, and Stephen F. Jencks. 1998. “Improving the Quality of Care for Medi-
 care Patients With Acute Myocardial Infarction: Results From the Cooperative Cardiovascular
 Project.” JAMA, 279(17): 1351–1357.
McClellan, Mark, Barbara J. McNeil, and Joseph P. Newhouse. 1994. “Does More Inten-
 sive Treatment of Acute Myocardial Infarction in the Elderly Reduce Mortality?: Analysis Using
 Instrumental Variables.” JAMA, 272(11): 859.
McConnell, K. John, Richard C. Lindrooth, Douglas R. Wholey, Thomas M. Maddox,
 and Nick Bloom. 2013. “Management Practices and the Quality of Care in Cardiac Units.”
 JAMA Internal Medicine, 173(8): 684.
Melitz, Marc J., and Sašo Polanec. 2015. “Dynamic Olley-Pakes Productivity Decomposition
 with Entry and Exit.” The RAND Journal of Economics, 46(2): 362–375.
Murphy, Sherry, Jiaquan Xu, Kenneth Kochanek, Sally Curtin, and Elizabeth Arias.
 2015. “Deaths: Final Data for 2015.” Centers for Disease Control.
Olley, G. Steven, and Ariel Pakes. 1996. “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommu-
 nications Equipment Industry.” Econometrica, 64(6): 1263–1297.
Oster, Emily. 2019. “Unobservable Selection and Coefficient Stability: Theory and Evidence.”
 Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 37(2): 187–204.
Polsky, Daniel, Ashish K. Jha, Judith Lave, Mark V. Pauly, Liyi Cen, Heather
 Klusaritz, Zhen Chen, and Kevin G. Volpp. 2008. “Short- and Long-Term Mortality after
 an Acute Illness for Elderly Whites and Blacks: Short- and Long-Term Mortality after an Acute
 Illness for Elderly Whites and Blacks.” Health Services Research, 43(4): 1388–1402.
Polsky, Daniel, Judith Lave, Heather Klusaritz, Ashish Jha, Mark V. Pauly, Liyi Cen,
 Hu Xie, Roslyn Stone, Zhen Chen, and Kevin Volpp. 2007. “Is Lower 30-Day Mortality
 Posthospital Admission Among Blacks Unique to the Veterans A↵airs Health Care System?:.”
 Medical Care, 45(11): 1083–1089.

                                              25
Sacarny, Adam. 2018. “Adoption and Learning across Hospitals: The Case of a Revenue-
  Generating Practice.” Journal of Health Economics, 60: 142–164.

Sarrazin, Mary Vaughan, Mary Campbell, and Gary E. Rosenthal. 2009. “Racial Dif-
  ferences In Hospital Use After Acute Myocardial Infarction: Does Residential Segregation Play
  A Role?: Black Medicare Beneficiaries Used High-Mortality Hospitals More Often than Their
  White Peers, despite Their Geographic Proximity to Lower-Mortality Hospitals.” Health A↵airs,
  28(Supplement 1): w368–w378.

Skinner, Jonathan, Amitabh Chandra, Douglas Staiger, Julie Lee, and Mark McClel-
  lan. 2005. “Mortality After Acute Myocardial Infarction in Hospitals That Disproportionately
  Treat Black Patients.” Circulation, 112(17): 2634–2641.

Skinner, Jonathan, and Douglas Staiger. 2015. “Technology Di↵usion and Productivity
  Growth in Health Care.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(5): 951–964.

Smith, David Barton. 2005. “Racial And Ethnic Health Disparities And The Unfinished Civil
 Rights Agenda.” Health A↵airs, 24(2): 317–324.

Steinberg, Benjamin A., William J. French, Eric Peterson, Paul D. Frederick, and
  Christopher P. Cannon. 2008. “Is Coding for Myocardial Infarction More Accurate Now That
  Coding Descriptions Have Been Clarified to Distinguish ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction from
  Non-ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction?” The American Journal of Cardiology, 102(5): 513–
  517.

Thomas, Kevin L., Adrian F. Hernandez, David Dai, Paul Heidenreich, Gregg C.
 Fonarow, Eric D. Peterson, and Clyde W. Yancy. 2011. “Association of Race/Ethnicity
 with Clinical Risk Factors, Quality of Care, and Acute Outcomes in Patients Hospitalized with
 Heart Failure.” American Heart Journal, 161(4): 746–754.

Tsai, Thomas C., Ashish K. Jha, Atul A. Gawande, Robert S. Huckman, Nicholas
 Bloom, and Ra↵aella Sadun. 2015. “Hospital Board And Management Practices Are Strongly
 Related To Hospital Performance On Clinical Quality Metrics.” Health A↵airs, 34(8): 1304–1311.

Williams, David R., and Pamela Braboy Jackson. 2005. “Social Sources Of Racial Disparities
 In Health.” Health A↵airs, 24(2): 325–334.

Yeh, Robert W, and Joseph V Selby. 2010. “Population Trends in the Incidence and Outcomes
 of Acute Myocardial Infarction.” New England Journal of Medicine, 362(23): 2155–2165.

Yusuf, Salim, Richard Peto, John Lewis, Rory Collins, and Peter Sleight. 1985. “Beta
 Blockade During and After Myocardial Infarction: An Overview of the Randomized Trials.”
 Progress in Cardiovascular Diseases, 27(5): 335–371.




                                              26
Tables

                    Table 1 - Summary Statisics on Patients and Hospitals
     Time period                             Baseline (1995-1999)        Endline (2010-2014)
     Race                                     Black      White            Black      White
     Panel A: Patients
     Survival, 30 Days                         81.7%     81.2%              86.7%     85.8%
     Age                                        76.8      77.6               77.7      79.3
                                               (7.5)     (7.3)              (8.2)     (8.2)
     Female                                    59.8%     49.5%              58.7%     48.2%
     Comorbid Conditions
       Heart Failure                          18.2%       12.5%             24.2%     15.0%
       Stroke                                  2.1%       1.2%               1.2%     0.6%
       COPD                                    7.6%       7.5%              10.4%     8.9%
       Count (out of 23)                        1.3        0.9                1.9      1.3
                                               (2.0)      (1.7)              (2.6)    (2.2)
     Patients                                 66,092    1,018,234           60,204   710,068
     Panel B: Hospitals
     Survival, 30 Days, Risk-Adjusted*         81.1%       79.6%            85.3%       84.2%
                                                    (3.8pp)                      (4.3pp)
     Patients per Hospital (Total)                   411.2                        297.4
                                                    (369.5)                      (310.1)
     Patients per Hospital (by Race)            24.4       375.5             22.2       261.8
                                               (47.2)    (347.6)            (45.8)    (283.0)
     Hospitals (!1 Patient in Race Group)      2,181       2,711            2,120       2,706
     Hospitals (Total)                                              2,712
     Notes: Panel A displays statistics about the sample of patients used to measure
     allocation and performance. Panel B shows statistics about the hospitals in our main
     analyses. All cells report averages or rates except those in parentheses which report
     standard deviations. See text for more details.
     * Reports the expected survival of the average Black or white patient at the average
     hospital, the measure of hospital performance described in equations 2 and 3. The
     standard deviation is adjusted for measurement error and in our main specification it
     is always equal for Black and white patients in the same time period.




                                               27
                      Table 2 - Static Decomposition of Hospital Performance
                                        (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)             (5)        (6)
Time period                         Baseline (1995-1999) Endline (2010-2014)                 Change
                                      Value      Share      Value      Share            Value     Share
Between-Race Gap (Black-White)         -0.96     100%        -0.29     100%              0.66     100%
                                      (0.11)                (0.11)                      (0.13)
Components of Between-Race Gap
  Between Hospital Markets             -0.42      44%        -0.01       5%              0.40       61%
                                      (0.07)                (0.07)                      (0.09)
  Between ZIP Codes (Within            -0.24      25%        -0.13      45%              0.10       15%
  Hospital Markets)                   (0.07)                (0.07)                      (0.10)
  Within ZIP Codes                     -0.30      32%        -0.15      50%              0.16       24%
                                      (0.05)                (0.05)                      (0.06)
N=2,712 hospitals. All values are percentage points (i.e. 1 indicates 1 percentage point) except for shares
indicated with a % symbol. Notes: This table displays the between-race gap, or the difference in the
average performance of hospitals used by Black and white patients, during the baseline period (columns
1 and 2), endline period (columns 3 and 4), and the change from baseline to endline (columns 5 and 6).
Hospital performance is measured by the risk-adjusted survival rate. The decomposition uses reweighting
to successively equalize the geographic distribution of Black and white patients at the hospital market
(HRR) and ZIP code levels. It separates the between-race gap into a between hospital market component,
a between ZIP code component, and a within ZIP code component. See text for more details.
Bootstrapped standard errors using 1,000 replicates in parentheses.




                                                    28
Table 3 - Dynamic Decomposition of Hospital Performance
                                     (1)            (2)
                                    Value          Share
Change in Between-Race Gap           0.66          100%
from Baseline to Endline            (0.13)
Components of Change
 Differential Performance            0.68          102%
 Improvement                        (0.15)
  Differential Hospital              0.19           29%
  Reallocation                      (0.08)
  Cross                              -0.21          -31%
                                    (0.09)
N=2,712 hospitals. All values are percentage points (i.e. 1
indicates 1 percentage point) except for shares indicated
with a % symbol. Notes: This table displays and
decomposes the change in the between-race gap from the
baseline period to the endline period. The decomposition
separates the change into differential performance
improvement, or changes in performance associated with
baseline Black-white allocation differences; differential
hospital reallocation, or changes in Black and white patient
allocation associated with baseline performance differences;
and cross, or changes in allocation and performance co-
occurring. See text for more details. Bootstrapped standard
errors using 1,000 replicates in parentheses.




                             29
     Table 4 - Decomposition of Hospital Technology Adoption
                                       (1)               (2)
                                  Beta-Blockers     Cardiac Cath
                                   (Low-Cost)        (High-Cost)
Avg at Baseline (All Patients)        37.3%            16.4%
Avg at Endline (All Patients)         98.5%            41.9%

Between-Race Gap (Black-White)
  Baseline                              -1.70                0.65
                                       (0.56)              (0.35)
  Endline                               -0.23               -0.93
                                       (0.09)              (0.46)
  Change                                1.46                -1.58
                                       (0.56)              (0.39)
  Components of Change
   Differential Performance             1.35                -0.64
   Improvement                         (0.58)              (0.32)
    Differential Hospital               0.59                -0.16
    Reallocation                       (0.34)              (0.25)
    Cross                               -0.48               -0.78
                                       (0.36)              (0.21)
Hospitals                              2,602               2,712
All values are percentage points (i.e. 1 indicates 1 percentage point)
except for shares indicated with a % symbol. Notes: This table
displays and decomposes the change in the between-race gap from the
baseline period (1995-1999) to the endline period (2010-2014) for
hospital technology adoption and use. The between-race gap is the
Black - white rate; thus a negative value would indicate that Black
patients receive treatment at less technology intensive hospitals than
white patients. Column 1 analyzes the use of a low-cost technology,
beta-blockers at discharge. Column 2 analyzes the use of a high-cost
technology, cardiac catheterization, on the same day as admission. See
text for more details. Bootstrapped standard errors using 1,000
replicates in parentheses.




                                  30
Figures

Figure 1: Decomposition of Between-Race Gap in Hospital Performance at Baseline

                                0.20
                                       A. Between-Race Gap
                                                                             White
                                0.15
                                                                             Patients
                                                 Black
                                                 Patients
                                0.10

                                0.05

                                0.00
                                    82%     84       86      88   90   92       94      96

                                0.20
                                       B. Between Hospital Markets
                                0.15       Hospital Market                   White
                                           Reweighted                        Patients
                                           White Patients
                                0.10

                                0.05

                                0.00
                                    82%     84       86      88   90   92       94      96

                                0.20
                                       C. Between ZIP Codes, Within Hospital Markets
                                0.15      ZIP Code                      Hospital Market
                                          Reweighted                    Reweighted
                                          White Patients                White Patients
                                0.10

                                0.05

                                0.00
                                    82%     84       86      88   90   92       94      96

                                0.20
                                       D. Within ZIP Codes
                                                                            ZIP Code
                                0.15                                        Reweighted
                                                                            White Patients

                                0.10         Black
                                             Patients

                                0.05

                                0.00
                                    82%     84       86      88   90   92       94      96
                                                Hospital Performance
                                          (Survival, 30 Days, Risk-Adjusted)

Note: This figure visualizes the static decomposition during the baseline (1995-1999) period. Each panel presents
kernel densities of hospital performance for Black and white patients, with the vertical lines representing means.
Panel A compares the actual densities for white and Black patients (the between-race gap). Subsequent panels
reweight white patients to have the same geographic distribution as Black patients. Panel B compares densities for
actual and market-level reweighted white patients (the between hospital markets term). Panel C compares densities
for market- and ZIP code-level reweighted white patients (the between ZIP codes, within hospital markets term).
Panel D compares the density for ZIP code-level reweighted white patients with the actual density for Black
patients (the within ZIP codes term). See text for more details.



                                                             31
Figure 2: Between-Race Gap in Hospital Performance at Baseline and Endline

                            0.20
                                   A. Baseline

                            0.15
                                       Black
                                       Patients                         White
                            0.10                                        Patients



                            0.05


                            0.00
                                82%      85        88     91       94          97         100

                            0.20
                                   B. Endline

                            0.15

                                                                                    White
                            0.10                                                    Patients

                                              Black
                            0.05              Patients


                            0.00
                                82%      85        88     91       94          97         100
                                            Hospital Performance
                                      (Survival, 30 Days, Risk-Adjusted)
Note: This figure visualizes the between-race gap term of the static decomposition during the baseline (1995-1999)
and endline (2010-2014) periods. Each panel presents kernel densities of hospital performance for Black and white
patients, with the vertical lines representing means. See text for more details.




                                                         32
     Figure 3: Decomposition of Between-Race Gap in Hospital Performance Over Time


                                           94%    A. Hospital Performance                            B. Fixing Market Shares                           C. Fixing Performance
                                                  by Race over Time                                  at Baseline Level                                 at Baseline Level
      (Survival, 30 Days, Risk-Adjusted)




                                            93
                                                              White                                              White
            Hospital Performance




                                                             Patients                                           Patients
                                            92

                                                                           Black                                               Black
                                            91                             Patients                                            Patients


                                            90                                                                                                               White Patients


                                            89                                                                                                               Black Patients


                                                 1995-1999     2000-2004    2005-2009   2010-2014   1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009     2010-2014   1995-1999   2000-2004    2005-2009   2010-2014
33




     Note: This figure visualizes the dynamic decomposition. Panel A shows the average hospital performance for Black and white patients in each period. The
     change in the Black-white gap from baseline (1995-1999) to endline (2010-2014) equals the change in between-race gap decomposed in Table 3. Panel B shows a
     counterfactual in which market shares remain at baseline levels but hospital performance evolves, depicting the di↵erential performance improvement term.
     Panel C displays a counterfactual in which hospital performance remains at baseline levels but market shares evolve, depicting the di↵erential reallocation term.
     See text for more details.
