                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




A COMPARISON OF MONTHLY GLOBAL INDICATORS FOR FORECASTING GROWTH

                                    Christiane Baumeister
                                        Pierre Guérin

                                     Working Paper 28014
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28014


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




We thank Nida Çakır Melek, Jim Hamilton, Francesco Ravazzolo, Christian Schumacher, Gregor
von Schweinitz, and Joaquin Vespignani for many useful suggestions. The views expressed in
this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF, its
Executive Board, IMF management, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Christiane Baumeister and Pierre Guérin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Comparison of Monthly Global Indicators for Forecasting Growth
Christiane Baumeister and Pierre Guérin
NBER Working Paper No. 28014
October 2020
JEL No. C22,C52,E37

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper evaluates the predictive content of a set of alternative monthly indicators of global
economic activity for nowcasting and forecasting quarterly world GDP using mixed-frequency
models. We find that a recently proposed indicator that covers multiple dimensions of the global
economy consistently produces substantial improvements in forecast accuracy, while other
monthly measures have more mixed success. This global economic conditions indicator contains
valuable information also for assessing the current and future state of the economy for a set of
individual countries and groups of countries. We use this indicator to track the evolution of the
nowcasts for the US, the OECD area, and the world economy during the coronavirus pandemic
and quantify the main factors driving the nowcasts.


Christiane Baumeister
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
3028 Jenkins Nanovic Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and CEPR
and also NBER
cbaumeis@nd.edu

Pierre Guérin
International Monetary Fund
700 19th St NW
Washington, DC 20431
pguerin@imf.org
1    Introduction

What is the current state of the business cycle and where is the economy headed? These are
questions of …rst-order importance that guide the decision-making process of economic analysts,
governments, central banks, and international organizations. One of the most closely followed and
comprehensive measures to monitor macroeconomic developments is real GDP since it constitutes
the primary indicator of the business cycle. An important drawback is that it becomes available
only with considerable time delay which hampers an early assessment of the current and future
economic situation. Therefore, policymaking institutions and the private sector channel substantial
resources toward collecting more timely information to analyze short-term ‡uctuations in economic
activity in real time. This is particularly useful in a fast-evolving economic environment that we
experienced at the onset of the coronavirus pandemic.
    These e¤orts have been supported by a large academic literature that has developed nowcasting
and forecasting approaches geared toward reliably gauging the underlying state of the economy
before the release of o¢ cial real GDP numbers based on high-frequency indicators. Popular ap-
proaches include factor models (e.g., Stock and Watson, 2002; Giannone, Reichlin, and Small, 2008;
Schumacher and Breitung, 2008; Chernis and Sekkel, 2017), bridge equations (e.g., Ba¢ gi, Golinelli,
and Parigi, 2004; Foroni and Marcellino, 2014; Golinelli and Parigi, 2014), mixed-frequency models
(e.g., Andreou, Ghysels, and Kourtellos, 2010; Clements and Galvão, 2008, 2009; Kuzin, Marcellino,
and Schumacher, 2011; Schorfheide and Song, 2020), and combinations thereof (e.g., Marcellino and
Schumacher, 2010; Schumacher, 2016). This literature has concluded that exploiting the informa-
tion content of high-frequency variables improves the accuracy of macroeconomic nowcasts and
forecasts.
    Most studies in this literature have focused on predicting the growth rate of real GDP in in-
dividual countries relying mainly on domestic variables. Much less attention has been devoted
to assessing current and future growth developments beyond national borders. Only a few pa-
pers have applied these approaches for the purpose of nowcasting and forecasting world economic
growth. For example, Golinelli and Parigi (2014) use several monthly business cycle indicators to
generate individual-country forecasts for output growth which are combined into world forecasts by
modeling country linkages via bridge equations. This type of bottom-up approach where forecasts
for individual countries are aggregated to the global level are also widely used by international
organizations like the IMF and the OECD. Ferrara and Marsilli (2019) focus on nowcasting annual
global growth directly using a mixed data sampling approach where the predictor variable is the
common component extracted from a large cross section of monthly real and …nancial variables for
37 countries. These studies are based on large datasets of economic indicators for advanced and
emerging countries which are di¢ cult to maintain for regular updates throughout the quarter. An-
other set of papers uses available global indicators directly to track quarterly world output growth.
For example, Rossiter (2010) and Stratford (2013) examine the usefulness of the global Purchasing
Managers Index, world goods trade, and the IFO World Economic Climate survey, among others,


                                                 2
for nowcasting global growth based on bridge models. Ravazzolo and Vespignani (2020) propose a
new indicator of world steel production whose reliability they evaluate based on a set of statistical
criteria among which its out-of-sample forecast accuracy for world real GDP.1
    Our paper contributes to the latter strand of this literature by investigating the promise of
mixed-frequency models using …ve popular monthly indicators of global real activity for forecasting
quarterly world output growth. We show that the global economic conditions (GECON) indicator
recently proposed by Baumeister, Korobilis, and Lee (2020) consistently outperforms all other ex-
isting indicators considered here. This …nding suggests that GECON is a useful indicator to gauge
the timing and magnitude of ‡uctuations in the global business cycle at the monthly frequency
also in other applications. Given that this indicator covers multiple dimensions of the global econ-
omy including measures of expectations and uncertainty, industrial activity, mobility and …nancial
indicators, among others, it allows us to gauge how information from various sources a¤ects our
assessment of the current state of the world economy by analyzing the contribution of each data
category to the nowcasts. These nowcasts and forecasts can be used as inputs for other models such
as DSGE models that are used for scenario analysis at policy institutions such as central banks and
international organizations.
    Given the deep economic interdependence among countries created by decades of globalization,
we also examine whether global economic indicators provide useful information for nowcasting and
forecasting output growth in groups of countries and single countries that di¤er in their exposure
to international economic developments. We …nd overwhelming evidence that GECON is by far
the best indicator also for the purpose of forecasting changes in regional and domestic real output.
The predictive power of GECON is strongest for the within-quarter updates across the entire set of
countries, while the forecasting success at longer horizons is concentrated in the larger countries and
economic blocs. Our analysis suggests that global economic conditions contain valuable information
for assessing the current and expected state of national business cycles. We further show that these
gains in forecast accuracy can be achieved in real time. Based on these encouraging results, we use
our mixed-frequency model with GECON to track real GDP nowcasts as the coronavirus pandemic
unfolded and quantify how much of the variation in the nowcasts can be attributed to each category
of data underlying the global economic conditions indicator.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 evaluates the usefulness of a set
of existing monthly indicators of global economic activity for nowcasting and forecasting quarterly
world output growth using mixed-frequency models. We also investigate whether global indicators
have predictive power for real GDP growth for regional blocks like the OECD area and the G7
economies as well as for a diverse set of individual countries. Section 3 extends this analysis to
a real-time setting and tracks the evolution of the nowcasts for the US, the OECD area, and the
   1
    Hamilton (2019) identi…es the most useful monthly indicator of global economic activity based on the correlation
with observed annual real GDP growth. Kilian and Zhou (2018) rely on anecdotal evidence and qualitative criteria
to compare indicators of global real activity but do not investigate the statistical relationships between the various
indicators and a target variable.



                                                          3
world economy during the COVID-19 pandemic based on the best performing model. Speci…cally,
we determine what type of information has been driving the nowcasts in the …rst half of 2020.
Section 4 o¤ers some concluding remarks.


2     Nowcasting and Forecasting Real GDP Growth

2.1   Mixed-Frequency Models

A widely followed approach to forecasting a low-frequency variable of interest yt with variables
                                               (f )
sampled at a higher frequency f denoted by Xt is the MIDAS approach originally proposed by
Ghysels, Sinko, and Valkanov (2007) and Andreou, Ghysels, and Kourtellos (2010). The standard
MIDAS regression model relates the dependent variable to the higher-frequency explanatory vari-
able in a parsimonious way by modeling the coe¢ cients as a distributed lag function to keep the
number of model parameters that need to be estimated small. We are interested in forecasting the
cumulative growth rate of real GDP for h = 1; 2; :::; 8 quarters ahead, measured at an annual rate:

                                     400             Yt
                             yth =       ln                                     for h = 1; 2; :::; 8:                (1)
                                      h             Yt h
We also explore nowcasts of the growth rate in quarter t obtained on the basis of monthly data
from some of the months of quarter t, and de…ned as:

                                                      Yt                                  1 2
                                 yth = 400 ln                                   for h = 0; ;                         (2)
                                                     Yt 1                                 3 3

where h = 0 denotes a nowcast when all of the months of quarter t are available but real GDP has
not yet been reported, h = 13 when the …rst of two months of quarter t are available but not the
third, and h = 23 when only the …rst month is available. We will be basing forecasts and nowcasts
                                                                                                (3)
on monthly series of a candidate global indicator whose three values for quarter t are denoted Xt .
Following the notation in Ghysels, Sinko, and Valkanov (2007), we will interpret the fractional lag
                (3)                                                     (3)
operator L2=3 Xt as picking up the …rst month of quarter t, L1=3 Xt as the second month of
                     (3)
quarter t, and L0=3 Xt as the …nal month of quarter t. Allowing for autoregressive dynamics as in
Andreou, Ghysels, and Kourtellos (2013) results in the following model speci…cation:
                                                              1           (3)
                                  yth =     h
                                            0   +    h
                                                     1   B(L 3 ;   h
                                                                       ) Xt h   +   h h
                                                                                     yt d   + "ht                    (3)
                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                              h
where d = 1 for h = 0; 13 ; 32 ; and d = h otherwise, and the MIDAS lag polynomial B(L 3 ;                        ) is an
exponential Almon lag weight function of the form:

                1
                     h           P
                                 2
                                            h              P
                                                           2     exp( 1 (k + 1) + 2 (k + 1)2 )
           B(L 3 ;       )           b(k;       )Lk=3 =        P2                                  Lk=3              (4)
                                                                    exp(    (k + 1) +   (k + 1) 2)
                              k=0                          k=0  k=0       1           2

                             h
with shape parameters          = f 1 ; 2 g. The weights b(k; h ) sum to one by construction. The horizon-
speci…c parameters h0 ;       h h
                              1;  ; and h are estimated by the method of nonlinear least squares and

                                                                   4
updated recursively. Using the estimated coe¢ cients and the most recent observations for the
global economic indicator and output growth based on the de…nitions in equations (1) and (2), we
                                                       h
generate the nowcasts and h-step-ahead forecasts for ybt+d as follows:
                                       h     h     1    h   (3)
                               h
                             ybt+d = b 0 + b 1 B(L 3 ; b ) Xt+m + bh yth                        (5)

where m = (1 h) for h = 0; 13 ; 32 ; and m = 0 otherwise. One advantage of this direct forecasting
approach is that there is no need to forecast the monthly global indicators. At the same time, the
MIDAS approach allows us to include monthly information available within the current quarter.
We deal with the ragged-edge problem at the end of the sample by applying simple nowcasting
techniques which have been shown to work well in other contexts (see, e.g., Baumeister, Korobilis,
and Lee, 2020). Details on the nowcasting rules for each global indicator are provided in the next
section.
   A more ‡exible alternative that relaxes the constraints incorporated in the functional lag poly-
nomial in the traditional MIDAS model has been developed by Foroni, Marcellino, and Schumacher
(2015). They show that unrestricted MIDAS (or U-MIDAS) models perform particularly well when
mixing variables of quarterly and monthly frequency. We consider the following U-MIDAS model:
                                           P2          (3)
                           yth =   h
                                   0   +    q=0
                                                  h
                                                  q   Xt h q=3   +   h h
                                                                      yt d   + "ht              (6)

which is linear in the parameters and thus can be estimated recursively by ordinary least squares.
     While all of our monthly indicators of global activity are available from the 1960s and 1970s
onward, our sample starts in 1980Q1 since this is the earliest date for which data on world real
GDP, the broadest measure we want to forecast, can be obtained at the quarterly frequency. Oxford
Economics provides data on quarterly world GDP at constant prices constructed on the basis of
market exchange rates in its Global Macroeconomic Databank. One advantage of this series is that
it is reported in levels which allows for the horizon-speci…c transformation in equation (1). Data
for world real GDP are released with a delay of one quarter which means that the …rst forecast is
actually a nowcast.
    We conduct a pseudo real-time forecasting evaluation where data vintages are constructed by
adding the latest available data point taking the real-time data ‡ow and thus publication lags into
account. We mimic as closely as possible the real-time forecasting environment that a forecaster
would have encountered at the time the out-of-sample forecast was generated. The …rst estimation
sample runs from 1980Q2 to 1989Q4 to obtain the parameter estimates. We then condition on
the information contained in the most recent monthly global indicators as they become available
throughout the …rst quarter of 1990 to nowcast real GDP growth in January 1990 for h = 23 , in
February 1990 for h = 31 , and in March 1990 for h = 0. Forecasts for real GDP growth use the
information for the monthly predictors available in the quarter at the end of which the forecast is
generated; that is, we condition on the information until December 1989 for the monthly predictors
when forecasting 1990Q1 output growth for h = 1, 1990Q2 output growth for h = 2, 1990Q3
output growth for h = 3, and so on. Since MIDAS models use the direct method to calculate the

                                                      5
forecasts, the models are separately estimated for each forecast horizon. We then re-estimate the
horizon-speci…c parameters using data through 1990Q1 to nowcast 1990Q2 growth for each month
of the second quarter of 1990 and to forecast 1990Q2 for h = 1, 1990Q3 for h = 2, up to 1992Q1
for h = 8. We continue to expand our estimation sample by one quarter until we reach the end of
the sample.
    We evaluate the forecast accuracy in terms of the mean-squared prediction error (MSPE) of
output growth. All forecasting results are presented relative to the direct forecasts obtained with
an AR(1) model which we use as the benchmark for evaluating the forecasting ability of competing
models as is done in Clements and Galvão (2009) for U.S. real GDP growth and in Ravazzolo and
Vespignani (2020) for world real GDP growth. An MSPE ratio below 1 indicates that a given model
outperforms the AR(1) benchmark. To get a sense of the statistical signi…cance of di¤erences in
forecasting performance, we use the Diebold-Mariano (1995) test of equal predictive ability. The
forecast evaluation period ends in 2018Q4. The use of such a long evaluation period reduces the
risk of spurious forecast successes.


2.2     The Predictive Content of Monthly Global Economic Indicators for World
        Output Growth

In this section we evaluate the predictive power of the most prominent global economic indicators
at the monthly frequency that have been proposed in the literature for the purpose of forecasting
world real GDP growth out of sample.2 Details on the di¤erent global measures can be found in
Table 1.


2.2.1    World Industrial Production

The …rst economic indicator measures the level of real output in the manufacturing sector, mining,
as well as the electric and gas industries worldwide. Up until 2011.10 the OECD published a
monthly index of industrial production covering OECD countries and six major emerging markets
(Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, the Russian Federation and South Africa) in its Main Economic
Indicator (MEI) database going all the way back to 1958.1. Baumeister and Hamilton (2019)
constructed an updated version of this index by applying the same methodology as the OECD.3
   Since the world industrial production index (WIP) is subject to data revisions, we use the real-
time vintages compiled by Baumeister, Korobilis, and Lee (2020) to account for the preliminary
nature of the most recent observations. Speci…cally, they extend the real-time dataset of Baumeister
and Kilian (2014) that contains vintages for the monthly index of OECD+6 industrial production
   2
     While there are other popular indicators like the J.P. Morgan global manufacturing PMI, world goods trade, and
international air freight tonne kilometers (see Stratford (2013) and Kilian and Zhou (2018) for additional discussion),
none of them extend far enough back in time and thus are less suitable for our purpose of forecasting global real GDP
growth over a long enough evaluation period.
   3
     This series is regularly updated and available at https://sites.google.com/site/cjsbaumeister/research.


                                                          6
up to the end of 2011 with real-time vintages of production-weighted world industrial production
provided by the CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis from March 2012 onward.
The March 2012 vintage contains data from 1991.1 to 2012.1 which they backcast to 1973.1 using
the OECD+6 series. For each vintage the most recent two observations are not yet available which
we nowcast at the average growth rate of the earlier data.
    Table 2 presents the recursive MSPE ratios for the MIDAS and U-MIDAS models. The forecast
accuracy of WIP for global growth is mixed. Columns 1 and 2 show that the unrestricted MIDAS
model does better than the MIDAS model at most forecasting horizons but only outperforms the
AR(1) benchmark in the second month of the current quarter and at the three- and four-quarter-
ahead horizons, while being about as accurate as the AR(1) forecast at most other horizons. The
largest MSPE reduction of 8% is observed for h = 31 with more modest gains at horizons 3 and 4.


2.2.2    Global Steel Production Factor

Ravazzolo and Vespignani (2020) propose monthly world steel production as an indicator of global
real economic activity based on the insight that steel is a key input for many industries including
construction, transportation, and manufacturing, and that it is traded freely worldwide. Instead of
using their aggregate measure of the level of steel produced worldwide which is only available since
1994, we follow Baumeister, Korobilis, and Lee (2020) and extract the common component from
an unbalanced panel of monthly growth rates of crude steel production for individual countries
and groups of countries using the EM algorithm.4 The advantage of this approach is that the
resulting measure of global activity is equally broad in coverage but goes further back in time,
while circumventing the problem of structural breaks that result from aggregating steel in physical
units.
   The World Steel Association publishes information on the amount of steel produced reported
by member countries with a one-month lag. We nowcast the missing observations for the current
month using the average growth rate of each production series over the available sample. While
there are some small data revisions, we rely on the currently available time series since the factor
approach would likely …lter them out as idiosyncratic noise (see Giannone, Reichlin, and Small,
2008).
   The forecasting performance of the global steel production factor is comparable to WIP and it
makes little di¤erence whether we use the MIDAS or the U-MIDAS model. Columns 3 and 4 of
Table 2 reveal that the MIDAS models with the steel index lead to some improvements in forecast
accuracy in the nowcasting period with MSPE reductions between 5% and 7% and some smaller
improvements at horizons 3 and 4. These results are consistent with Ravazzolo and Vespignani
(2020) who use an aggregate measure of world steel production and a shorter evaluation period.
   4
    Crude steel production data for the United States, Japan, the European Union and other reporting countries
start in 1968.1. Data for China, Eastern Europe, and the Middle East become available in 1990.1 and for Russia and
Ukraine in 1992.1. This results in an unbalanced panel of seven time series for monthly production of crude steel
measured in thousands of tons.


                                                        7
2.2.3    Kilian Index

The next indicator of global real economic activity is an index based on international shipping costs
developed by Kilian (2009). The reasoning underlying this measure is that raw industrial materials
need to be shipped before they can be used in production. An upswing in the global economy will
lead to an increase in the demand for industrial commodities and thus shipping services which raises
the cost of shipping given that the supply of ships is …xed in the short run. To identify the cyclical
component of global economic activity, Kilian (2009) proposed to remove a linear time trend from
the shipping cost index after de‡ating it with the U.S. consumer price index (CPI). Kilian (2009)
makes the case that the resulting index is proportionate to the overall level of global real economic
activity. Based on a qualitative analysis, Kilian and Zhou (2018) reinforce this idea by concluding
that the Kilian index is better suited than other measures for capturing the timing and amplitude
of ‡uctuations in the global business cycle. Given this interpretation, the Kilian index should be a
useful measure for predicting global growth.
    Hamilton (2019) provides in-sample evidence that the Kilian index has no statistically signi…cant
correlation with annual world real GDP growth rates, while our focus is on out-of-sample forecasts
of quarterly world real GDP growth rates. For this purpose, we use the new de…nition of the Kilian
index now recommended by Kilian (2019) which corrects a coding error in the calculation of his
original index uncovered by Hamilton (2019). Since our goal is to mimic as closely as possible a
real-time setting, the Kilian index available on Lutz Kilian’s webpage is not suitable given that it is
already transformed using the entire sample period.5 Instead, we use the series of the log nominal
shipping index provided on Jim Hamilton’s webpage.6 This allows us to account for the one-month
lag in the release of U.S. CPI which we nowcast based on past average in‡ation and to linearly
detrend the de‡ated index only using data available to the forecaster at the time the forecast is
made.7
    Columns 5 and 6 of Table 2 show that neither model using the Kilian index beats the AR(1)
benchmark except for one horizon. While the U-MIDAS model reduces the MSPE by 4% at the
one-quarter horizon, all other MSPE ratios are above 1, and the forecasting performance of the
models with the Kilian index deteriorates considerably as the horizon lenghtens.8 These results
are inconsistent with the notion that the Kilian index is a useful measure of global business cycle
‡uctuations.
   5
     Note that Ravazzolo and Vespignani (2020) used this full-sample version of the Kilian index which implies that
their forecasting results are subject to a look-ahead bias.
   6
     See http://econweb.ucsd.edu/~jhamilto/shipping_costs.xlsx
   7
     Note that data revisions in the U.S. CPI tend to be small so that they can be safely ignored.
   8
     Hamilton (2019) and Funishima (2020) show that one problem with the Kilian index is the assumption of a linear
time trend. While alternative transformations of shipping costs, as recommended by Hamilton and Funishima, might
be more useful, Kilian and Zhou (2018) insist that "the Kilian index [...] is constructed as a business cycle index and,
hence, must not be di¤erenced or otherwise transformed" (p.57).




                                                           8
2.2.4      Real Commodity Price Factor

Another measure of global economic activity suggested by Alquist, Bhattarai, and Coibion (2020),
Delle Chiaie, Ferrara, and Giannone (2017), and West and Wong (2014) relies on the common
variation in a large cross-section of real commodity prices. The idea is that a factor extracted
from this dataset captures demand-driven global ‡uctuations which make all prices comove, while
commodity-speci…c developments a¤ect prices in idiosyncratic ways. We use the same 23 basic
industrial and agricultural commodities selected by Baumeister, Korobilis, and Lee (2020) and
summarized in Table 1 since they feed directly into the production of …nal goods and are thus
related to real output. While nominal commodity prices are available in real time and are not
subsequently revised, U.S. CPI is released with a delay of one month. As before, we use the past
average in‡ation rate to nowcast the current-month CPI to de‡ate the commodity prices before
extracting the real commodity price factor in real time.
    The models with the real commodity factor perform consistently well at short horizons. Columns
7 and 8 of Table 2 show that both MIDAS models using the real commodity price factor dominate
the AR(1) forecast for horizons up to 1 year with considerable gains in predictive accuracy of up
to 14% during the nowcasting quarter and up to 4% one quarter ahead. The MSPE reductions are
at most 2% at longer horizons.


2.2.5      Global Economic Conditions Indicator

Baumeister, Korobilis, and Lee (2020) recently developed a global indicator based on a diverse
dataset that covers multiple dimensions of the world economy relevant for measuring aggregate
‡uctuations. Speci…cally, they put together a panel of 16 variables including broad measures
of real economic activity, commodity prices, …nancial indicators, uncertainty measures, weather-
related variables, indicators of transportation demand, expectations measures, and energy-related
indicators.9 For example, leading economic indices as well as expectations and uncertainty measures
provide an assessement of households’and businesses’outlook for future spending and growth; world
industrial production, energy consumption, and mobility measures capture the current intensity of
real economic activity; stock returns, foreign exchange ‡uctuations and real copper prices contain
forward-looking information of trade and …nancial ‡ows. The …rst principal component extracted
from this rich cross-section of variables provides a summary measure of current and future global
economic conditions that a¤ect macroeconomic performance worldwide.
    The 16 variables that enter the construction of the global economic conditions (GECON) in-
dicator are released with varying publication lags as detailed in Table 1. We …ll the data gaps at
the end of the sample using the same nowcasting techniques as Baumeister et al. (2020). Most
of the series underlying GECON are subject to either small or no revisions which is why we use
the currently available time series except for WIP where we use the real-time vintages described
earlier.
  9
      For the full list of variables, see Table 1.


                                                     9
    The MIDAS models with the GECON indicator are the most successful for purposes of now-
casting and forecasting global growth. Columns 9 and 10 of Table 2 show a dramatic improvement
in forecast accuracy across all horizons. Both the MIDAS model and the U-MIDAS model using
GECON outperform the AR(1) forecast by a wide margin with the MIDAS model yielding the best
overall results. The nowcasts achieve statistically signi…cant reductions in MSPE ratios of 12% for
the …rst month, 24% for the second month, and 34% for the last month of the current quarter.
This indicates that as more information becomes available throughout the quarter, the forecasting
performance improves substantially. Similarly impressive gains are obtained for forecast horizons
one-to-eight quarters ahead with average MSPE reductions of 10%.


2.2.6   Tracking the Forecasting Performance of Indicators over Time

The results reported in Table 2 summarize the average forecast accuracy. The most accurate model
by far is the MIDAS model using the GECON indicator, while the MIDAS model with the Kilian
index displays the weakest overall performance. The models with the real commodity price factor
come in second producing gains mainly at shorter horizons. There is no systematic pattern for
the models relying on WIP and the steel factor which only occasionally improve upon the AR(1)
forecast.
    To get a better sense of where the di¤erences across global indicators come from, we take a
look at the evolution of the cumulative mean-squared prediction errors over time. For this purpose,
we compare the forecasting performance of the MIDAS and the U-MIDAS models relative to the
AR(1) benchmark for three di¤erent horizons: the nowcast when only one monthly observation of
the global indicator is available, the nowcast at the end of the current quarter, and the one-year-
ahead forecast. Figure 1 illustrates that the forecasts obtained with the MIDAS models using the
GECON index consistently outperform the AR(1) forecasts over the entire evaluation period and
across horizons. Much of the superior forecast accuracy of the GECON models derives from the
period following the 2008/09 …nancial crisis. The markedly more accurate nowcasts of the models
with the real commodity factor are exclusively due to the post-2010 period. This is consistent
with evidence provided in Bjørnland, Ravazzolo, and Thorsrud (2017) who show that gains in the
short-run forecast accuracy of domestic real GDP growth for a large panel of countries are mainly
realized in the aftermath of the Great Recession for models that include a common international
business cycle factor. The opposite is true for the models using the Kilian index where the post-2010
period is detrimental to the forecasting performance. This is in line with the problem highlighted
by Hamilton (2019) that since 2010 the Kilian index has exhibited increased volatility and periods
of sharp contractions that are incompatible with any other available measure of recent ‡uctuations
in world economic activity. At the one-year horizon, the models with WIP, the steel index, and the
commodity factor are essentially on par with the AR(1) forecast. The …gure also con…rms that in
most cases there is little to choose between the MIDAS and U-MIDAS models given their similar
performance across indicators and time.



                                                 10
2.3     The Role of Global Indicators for Regional and Domestic Growth Forecasts

Over the past decades the world economies have become more and more integrated and the evolution
of national business cycles is increasingly in‡uenced by global economic conditions as a result of
globalization. For example, Ductor and Leiva-León (2016) document a marked increase in business
cycle interdependence across the globe in the early 2000s. This begs the question whether and to
what extent worldwide economic conditions contain valuable information for forecasting the path
of output growth in di¤erent countries and groups of countries.10 For this purpose, we evaluate the
information content of the same set of monthly indicators of global activity for growth forecasts
for the OECD area, the G7 economies, and a diverse set of individual countries. While for some
countries data for real GDP are available further back in time, we keep 1980Q1 as the common start
date, mainly for purposes of comparability with the forecasting results for global growth. Another
consideration is that economic integration played a more prominent role since the 1980s and that
many advanced economies have undergone important transformations beforehand.


2.3.1    Groups of Countries

We investigate the usefulness of global economic indicators for two country blocs that di¤er in their
size and composition: the OECD area which consists of 37 member countries and the Group of
Seven (G7) which includes the seven major advanced economies in the world.11 We obtain data
on quarterly real GDP for the OECD area from the November 2019 OECD Economic Outlook
database and for the G7 countries from Haver Analytics.12
    Table 3, panel (a) shows that the MIDAS model using the GECON indicator which consists
of the most diversi…ed set of variables has the highest predictive value for nowcasting and fore-
casting growth in the OECD economies among the …ve global indicators. This model yields the
largest MSPE reductions relative to the AR(1) benchmark across all horizons, most of which are
statistically signi…cant. The second-best model for nowcasts and long-horizon forecasts is the MI-
DAS model based on the global steel index but the MSPE reductions do not measure up to those
achieved with GECON. For example, the MIDAS model with GECON yields gains in forecast ac-
curacy of 17% for the …rst month, 26% for the second month, and 39% for the last month of the
current quarter, while the corresponding gains for the MIDAS model with the steel index are only
7%, 2%, and 14%. Equally impressive are the MSPE reductions of the GECON model at longer
  10
     Using a dynamic factor model, Bjørnland et al. (2017) show that a quarterly common international business
cycle factor adds marginal predictive power to forecasting domestic real GDP growth at short horizons for the period
after the Great Recession.
  11
     Current OECD member countries are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Chile,Colombia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithua-
nia, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Korea,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the United States. The G7 is composed of Canada,
France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States.
  12
     Both aggregates are constructed using market exchange rates and are released with a delay of one quarter. Real
GDP for the G7 countries (S005NGCD@G10) is only available from 1981Q1 onward.


                                                        11
horizons with improvements of about 20% over the benchmark. At horizons 1, 2, and 3-quarters-
ahead, the U-MIDAS model with the Kilian index has some success but it never performs better
than GECON. The models using WIP and the real commodity price factor are not useful for the
purpose of forecasting growth for the OECD area.
    A similar picture emerges for the G7 growth forecasts. Panel (b) of Table 3 highlights that the
MIDAS model using GECON is again the winner by a large margin with substantial improvements
in forecast accuracy that are highly statistically signi…cant. MSPE reductions range between 36%
for the nowcast, 23% at the 1-year horizon, and 22% at the 2-year horizon. The usefulness of the
other indicators is a bit more mixed compared to the OECD area and dependent on the forecast
horizon. During the nowcast period, the information conveyed by WIP and the steel index seems
useful in the …rst month of the quarter, while WIP and the commodity price factor are more
important in the second month, and the global steel index performs best among those three at the
end of the current quarter. At intermediate horizons the MIDAS and U-MIDAS models with WIP
and the Kilian index deliver some modest gains relative to the AR(1) benchmark but never larger
than 5%.


2.3.2   A Diverse Set of Individual Countries

We now focus on several individual countries that di¤er in their exposure to international devel-
opments and a number of other distinctive characteristics which should help shed light on the
usefulness of global economic indicators for domestic growth. In particular, we distinguish between
large closed economies and small open economies, some of which are net commodity importers,
while others are net commodity exporters.


Large Closed Economies. The common perception is that large economies are more closed
since foreign trade contributes a relatively small share to GDP and that they are therefore less
susceptible to economic ‡uctuations in the rest of the world. We examine to what extent indicators
of global activity have predictive content for quarterly growth in the Euro area and the United
States.
    Euro area. While the Euro area could be considered as a group of countries, it has stronger
economic ties than the OECD and the G7 which is why we treat it as a single, country-like entity.
This is supported by the fact that institutions like the European Central Bank (ECB) are mandated
to take only area-wide economic developments into account when conducting monetary policy, for
example. It is thus of direct policy interest to understand whether worldwide economic conditions
matter for the purpose of forecasting area-wide growth. The broadest aggregate for Euro-area real
GDP comprising all 19 countries is available from Eurostat starting in 1995Q1. We use the growth
rate of real GDP from the ECB’s Area Wide Model (AWM) database to extend this series back to
1980Q1.



                                                12
    Table 4, panel (a) shows that WIP is the most useful predictor in the …rst month of the current
quarter, while the MIDAS model using the GECON indicator performs best across all other horizons
with statistically signi…cant MSPE reductions of 24% for the full-quarter nowcast and of 15% at the
2-year horizon. The MIDAS models with the global steel production factor are also more accurate
than the AR(1) forecast with sizeable MSPE reductions of up to 14% at short horizons. This
forecasting success is not entirely surprising given the important role of the steel industry for the
European economy. Among the other global indicators, the Kilian index again displays the worst
overall performance.
    United States. U.S. real GDP growth is probably one of the most often forecast variables. A lot
of e¤ort has been put into …nding suitable predictor variables for this key measure of macroeconomic
performance. We obtain data for quarterly U.S. real GDP from the FRED database.
    Panel (b) of Table 4 shows that using current-quarter global information embodied in GECON
leads to staggering gains in forecast accuracy when forecasting U.S. growth rates. MSPE reductions
are as large as 19% in the …rst month, 28% in the second month, and 37% in the last month of the
nowcasting quarter for both the MIDAS model and the U-MIDAS model. The gains for horizons
1- to 8-quarters ahead range between 10% and 18%. None of the other indicators of world activity
have additional predictive power relative to the AR(1) forecast. In particular, the MSPE ratios for
the models with the Kilian index and the real commodity price factor are all above 1.


Small Open Economies. It is well known that economic activity in small open economies
tends to be heavily in‡uenced by foreign economic developments given their strong trade linkages
with the rest of the world. It is particularly important for policy institutions to …nd ways to
incorporate global developments into their forecasting models for the domestic economy (see, e.g.,
Rossiter, 2010; Stratford, 2013). External forces are typically taken into account by a large share
of international predictor variables in a data-rich environment (see, e.g., Chernis and Sekkel, 2017).
Here we focus directly on the value of existing global indicators for growth forecasts in small open
economies. We consider four representative countries that mainly di¤er in their dependence on
commodities: Canada, Norway, the United Kingdom, and Japan.13
    Net Commodity Exporters. Canada and Norway are both resource-rich economies which export
a large share of their natural resources, mainly crude oil and petroleum products. Thus, we would
expect global indicators tied to the demand for energy and commodities more broadly to be useful
for forecasting domestic output growth.
    The results for Canada reported in Table 5, panel (a), show that once again the MIDAS models
with the GECON indicator produce the lowest MSPE ratios for all horizons with an average im-
provement of 15% relative to the AR(1) benchmark. The MIDAS model using the real commodity
price factor also achieves gains of up to 7% for forecast horizons up to one year. What is surprising
  13
    The data for real GDP for each country were obtained from Haver Analytics and they become available with
a one-quarter lag. The mnemonics are as follows: S156NGPC@G10 for Canada; S142NGPC@G10 for Norway;
S112NGPC@G10 for the U.K.; and S158NGPC@G10 for Japan.


                                                    13
is that the Kilian index that is supposed to track the demand in industrial commodity markets is
not able to beat the AR(1) forecast at any horizon despite Canada’s role as net exporter of a range
of commodities. Also WIP and the steel index have barely any predictive power for Canadian real
GDP growth.
    Table 5, panel (b) presents the results for Norway which turn out not to be as strong as
those for Canada. GECON is the only global economic indicator that achieves any reductions in
MSPEs, but does not dominate the AR(1) forecast at all horizons. The MIDAS model delivers
statistically signi…cant gains of around 5% for the within-quarter nowcasts and the one-quarter-
ahead forecasts.14
    Baumeister et al. (2020) show that the indicator of global economic conditions is particularly
useful for forecasting the real price of Brent crude oil, so it is not entirely unexpected that models
using GECON also perform well for forecasting output growth in oil-exporting countries. What
about countries whose primary resource endowments imply di¤erent trading patterns?
    Net Commodity Importers. The United Kingdom is a hybrid case since it switched from being an
oil exporter to being an oil importer during our evaluation period, while Japan’s resource scarcity
makes it heavily dependent on imported energy, raw materials, and food commodities.
    Table 6, panel (a) shows that for the UK the MIDAS model with GECON outperforms all other
global activity indicators and beats the AR(1) forecast across all horizons. The MSPE reduction
is largest for the full-quarter nowcast with 14%, while for the other horizons the improvements
are on average around 5%. The only model that is competitive at the intermediate horizons of 3-
and 4-quarters ahead is the MIDAS model using the world industrial production index, while the
MIDAS model using the steel index shows some promise for the within-quarter nowcasts. Neither
the Kilian index nor the commodity factor have any predictive content for output growth in the
UK.
    The picture for Japan is a bit more mixed. Panel (b) of Table 6 indicates that WIP delivers
the …rst useful piece of information for the nowcast in the …rst month of the quarter which yields
an MSPE reduction of 12% for the U-MIDAS model. Adding the information contained in the
other variables underlying GECON increases the forecast accuracy by 13% also in the second and
third months of the current quarter relative to the AR(1) benchmark. While GECON is also the
best predictor at longer forecasting horizons, 1-quarter to 1-year-ahead forecasts obtained with the
models using WIP and the global steel production factor perform better. The U-MIDAS model
with the real commodity factor also displays a solid performance beating the AR(1) forecast for
most horizons but by smaller margins than the other three indicators. The Kilian index again ranks
last.
  14
    Norway also has the concept of ‘Mainland GDP’ which excludes activities that stem from the exploration of
crude oil and natural gas as well as related services like transportation. We …nd qualitatively similar results for this
de…nition of GDP; in fact, the forecasting performance of the MIDAS model with GECON for mainland GDP is even
somewhat better at short horizons.




                                                          14
3        Assessing the Real-Time Forecasting Performance

The evidence presented thus far clearly suggests that, among the monthly global indicators con-
sidered here, the global economic conditions indicator of Baumeister et al. (2020) is the most
relevant predictor for output growth not just at the global level but also for economic blocs and
individual countries. Up to this point we have abstracted from the fact that real GDP data get
revised over time. A possible concern is that not accounting for data revisions may result in an
overly optimistic assessment of the forecast ability of our best-performing model (see, e.g., Golinelli
and Parigi, 2014). While no real-time vintages of data on real GDP exist for the world and the
country aggregates, we are able to track data revisions for all individual countries. This allows
us to conduct a proper real-time exercise. In Section 3.1, we evaluate to what extent the use of
preliminary data a¤ects the forecast accuracy of the GECON model, and in Section 3.2, we use
this model to nowcast output growth in real time during the pandemic.


3.1      The Importance of Real-Time Data Vintages

We collect vintages for quarterly U.S. real GDP from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia’s
Real-Time Dataset for Macroeconomists (RTDSM). The …rst vintage corresponds to 1990Q1 which
contains information available to the public in the middle month of the previous quarter in line
with the forecast origin for our evaluation period that starts in 1990Q1. As before, we only use
data from 1980Q1 onward. Keeping this starting point …xed, we re-estimate the model at the end
of each quarter, now using the vintage consistent with the information a forecaster had in real time.
For Canada, Norway, the UK, and Japan, we obtain real-time vintages of quarterly real GDP from
the Original Release Data and Revisions Database for the OECD Main Economic Indicators. A
consistent set of vintages that contains data going back to 1980Q1 starts in December 1999 for all
four countries.15 Thus, the ability to fully account for data revisions comes at the cost of having to
shorten the evaluation period by a decade. At the same time, this provides a useful check to verify
that the forecasting success of the GECON model is robust to the speci…c choice of the evaluation
sample. To separate the in‡uence of the shorter evaluation period from the aspect of data revisions,
Table 7, panel (b) reports the MSPE ratios for forecasts obtained with both the most recent vintage
of data and the real-time vintages for the evaluation period 2000Q1 to 2018Q4. For completeness,
panel (a) provides results for the full forecast evaluation period but only for the US. The forecasts
are evaluated against the same realized values for output growth as before.
   We focus on the MIDAS model since the results for the U-MIDAS model turn out to be very
similar. Panel (a) reveals that for the longer evaluation period, the forecasts for U.S. output growth
generated with real-time data generally outperform those generated with the most recent vintage
    15
    Publication lags for real GDP series vary across economies and over time within economies. We use the GDP
release from the middle month of the quarter containing information for GDP of the previous quarter, or the …rst
release of data on the level of output when GDP is released with a publication lag longer than two months (assuming
that it is actually available in the middle month of the quarter).


                                                        15
with additional gains of up to 7%. While this might seem surprising, it is important to keep in mind
that the preliminary nature of the data not only a¤ects the forecasts of the MIDAS models but also
the AR(1) benchmark. For the shorter evaluation period the results are a bit more mixed. Panel
(b) shows that the nowcasts and short-horizon forecasts obtained with the real-time and revised
data are mostly tied, but from horizon 3 onward the MSPE ratios of the MIDAS model based on
the real-time vintages are on average 8% higher compared to those using the …nal vintage of data.
The improvements in forecast accuracy relative to the benchmark model remain sizeable however,
with MSPE reductions between 4% and 12%.
    For Canada the forecasting performance of the MIDAS models based on real-time vintages and
revised data is more comparable. Rows 5 and 6 of Table 7 show that no model dominates across
all horizons and that di¤erences in MSPE reductions amount to at most 3% with both models
achieving sizeable gains in forecast accuracy of 18% on average up to 6 quarters ahead. Rows
7 and 8 indicate that the accuracy of the nowcasts and 1-quarter-ahead forecast for Norwegian
output growth su¤ers slightly when real-time data vintages are used, registering an average loss of
2% in MSPE reductions. At horizons 3 and 4 instead real-time vintages yield additional gains of
3% and 7% respectively relative to the revised data. Using real-time data improves the forecast
performance for U.K. real GDP growth across all horizons with additional MSPE reductions of up
to 9% (see rows 9 and 10). In contrast, for Japan, rows 11 and 12 show that the preliminary nature
of the data leads to a loss in forecast accuracy of 6% on average at short horizons but the MIDAS
model using GECON still improves the nowcasts and the 1-quarter-ahead forecast relative to the
AR(1) benchmark.
    Taken together, the use of real-time data vintages for real GDP does not have a large impact on
the performance of the MIDAS forecasts using GECON across all countries. This means that these
gains in forecast accuracy are achievable in real time. Figure 2 shows the evolution of the recursive
MSPE ratios for selected horizons for the …nal and real-time vintages and the two evaluation periods
which allows for a direct comparison along these two dimensions as well as across countries. The
…gure con…rms that in most cases it makes little di¤erence whether we use revised or real-time data
for real GDP at each point of the evaluation period. It also reveals that the shorter evaluation
period yields slightly more favorable results at shorter horizons. The MIDAS models get a lot of
milage out of the 2008/09 …nancial crisis episode which is in line with the evidence presented in
Figure 1 for world real GDP growth and the …ndings of Bjørnland et al. (2017) for output growth in
individual countries. However, on average the gains in MSPE reductions for the shorter evaluation
period are only around 5% for horizons up to 1 year. For most countries, the di¤erences at longer
horizons are even smaller except for Canada and Japan where the longer evaluation period yields
larger improvements in forecast accuracy at horizons 6 and 8. Overall, the pattern of forecasting
performance is robust across evaluation periods.




                                                 16
3.2      Nowcasting Growth during the COVID-19 Pandemic

The coronavirus pandemic was an event of global scale with unprecedented economic consequences.
As the health crisis unfolded, one of the most pressing tasks for policymakers around the world
was to gauge the evolution of the state of the economy in a timely fashion. There are a number
of recent studies that provide nowcasts and forecasts of real GDP growth for the U.S. economy
(see, e.g., Diebold, 2020; Schorfheide and Song, 2020) and the G7 countries (see, e.g., Foroni,
Marcellino, and Stevanović, 2020) for 2020. Existing growth assessments for a particular country
tend to rely on domestic variables only. It stands to reason that a measure of global economic
conditions that captures key aspects of the current crisis could be especially useful for monitoring
economic developments during the pandemic. In particular, the most recent episode is characterized
by worldwide disruptions of industrial activity and trade ‡ows, a sharp drop in global mobility,
plummeting consumer con…dence, and rampant uncertainty –all variables that …gure prominently
in GECON. While domestic variables are undoubtedly important, global economic conditions might
also have a role to play. This consideration is even more important once we try to track the decline
in economic activity that transcends national boundaries.
    Using a model that allows to incorporate new information about the global economy every month
is key to picking up the latest developments in economic conditions and gauging the slowdown as
it unfolds. This feature was particularly important in the …rst quarter of 2020 where the bulk of
events was concentrated in the last month of the quarter. Based on our MIDAS model, we generate
real-time nowcasts of real GDP growth for the US, the OECD area, and the global economy for
the …rst half of this year using vintages of GECON as they were assembled in real time at the end
of each month over the period January to June 2020.


Crisis-Speci…c Considerations. As pointed out by Foroni et al. (2020), in unusual times it
makes sense to deviate from established practices to accurately capture special circumstances in an
e¤ort to obtain informative nowcasts. We consider two adjustments along those lines. First, while
simple nowcasting rules based on the time series properties of the variables underlying GECON
work well during normal times, rapid changes in a crisis environment like the pandemic warrant
a more careful treatment. For example, the collapse of transportation demand as a result of the
lockdown measures and travel restrictions cannot be captured by the average historical behavior
of U.S. vehicle miles traveled. Therefore, we nowcast the two missing observations at the end of
March 2020 by the no-change forecast; in April, tra¢ c data …rm INRIX16 reported an average drop
of nationwide tra¢ c volume of 30% for the second half of March 2020. Based on this information,
we assume a reduction in mobility of 15% to nowcast the March value and a 30% reduction to
nowcast the April value; in May, we used the most recent change to nowcast the April and May
values and in June we switched back to the average growth rate. Another important variable
for transportation are OECD passenger car registrations, the data for which are released with
 16
      https://inrix.com/blog/2020/03/covid19-us-tra¢ c-volume-synopsis/



                                                        17
an 8-month lag. To obtain more timely information, we collect data on vehicle registrations for
the US, EU28, Canada, Japan, and Australia in units of thousands of cars from the OECD MEI
database which are published with a delay of only one month, sum them up, and apply the growth
rate of this aggregated series to the OECD index.17 Similarly, there was no doubt that world
industrial production would be hit hard which made nowcasting based on the past average growth
rate implausible. To ensure that the nowcasts in the April 2020 vintage re‡ect this expectation,
we extrapolate the two missing observations for March and April based on the average growth
rates of manufacturing PMI for the US, Canada, the Euro area, the UK, Australia, Russia, China,
and India where the selection of countries was determined by data availability for both months.
Consumer con…dence was also shattered as a result of the pandemic and extended lockdowns and
even though this variable becomes available with a delay of just one month, assuming no change to
nowcast the value in April was unrealistic. Instead, we use the average of growth rates of consumer
con…dence for the US, Canada, France, Spain, Italy, and Australia to obtain a more reasonable
nowcast for April 2020.18 All other variables are nowcast as summarized in Table 1.
    Second, exceptionally large deviations from the historical behavior of the economy raise concerns
about the stability of forecasting relationships and the ability of the model to perform well. This
is relevant when deciding whether to update the estimates of the model parameters by including
the most recent observations or whether to …x the parameters at pre-crisis estimates. Schorfheide
and Song (2020) note that if the pandemic shock was a one-time aberration that did not change
the structure of the economy, then it is best to omit the crisis observations from estimation since
they might distort the parameter estimates; but, if the pandemic did a¤ect how economic variables
interact, then parameter estimates should be updated using the latest information. We examine
the role of the estimation sample by comparing the nowcasts for 2020Q2 derived from a model with
updated estimates and estimates kept at their 2019Q4 values.
    A last modi…cation pertains to the model for world GDP growth. Since we no longer have access
to the Oxford Economics database, we estimate the GECON model without an autoregressive term
to produce nowcasts for global growth as in the basic MIDAS approach of Ghysels et al. (2007).19
These results, while informative, should be viewed as an approximation and thus be taken with a
grain of salt.20


Nowcasting Evidence. Figure 3 displays the monthly nowcasts of real GDP growth for the US,
the OECD area, and the global economy during the …rst and second quarters of 2020. Output now-
casts in the …rst quarter are too optimistic across all three economies. While the new information
  17
     The correlation between the growth rate of this aggregated series and the OECD index is 0.93 for the overlapping
period from January 1994 to December 2018.
  18
     The data for the manufacturing PMIs and consumer con…dence indices were obtained from tradingeconomics.com.
  19
     The last available data point for world real GDP is 2019Q2 since the University of Notre Dame discontinued its
subscription.
  20
     We also investigated the impact of omitting the autoregressive dynamics for the nowcasts for the US and the
OECD area. We do not …nd major di¤erences in the nowcasting performance across the two types of models which
we …nd reassuring.


                                                         18
that arrives in March lowers the nowcasts considerably pointing to a deceleration of growth, they
are far from the realized values of negative growth that were released about a month later and range
from -5% for the US to -7% for the OECD. This is a common feature across alternative real-time
nowcasting attempts in 2020Q1. For illustration purposes, we include the nowcasts for U.S. real
GDP growth produced by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.21 In contrast to our nowcasts,
the New York Fed nowcasts were over one percentage point lower in January and February but 0.6
percentage points higher in March when our model points to a sharp downward correction.
   We can not only track the evolution of the nowcasts over time but we can also determine which
categories of data underlying the GECON indicator drive the nowcasts. The major forces pulling
down the nowcast in March 2020 were a drastic reduction in real activity and in tra¢ c volumes
and to some extent rising uncertainty. Financial indicators on the other hand remained strong and
were stemming the slowdown by making a positive contribution to the nowcasts. A similar pattern
emerges for the OECD area and the world economy.
    For the second quarter of 2020, we report nowcasts for US and OECD growth using the MIDAS
model once with coe¢ cients updated during the crisis and once with coe¢ cients …xed at their
pre-crisis estimates as well as the respective decompositions. The nowcasts obtained with both
models are broadly similar with the most recent estimates indicating a somewhat more pronounced
decline. While both nowcasts pick up the substantial deterioration of economic activity in the US
and the OECD, they cannot match the sheer magnitude of this extreme event. What is interesting
is that in May 2020 the NY Fed nowcast reaches a low of -35%, while the GECON model signals
some improvement relative to April; yet, both nowcasts are pretty close in June 2020 with our
model indicating a drop of 10% and the New York Fed model a drop of 16%. The realized values
were a staggering -31.7% for the US and -33.8% for the OECD. The nowcasts for global growth
monotonically decline as the second quarter progresses but the predicted size of the downturn
is smaller. However, as the decomposition shows, this is not due to the information content of
GECON whose components explain a similar amount of the decline as for the US and the OECD;
rather, it must be the case that the constant term which captures past average growth prevents
the nowcasts from falling further. While all data categories make a negative contribution to the
nowcasts in the second quarter, plummeting economic activity and transportation demand account
for the lion’s share of the severe contraction in line with the travel bans and widespread lockdown
measures. Other important sources of slack are increasing uncertainty, pessimistic expectations,
and weakening …nancial indicators. The breakdown is again similar across economies.
  21
    The New York Fed updates its nowcasts throughout the quarter as new data are released
(https://www.newyorkfed.org/research/policy/nowcast). We use their nowcasts that correspond to the end of each
month to match them with the timing of our nowcast updates.




                                                     19
4    Conclusions

Monthly global economic conditions have the potential to provide useful information about current
and future output growth at the global and regional levels as well as for individual countries in
a timely manner. In this paper we evaluated the usefulness of several existing monthly measures
of global economic activity in terms of their out-of-sample forecasting performance for quarterly
real GDP growth using mixed-frequency models. We showed that the most accurate model uses a
global economic conditions indicator based on a set of 16 variables recently proposed by Baumeister,
Korobilis, and Lee (2020) that covers multiple dimensions of the world economy. The nowcasts and
forecasts for global growth generated by this model present a valuable complement to the economic
outlook obtained from a bottom-up approach used by international organizations like the OECD
and the IMF.
    Global developments captured by this indicator turned out to be helpful also for forecasting
output growth for country groups and a heterogeneous set of individual countries and gains in
forecast accuracy can be achieved in a real-time setting. This is not to say that domestic economic
conditions do not matter but rather that there is additional valuable information in global economic
conditions that should not be disregarded. While this has been recognized before, previous studies
relied on large datasets that are tedious to update frequently. This paper o¤ers an alternative in
the form of the global economic conditions indicator that is based on just 16 variables that can be
easily updated in real time. Thus, an interesting question for future research is to what extent the
forecasting performance of national real GDP growth can be improved by augmenting standard
forecasting models with this global predictor variable.




                                                20
                                         References

   Alquist, Ron, Saroj Bhattarai, and Olivier Coibion (2020). "Commodity-Price Comovement
and Global Economic Activity," Journal of Monetary Economics 112: 41-56.
   Andreou, Elena, Eric Ghysels, and Andros Kourtellos (2010). "Regression Models with Mixed
Sampling Frequencies," Journal of Econometrics 158(2): 246-261.
    Andreou, Elena, Eric Ghysels, and Andros Kourtellos (2013). "Should Macroeconomic Fore-
casters Use Daily Financial Data and How?" Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 31(2):
240-251.
   Ba¢ gi, Alberto, Golinelli, Roberto, and Giuseppe Parigi (2004). "Bridge Models to Forecast
the Euro Area GDP," International Journal of Forecasting 20: 447-460.
   Baumeister, Christiane, and James D. Hamilton (2019). "Structural Interpretation of Vector
Autoregressions with Incomplete Identi…cation: Revisiting the Role of Oil Supply and Demand
Shocks," American Economic Review 109(5): 1873-1910.
   Baumeister, Christiane, and Lutz Kilian (2014). "What Central Bankers Need to Know About
Forecasting Oil Prices," International Economic Review 55(3): 869-889.
   Baumeister, Christiane, Dimitris Korobilis, and Thomas K. Lee (2020). "Energy Markets and
Global Economic Conditions," Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
   Bjørnland, Hilde C., Francesco Ravazzolo, and Leif Anders Thorsrud (2017). "Forecasting GDP
with Global Components: This Time is Di¤erent," International Journal of Forecasting 33(1): 153-
173.
   Caldara, Dario, and Matteo Iacoviello (2018). "Measuring Geopolitical Risk," Federal Reserve
Board of Governors, mimeo.
  Chernis, Tony, and Rodrigo Sekkel (2017). "A Dynamic Factor Model for Nowcasting Canadian
GDP Growth," Empirical Economics 53: 217–234.
     Clements, Michael P. and Galvão, Ana Beatriz (2008). "Macroeconomic Forecasting with
Mixed-Frequency Data: Forecasting US Output Growth," Journal of Business and Economic Sta-
tistics 26: 546-554.
   Clements, Michael P. and Galvão, Ana Beatriz (2009). "Forecasting US Output Growth Using
Leading Indicators: An Appraisal using MIDAS Models," Journal of Applied Econometrics 24(7):
1187–1206.
  Delle Chiaie, Simona, Laurent Ferrara, and Domenico Giannone (2017). "Common Factors of
Commodity Prices," Federal Reserve Bank of New York, mimeo.
   Diebold, Francis X. (2020). "Real-Time Real Economic Activity: Exiting the Great Recession
and Entering the Pandemic Recession," University of Pennsylvania, mimeo.



                                              21
    Diebold, Francis X., and Roberto S. Mariano (1995). "Comparing Predictive Accuracy," Journal
of Business and Economic Statistics 13(3): 253-263.
   Ductor, Lorenzo, and Danilo Leiva-León (2016). "Dynamics of Global Business Cycle Interde-
pendence," Journal of International Economics 102: 110-127.
   Ferrara, Laurent, and Clément Marsilli (2019). "Nowcasting Global Economic Growth: A
Factor-Augmented Mixed-Frequency Approach," World Economy 42(3): 846-875.
    Foroni, Claudia, and Massimiliano Marcellino (2014). "A Comparison of Mixed Frequency
Approaches for Nowcasting Euro Area Macroeconomic Aggregates," International Journal of Fore-
casting 30(3): 554-568.
   Foroni, Claudia, Massimiliano Marcellino, and Christian Schumacher (2015). "U-MIDAS: MI-
DAS Regressions with Unrestricted Lag Polynomials," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society –
Series A 178(1): 57-82.
   Foroni, Claudia, Massimiliano Marcellino, and Dalibor Stevanović (2020). "Forecasting the
Covid-19 Recession and Recovery: Lessons from the Financial Crisis," CEPR Discussion Paper
15114.
   Funishima, Yoshito (2020). "Global Economic Activity Indexes Revisited," Economics Letters
193: 1-3.
    Ghysels, Eric, Arthur Sinko, and Rossen Valkanov (2007). "MIDAS Regressions: Further Re-
sults and New Directions," Econometric Reviews 26: 53-90.
    Giannone, Domenico, Lucrezia Reichlin, and David Small (2008). "Nowcasting: The Real-Time
Informational Content of Macroeconomic Data," Journal of Monetary Economics 55(4): 665-676.
   Golinelli, Roberto, and Giuseppe Parigi (2014). "Tracking World Trade and GDP in Real
Time," International Journal of Forecasting 30: 847-862.
   Hamilton, James D. (2019). "Measuring Global Economic Activity," Journal of Applied Econo-
metrics, forthcoming.
   Kilian, Lutz (2009). "Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply
Shocks in the Crude Oil Market," American Economic Review 99(3): 1053-1069.
   Kilian, Lutz (2019). "Measuring Global Economic Activity: Do Recent Critiques Hold Up to
Scrutiny?" Economics Letters 178: 106-110.
  Kilian, Lutz, and Xiaoqing Zhou (2018). "Modeling Fluctuations in the Global Demand for
Commodities," Journal of International Money and Finance 88: 54-78.
    Kuzin, Vladimir, Massimiliano Marcellino, and Christian Schumacher (2011). "Midas vs.
Mixed-Frequency VAR: Nowcasting GDP in the Euro Area," International Journal of Forecast-
ing 27: 529-542.




                                              22
    Marcellino, Massimiliano, and Christian Schumacher (2010). "Factor MIDAS for Nowcasting
and Forecasting with Ragged-Edge Data: A Model Comparison for German GDP," Oxford Bulletin
of Economics and Statistics 72(4): 518-550.
   Ravazzolo, Francesco, and Joaquin Vespignani (2020). "World Steel Production: A New
Monthly Indicator of Global Real Economic Activity," Canadian Journal of Economics 53(2):
743-766.
   Rossiter, James (2010). "Nowcasting the Global Economy," Bank of Canada Discussion Paper
2010-12.
   Schorfheide, Frank, and Dongho Song (2020). "Real-Time Forecasting with a (Standard) Mixed-
Frequency VAR during a Pandemic," University of Pennsylvania, mimeo.
   Schumacher, Christian (2016). "A Comparison of MIDAS and Bridge Equations," International
Journal of Forecasting 32: 257-270.
   Schumacher, Christian, and Jörg Breitung (2008). "Real-time Forecasting of German GDP
Based on a Large Factor Model with Monthly and Quarterly Data," International Journal of
Forecasting 24(3): 386-398.
   Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2002). "Macroeconomic Forecasting Using Di¤usion
Indexes," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 20(2): 147-162.
   Stratford, Kate (2013). "Nowcasting World GDP and Trade Using Global Indicators," Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin 53(3): 233-242.
   West, Kenneth D., and Ka-Fu Wong (2014). "A Factor Model for Co-movements of Commodity
Prices," Journal of International Money and Finance 42: 289-309.




                                             23
                  Table 1. Monthly Indicators of Global Real Economic Activity and Underlying Disaggregated Data
Global Economic Activity                                                                        Data    Nowcast                 Start
                              Components                          Transformation                                  Data source
Indicator                                                                                       delay    rule                   date
World industrial production   Industrial production of OECD,      First log difference            2       AG      BH            1958.1
index (WIP)                   Brazil, China, India, Indonesia,
                              the Russian Federation and South
                              Africa aggregated as described in
                              Baumeister and Hamilton (2019)
Global steel production       Crude steel production, US          Growth rates computed as       1        AG      WSA           1968.1
factor                        Crude steel production, Japan       first log differences and      1        AG      WSA           1968.1
                              Crude steel production, EU and      missing observations filled    1        AG      WSA           1968.1
                              other reporting countries (29 in    with EM algorithm
                              total)
                              Crude steel production, China                                      1        AG      WSA           1990.1
                              Crude steel production, Eastern                                    1        AG      WSA           1990.1
                              Europe
                              Crude steel production, Middle                                     1        AG      WSA           1990.1
                              East
                              Crude Steel production, Russia                                     1        AG      WSA           1992.1
                              and Ukraine
Kilian index (REA)            Log of the nominal shipping cost    Deflated with U.S. CPI and     1        AG      JDH, FRED     1968.1
                              index calculated as described in    linearly detrended
                              Hamilton (2019)                     (recursively)

Real commodity price factor Aluminum                              Nominal dollar prices          1        AG      WB, FRED      1972.5
                            Barley                                deflated with U.S. CPI and     1        AG      WB, FRED      1960.1
                            Beef                                  growth rates computed as       1        AG      WB, FRED      1960.1
                            Coffee, Arabica                       first log differences          1        AG      WB, FRED      1973.1
                            Coffee, Robusta                                                      1        AG      WB, FRED      1973.1
                            Copper                                                               1        AG      WB, FRED      1964.1
                            Cotton, A Index                                                      1        AG      WB, FRED      1971.1
                            Lead                                                                 1        AG      WB, FRED      1960.1
                             Logs, Malaysian                                                 1   AG   WB, FRED   1971.5
                             Maize                                                           1   AG   WB, FRED   1972.1
                             Nickel                                                          1   AG   WB, FRED   1973.1
                             Palm Oil                                                        1   AG   WB, FRED   1964.1
                             Rice, Thai 5%                                                   1   AG   WB, FRED   1960.1
                             Rubber, SGP/MYS                                                 1   AG   WB, FRED   1960.1
                             Sawnwood, Malaysian                                             1   AG   WB, FRED   1971.5
                             Soybeans                                                        1   AG   WB, FRED   1973.1
                             Soybean meal                                                    1   AG   WB, FRED   1973.1
                             Soybean oil                                                     1   AG   WB, FRED   1971.1
                             Sugar, US                                                       1   AG   WB, FRED   1973.1
                             Sugar, world                                                    1   AG   WB, FRED   1973.1
                             Tin                                                             1   AG   WB, FRED   1960.1
                             Wheat, US HRW                                                   1   AG   WB, FRED   1973.1
                             Zinc                                                            1   AG   WB, FRED   1973.1
Global economic conditions   World industrial production index   First log difference        2   AG   BH         1958.1
indicator                    Conference Board Leading            First log difference        1   AG   DS         1973.1
                             Economic Index
                             Consumer Confidence Index           First log difference        1   RW   OECD MEI   1974.1
                             Real copper price                   First log difference        1   AG   WB, FRED   1964.1
                             Real trade-weighted U.S. Dollar     First log difference        0        FRED       1973.1
                             index: broad
                             MSCI World Stock Price Index        Year-on-year growth rates   0        GFD        1972.1
                             Excess returns on Fama-French       Year-on-year growth rates   2   RW   FF         1973.1
                             portfolio: transportation
                             Passenger car registrations         First log difference        8   AG   OECD MEI   1973.1
                             Total vehicle miles traveled        First log difference        2   AG   FRED       1973.1
                             Geopolitical Risk Index             First log difference        0        CI         1973.1
                             Long-run oil price uncertainty      Level                       0        B          1989.4
                             University of Michigan Index of     First log difference        0        UMS        1978.1
                             Consumer Expectations
                                      Spread between long-run and                  Level                                      0                     B                   1988.11
                                      short-run oil price expectations
                                      Oceanic Niño Index                           Level                                      2          RC         NOAA                  1973.1
                                      Residential Energy Demand                    Level                                      1          RW         NOAA                  1973.1
                                      Temperature Index
                                      Energy production and electricity            First log difference                       3          AG         FRED                  1991.1
                                      distribution
NOTES: The delay in data release is expressed in months. Nowcasts are based on the average growth rate (AG), the most recent change (RC), or the assumption of no change
(RW). The codes for the data sources are as follows: B – Bloomberg, BH – Baumeister and Hamilton (2019) update of the discontinued OECD+6 series
(https://sites.google.com/site/cjsbaumeister/OECD_plus6_industrial_production.xlsx?attredirects=0&d=1),        CI       –      Caldara       and      Iacoviello    (2018)
(https://www.matteoiacoviello.com/gpr.htm), DS – Datastream, FF – Fama-French 17 Industry Portfolios (average value-weighted returns)
(https://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html), FRED – Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Economic Database, GFD – Global Financial
Database, JDH – Hamilton (2019) (http://econweb.ucsd.edu/~jhamilto/shipping_costs.xlsx), NOAA – U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National
Climatic Data Center (https://www.noaa.gov/), OECD – OECD Main Economic Indicators Database, UMS – Survey of Consumers, University of Michigan
(http://www.sca.isr.umich.edu/), WB – World Bank Commodity Price Data, The Pink Sheet (http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/561011486076393416/CMO-Historical-Data-
Monthly.xlsx), WSA – World Steel Association, Steel Statistical Yearbook (https://www.worldsteel.org/). If data are available at a frequency higher than monthly, we obtain
monthly data by averaging. The groupings for the crude steel production data comprise the following countries: EU and other reporting countries include Austria, Belgium,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, the United Kingdom, former
Yugoslavia (now consisting of Bosnia-Herzegovina, Croatia, Macedonia, Serbia, and Slovenia), Canada, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Venezuela, Australia, India,
Republic of Korea, South Africa, and Taiwan; Eastern Europe includes the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and the Slovak Republic; Middle East includes Egypt, Iran,
                                                                                                                      252
and Saudi Arabia. Oil price uncertainty is defined as realized volatility and is calculated as follows: 𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑝𝑚 = 100 ∗ √       ∗ (∑𝑛𝑑=1(∆𝑓𝑑𝑚 )2 ) where ∆𝑓𝑑𝑚 is the daily return for
                                                                                                                          𝑛
the oil futures contract on day 𝑑 in month 𝑚 computed as the log difference between the futures price on day 𝑑 and 𝑑 − 1, and 𝑛 is the number of trading days in a given
month. Oil price expectations are proxied by log futures prices. Long-run refers to futures with 12-month maturity and short-run to futures with 3-month maturity. The start
date indicates the earliest available observation.
                          Table 2. Recursive MSPE Ratios Relative to AR(1) Forecast of Quarterly World Real GDP Growth
                                                      Evaluation Period: 1990Q1-2018Q4

 Quarterly          World IP index                   Global steel                   Kilian index              Real commodity price              Global economic
  horizon              (WIP)                      production factor                    (REA)                         factor                   conditions (GECON)
                    (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)            (8)             (9)            (10)
                 MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS          U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS
     0            1.108           1.014           0.956          0.929           1.023           1.180          0.925           0.925          0.661**         0.668*
    1/3           0.927           0.922           1.010          1.010           1.040           1.172          0.860           0.888          0.758*          0.775*
    2/3           1.010           1.010           0.951          0.951           1.055           1.114          0.959           0.960          0.877*          0.847*
     1            1.120           1.127           1.004          1.014           1.036           0.960          0.958           0.975          0.885*          0.911
     2            1.016           1.012           1.010          1.010           1.084           1.025          0.999           0.999          0.905           0.927
     3            1.004           0.982           0.974          0.974           1.185           1.142          0.977           0.978          0.901           0.920
     4            1.020           0.993           0.978          0.978           1.308           1.290          0.993           0.992          0.893           0.901
     6            1.037           1.036           1.007          1.007           1.477           1.475          1.051           1.051          0.869           0.874
     8            1.045           1.053           0.993          1.004           1.575           1.612          1.079           1.079          0.905           0.912
NOTES: Boldface indicates improvements relative to AR(1) forecast. ** denotes significance at the 5% level and * at the 10% level based on the Diebold-Mariano test. Red
indicates the best model among all global indicators and blue indicates whether the MIDAS or the U-MIDAS model performs better.
                 Table 3. Recursive MSPE Ratios Relative to AR(1) Forecasts of Quarterly Real GDP Growth in Country Blocs
                                                  Evaluation Period: 1990Q1-2018Q4

 Quarterly          World IP index                   Global steel                   Kilian index              Real commodity price              Global economic
  horizon              (WIP)                      production factor                    (REA)                         factor                   conditions (GECON)
                    (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)            (8)             (9)            (10)
                                                                                   (a) OECD economies
                 MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS          U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS
     0            1.121           1.134           0.856          0.859           1.025           1.210          0.988           0.996          0.614**         0.636*
    1/3           1.107           0.973           0.978          0.978           1.026           1.158          0.939           0.954          0.738*          0.747*
    2/3           1.113           1.113           0.930          0.930           1.031           1.116          1.024           1.025          0.830**         0.828*
     1            1.108           1.122           1.021          1.040           0.972           0.890          0.984           1.031          0.881           0.910
     2            0.970           0.972           1.043          1.044           0.954           0.908          1.003           1.058          0.819**         0.845**
     3            0.998           1.021           1.003          1.008           1.012           0.988          1.000           1.020          0.797*          0.822*
     4            1.052           1.052           0.980          0.994           1.073           1.090          1.002           1.015          0.797*          0.811*
     6            1.065           1.062           0.994          0.995           1.139           1.142          1.024           1.033          0.816*          0.819*
     8            1.046           1.040           0.995          1.001           1.133           1.135          1.040           1.046          0.829*          0.835*
                                                                                        (b) G7 countries
                 MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS          U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS
     0            1.107           1.053          0.918           0.938           1.022           1.160          0.982           0.997          0.644**         0.672**
    1/3           0.978           0.913          1.012           1.016           1.017           1.136          0.950           0.968          0.740**         0.772*
    2/3           0.947           0.972          0.944           0.945           1.025           1.103          1.024           1.031          0.874           0.864
     1            1.027           1.008          1.015           1.028           0.996           0.957          1.005           1.064          0.880           0.896
     2            0.959           0.965          1.047           1.044           0.948           0.952          1.038           1.066          0.822**         0.840**
     3            0.965           0.966          0.974           0.972           0.986           0.959          0.999           1.011          0.773**         0.787**
     4            0.976           0.977          0.930*          0.931*          1.046           0.999          0.996           0.989          0.769**         0.780**
     6            1.014           1.020          0.940**         0.940**         1.092           1.037          1.013           1.019          0.761**         0.770*
     8            1.044           1.045          1.003           0.990           1.083           1.052          1.036           1.040          0.780**         0.793**
NOTES: Boldface indicates improvements relative to AR(1) forecast. ** denotes significance at the 5% level and * at the 10% level based on the Diebold-Mariano test. Red
indicates the best model among all global indicators and blue indicates whether the MIDAS or the U-MIDAS model performs better.
           Table 4. Recursive MSPE Ratios Relative to AR(1) Forecasts of Quarterly Real GDP Growth in Large Closed Economies
                                                  Evaluation Period: 1990Q1-2018Q4

 Quarterly          World IP index                   Global steel                   Kilian index              Real commodity price              Global economic
  horizon              (WIP)                      production factor                    (REA)                         factor                   conditions (GECON)
                    (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)            (8)             (9)            (10)
                                                                                          (a) Euro Area
                 MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS          U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS
     0            1.028           1.028          0.930           0.935           1.040           1.293          1.012           1.036          0.763*          0.763*
    1/3           0.857           0.853          0.861*          0.858*          1.046           1.258          0.965           1.009          0.841           0.876
    2/3           0.872           0.875          0.956           0.966           1.043           1.111          1.039           1.057          0.928           0.940
     1            1.072           1.126          0.972           0.966           1.035           0.994          0.946           0.979          0.899           0.923
     2            1.094           1.104          0.909*          0.911*          1.052           0.992          0.978           0.990          0.910           0.959
     3            0.982           1.020          0.932           0.937           1.063           1.005          1.016           1.023          0.932           0.990
     4            0.985           1.003          0.960           0.984           1.106           1.069          1.006           1.016          0.937           0.963
     6            1.005           1.015          0.969*          0.975           1.178           1.159          1.031           1.034          0.901           0.914
     8            1.018           1.023          0.993           1.004           1.144           1.138          1.018           1.024          0.851**         0.865**
                                                                                         (b) United States
                 MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS          U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS
     0            0.972           0.995           0.933          0.933           1.044           1.089          1.062           1.110          0.626**         0.629**
    1/3           1.073           1.076           1.015          1.015           1.015           1.015          1.037           1.081          0.721*          0.726*
    2/3           1.086           1.097           0.980          0.986           1.008           1.015          1.076           1.092          0.817**         0.808**
     1            1.015           1.034           1.023          1.023           1.010           1.090          1.015           1.022          0.848**         0.849**
     2            0.995           1.018           1.033          1.052           1.016           1.051          1.069           1.075          0.892           0.899
     3            0.997           1.023           1.046          1.055           1.029           1.049          1.053           1.066          0.844*          0.843*
     4            1.055           1.047           1.040          1.041           1.105           1.132          1.037           1.043          0.817*          0.820*
     6            1.053           1.060           1.024          1.034           1.155           1.161          1.060           1.031          0.833*          0.834*
     8            1.014           1.024           1.022          1.016           1.147           1.163          1.064           1.039          0.868*          0.870
NOTES: Boldface indicates improvements relative to AR(1) forecast. ** denotes significance at the 5% level and * at the 10% level based on the Diebold-Mariano test. Red
indicates the best model among all global indicators and blue indicates whether the MIDAS or the U-MIDAS model performs better.
             Table 5. Recursive MSPE Ratios Relative to AR(1) Forecasts of Quarterly Real GDP Growth in Small Open Economies
                                                   Evaluation Period: 1990Q1-2018Q4

 Quarterly          World IP index                   Global steel                   Kilian index              Real commodity price              Global economic
  horizon              (WIP)                      production factor                    (REA)                         factor                   conditions (GECON)
                    (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)            (8)             (9)            (10)
                                                                                     (a) Canada
                 MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS          U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS
     0            1.012           1.013           1.072          1.072           1.038           1.250          1.098           1.083           0.840          0.819
    1/3           1.098           1.091           0.987          1.011           1.071           1.237          1.049           1.102           0.883          0.904
    2/3           1.050           1.053           0.982          0.987           1.069           1.249          0.929           1.012           0.840          0.840
     1            0.951           0.969           1.001          1.047           1.054           1.189          0.925           0.987           0.851          0.851
     2            1.001           1.014           1.040          1.041           1.123           1.191          0.927           0.980           0.859          0.865
     3            1.025           1.015           1.065          1.059           1.165           1.246          0.941           0.983           0.853          0.856
     4            1.057           1.113           1.059          1.045           1.236           1.284          0.991           0.990           0.834          0.834
     6            1.078           1.142           1.058          1.064           1.339           1.340          1.033           1.016           0.817*         0.813*
     8            1.035           1.072           1.036          1.007           1.413           1.402          1.053           1.023           0.906          0.908
                                                                                     (b) Norway
                 MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS          U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS
     0            1.043           1.045           1.004          0.999           1.080           1.104          1.065           1.061          0.960           0.979
    1/3           1.010           1.030           1.030          1.010           1.088           1.125          1.053           1.052          0.950*          0.965
    2/3           0.998           0.995           1.014          1.044           1.075           1.123          1.045           1.053          0.936**         0.946*
     1            1.021           1.025           1.056          1.042           1.078           1.131          1.126           1.142          0.939*          0.962
     2            1.023           1.020           1.051          1.005           1.104           1.134          1.078           1.071          0.978           1.014
     3            1.042           1.048           1.037          1.037           1.110           1.089          1.080           1.089          0.982           0.992
     4            1.018           1.024           1.006          1.012           1.183           1.188          1.095           1.115          0.980           0.992
     6            1.007           1.004           1.033          1.025           1.342           1.381          1.036           1.078          1.003           1.010
     8            1.017           1.011           1.001          1.042           1.528           1.531          1.050           1.113          1.024           1.059
NOTES: Boldface indicates improvements relative to AR(1) forecast. ** denotes significance at the 5% level and * at the 10% level based on the Diebold-Mariano test. Red
indicates the best model among all global indicators and blue indicates whether the MIDAS or the U-MIDAS model performs better.
             Table 6. Recursive MSPE Ratios Relative to AR(1) Forecasts of Quarterly Real GDP Growth in Small Open Economies
                                                   Evaluation Period: 1990Q1-2018Q4

 Quarterly          World IP index                   Global steel                   Kilian index              Real commodity price              Global economic
  horizon              (WIP)                      production factor                    (REA)                         factor                   conditions (GECON)
                    (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)            (8)             (9)            (10)
                                                                                 (a) United Kingdom
                 MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS          U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS
     0            1.060           1.068           0.998          1.020           1.025           1.264          1.023           1.061           0.860          0.891
    1/3           0.985           0.983           0.929          0.919           1.018           1.173          1.027           1.046           0.915          0.946
    2/3           1.008           1.012           0.987          1.016           1.026           1.079          1.112           1.126           0.957          0.964
     1            1.035           1.035           1.064          1.073           1.000           1.031          1.060           1.129           0.978          1.019
     2            0.977           1.003           1.100          1.118           1.002           1.034          1.091           1.115           0.965          1.007
     3            0.949           0.958           1.098          1.117           1.026           1.018          1.110           1.063           0.932          0.939
     4            0.960           0.984           1.098          1.103           1.056           1.063          1.079           1.066           0.933          0.947
     6            1.087           1.058           1.064          1.077           1.166           1.165          1.008           1.028           0.906          0.895
     8            1.093           1.068           1.020          1.017           1.277           1.288          1.038           1.023           0.994          0.990
                                                                                         (b) Japan
                 MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS          U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS          MIDAS         U-MIDAS
     0            0.994           1.068          0.975           0.987           1.042           1.163          0.999           0.987           0.874*         0.874*
    1/3           1.005           0.897          1.016           1.018           1.044           1.189          1.006           1.018           0.874*         0.886*
    2/3           0.895           0.882          0.973           0.975           1.042           1.086          1.021           0.975           0.913          0.922
     1            0.989           1.018          0.941           0.950           1.015           0.952          0.995           0.950           0.949          0.975
     2            0.972           1.035          1.015           1.019           1.016           1.029          1.054           1.019           0.979          0.992
     3            0.974           0.971          0.976           0.987           1.021           1.021          1.016           0.987           1.015          1.008
     4            1.012           0.994          0.970           0.980           1.020           1.007          1.042           0.980           1.013          0.999
     6            1.037           1.033          0.991           1.004           1.041           1.017          1.078           1.004           0.970          0.973
     8            1.039           1.054          0.969**         0.984           1.086           1.093          1.057           0.984           0.946          0.958
NOTES: Boldface indicates improvements relative to AR(1) forecast. ** denotes significance at the 5% level and * at the 10% level based on the Diebold-Mariano test. Red
indicates the best model among all global indicators and blue indicates whether the MIDAS or the U-MIDAS model performs better.
      Table 7: The Role of Real-Time Vintages for the Forecasting Performance of the MIDAS Model with the GECON Indicator
                                                                         Quarterly horizon
                                  0         1/3         2/3          1           2         3         4         6          8

        United States                                                             (a) Evaluation period: 1990Q1-2018Q4
                                              **             *              **
(1)     Final vintage                  0.626          0.721          0.817          0.848**      0.892       0.844*    0.817*                   0.833*         0.868*
(2)     Real-time vintages             0.617**        0.724*         0.788*         0.826*       0.824*      0.812     0.789*                   0.819*         0.863*

                                                                                  (b) Evaluation period: 2000Q1-2018Q4
                                              *              *              *
(3)     Final vintage                  0.594          0.694          0.816          0.864*       0.902       0.828     0.788                    0.814          0.839
(4)     Real-time vintages             0.588*         0.707*         0.858*         0.866        0.896       0.889     0.876                    0.880          0.960

        Canada
(5)     Final vintage                  0.802          0.842          0.813          0.818          0.793          0.775          0.771          0.882          1.002
(6)     Real-time vintages             0.830          0.858          0.788          0.791          0.803          0.798          0.797          0.879          0.994

        Norway
(7)     Final vintage                  0.903**        0.888**        0.862**        0.868**        0.956          0.973          0.984          1.033          1.024
(8)     Real-time vintages             0.912**        0.915**        0.881**        0.889**        0.954          0.935          0.905*         1.031          1.009

     United Kingdom
(9) Final vintage                      0.783*         0.852*         0.913          0.948          0.950          0.906          0.899          0.911          0.962
(10) Real-time vintages                0.743*         0.775**        0.847*         0.883*         0.855*         0.853          0.856          0.883          0.967

     Japan
(11) Final vintage                     0.814*         0.823*         0.863          0.909          0.977          1.043          1.072          1.083          1.118
(12) Real-time vintages                0.878          0.878          0.923          0.966          1.030          1.103          1.125          1.114          1.111
NOTES: Boldface indicates improvements relative to AR(1) forecast. ** denotes significance at the 5% level and * at the 10% level based on the Diebold-Mariano test.
            Figure 1: Cumulative Out-of-Sample Mean-Squared Prediction Errors for Global Growth Forecasts Across Global Indicators
                                                     Evaluation Period: 1990Q1-2018Q4




 First month of
current quarter
        2
   (ℎ = )
        3




 Last month of
current quarter
    (ℎ = 0)




1-year horizon
   (ℎ = 4)
                          Figure 2: Real-Time vs. Revised Recursive MSPE Ratios for Growth Forecasts Across Countries for the
                                             MIDAS Model with the Global Economic Conditions Indicator



 First month of
current quarter
        2
   (ℎ = )
        3




 Last month of
current quarter
    (ℎ = 0)




1-year horizon
   (ℎ = 4)




        NOTES: A ratio below 1 indicates an improvement relative to the AR(1) forecast. The plots show the evolution of the recursive MSPE ratios over time from 1992Q1 onward
        for the evaluation period 1990Q1-2018Q4 and from 2002Q1 onward for the evaluation period 2000Q1-2018Q4 to allow the MSPE ratio to stabilize.
Figure 3: The Evolution of Monthly Nowcasts during the COVID-19 Pandemic and their Decomposition

 United States                          OECD economies                             World economy
