                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          EMPLOYER BEHAVIOR IN THE
                      FACE OF UNION OROANIZTNO DRIVES




                             Richard B.   Freeman

                             Morris M. Kleiner




                           Working Paper No. 2805




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                December 1988




This study was funded by the National Science Foundation. The authors want
to thank William Dickens, and participants in seminars at Bradley University,
NBER, and the University of Minnesota for many helpful comments. We also
want to thank Janet Bull, Alida Castillo-Freeman, and Thomas Clifton for
their research assistance. This research is part of NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                            NEER Working Paper #2805
                                            December 1988


               EMPLOYER REHAVIOR IN THE FACE OF UNION ORGANIZING DRIVES

                                      AESTRACT



     The direct role of employers in union organizing has long been a neg-
lected part of the union organizing literature. In this study we examine
the determinants and consequences of employer behavior when faced with an
                                                      are:
organizing drive. Our principal substantive findings
        -   that
            there is a substitution between high wages/benefits/good work
                                                                   to
conditions/supervisory practices and "tough" management opposition
unionism.
        -
            that
            a high innate propensity for a union victory deters management

opposition, while some indicators of a low propensity also reduce opposi-
tion.
        -   that
            "positive industrial relations" raise the chances the firm will
defeat the union in an election, as does bringing in consultants and having

supervisors campaign intensely against the union.
     -  that the careers of managers whose wagesjsupervisory practices/
benefits lead to union organizing drives, much less to union victories,
suffer as a result.
     In general we interpret our results as consistent with the notion that
firms behave in a profit maximizing manner in opposing an organizing drive
and with the basic proposition that management opposition, reflected in
diverse forms of behavior, is a key component in the on-going decline in
private sector unionism in the United States.




Richard B. Freeman                           Morris M. Kleiner
National Bureau of Economic Research         Humphrey Institute
1050 Nassachusetts Avenue                    231 Humphrey Center
Cambridge, MA 02138                          301 19th Avenue, S.
                                             University of Minnesota
                                             Minneapolis, MN 55455
                                                                         in
    The behavior of management toward trade unionism has changed greatly

the United States in the past quarter century.   In the 1960s management at

most large firms recognized unions as a permanent labor market institution

and viewed collective bargaining as an acceptable mode for determining wages

and working conditiona.   They sought the best deals they could get through

the bargaining process and worried that unions had acquired too much

economic power in societyJ     In the l970s and l980s management's attitude

and behavior changed dramatically.2 The goal of a union-free environment,
                                                                      1983
once espoused by fringes of the management community, spread until by

43% of the relatively progressive firms in the SNA's Personnel Practices

Forum declared that being nonunion was their major labor relations goal

(Kochan, McKersie and Chalykoff, 1986).    Unfair labor practices committed by

                                         in NLRZ representation elections,
management skyrocketed despite e decline

and approximately one-third of the firms whose workers voted to unionize

remained nonunion by failing to sign a collective contract, effeccively

reversing the result of
                        the election.3    Management opposition, of one form

or another, has been found to be a key determinant of NLRB elections
                                                                      the
 (Dickens, 1983;   Freeman, 1988), and many have come to believe that

                         been a major, if not the major, direct cause of the
growth of opposition has

decline in private sector unionism in the U.S. (Freeman and Medoff, 1984;

 Dickens and Leonard, 1985; Farber, 1987).

                                                      in de-unionizing the
      Despite the importance of management opposition
                                         31% in 1967 to 13% in 1987 using
 private sector (where density fell from
                                                           known about what
 Current Population Survey estimates) relatively little ia

 determines the extent and method of cpposition to unionism during an

 organizing drive.    Is the nature and depth of management opposition the
result of differences in the likely costs of unionism to the firm?    Are

higher wages and good working conditions- -so-called positive industrial

relations--substitutes or complements for hiring consultants, committing

unfair practices, or otherwise campaigning intensely and using expensive

mechods of opposition against unions during an organizing drive?    What

management tactic appears to have the greatest impact on outcomes?

     In this paper we use two data sets gathered during l980s organizing

drives to examine these questions.    The first set is based on a survey of

202 establishments that had NLRB representation elections in the Boston and

Kansas City NLR.B districts.   The survey obtained information from managera

about the use of consultants in the election drive    perceived causes of the

drive, the wages and benefits paid to workers, and the impact of union

victories on the careers of the managers; and information from the NIlE

shout unfair labor practices and election outcomes.    The second data set was

obtained from a 1982-83 AFL-CIO survey of union organizers in 274 election

drives.    The organizers survey contains data on benefits available at the

firm (but not on wages), characteristics of workers, management anti-union

tactics, and organizers' perceptions of important tampaign issues.    Both

data sets have weaknesses, because they lack information on certain aspects

of campaigns and in part because they are obtained from persons with        -




definite   biases.   It is for this reason that we examine them together,

hopefully obtaining a more complete and accurate picture of management

opposition than is possible with each set separately.

     Our results reveal some substitution between "positive industrial

re1ations and other management tactics that may be seen as directed towards

opposition to unions, with firms that have higher wages and better benefits
or work conditions less likely to commit unfair labor practices than firms

with lower wages/worse benefits or conditions.           In our firm data set we find

that companies that brought in consultants were more likely to defeat unions

than other firms, and, perhaps most strikingly, that managers whose

establishments face organizing drives are likely to suffer in their careers.

In our organizers data set, we find that firms with poor work
                                                      to commit unfair
conditions/supervisory problems are especially likely
                                            with an especially high
practices while those that face a workforce
                                      in the percentage who sign
propensity to organize, as reflected,

authorization    cards for the election,     are less likely to commit unfair

practices.     The most effective "hardnosed" company tactic is to have direct

                                                            In neither data set do we
supervisors campaign intensely against the union.

find that committing unfair practices reduces the union's likelihood of

                                         the endogeneity of the practices;
winning, in part, we surmise, because of

that is, firms that are more likely to lose are more likely to commit an

unfair labor practice, and the tendency for unions to file charges after

losing elections.     The remainder of the paper presents the arguments and

evidence for these claims.

Theory   of   Management   ()poosition
      How   does management    react to a   union   organizing drive   at a particular
 locality?    What influences the specific types of policies is it likely to

                                                                  In this section we
 adopt once it knows it is headed for an NLRB election?
                                                    will depend on three
 postulate that the reaction to an organizing drive

 factors:     the probability that the union will win the ensuing election and

 obtain a contract, and the expected impact of management opposition on that

 probability; the costs of opposition; and the prospective loss of profits
due to unionization, which itself depends on the likely union wsge impsct.

The model predicts an inverse U-shaped curve relating management opposition

to the probability of a union win; a negative relation between "positive

industrial relations" (high wages,.benefits, good working conditions) and

opposition; greater impacts on election outcomes for more expensive forms of

opposition; and highlights the problem of evaluating what opposition does to

outcomes when opposition is endogenous.

     We assume at the outset that principal-agent issues between management

and shareholders are of negligible importance and thus that management's

actions are determined by perceptions of what unionization will do to

expected profits.   This is not an innocuous assumption.    Union-induced

changes in shareholder returns are unlikely to affect significantly the

economic position of most managers, particularly the lower-level foreman and

other supervisors whose behavior is critical to any management campaign to

defeat unions.   We assume, and later provide evidence consistent with our

assumption, that firms' managerial personnel policy substitutes for the

incentive of ownership.   Conversely, lower-level management may devote

resources to oppose unions when it is not in the shareholder's interest,

sacrificing profits for control and greeter flexibility at the work place.

Further, as some union corporate campaigns make clesr, it is possible to

pressure shareholders or management into neutrality in representation

elections, possibly at the expense of profits,   by imbedding the issue of the

union drive into a broader problem of, for example, obtaining assets from a

major financial institution (Pruitt,   Wei, and White,   1988).
     For   simplicity, we also ignore potential strategic game theoretic

interactions between management opposition and union organizing efforts
                                                       to send a message to
(e.g., management drives to oppose unions in one plant

unions about other plants; management decisions that depend on potential

                                                      a company within a
responses by the union organizing committee to target

geographic area).

     In simplest form our model contains three basic equations:

     (1) Probability of a union victory in the campaign:       P(X,MO) with P'—

P/MO <0, with MO
                 — management opposition   and X —   other   factors that

determine worker propensity to support a union, such as the composition of

the work force, special conditions in the firm, and so on.        Zecause P is

bounded between 0 and 1 we postulate a logistic form, with P'—-B(l-P)(P)

where B is the impact parameter of MO in the logistic equation.

     (2) Cost of opposition: C(MO) with C'I"O, where we include as opposition

such actions as:    committing unfair labor practices; hiring specialized

consultants to direct an anti-union campaign;   directing supervisors to

devote time and effort to convince workers to oppose the union, etc.

     (3) Loss   of profits due to unionization: L(WD) with L'>O, where WD

measures the likely wage (or cost) difference between the firm when it is

union and when it is not.

     We assume that the firm seeks   to minimize the expected loss from


unionization, subject to the Cost and probability functions.        The solution

                                             the extent of opposition and
yields an inverted U-shaped relation between

what we will call the innate probability of a union victory, P(X,O),--the

                                                                    The simplest
probability the union wins absent any management opposition.
                                         the decision whether or not to
way to see the inverted U is to consider

oppose an organizing drive.    If the firm does not oppose the drive it has an

 expected loss of L P(X,O).   If it opposes the drive and chooses the optimum
                                                  6

level of opposition MO* with cost 0*, it has an expected loss of 0* +               L   P(X,

MO*)the     sum of (L +      0*)   P(X, MO*),   the probability weighted loss if it

fails to defeat the organizing drive and              [l-P(X,   110*)] 0*, the prohability

weighted loss if it succeeds in defeating the drive.                Given these costs the

firm will oppose the union drive if the expected savings from opposition

exceed the cost of the management campaign:

     (4)    -L DP >   0*,   where OP — P(X, 110*)     -
                                                          P(X,O), or, letting dP

approximate the change in probability, B(l-P)P > G*/L

     Because the derivative of the logistic (or any similarly shaped

probability function like the normal) varies with the level of probability,

(4) implies a nonlinear relation between company opposition and the (innate)


probability of a union victory: when P is large end the union near certain

to win, the firm will forego campaigning against the union; similarly when P

is smell,   the firm will forego campaigning as it does not have to worry

seriously about a union victory.           Only when there is serious doubt about the

likely victor will management work hard to oppose the union.

     Turning to the optimum level of management opposition, the interior

solution requires that the firm equate the marginal expected benefit of

opposition and the marginal cost of opposition:

     (5) F'   L — B PU-P) L — C'

Since F' depends on PU-F), we again get a predicted nonlinear relation

between the "innate" probability of a union win and management opposition.

The closer P is to one-half, the greater is the marginal benefit from

opposition, and thus the greater the likely opposition.

     Solving the model for management opposition yields the basic equation

of concern in this study- - the relation between management opposition and the
                                               7

likely union-induced loss in profits, the innate probability the union will

win the election (in s nonlinear manner), and the costs of opposition:

     (6)   MO — F(L, P(X,O),    C), where dF/dL    >   0, dF/dC   <   0, and where dF/dP

rises snd then fslls with the level of        P.   As all of the explanatory

variables in (6) are exogenous the equation            can be estimated by single-

equation methods.

     The endogeneit of mansgement opposition creates problems, however, in

estimating the other key relation in the model, the structural impact of

opposition on outcomes (equation (1))          Unless the factors that determine

the innate probability of a union win are perfectly specified, single-

equation estimates of P(X,M0) will be biased, presumptively toward 0.

Consider, for example, the extreme case when we have no information on

F(X,0).    If the probability of a union win is         innately, high, we will observe

little opposition, and incorrectly infer' that the lack of opposition caused

the win.    By the   nonlinearity'   of the opposition equation, however, we get

the opposite effect when the probability of a union win is innately low:                   a

union loss associated with lack of opposition, that could lead to the

incorrect inference that lack of opposition caused the loss.                The net of

these effects is that single equation estimates are likely to be biased

toward zero.    In principle one can use L and C to instrument for opposition,

but the available measures are too weak, at least in our data, for

instrumenting to be satisfactory.

     Finally,   note that our data are limited to firma that face organizing

drives that proceed to an      NI-RB   conducted election.    We do not deal with

management opposition that deters unions from a drive or from carrying it to

an election nor with management recognition of a union without a
                                        8

representation election.   The absence of data on these caaes further

suggests that our estimates will understate the impact of opposition on a

union win for the broader sample of all firms that potentially face a drive.

Survey Data on Management Opposition

     As noted at the outset our empirical analysis treats an employers data

set and a union organizers data set.   The employers data set is based on

interviews with firms in the Boston and Kansas City National Labor Relations

Board districts that had elections during the 1980s.    We contacted 243 firms

that had elections with over 20 employees in the potential bargaining unit

and obtained on-site interviews with management in 202, for a response rate

of 83.1 percent:   100 were in the Boston region and 102 were in the Kansas

City region; 5 percent had elections in 1985; 31 percent in 1984; 12 percent

in 1983; 10 percent in 1982; 16 percent in 1981;   16 percent in 1980 and 10

percent in 1979.   The states covered by the two   districts are   generally

reflective of the national labor relations environment,4 and the win rate of

unions in our sample was similar to the national average:    unions won 39

percent of the elections in our sample compared to a 38 percent win rate for

all elections conducted in 1981 with over 20 employees (Medoff,      1984).    In

addition, the proportion of firms who lost elections and signed collective

contracts was close to the national average: 64 percent of the elections won

by unions in our sample produced signed collective contracts; this compares
with the 63 percent for the period 1979-82 (McDonald, 1983).

     Our second data set is based on an AFL-CIO Department of Organization &

Field Services survey of the organizers involved in 274 NLR8 election

drives.   The sample covers 15 AFL-CIO affiliates and consists alnost

entirely of units with at least 50 eligible voters.     The sample is
                                                             of the country,
geographically dispersed, with observations from all regions

including the South.     Because some questions were added midway in the study,

however, data on some aspects of management opposition are available for

only half or so of the sample.

     Both data sets suffer from problems of missing information for
                                                  To maximize the usable
occasionally significant numbers of observations.

sample sizes in statistical analysis, we assigned the mean value of a

variable to missing independent variables, and added a dummy variable that

took the value one for that observation/variable (Little and Rubin, 1987).

We report results for samples limited solely by missing observations on

independent variables; however, our analysis of smaller samples limited to

observations for which no independent variables were missing yield

comparable results, suggesting that there is no selectivity bias with

respect to observations for which there are missing values.

     Table   1   suamarizes the information from the surveys on the methods

firms use to oppose union organizing drives.         Panel   A   shows the frequency of

use of consultants and of filed and upheld unfair labor practice charges in

the employer survey.      Panel   B   records similar information for the

                                                                      used
organizers' survey and additional information on the specific tactics

                                                Because the organizers survey
by the companies to deter unionization.

included lawyers with consultants its 70% figure is much higher and we

believe less accurate than the 41% estimated usage of consultants in the

employers survey.5      The proportion of campaigns in which unions charged or

could reasonably be inferred to charge unfair labor practices are of

 comparable magnitude between the surveys,6 though the organizers report many

 more discharges and discriminatory layoffs than indicated in filed charges.
                                         10

Finally, with respect to specific tactics, the organizers survey shows that

the vast majority of firms used everything from leaflets to captive audience

speeches to numerous small worker meetings with supervisors to oppose

unionization of their work force.   Approximately half of the organizers were

asked to evaluate the intensity of the supervisor's efforts to oppose

unions, and of those half rated the intensity as high.7

     Table 2 provides some information on the issues that managers and the

organizers saw as important in the organizing drive/campaign.8   The figures

reveal a striking difference in their perceptions.   While managers

recognize that treatment of workers involving fairness or communication or

dissatisfaction are important causes of union campaigns, they ace purely

economic issues- -wages end benefits and job security--as the key factor; and

also look outside their firm to union organizers or preasurea from outside

unions for the impetus to the drive.   The organizers, by contrast, viewed

supervision aa by far the most important issue in the drive, vith wages and

fringes next in importance, and viewed the risk of strikes, the danger of

layoffs or cloaing, and union dues as the 'most important company issues'

rhat is, ones that rhe company presented to discourage employees from voting

for the union with vsges of much lesser import.   Finally, going beyond Table

2, organizers reported that 23%   of the drives were initiated as a result of

the organizer or the international targeting the firm, which is of

comparable magnitude to the percentage of firms citing union pressure as a

primary cause.   However, 57% of campaigns began as a result of workers in

the firm calling the union.   Overall the biggest difference between the

managers and organizers is in the veight plated on vages and benefits as

opposed to worker-management relations or "voice" issues.
                                          11

Determinants   of Opposition
     The results of our analysis of the factors that determine management
                                             in table         Here we measure
opposition in the employers survey are given
                                                         3.



opposition with two sets of related variables:     0-1 dummy variahles for

whether there were unfair labor practice charges associated with the

election and whether there were charges that the NLRB upheld; a 0-1 dummy

for whether or not the firm hired a consultant and a continuous variable

                                                                We estimated the
measuring the number of days the firm used the consultant.
                                             form and used a Tobit analysis
equations with 0-1 variables with a logistic

to estimate the equation for the number of consultant days used by the firm.

The key dependent variable in the analysis is a measure of the likely loss

of profits due to unionization:     the difference between the log of hourly

wages and estimated total fringes in unionized firms in the one-digit
                                                   the log of the firm's own
industry and occupation in its geographic area and

hourly wages and fringe benefits.    The greater the compensation difference

the greater wage increases are likely given unionization and thus the

greater the loss in profits.    The estimated impact of the compensation

difference variable is recorded in the first line of the table.      We also

examined the impact of an index of personnel practices (defined as the sum

of 0-1 dummy variables for whether or not a firm had each of the five

practices listed in the table note) on managerial opposition.      Because the

                                                                   of a
employer's survey lacks good information on the innate probability

union victory we are unable to test for the impact of that variable on

                                                      we controlled Lot various
 opposition.    Finally, as can be seen in the table,

 other potential differences between firms,    such as size of employment,

 occupation of workers, area, industry,   and experience with unions.
                                           12

      The principle finding in the table ia that firms who fall behind local

area wages have a higher likelihood of committing unfair labor practices,

but no greater probability of using a consultant. This is consistent with

the substitution between likely profit loss and management opposition

predicted by equation (5)9      The index of personnel practices, by contrast,

has no clear impact on management opposition, lowering modestly the

probability of committing an unfair practice that is upheld by the NLRB, but

raising modestly employment of consultants.     While we do not know if the

firms with higher wages in our sample consciously set wages to reduce the

attractiveness of unions to their workers, thete is some evidence from their

ensuing behavior consistent with this notion:     firms with large union wage

differences raised wages more than other firma after the organizing driveJ°

In   sum,   the employers aurvey data suggest a substitution between higher

wages and the use of some forms of management opposition.     The results

suggest that firms that pay more have a reduced incentive to commit unfair

practices.

       The evidence on the determinants of management opposition in the

organizers survey, sunusarized in table 4, both supports and adds to this

finding.      For this portion of the analysis, we esploy three measures of

management opposition:      charges of unfair labor practices, whether the

organizer claimed union supporters were fired or discriminatorily laid off,

and whether supervisors campaigned against the union.      As the organizers

survey lacks information on     wagesj we   measure whether an employer is

practicing "positive industrial relations" and the likely profit loss by

unionization by two indices:      an index of the fringe benefits provided by

the firm and an index of work conditions/supervisory practices.      The fringe
                                         13

index counts the number of fringes provided by the firm from the list given

in the table note. The work conditions/superviaory practices variable sums
                                                           with the highest
ratings of various conditions/practices using a 1-5 scale,

ratings indicating worse conditions.    Again, we give the specific questions

used in the table note.    Finally, the organizers survey contains two

variables that we regard as potentially good measures of the innate

propensity of workplaces to vote for the union:     the percentage of workers

who signed authorization cards; and an index of "union propensity" created

from questions regarding the attitudes of workers/community toward unionism

and employer anti-union activity prior to the election, as listed in the

table note.   We uae the card signing variable   to test for the hypothesized


nonlinearity in the impact of the innate probability of a union victory by

forming two dummy variables to reflect the extremes of the distribution:

the cases where 40% or fewer workers signed cards and the cases where more

than 70% signed cards.    The hypothesized nonlinearity should produce

negatively signed coefficients on both dummy variables, distinguishing the

extremes from cases with 40-70% cards signed.     We use the union propensity

index to test for nonlinearity by entering linear and squared terms.       Here

nonlinearity should yield a negative squared term and poaitive linear term.

     There are three findings in the table.      First,   our measures of positive

industrial relations/potential profit loss from unionism have the expected

inverse relation to management committing unfair practices or firing/laying

off union activists:     the greater the number of fringe benefits the less

likely management is to commit unfair practices/fire or discriminatorily

layoff union activists while by contrast the poorer work conditions/

superviaory practices the more likely they are     o   commit such actions.
                                          14


Second, however, we find that while poor work conditions/supervisory

practices increase the probability that supervisors campaign against the

union, good benefit packages also increase the probability that supervisors

campaign against the union, perhaps because this gives them a strong

argument against the union.    Third, we find some evidence for nonlinearity

in the relation between our indicators of the innate probability to unionize

and unfair practices.   In columns 1 and 2 the nonlinearity shows up in our

union propensity index, which takes a parabolic form so that a greater union

propensity has first an increasing then a decreasing effect on management

opposition.   The percentage who sign cards, by contrast, does not evince

such a reversal of effects:    it shows a fairly continuous impact of card-

signing on unfair practices/firings/discriminatory layoffs,        with greater

proportions signing cards leading to lesser management opposition.         This

supports the notion that management will campaign less virulently when a

union has strong aupport but not the notion that it also campaigns less when

a union has weak support.     In the column   3   calculations for the determinants

of whether supervisors campaign against the union or       not,   however, the

percentage who sign cards has the predicted nonlinear effect, with both high

and low percentage cards reducing the probability a company will direct

supervisors to campaign against the union.         In the underlying data 86% of

companies have supervisors campaigning against the union when there are 70%

or more card-signers, 95% of companies have them campaigning against the

union when 40-70% sign, and 84% have them campaigning when less than 40%

have them sign.   The union propensity index has no effect in this

calculation, however.   While each equation shows some indication of

nonlinearity, the fact that different indicators show up differently between
                                        15

them suggests thst this finding be viewed with csution.    The strong result

is that firms faced with work forces with the greatest innate probabilIty to

vote union show less osposition to unions than others.

nentaoftcomes
     While, as noted earlier, there are potential problems in estimating tho

determinants of NT_RE rspressntscion election in s model in which ;pposition

is endogenous, we have estimsted logistic equations relating the probability

that a union will win a representation election to measures of work

conditions and opposition.    Even though we are unlikely to obtain the "true"

                                                                  see
underlying structural relations of equation I, it is important to

whether our hypothesized indicators of the innate probability of a union win

have a positive effect on winning with methods of opposition held fixed;

whether any methods of opposition reduce that probability of a union win

despite potential econometric problems that should bias estimates toward

zero; and whether or not indicators of "positive industrial relations" have

their expected effect on the chances of a union victory.

     Table 5 presents the results of our analysis of the determinants of a

union victory in the two surveys.    The coefficients reported in column   1


show that out principal measure of management opposition in the employers

                                                                on the
survey--consultant days used--had a significant negative impact

probability of a union win.    The coefficient on the compensation diffetenco

variable is positive, and personnel practices ate negative, as one would

                                                   on unfair practices is
expect, but not significant, while the coefficient

positive with s standard error of approximately the same size.    The

coefficients tepotted in column 2 for the organizers survey give a similar

picture of the determinants of outcomes, though with some differences in the
                                           16

impact of particular variables.      Here, two factors stand out:        the

percentage of workers who sign cards has the greatest positive impact on a

union victory while supervisory opposition has the greatest negative impact.

The index of total benefits has the expected negative effect on the

probability of a union win but its coefficient is not significant, in part

because it is inversely related to the fraction who sign cards.           The index

of work conditions/supervisory practices also has an insignificant but

correctly signed impact, for the same reason.      Finally, in column 3 we add a

variable for which we have measures in only about half of the cases--an

index of the intensity of supervisory opposition (scaled from 1 to 5).           With

the mean entered for missing values and a dummy variable to flag those

caaea, we see that intensity of supervisor's opposition is a major

determinant of outcomes.      Finally, note that in the organizers survey unfair

practices are positively rather than negatively related to the probability

of a union victory.      One likely reason for this seemingly aberrant result in

both surveys is that unions are unlikely to file charges, even if illegal

acts were committed, if they win the election drive.      There is, moreover,

nothing inconsistent between these results and time series or industry/state

calculations that find that the proportion of workers who are organized

through ELItE elections is reduced by the frequency of unfair practices, as

much of that variation in these studies results from variation in the number

of   ELItE elections   held rather than from variation in win   rates.     It does,

however, underscore that unfair practices in aggregate studies should be

viewed solely as an indicator of management opposition and that its impact

is largely   on the number of organizing campaigns)-2

Effect of Organizing Drives on Management Careers
                                          17


     Now does a union organizing drive affect management? As most union
                                                             there is
studies are concerned with what unions do for their members,

                              on this question (see, however, Clark for
relatively little information
                                      of firms).         An analysis of management
inttiguing evidence on a small sample
                                                         the issue.         From
opposition to organizing drives cannot, however, neglect
                                                          the direct
the perspective or our model it is important to delineate
                                                                  unionism.
incentives management, as opposed to stockholders, have to oppose

                                           treated managers in firms facing
Knowing how higher management/stockholders
                                                         of the cause for
drives is also important in evaluating their perceptions
                                                              what had happened
the organizing campaign.     Accordingly, we asked management

to the plant aanagets in our employers survey--whether they were promoted,

                                                             For the purposes of
fired, sent for retraining or reassigned, or other.

                         we asked the same question of 33 firms who do not
establishing a benchmark
                                                        named by the firms
experience an organizing drive: these firms were those
                                                         and Kleiner, 1988)
in our sample as their "closest competirot" (see Freeman
                                                          for establishment
and we asked them for the distribution of career outcomes

                            in which the organizing drive took place.
managers in the same period
                                                          the organizing
     Table 6 tabulates the responses to this question, by

 status of the firm.    Line I shows the distribution of changes in manager

                                                                took place.
 status for 202 establishments in our sample in which elections
                                                      outcomes of the
 Lines 2 thtough 4 give the distributions for varying

                       a union win and a contract; a union win and no contract;
 organizing drive:
                                                                          for the
 and a union loss in the election.     Line    5   gives the distribution

                                                          that did not face
 "control" subsample of matched (nonunion) establishments
                                                              the pairs of
 an organizing drive, while line 6 shows the distribution for
                                                           both an organizing
 these establishments. The tesults show a clear impact of
drive and a 'mica victory zn tn crrerr or managers.                                      Two    percent 01
manage': a nu ;a.        -u. as Cre. naared to     'r                                    SI In tLa raani.r af

                    •
                        ---a:'                              c.         1saI:c',c         -aasaisgie;"a'c'-n
                  ;;Lua                                      'tth . ollecti;re ha:g:4ring
ale

At

pLO Aj' -..       -4J
                                 T
                                      and c,cL

                                     elaj''
                                          0       a
                                                         p



                                                         as a
                                                                -f  ngara Ja "ua ntt- 1
                                                                     a;


                                                                           .aaple   r:ciç
                                                                                            a           :
                                                                                                      rontreac
                                                                                                             unac

                                                                                                  otgaaizan5 dai
ansi   a.         •.a        aaple     ahu       ;; 1 up       ui.     a uni;n      c:ta:         Theaa findings

(conaa                       a   ark' a       ?aaar results                  -         i,j J'a5i-a far
undere;aa                        anaetaa a'ç;rse                       :         Y,-   dimes. Fizat, the,
suggest       -         th   sanagement has             1    ac an,,   -               e engage ar r- Crave

indusatial a-elara'vs that deters union organ a   activity, and. facec with
a drive, to engage in any activities that will defeat the union. Second,
the aesuir' -an also be interpreted as in sting that a union organizing
drIve signals stockholders and cop management that the establishment
management         is,   in      fact, poor. and should                he replaced.

Conclusions

       The direct role of employers in union organizing has long been a

neglected part of the union organizing literature.                                     In this study we have

examined the determinants and consequences of employer behavior when faced

with an organizing drive. Our principal substantive findings are:

       o    that there is a substitution between high wages/benefits/good work

conditions/supervisory practices and "tough" management opposition to

unionism.

       o that a high innate propensity for a union victory deters management

opposition, while some indicators of a low propensity also teduce

opposition.
                                       19

     o    that "positive industrial relations' raise the chances the firm

will defeat the union in an election, as does bringing in consultants and

                                                  union.
having supervisors campaign intensely against the

     o that the cateers of managers whose wages/supervisory

                                                    much less to union
practices/benefits lead to union organizing drives,

victories, suffer as a result.

     In general we interpret our results as consistent with the notion that

firms behave in a profit maximizing manner in opposing an organizing drive

and with the basic proposition that management opposition, reflected in

diverse forms of behavior, is a key component in the on-going decline in

private sector unionism in the United States.
                                         20

              TABLE 1: Percentage of All Firms Using Specified
                  Method of Opposing Union Organizing Drive



A.   EMPLOYER SURVEY

     Consultants Used (yes):                         41 %
           C month                                            13 %
           1 month or more                                    28 %

     Unfair Labor Practices:   Charses filed         24 %
           Guilty                                             15   %


8.   ORGANIZER SURVEY

     Consultants/Lawyers Used (yes):                 70 %

     Unfair Labor Practices:
           Filed                                              36 %
           Discharges or Discriminatory layoffs               42 %


     Tactics:
           Company Leaflets                          80 %
                                                              33%
                Sormore                                       47%
           Company Letters                           91   %
                                                              41%
                Sormore                                       50%

           Captive Audience Speech                   91   %
                                                              62%
                Sormore                                       29%

           Supervisory Small Mtgs. per/employee      92   %
                                                              46%
                5-8                                           12%
                9 or more                                     33 %


           Supervisor Intensity in opposing union1
                Low                                           14%
                Moderate                                      34 %
                High                                          51 %



Source:   Employer Survey: NSER Survey of 203 Establishments that
          faced organizing drives.
          Organizer Survey: AFL-CIO Department of Organization &
          Field Services, Survey of 276 Organizers.

          1Asked of only half the survey.
                                         21

               TABLE 2: Perceived Cpu.ses of Oreanizina Drive
                            and Issues in Drive


A.   EMPLOYER SURVEY

                                        Primary      Primary Plus
                                         Cause     Secondary   Ca"
     Economic
           Wages   &   Benefits          17    %          27   %
          Job Security                   10    %          15   %


     'Voice"
           Lack of Fairness               7    %          13 %
           Dissatisfied Employee(s)      14    %          18 %
           Lack of Communication
             about Company               12    %          19 %

     Union Pressure
           Pressure from other unions
             in establishment or area     11 %            18 %
           Union Organizer                 7 %            10 %


B,   ORGANIZERS SURVEY

                                   Most Important Issue

     Beneficial for Union Issues
           Supervisory                    52   %

           Wages                          27   %

           Fringes                         6   %

           Safety                          7   %
           Discrimination                  3   %

           Pressure                        5   %

     Beneficial for Management Issue
           Strikes                        36 %
           Layoffs & Closing              16 %
           Dues                           13 %
           Wages                           2 %
           Other                          31 %




Source:   See Table 1.
                                                22

                     3:
                 TABLE         rFFi.i.-and Standard Errors           of
                   Mnnnement flnnnqitlnnt Emnlnver Survey


                   Charge      of   Guilty of
                   Unfair            Unfair           Hired        Consultant
                                                     Consultant    Dave Used
Explanatory

Union Compensa-        2.50           3.47               .31         1.09
tion Difference       (1.50)         (1.74)            (1.30)        (6.89)


Index of Person-      -.21            -.19               .14           .54
nd Practice1           (.16)          (.16)             (.12)         (.56)



Other Controls

Number of
Employees                /             %/                V             V
Production/
Non-Production           V             V                 7             './
                                                                       .-
KG/Boston

Mfg/Other

Dummies for
                                       _V
                                       7                 ,—            -
Missing Indepen-
dent Vsriables         .,../           u7                 '7            V
Experience
with Union             .Z              .—                                 -
Summary     Statistics
Sample Size              188           184               188          184

Technique              Logistic       Logistic          Logistic       Tobit

-2 Log   Likelihood      184.0         142.3             239.5        682.85


1Sum of whether firm had any of 5 practices:
   1) Formal Written Grievance Procedure
   2) Formal Written Seniority System for Promotiona,
   3) Formal Written Sick Leave Policy
   4) Written Posting of Training Opportunities
   5)  Formal Written Policy for Layoff and Recalls
                                              23

          TAZLE   4: Coefficients     and Standard Errors for Deteriiinants
                   of Manasement    Osoosition:  Oranizer's Suye

                                                                    Supervisors
                                                Fired!              Campaigned
                      Charged with Unfair      Discriminatory         Against
                       Labor Practices                Layoff          Union
Explanatory
Variables                      (13                       (2)             (3)
Index of
Benefits                   -.22(10)               -   .19(10)          .41(17)

Index of Poor Work
Conditions/Super -
visory Practices            .14(.04)                  .12(.04)         .14(.05)


%   Cards >70%             -.81(45)               -.68(43)           -1.51(65)

% Cards <40%                .64(.47)                  .37(.47)        -.87(73)

Union Propen-
sity Index                  .37(.24)                  .36(.23)        - .28(50)

Union Propen-
sity Index2                -.009(005)                 008(005)         .01(01)

Controls

Industry                       /                             \_/_            Z
Region                         -                          .-
Age,   Sex, Race               -                          —
"Wage Deficiency"              /                          ..-'               ..-'

Previous Exper-
ience with Union               ./                         /                  \.V

Summary    Statistics
Sample Size                   232                      233             244

-2 Log Likelihood             264.4                    280.8           102.2
                                         24

                                  NOTES TO TAZLE_4


Index of Benefits   sums 0-1 variables for medical insurance, dental

insurance, sick pay, pension, grievsnce procedure, arbitration, employee

handbook, open door policy, quality of work life.

Index   of work conditions/supervisory orsccices   sums answers   to: Is
supervision unpredictable, intonsistent or autocratic? Is the work of a
routine nature where employees receive little recognition from supervisors
or little personal job satisfaction? Are employees stuck in "dead-end" jobs

with little chance for promotion?    Have there been major accidents in the

plant, or are there serious thrests to the health and safety of workers?

Are there severe pressures, including mandatory overtime, placed on

                                                       evidente of
employees to maintain or increase production? Is there

discrimination or favoritism of any kind?     Do the employees feel that the

company has little personal concern for them?

Index of union propensity:    suma anawera to:     Haa the workplace been

subjected to substantial anti-union propaganda and/or attitude aurveys

before the organizing campaign started? Does the company have a pre-

                                                   union sympathizers?      Do a
employment screening process to weed out potential

 subatantial number of employees belong to civil rights groups, tenant

 associationa, social advocacy groups or church organizations which are

 active in community affairs? Is there access to employees, either on or off

 the job?    Are labor unions generally well accepted within the community?

 Have there been any recent shutdowns of large union plants or establishmants

 in the community?    Have there been bitter, highly publicized strikes in the

 community in the past few years?    Is employee turnover relatively low?

        The variables in the work practices/supervisory conditions and union

                                               described in the text.
 propensity indices are scaled from 1 to 5, as
                                                   25

              TAZLE 5:      Coefficients and Standard Errors of the Determinants
                        of Union Victory in NLRZ Representation Election

                                              F.mol ovar    Siirvrv             Orann-f   mr
Union Compensation Difference                     1.91(1.34)
Consultant Days Used                              - .04(02)

Index of Personnel Practices                      - . 17(.12)

Unfair Practices                                   .53(.46)             .81(.43)               .72( .45)
Index of Total Benefits                                               -.09(10)             -.07(.l0)
Index of Work Conditions
    Supervisory Practices                                               .03(.03)               .05(.03)
Supervisors Campaign
   Against Unions                                                     -2.11( .67)         -1.98(72)
Intensity of Supervisors* Campaign                                                         -.75(.20)
% Cards                                                               4. 52 (1. 05)        4.89(1.09)
Index of Union Propensity                                               .06(.03)            .04(.03)

OTHER CONTROLS                                             A                B                     B

STJMMARY STATISTICS

N                                                       190                240                   240

-2 Log Likelihood                                       225.4              277.4                 334,6



Notes:    A    -   See Table     3 controLs.
          B    -   See Table     6 controls.    Also with      dumay for   whether
                   consultant/lawyer       was used.

*   Available      for 124 carllpaigns only.
                                                        26

                      ThZLE     6: Percentaee of Firas Chanaina Manner
                                   Status. by Organizing Drive
                                                         Manager Re-
                                             assigned to
                                            Manager
                      No            Sent for Another
                                Manager                  Manager
                  Change Proiioted Retraining Location    Fired              Other   No Answer

(1) All establish-
ments with or-
ganizing drives
(Percent) N—202        76           3           1             3        8       8

(2) Establishments
where the union
won and a con-
tract was
reached (Per-
cent)N—50              82           0           2             2        10      4         2

(3) Establishments
where the union
won the elec-
tion, but no
contract was
reached (Percent)      61           7           0             4         7     18         4
N—28

(4) Establishments
where the union
lost the election
(Percent) N—124        77           3           0             3         7      8

(5) Sub-sample   of
firms without
union and no
election. N—33*        41          21           3             4         2      9

(6) Paired Sub-
sample of firms
[with those in (5)]
with organizing
drives. N—33               70           0           0             3     15     6




Percentages sum to less than 100 due to rounding.

*These values are the means of the percentages of the change in manager status over
the same time period as firma experiencing;an; organizing drive..
                                       27

                                 fl4DNOTES




1. As late as 1976 business leaders perceived labor as an overly powerful
influence group and wanted strongly to reduce the power of labor.  See
Sydney Verba and Gary Orren, Equality in America (Harvard 1985).


2. Several studies have suggested that a major reason for the increased
hostility toward unions over this period was the growth in the union-
nonunion wage gap, deregulation, and foreign competition with little change
in union workers productivity relative to nonunion workers, resulting in
reduced firm profits (Freeman and Kleiner, 1986).

3. The unfair practices data are from NLR8.  The percenrage who get
contracts is from Cooke (1985), McDonald (1983), and Freeman and Kleiner
(1986)

4. A composite ranking of private sector union density in the states in our
sample was 29th our of 51 (D.C. included). The states in our sample rhar
had NLRB election data included Arkansas, Connecticut, Iowa, Kansas, Maine,
Massachusetts, Missouri, Nebraska, New Hampshire, and Vermont.

5. The AFL-CIO questionnaire contained information that differentiates
between lawyers and consultants but that information was nor coded and
placed on the computer file that we used.

6. The problem is that the AFL-CIO questionnaire contained a question on
firings and a separate question on "orher unfair labor pracrices that were
filed with rhe HLR8. In the table we assume that firings were filed
charges, but the questionnaire is ambiguous on this.

7. The questionnaire asked for a rating of intensity from 1 to 5. Our high
category is the 5 category, moderate is rhe 3 and 4 category and low is 1
and   2.


8. Note that the surveys asked for somewhat different information. The
employers survey asked for the causes of the election drive while the
organizers survey asked for the most important issue in the campaign.

9. This finding is not inconsistent with Kleiner's results showing that
current profitability is unrelated to committing an unfair practice. In the
model we invesrigate it is the potential effect of unions on future profits
that is the key determinant of unfair practices, not current profitability.

10. Ve regressed the difference in the log of wages one year after the N1.RB
election and one year before the election on the wage difference and a dummy
variable for whether or not the firm signed a collective contract. The
coefficient on the compensation difference variable was .09 with a standard
error of (.04) while the coefficient on the collective bargaining dummy was
.01 with a standard error of (.01).

11. There was a question about whether the firm has a "wage deficiency'
which we entered in the regression; it had the expected sign in the
regressions but was of negligible scatiscical importance.
                                       28

12. such a relation is to be expected if management opposition reduces the
chances of union victories, leading unions to be more selective in the
campaigns they pursue.
                                              29

                                    BIEUOCRAPtIY


Ashenfelter, Orley and C. E. Johnson, 1969,        "Bargaining Theory, Trade

     Unions, and Induatrial Strike Activity," American Economic Review,

     Vol. 59, pp. 35-42.

Clark, Kim 8., 1984,   "Unionization and Firm Performance:        The Impact on

     Profits, Growth, and Productivity," American Economic Review,

     pp.   893-919.

Cooke, William, N., 1985, "The Failure to Negotiate First Contracts:

     Determinants and Policy Implications," Industrial and Labor Relations

     Review, January Vol. 38, No. 2, pp. 163-178.

Dickens, William T., 1983,    "The Effect of Company Campaigns on

     Certification Elections: Law and Reality Once Again," Industrial and

     Labor Relations Reviow, Vol. 36, No. 4, pp. 560-575.

Dickens, William T. , and Jonathan S. Leonard,       1985,   "Accounting for rhe

     Decline in Union Membership, 1950-1980," Industrial and Labor Relations

     Review, Vol. 38, No.    3,   pp.   323-334.

                           "The Recent Decline of Unionization       in the United
Farber, Henry S., 1987,

     Slates," Science, Vol. 238, pp. 915-920.

                                                                 The Divergence of
Freeman, Richard B. , 1988, "Contraction and Expansion:

     Private Sector and Public Sector Unionism in the U.S.," Journal of

      Economic Perspectives, Spring.

Freeman, Richard 8. and Morris M. Kleiner, 1988,        "The Impact of New

      Unionization on Wages and Working Conditions:          A Longitudinal Study of

      Establishments Under NL.RB Elections, Journal of Labor Economics,

      forthcoming.
                                               30

Freeman, Richard B., and Morria H. Kleiner, 1986,             "Union Organizing Drive

     Outcomes From NLRB Elections During a Period of Economic Concessions,"

     Industrial Relations Research Association, Vol. 39, pp. 41-47.

Freeman, Richard B., and James Medoff, 1984, What Do Unions Do?, New York:

     Basic Books, Inc.

Kleiner, Morris, H., 1984, "Unionism and Employer Discrimination:                Analysis

     of 8(a)(3) Violations," Industrial Relations, Vol. 23, No. 2,

     pp. 234-243.

Kochan, Thomas. A,     Robert B. McKersie, and John Chalyhoff, 1986,            "The

     Effects of Corporate Strategy and Workplace Innovations on Union

     Representation," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 39, No. 4

     pp. 487-501.

Little, Roderick J. A., and Donald Ruhin, 1987, Statistical Analysis With

     Missine Data, New York: John Wiley & Sons, pp. 6-9.

McDonald, Charles, 1983, "Memorandum to the National Organizing Committee,'

     AFL-CIO.

Medoff, James, 1984, "The Public's Image of Unions," Bureau of               National
     Affairs, pp. D-l.

Ptuitt, Stephen W. , John Wei, and Richard White, 1988,             "The Impact of Union-


     Sponsored Boycotts on the Stock Prices of Target Firms," Journal of

     Labor Research, Summer, Vol. 9, No.            3,   pp. 285-290.


Stephan, Paula   E.   and Bruce   E.   Kaufman, 1986, "Factors Leading to a Decline

      in Union Win Rates: 1973-1981," Industrial Relations Research

     Association, Vol. 39, pp. 296-305.

Verba, Sidney and Gary Orren,          1985,   Eoualitv in   Aaerica:   A View From   the


     ,     Cambridge, MA: Harvard University             Press.
