                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        INITIAL PUBLIC OFFERINCS:
                    INVESTOR BEHAVIOR AND UNDERPRICINC




                             Robert J. Shiller




                          Working   Paper   No.   2806




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Canibridge, MA 02138
                               December 1988




This paper is an outgrowth of research done in collaboration with John Pound
with the Investor Behavior Project at Yale University. Paul T. Friedman,
Roger Ibbotson, Jeff Jaffe, Jay Ritter and Kevin Rock made heLpful
suggestions. This research was supported by the National Science Foundation,
and is part of the National Bureau's Program on Financial Markets and
Monetary Economics. The views expressed here are not necessarily the views
of any of the above.
                                      PIBER Working Paper #2806
                                      December 1988


      INITIAL PUBLIC OFFERINGS: INVESTOR BEHAVIOR A1'W UNDERPRICING


                                 ABSTRACT




     A questionnaire survey of investors in initial public offerings (IPO's)

was undertaken to learn about patterns of investor behavior that might be

relevant to theories of their underpricing. Respondents were asked for

their perception of the allocation process, their concern with stockbroker

or underwriter reputation, their theories of IPO underpricing, and their

communications and information sources. Results are interpreted as

supporting the notion that there is an element of truth in some existing

theories of IPO underpricing. and also suggesting different hypotheses. The

impresario hypothesis is that underwriters deliberately underprice to obtain

publicity and promote enthusiasm. Other hypotheses suggested by the results

are an investor risk perception hypothesis and a fairness-relationship

hypothesis.




                                        Robert .3. Shiller
                                        Cowles Foundation
                                        Yale University
                                        Box 2125 Yale Station
                                        New Haven, CT 06520
                           INITIAL pUBLIC OFFERINGS:

                      INVESTOR BEHAVIOR AND UNDERPRICING



                                                                     in
    We have collected questionnaire survey data concerning investors

initial public offerings (IPO's) of common stock to learn about their

behavior, with the purpose of providing new information that will help us to

differentiate among several theories of the IPO marketJ The theories are

                                                           tend to be underpriced by
used to explain the puzzling phenomenon that IPO's

their underwriters. i. e. • have extremely high average returns between the

offering date and the aftermarket. and that the extent of the underpricing

tends to show persistent variations through time; see Ibbotson [19751,

 Ibbotson and Jaffe [1975]. Ritter (19841. and Ibbotson.        Sindelar and titter


 11988].
      The premise of this survey work is that more information on parameters

 of investor behavior is needed to understand the IPO underpricing

 phenomenon.   The present Tm   literature   is hampered   by the reliance primarily

 on conventional theoretical preEuppositiOns that investors are expected

 utility maximizers. These presuppositions do not allow any serious

 consideration of the views of the IPO underpricing that are commonly

 expressed in the industry and in the news media: that underpricing is

 deliberately planned by underwriters to create a satisfied clientele and

 that periods of high demand are due to speculative fervor on the part of




               work was undertaken with the collaboration of John Pound.

                                             1
             2
investors.

     There is no reason why the behavior of issue prices of IPO's should be

understood primarily in terms of any concepts of efficient markets or

rational optimizing behavior of investors. These prices are not market

prices, one cannot trade freely at these prices, so apparent profit

opportunities cannot be exploited by "smart money". Since the shares in

lEO's are ratIoned, a viable strategy for underwriters is to price LEO's

with a particular segment of the market in mind, excluding others who might

see profit opportunities. Thus, investor behavior, the behavior of the

masses of investors or less rational subgroups of investors, might be an

especially important factor in models of these prices, just as models of

less rational consumer behavior might explain why retail prices of clothing

like $9.99 are more common than prices like $10.01.

     Data collection on investor behavior may also serve a role in

confirming existing theories of IPO underpricing. For example, it would be

supportive of the information asymmetry theories if we were to find that

investors were aware of such asymmetries and offered them when discussing

the IPO market. It would be supportive of the quid-pro-quo theories if

investors were aware that giving business to a stockbroker is expected to

result in a large allocation in a winning IPO.



     2Examples are not hard to find. It is matter-of-factly stated that
"The brokerage firms do this [underprice) so that the shares appreciate in
the aftermarket and create a satisfied shareholder base for the company."
(Fred R. Bleakely, "The Current Bonanza in New Issues," New York Tines Nay
1S, 1983, III 10:3.) In one of the hot markets it is stated that "The
investing public's keen appetite for securities, reflected by rising prices
and the most active dealings in years on the New York Stock Exchange, is
spurring a vigorous search for new stock issues by underwriters and their
agents." (Mitchell Corden, "More Companies Offer Stock for First Time;
Rising Demand a Lure," Wall Street Journal, February 17, 1961, l;l.)

                                      2
     It should be stressed that the effort here should not be viewed as

trying to choose among competing theories of IPO underpricing, as if only

one of these theories is right. Since offering prices are not market prices

underwriters have a lot of latitude in their pricing decision, and the

freedom to let a lot of considerations affect their behavior. As with many

decisions in life, the outcome is the result of the weighing of a lot of

pros and cons. It is by no means a sign of a weak theory if we say that

many such considerations figure into the pricing decision.

     The questionnaire survey reported here asks investors about their

trading histories, their perceptions of the allocation process, the

perceived importance of broker and underwriter reputation, the theories of

IPO investors, and their communications patterns and information sources.

Then, this paper will offer some interpretations and conjectures as to the

sources of IPO underpricing. I will discuss an "impresario hypothesi&' for

IPO underwriting, and offer as well as an "investor risk perceptions

hypothesis" and a "fairness-relationship hypothesis."



                             A. Survey Desien



A.l The Three Samples
     Questionnaires were sent out to three samples, the first two

representing IPO investors, the third (the control sample) representing a

random sample of all investors. In all three samples, respondents were

asked to name an IPO (or, for the control sample, a common stock) that they

had purchased recently, which would be referred to in subsequent questions

as the COMPANY. This was done so that we could ask concrete questions about


                                       3
one investment, rather than ask respondents to think of all the investments

they had made.

     There is some difficulty in obtaining a list of IPO investors that is

truly random. For the IPO investors, we obtained two lists of investors

that we thought would contain a high proportion of such investors, and yet

contain no obvious important sample selection biases.

     IPO Investors sample 1 (IPO-l)

     We purchased a mailing list of probably active high income investors

from a mailing list company Il.   S. Ponton, mc, a specialist in investor

mailing lists. This list, entitled their "High Grade Multi-Investor' list

is described in the Ponton Investor List Catalog Vol.. VIII by names on

three or more mailing lists -     net   worth generally over $250,000.00." This

list is composed of names on three or more of the Ponton mailing lists that

are suggestive of high-income active investors. The Fonton lists are from

directories of customers of brokerage houses, lists of investment seminar

attenders, lists of respondents to ads relating to investments, lists of

persons mentioned in newspaper articles, yacht owners, aircraft owners,

doctors, etc. Appearing on three or more of these lists is taken to

indicate a likely active investor.         Most of the lists described in their

catalog are used to produce the high grade multi-investor list. However, no

use is made of some of their more unusual lists (lists of gamblers, cattle.

or new movie investors). We were given a random selection from the entire

United States, from which we sent out 500 questionnaires in February, 1987.

One week after the initial mailing a postcard was sent reminding them to

fill out the questionnaire, three weeks after the initial mailing a second

letter was sent with a replacement questionnaire. We received 53 responses


                                            4
from investors who said they had purchased or seriously considered

purchasing an IPO. Note that the response rate on our questionnaire should

not be calculated as 53/500, since the number of individuals in our sample

who had purchased or seriously considered purchasing an IFO was likely to be

less than 500.

     IFO investors Samole 2 (IPO-2) We purchased a mailing list of

subscribers to the publication New Issues Alert. New Issues Alert.

published by Export Newsletter Association in Boca Raton Florida, is an 8-

page monthly reporting on new stock offerings. The subscription price for

the newsletter is $119.00 per year. One thousand questionnaires were sent

to these in February 1987; no more mailings were made to these. We had 100

responses who indicated that they purchased or considered purchasing an IPO.

     Control Sanole (CONTROL) We purchased a list of high income Americans

provided by Survey Sampling, Inc. • who specialize in producing true random

samples of the United States population. This list was not intended to be

an investor list. They described the list we purchased as "geographic area:

all, continental U. S.. demographic selection: $70,000.00 to no limit. •      Five
hundred questionnaires were sent out in July. 1986. One week later, a

reminder postcard was sent, and then two more reminder letters with

replacement questionnaires went out, the last in September 1986. For this

sample, the first question on the questionnaire inquired whether they had

purchased common stock. We received 156 usable completed responses who

 answered yes.



Analysis of Samples

      Table I shows some comparisons of the three samples on various


                                            5
measures.

The flU-i sample closely resembles the CONTROL sample in most dimensions.

This is as we would expect, since we know of no biases which would make

these samples different from a random sample of the wealthy investing

public. The average income is a little higher in the IPO-l sample.

representing, in effect, a different cutoff income for the samples.

The IP0-2 sample is somewhat different. They are more likely to describe

their investments as risky than are individuals in the other samples. They

are somewhat more likely to use "sophisticated" investments such as futures

and stock options, and much more likely to have invested in gold or silver.

Since they have taken the trouble to subscribe to a specialized publication.

it is not surprising that they are more likely to do unusual investments.



                            B. Survey Results

     It should be noted first that the IPO surveys were railed out during a

"cold" market for IPO's. According to ibbotson, Sindelar and Ritter (19881,

the average initial return on IPO's in 1981 was 10.39% and in 1986 was

9.99%, compared with the average initial return of 20.25% for 1977 to 1987.

Since the IPO market was (and still is) cold, we are not in the best

situation to find evidence of fads or related judgmental errors among IPO

investors. Still, the initial returns in the 10% range are quite high when

compared with other investments, since the return is earned over a few days

at most.

     Trading history among or respondents (Table 2) shows that most IPO

investors are repeat purchasers of IPO's. They do not generally "flip,"

that is buy and sell promptly in the aftermarket, instead the investment


                                       6
tends to be made for something on the order of a year. Most IPO investors

deal with only one broker, and despite the rationing of Itt's which are

highly profitable on average, make no attempt to find other brokers who will

ration them shares in the Itt's. These results are consistent with a

relationship of trust between client and broker.

     Investors in IPO's do perceive that the allocation process works as it

has been hypothesized in the IPO literature (Table 3). Their allocations of

shares, and especially in winning 120's, are thought to be related to

business given the broker. The average investor reports getting about 80%

of the shares requested, and only about 60% of the shares requested in

winning lPO's. This percent is low enough, given the high variance of 120

returns, to be consistent with the notion that the expected initial return

is not high if weighted by the amounts one is allocated. The fact that the

second percent quoted above is lower shows that the investors are aware of

the vinner's curse phenomenon in the IPO market.

     Investors in 120's are very much concerned with the reputation of both

the broker and the underwriter (Table 4). Slightly less than half of the

investors rely on stockbrokers for the decision to buy in an 120. Investors

conf in that they feel they need some compensation for the winner's curse

problem (they stay away from IPO's that other investors know more about) in

accordance with Rock's [1986] theory of IPO underpricing.

     Respondents were asked for the reason why they invested in the company:

 Can you state, in a few words, the theory that led you to invest in (or

consider investing in) the COMPANY's stock? Put the theory as you would

have put it to convince a trusted friend to buy the stock. -   The most common

answer for both lPO samples was to refer to a story about the product or


                                       7
concept of the firm. Of the IPO-1. respondents, 25% said this, of the IPO-2

respondents. 38.5% said this. These were generally nonquantitative stories

about the quality" of the product or the outlook for growth, without any

explicit evaluation whether the IPO was priced well. In an earlier paper

(Shiller and Pound (19881) about stock market investors in general we noted

that investors tend to tell stories about the stock without reference to

price, as if price did not matter, and we find this tendency in the IPO

market as well. The second most common answer for both IPO groups was that

a stockbroker had advised the purchase (21% of IPO-l and 13% of IPO-2),

followed by claims that the management of the issuing firm was good (13% of

IPO-i and 13% of IPO-2). References to historically high returns on IPO's

were made by 8% of the IFO-l investors and 10% of the IP0-2 investors.

References to "hot" underwriters were made by 5% of the IPO-2 investors, but

by none of the IPO-l investors. From all these answers, it is apparent that

the modal answer is one that the investor chose the IPO because of its

product or concept. While the historically high returns on IPO's were

mentioned by only 8 to 10 percent of the respondents, we think that the

evidence suggests that these high returns are very much on investors' minds.

A question like this is perhaps construed as asking for a story or concept,

and not a factor specific to the entire IPO market.

     Respondents were asked to classify the reasons they give, see Table 5,

top. IPO investors are somewhat more likely than our control investors to

think that they are buying in IPO's for reasons of market psychology. There

is some tendency among IPO investors to think that they are riding a wave of

investor popularity. Somewhat less than half of the IPO investors appear to

be trading on the IPO market itself, thinking that IPO's do well because of


                                       8
investor psychology. This evidence is consistent with the traditional

notion of a self-conscious speculative bubble.

     Communications patterns among IPO investors (table 6) are conducive to

the sort of interpersonal interaction that is necessary for speculative

enthusiasm to develop. However, by some measures this communication is less

intense than in ordinary issues. The subscribers to the New Issue Alert

seem particularly to be relativeloners, who read and invest rather than

talk and invest. However, interpersonal communication operates at a

substantial level for all investors.

     Most investors had not done any careful calculations or study before

investing in their IPO. Thus, the reputation of the broker and underwriter

is especially likely to be important to them, and the sense of trust in

their relationship.




C. Speculative Enthusiasm and the Impresario Hypothesis

     The idea is commonplace in the popular literature that speculative

behavior, behavior characterized by investor enthusiasm not grounded in

objective information, is important to understanding the IPO market. The

idea has been brought up In the scholarly literature but usually dismissed

with little serious attention,

     The theory of speculative behavior that often seems to be suggested in

the popular literature is that an increase in investor enthusiasm between -

the offering date and the aftermarket accounts for the increase in price
between these dates. But, just because the dynamics of price between the

offering date and the aftermarket are the concern of our speculation


                                       9
theories, does not mean that we must attribute these dynamics to changes in

investor behavior over this short interval of time. A more attractive

theory of underpricing of IPO's is that the underwriters deliberately

underprice them because of their perceptions of individual speculative

behavior, so that the price increase that tends to follow is not due to any

change in investor behavior then. Underwriters may do so if the

underpricing creates a favorable impression among their clients when price

increases in the aftermarket.

     Observing one's investment increase in value by 20% within a few days

may create a vivid impression among investors, and may redound to the credit

of the stockbroker who advised the investment. If underwriters can create

such a reputation for themselves and for stockbrokers who market the issues,

then this reputation may help them to get better prices for future issues.

Issuing firms would rather that underwriters marketed their issue at a

market clearing price, but are nonetheless happy to do business with an

underwriter whose reputation increases the value of their issue above what

they could get for it if they tried to underwrite their own issue, or if

they dealt with an underwriter who was not Thot" at the time. This

impresario theory of underpricing of IPO's does not require that

underwriters have a "monopsony" as adduced the literature to explain the

intentional underpricing of issues by underwriters (see for example Ritter

(1974)).

     I call this an impresario hypothesis because it is the same theory that

explains why impresarios may sometimes underprice tickets to concerts, so as

to enhance the reputation of the performer (by creating a jam-packed

auditorium and long lines for tickets) and thereby increasing the prices


                                     10
they can charge for subsequent concerts.

       The impresario hypothesis is not likely to be the Qfljy explanation of

IPO underpricing. The other theories in the literature, such as the

information asymmetry and litigation avoidance theories, are likely also to

play a rote in IPO underpricing. Rut the circumstantial evidence that the

impresario underpricing does play a role in this phenomenon is substantial.

We saw above that the reputation of the stockbroker and underwriter are

important factors on the minds of IPO investors. Since as we have seen most

IPO investors do not do quantitative research on the investments themselves.

they must be trusting in others to evaluate investments for them. Investors

seem to have at hand for quick retelling the story about the investments,

but not     the   comparisons that must be made to know whether the price is a

good one. Since investors are not evaluating the job stockbrokers or

underwriters       are doing on such comparisons, then, they must look at the

returns     that the broker or underwriter earned for the investor or his or her
friends in the recent past.
       It   is significant that most investors do not attempt to buy       an initial
public    offering from more than one broker. While many investors are aware

of the high initial returns that IPOs          tend to earn, and a substantial
minority     of the investors say they would be discouraged from buying an IPO

 if   the overall market looked less encouraging, they still do not feel sure

 enough about the market that they would try          a serious strategy of buying all
 IPO's. The majority say they would tend to stay away from an IPO           that   they
 felt other investors knew      more about.

        This   means that many investors are viewing their      past successes with

 IPO investments as related to their own           information sources, substantially

                                              11
their knowledge of their broker and underwriter, and not as a     return just

for the fact of having invested in a random IPO. This in turn means that

the high initial returns are likely to be enhancing the reputation of the

underwriter of the issue.

     For this theory to hold up. it is necessary that investors do not

generally fully realize that the high initial returns are     due to a decision

by underwriters to underprice. Other evidence suggests that it is likely

that most investors are at least partially fooled by such a strategy.      In a

questionnaire study of home buyers in a recent California real estate boom,

(Case and Shiller [1988)) we found that the underpricing that     resulted in

selling prices above the asking price in about 8% of sales was

misinterpreted by buyers. They tended to view the selling prices above

asking prices as evidence of investor panic, rather than of the occasional

underpricing errors that must be made by some sellers in an up market.

     While changes in investor enthusiasm over a few days do not play a role

in the price change between the offering and the aftenarket. we hypothesize

that changing enthusiasm does play a role in the dynamics of the "hot" issue

markets that occur from     time   to time. The dynamics of "hot" issue markets

 are sufficiently slow that their appearance and disappearance could be

 explained in terms of contagion models of investor communications, like the

 one described in Shiller and Pound (1989). In tenos of average initial

 returns, hot markets come and go over periods of years. There was a "hot"

 IFO market in 1961, another in 1967-8, another in the early 1970's, another

 in the late 1970's and early 1980's. We hypothesize that there are periodic

 "fads" in which investors show great enthusiasm for IPO's, and that part of

 the dynamics of the fads is the observation among investors of the high


                                           12
initial returns. During these fads underwriters and stockbrokers may      find
it profitable to sell very underpriced new issues to generate publicity and

protect their reputation as dealers who can get their investing clients in

on the action.   The tendency for high initial returns to come and go is

likely to be the same as the tendency for impresarios to underprice some

concerts and not others: one underprices a concert only if one thinks that

the impression given by the underpricing will pay off in subsequent

receipts, which is only if concertgoers are paying attention to the

underpricing end are willing to believe that the performer is a star.

Ultimately, underwriters can use very high initial returns to facilitate the

spread of fads only if a fad is already in the works. No one can manage

public opinion so well as to know how predictably to start a fad.

     Evidence that there is some truth to this interpretation of the

dynamics of hot and cold markets takes several forms. The extent of

interpersonal communications documented above would certainly support a

contagion of interest story. Moreover, respondents report that the

communications had a serious nature: they tended to think that they made

friends likely to purchase IPO's. Such a contagion of interest story is

further supported by the observation that volume of new issues tends to be

high 6 to 12 months after periods of high initial returns (Ibbotson,

Sindelar and Ritter (1988]). Such a lag is what one might expect of

contagion models of investor communications (Shiller and Pound, 1989].



Other Behavioral Hvootheses for IPO Undervricjn

     Other hypotheses relevant to IPO underpricing are also suggested by

these results.   These are not proposed as stand-alone theories of IPO


                                      13
underpricing. but as considerations that underwriters have in mind when

deciding how much to underprice an issue.
                                                                        there is
    One is a simple investor risk perception hypothesis. Since

great uncertainty as to the price that a share will have in the aftermarket.

investors in IPO's must be compensated for this uncertainty. This is

different from the risk aversion hypothesis discussed by Tinic (1988),        who

speaks of the risk aversion of underwriters rather than of the ultimate

investors. The risk that individual investors in IPO's     incur   is

substantial: Ibbotson (1975) found that for the period 1960 through 1969

investors in IPO's had about an equal chance of making positive or negative

return, the positive expected return coming because the distribution of

returns is positively skewed.

     Since, as we have seen, investors in IPO's do not diversify away the

risk of their IPO   investments,   investing in only a small number themselves.

the shape of this distribution is likely to matter to their sense of

 satisfaction in their investment. They are likely to have an impression as

 to the shape of this distribution for investments sold by their broker, from

 their own experience and from the conversations with friends that were

 documented above. That the shape of the distribution of an individual

 investment should matter to an investor, rather than the contribution of

 that investment to the investor's portfolio, is of course contrary to modern

 portfolio theory. 3ut it is consistent with the principle of "mental

 accounting" proposed by Shefrin and Statman (1985), drawing on the Prospect

 Theory of Kahneman and Tversky (1979). The mental accounting principle is

 that "decision makers tend to segregate the different types of gambles into

 separate accounts, and then apply prospect theoretic decision rules to each


                                          14
account by ignoring possible interactions.    Of course, if we discard

modern portfolio theory for the pricing of IPO's it does not follow that we

should discard the theory for other applications. As noted above, the lEO

market is special in that quantities are rationed to a certain clientele.

    Underwriters may tend to feet that if they priced IPO's so as to make

expected initial returns equal to zero, thereby causing most investments in

IPO's to result in a loss, it would destroy the sense of good will that

investors feel toward the stock broker. The observation of Beatty and

Ritter (1986] that expected initial return is positively related to ex ante

uncertainty would appear to be supportive of this investor perception

theory.

     Another possible consideration for the time pattern of IPO initial

returns is a "fairness-relationship" hypothesis. Since the IPO investment

is made within an ongoing relationship of trust between investor and broker,

considerations of "fair pricing" may play an important role, Kahneman,

Knetsch and Thaler Ll9811 have documented that such considerations play an

important role in many economic decisions, and that the decisions as to what

is fair are based on a complicated set of social norms. Case and Shiller

 (1988] have documented that such fairness considerations play a role in

certain investment decisions as well. It could be that some conventional

standards for lEO pricing are applied, and investors feel that they are

 treated fairly if their initial returns mimic the rest of the market,

whether hot or cold.

     One aspect of the lEO underpricing that seems not to be explained in

 terms of the impresario hypothesis (or any of the other hypotheses in the


      3shefrin and Statman, [1985].

                                       15
literature) is the periods of persistent nesative initial returns.

According to Ibbotson, Sindelar, and Ritter (1988J, the year 1973 had an

average initial return of -17.82%, 1974 had -6.98%, and 1975 had an -1.86%.

The appearance of persistent bust markets as well as persistent hot earkets

suggests that there is a sort of sluggishness in underwriter pricing,

resulting in both positive or negative initial returns depending on market

price relative to the conventional price.

     Tinic (1988) has proposed that underpricing of IPO's may be due to the

threat of litigation. Underpricing of IPO's is taken to reduce the

probability that underwriters or stockbrokers will be sued for

misrepresenting the issue. Tinic's argument is in fact a special case of

the fairness-relationship hypothesis. Litigation is not the only way to

express displeasure at an underwriter. Tinic's own evidence suggests that

the fairness-relationship hypothesis extends beyond the effects of formal

litigation.    Tinic collected data on 70 IPO's in the years 1923 to 1930,

before the Securities Act of 1933 which has been the basis for litigation in

IPO cases. He found no evidence of such litigation in this period. He

found that the initial returns were lower in this period than in the post-

1933 period, but still lsrge and positive.




                                      16
                                   Table I

                        Characteristics of the Samples

                                  IP0-1             IP0-2         CONTROL

                                   53                100            156
1.    sample Size

II.    Average Income          $181,400            $53,600        $113,000

III. Other Investments:            23%                29%           35%

                                        23%             29%            35%
           Savings Bonds
                                        19%                36%         35%
           Commodity Futures
                                        29%                20%         34%
           Treasury BIlls
           Gold or Silver               17%             49%            19%
                                        25%                37%         26%
           Stock Options

IV.    Average Age (inferred from age brackets data)

                                    51                48             52


V.     Retired

                                    27%               20%            18%



VI.    "Most other holdings are risky and speculative."

                                   22.0%               55%

VII. "Most other holdings are safe and unexciting."


                                   78.0%               45%

 VIII. "Are you currently an investment professional? (for example.
 stockbroker, investment advisor, or investment banker)

                                 7.8% yes              6.2% yes      5.3% yes




                                              17
                                  Table 2

                             Investment History
How many initial public offerings did you invest in during each of the
following years?
                                 Itt-i          IPO-2
              in 1982            0.161          0.586
                                (0.075)        (0.272)
              in 1983            0.333          0.844
                                (0.115>        (0.214)
              in 1984            0.452          1.124
                                (0.144)        (0.224)
              in 1985            0.667          1.373
                                (0.160)        (0.232)
              in 1986            0.738          1.850
                                (0.158)        (0.283)

What is the shortest period for which you held an initial public offering,
from the date of purchase to the date of sale?

                                 IPO-1          IPO-2
                               38.4 weeks     21.3 weeks
                              (10.9 weeks)    (3.3 weeks)

What is the average or typical period for which you held an initial public
offering, from the date of purchase to the date of sale?

                                 IPO.l          IPO-2
                               68.4 weeks     48.5 weeks
                              (10.8 weeks)    (4.9 weeks)

Approximately what percent of your holdings of stocks, bonds and other
financial assets was in the COMPANY after you made your most recent
purchase?

                                 IPO-1          IPO-2         CONTROL
                                 6.74%          9.25%          12.85%
                                (1.75%)        (1.89%)         (1.98%)

Have you ever attempted to purchase stock in one initial public offering
through nore than one stockbroker?

                                 IPO-l          IPO-2
                               27.5% yes      33.7% yes
                               72.5% no       66.3% no
                               (6.2%)         (4.8%)

What is the naximum nwnber of brokers from whom you attempted to purchase
stock in one particular initial public offering?
                                 Itt-i           IPO-2
                                  1.81            1.86
                                 (0.18)         (0.27)

                                        18
                                  Table 3

                Investor Perceptions of Allocation Process



Do you find that you are more Likely to be allocated shares in an IPO if you
do a lot of other business with the stockbroker?

                                 120-1          120-2
                               59.5% yes      63.3% yes
                                9.5% no        5.6% no
                         31.0% no opinion     31.1% no

Do you find that you are more likely to be given shares in a winning IPO if
your broker owes you a favor or is seeking more business from you?

                                 120-1          120-2
                               45.2% yes      58.9%   yes
                               21.5% no       16.4%   no
                          33.3% no opinion 26.7% no opinion

Thinking back across all the 120's you've tried to purchase, how many shares
have you generally been allocated, compared to how many you wanted to get?
Give a rough percentage.

                                 120-1          120-2
                                 79.8%          80.5%
                                 (4.8%)          (3.6%)

Thinking back across all the 120's you've tried to purchase, consider those
120's whose price actually went up 10% or more right after the offering
date, making a nice profit for those who were allocated shares. What percent
of the shares of those have you been allocated?

                                 120-1          120-2
                                 63.9%          58.4%
                                 (8.6%)         (5.1%)

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                         19
                                      Table 4

              Importance of Underwriter and Stockbroker Reputation


Would you be more likely to buy an IPO that is underwritten by a particular
investment bank or investment bank consortium?

                                     IPO-l          IPO-2
                                   58.3% yes      56.1% yes
                                   41.7% no       43.9% no
                                     (7.1%)         (5.0%)

Do you know   the   name of the lead underwriter for this IPO?

                                     IPO-l          IPO-2
                                   39.7% yes      63.8% yes
                                   60.3% no       36.2% no
                                     (6.7%)         (5.2%)


Was a stockbroker influential in your decision whether to buy stock in the
COKPMJY?

                                     IP0-l          IPO-2        CONTROL
                                   41.5% yes      46.5% yes      36.6% yes
                                   58.5% no       53.5% no       63.4% no
                                     (6.8%)         (5.0%)        (3.9%)



Do you generally stay away from IPO's that you think other investors know
wore about unless you think they're a really great buy?

                                     IPO-l           IPO-2
                                   71.7% yes       50.5% yes
                                   28.3% no       49.5% no
                                     (6.6%)          (5.2%)



Note: Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                          20
                                   Table S

                            Investment Theories

Can you state, in a few words, the theory that led you to invest in (or
consider investing in) the COMPANY's stock? Put the theory as you would
have put it to convince a trusted friend to buy the stock           Which of
the following better describes the above theory?

                                  IPO-l           IPO-2       CONTROL
  A theory about the kinds of     41.7%           63.7%        34.6%
  stocks that are becoming         (7.5%)         (5.0%)       (4.2%)
  attractive to investors

  A theory about fundamentals,    56.3%           36.3%        65.4%
  such as profits or dividends     (7.5%)         (5.0%)       (4.2%)

Do you remember thinking that purchasing stock in any initial pubLic
offering is likely to be a good investment regardless of the fundamentals of
the particular company, because these investments generally do well?

                                   IPO-l         IPO-2
                                 33.0% yes     40.6% yes
                                 66.0% no      59.2% no
                                   (7.0%)         (5.0%)

Do you remember thinking that regardless of the fundamental value of the
COMPANY its performance was likely to be determined by the attitudes of
other investors?

                                   IPO-l          IPO-2
                                 39.3% yes     60.0% yes
                                 60.8% no      40.0% no
                                   (7.4%)         (4.9%)


If the IPO market in general had looked less encouraging, that would
have discouraged me from investing in the COMPANY.

                                   IPO-l          IPO-2
                                 43.2% yes     41.5% yes
                                 56.8% no      58.5% no
                                   (8.1%)         (5.4%)

Prior to purchasing (or considering purchasing) stock in the COMPANY, did
you feel that it was important to purchase COMPANY stock right away, due to
some short-lived profit opportunity?

                                   IPO-1          IPO-2        CONTROL
                                 52.0% yes     66.7% yes      33.3% yes
                                 48.0% no      33.3% no       66.7% no
                                   (7.1%)        (4.7%)         (4.0%)

                                          21
                                    Table 6
              Investor   Communications and Information Sources

                                                            influential in your
Was another person you spoke to, besides a stockbroker,
decision whether to buy stock in the COMPANY?

                                   IPO-1          IPO-2           CONTROL
                                 49.1% yes      21.4% yes         32.9% yes
                                 50.9% 110      78.6% no          67.1% no
                                   (6.9%)         (4.1%)           (3.8%)

Was the fact that someone (whom you know or know of) bought stock in the
COMPANY influential in your decision whether to buy?

                                   IPO-l          IPO-2            CONTROL
                                 37.7% yes      14.1% yes         28.1% yes
                                 62.3% no       85.9% no          11.9% no
                                   (6.7%)          (3.5%)           (3.6%)

How many friends, business associates. and other potential investors would
you guess you have talked to about the COMPANY since the time you first
became interested in the COMPANY?

                                   IPO-l           IPO-2           CONTROL
                                    9.23            5.46            19.7
                                   (2.37)          (1.11)          (7.31)
How many of these people would you guess became very likely to purchase
COMPANY stock as a result of your conversations?

                                   IPO-1           IPO-2           CONTROL
                                    2.48            1.69             7.09
                                   (0.80)          (0.41)           (0.50)

 When you made the decision whether to purchase the COMPANY stock, had you
 recently conducted your own analysis of the COMPANY and its likely stock
 performance? This miglit involve using Value Line, other reports,
 computerized databases, etc.
                                  IPO-l          IPO-2          CONTROL
                                23.5% yes      36.8% yes      23.1% yes
                                76.5% no       63.2% no        76.9% no
                                    (S.9%)         (4.9%)            (3.5%)

 Have you done (or read about or talked with others about) any calculations
 of what the true fundamental value of a share in the COMPANY
 was, and compared the price of a share with this value?

                                    IPO-l          IPO-2
                                  37.3% yes      20.4% yes
                                  62.7% no       79.6% no
                                   (6.8%)          (4.1%)
                                           22
                                 References

Beatty, Randolph P. • and Jay R. Ritter. "Investment Banking, Reputation, and
the linderpricing of Initial Public Offerings," Journal of Financial
Economics, 15:213-32, 1986.

Case, Karl E. •and Robert ,1. miller, "The Behavior of Home Buyers in Boom
and Post Boom Markets," Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, HA, 1988.

Ibbotson. Roger C., "Price Performance of Common Stock New Issues," Journal
of Financial Economics, 2:235-72. 1975.

Ibbotson. Roger C., and Jeffrey F. Jaffe, " 'Hoc Issue' Markets," Journal of
Finance, 30:1027-42. september 1975.

Ibbotson, Roger C., Jody L. Sindelar. and Jay R. Ritter, "Initial Public
Offerings." Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, pp. 37-45.

Kahneman, Daniel, Jack Knetsch, and Richard Thaler, "Perceptions •of
Unfairness: Constraints on Wealth Seeking," American Economic Review,

Kabneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of
Decision Under Risk," Econonietrica. 46:263-91, March 1979.

Ritter, Jay R. • "The 'Hot Issue' Market of 1980," Journal of Business.
57:215-40. 1984.

Rock, Kevin, "Why New Issues are Underpriced." Journal of Financial
Economics, 15:187-212, 1986.

Shefrin, Hersch, and Meir Statman, "The Disposition to Sell Winners Too
Early and Ride Losers Too Long: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Finance,
40:777-90, July 1985.

Shiller, Robert J. • and John Pound, "Survey Evidence on Diffusion of
 Interest and Information among Investors." forthcoming, Journal of Economic
 Behavior and OrEanization, 1989.

 Tinic, Seha H., "Anatomy of Initial Public Offerings of Common Stock," flj
 Journal of Finance, Vol. 43, No. 4, Pp. 789-822, September. 1988.




                                       23
