NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXCHANGE

RATE VARIABILITYAND ASSET TRADE

Torsten

Persson

Lars E.O. Svensson

Working Paper No. 2811

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1989

at the Conference on "Exchange Rate Variability" in Toronto,
We thank participants in the confetence, our
25-26, 1987.
discussant Bernard Dumas in particular, participants in seminars at Georgetown University, lIES, International Monetary Fund, Stockholm School of
Economics, University of Helsinki, Paris Macroeconomic Workshop, and Elhanan
Helpman for comments. We are grateful to Kerstin Blomquist and Maria Gil for
secretarial and editorial assistance. This research is part of NBER's
research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Presented
September

NBER Working Paper #2811
January 1989
EXCHANGE RATE VARIABILITY AND ASSET TRADE

ABSTRACT

In discussions about different international monetary arrangements it is often
maintained that exchange rate variability has a negative influence on internationaltrade and
foreign investment. This paper addresses one specific aspect of this general issue, namely the
effect of exchange rate variabilityon capital flows and internationalportfolio diversification.
More precisely, we examine how different monetary policies-- and among those, policies that
aim at stabilizing exchange rates-- determine

the risk characteristics

of nominal assets, and

how these risk characteristics determine international portfolio composition and trade in
assets, when internationalasset markets are incomplete.

Torsten Persson
Institute for International
Economic Studies

tars ED. Svensson
Institute for International

University of Stockholm

University of Stockholm
S-106 91 Stockholm

S-106

91 Stockholm

SWEDEN

Economic

SWEDEN

Studies

I. Introduction
Iii popular discussions about the merits of different international monetary
arrangements one often hears the argument that increased exchange rate variability has a
negative influence on internationaltrade and capital flows. Yet
analyses in the

there arc few serious

international trade and finance literatureof how exchange rate variability

affects trade and-capitalflows. This paper addresses a specific, but also a very basic,
question within this general issue, namely the effect of exchange rate variabilityon capital
flows and internationalportfolio diversification in different assets: How do different rules for
monetary policies- - and amongthose,rulesthat aim at stabilizing exchange rates-- influence

the risk characteristics of nominal assets? How do these risk characteristics in turn affect
internationalportfolio composition and trade in assets, when internationalasset markets are
incomplete?

The motivation for our focus on nominal assets

is evident. From

an empirical point

of view, an overwhelming proportion of international capital flows are in assets denominated
in some currency with fixed nominal interest payments. From

a theoreticalpoint of view,

monetary policy can exert a direct effect only on the risk structure of nominal assets and any
effect on the risk structure of real assets must be indirect via some other non- neutrality.
is also evident

It

that internationalasset markets must be incomplete for our analysis to be

interesting. For if markets were complete the risk characteristics

of nominal assets would

not matter.
Previous literature in the macro tradition on internationalportfolio investment in
monetary open economies has largely relied on the "portfolio balance' approach. That
approach specifies asset demand functions directly and does not derive them from a
maximization problem given the risk- return characteristics of available assets. (See Branson
and Henderson (19S5) for a survey of the portfolio balance approach.) Such an approach is
subject to the "Lucas critique", however. Since our purpose in this paperis precisely to
investigate how differeot policy rules affect the trade pattern in assets, we cannot rely on a
portfolio balance approach.

Previous literature in the finance tradition on international portfolio diversification
has iideed derived asset demands froni first principles, hut has typically treated the
stochastic processes for asset returns and exchange rates as exogenous rather than
determined by monetary policies in general equilibrium (see for instance Fama and Farber
(1979), Crauer, Litzenberger and Stehle (1976), and Kouri (1977)).
An integrationof monetary policies in general equilibrium is indeed undertaken in the

international asset pricing models of Lucas (1982), Stulz (1984) and Svensson (1985). But
the focus in these papers is on prices and exchange rates and not on the trade pattern in
assets. Since a perfectly pooled eqnilibrinm is assumed, the trade pattern is indeed trivial.i
A closer antecedent to the present paper is I-lelpman and Razin (1982) who use a framework
very similar to the one we will use. Their focus is on the optimality properties of different
exchange rate regimes though, not on the associated trade patterns.
Svensson (1988a) studies the effect of monetary policies on the trade pattern in
nominal assets by adopting

an "indirect"

approach, which exploits the general Law of

ComparativeAdvantage,as developed by Deardorff (1980) and Dixit and Norman (1980).
The indirect approach first derives a correlation between the trade pattern in assets and
autarky asset pricedifferences, and then explains autarky asset price differences by
differences in countries technologies, preferences, and monetary policies. Tisis is convenient
because it is not necessary to solve for the explicit equilibrium trade pattern; it is sufficient

to solve for the simpler antarky equihibrinm. But for our purpose the approach has the
disadvantage that the results on tlse trade pattern are only in the form of correlations; tisere
are no specific results on particular assets.

To get specific results, we instead adopt a "direct" approacis. That is, we solve
explicitly for the trade equilibrium and analyze the determinants of tlse aggregate capital

That is, relative to antarky each country (in a two- country world) exports half of
its assets and imports half of the otiser country's assets. Still, capital movements and
correlations between key macro variables like investment, the current account, output, etc.,
can be studied, as in Stockman and Svensson (1987), hot any current and capital account
movements are due exclusively to revaluation of domestically i2a5l assets relative to foreign
based assets, isot to cisauges us the ownership of assets.

account, as well as its composition into trade in distinct nominal bonds. We do this in a
general equilibrium

where price levels, exchange rates, and asset returns are determined by

monetary policies. Most of tIme equilibria differ from the perfectly pooled equilibrium even

when countries have identical preferences. We also consider equilibria when COuntrieS
preferences differ, more precisely when attitudes to risk differ. Our approach relies to a
considerable

extent on a recent paper by Gordon and Varian (1987) which develops an

intertemporalCAPM model of trade in risky assets between barter economies.2
A limitation of our analysis is that we postulate that international financial markets
are incomplete, without attempting to integrate any reason for that inconspleteness— such as
moral hazard,adverseselectionor costly state verification-- into the analysis. Instead we
—

simply assume that the only internationally traded assets are nominal bonds, denominated

in each currency, and indexed bonds. In spite of outputs being random, we rule out trade in
stocks and claims to national Outputs by assumption.3
A new element in our paper is to apply, in the context of the internationaltrade in
assets, Selden's (1978) formulation of preferences. Selden's so called OCE (Ordinal

Certainty Equivalence) approach allows a distinction between intertemporalpreferences and
attitudes towards risk, a distinction that is blurred in the usualexpected utility framework.
Allowing for this distinction may be particularly important in an analysis of international
portfolio choice, since we want to know what capital flows arise from intertemporal
preferences and what ones arise from risk aversion. As far as we know, our paper is the first
2

Gordon and Varians (1986) focus is on the effect of taxes on prices of
internationallytraded assets. They demonstrate, among other things, a result similar to the
optimum— tariff one, nansely that asset terms—of— trade can be affected by taxation so as to
improve national welfare.
Cole (1986) examines the effect of different kinds of assets (ex post securities,
Arrow- Debreu securities, Helpman- Razin equities) on variance and covariance of key real
variables, like Output, consumption, and trade balance.
The restriction on trade in claims on national outputs is perhaps easier to defend
than the restriction on trade in stocks, since the former partly captures the difficulty in
trading claims to human capital. From the viewpoint of financial equilibrium, we thus have
a model where sonic risk is not directly marketable. This is not common in the finance
literature,but an early contribution is Mayers (1973) analysis of non- marketable risk in the
CAPM model.

paper to look at equilibrium capital flows using the OCR formulation.4
The paper is organized in the following way. Section 2 presents the real aspects of
the model and the general equilibrium. Section 3 presents the monetary aspects and the
differeot policy rules for niooetary policy. Section 4 examines the trade pattero in nominal
bonds and indexed hoods for different policy conflguratioos in the world economy. In

particular, it examioes the effects ois the aggregate capital account aod its compositioo of
adoptiog policy rules in the foros of exchaoge rate targets, tisat do limit exchaoge rate
variability. Some conclusionsand possible extensioos are mentioned in Section 5. Ao
appendix includes some technical details.

2. The Real Economy

/

The economyis a monetary economy with cash- in- advance constraints in goods
markets. However, from a presentational point of view, it is easier to postpone the
discussion of monetary issues. Accordingly, this section abstracts entirely from monetary
issues and deals only with the real economy, while money and monetary policy is introduced

in the next section.5
We study a simple general equilibrium model of a world economy with two countries:
the home country and the foreign country. Foreign variables and parameters are indexed
with

an asterisk

.

There

are two time periods, 1 and 2. Period 1 and 2 variables and

parameters are indexed with superscripts. In each period there is one perishable and
internationally traded good, which is produced and consumed by both cOuntries. Period 1
outputs are exogenous and certain, with home and foreign output denoted by y1 and y*'•
Period 2 outputs, y2 and y*2, are also exogenous but uncertain. We call s = (y2,y*2) the

Svensson (1988b) uses the OCE framework when applying the "indirect" approach
of the law of comparative advantage to trade in risky real assets.
5
The modelis similar to the ones of Helpman (1981) (except it Isas uncertainty and
only two periods), Helpman and Rasin (1982) (except it has no uncertainty in period 1),
Lucas (1982) (except it has possibly incomplete markets and only two periods), Persson
(1982, 1984) (except it has uncertainty and only two periods), and Stockman (1983) (except
it lsas cash in advance instead of money in the utility function).

,

state (of the world). The state s is assumed to be bivariate normal, with
variances

and

means

and

and covariance

As discussed in the introduction, international asset marketsare assumed to be
incomplete. In addition to the national moneys, there are only three internationally traded
assets: one indexed bond, and nominal bonds denominated in home and foreign currency.
The inclusion of the indexed bond is for convenience: it greatly simplifies the solution of the
model.
The indexed bond, denoted by subindex 0, has a state- dependent

home— currency

return of P2(s) or a state—dependent foreign currency return of P2(s); P2(s) and P*2(s)
being the home and foreign price level in state s. Its real return- the return in terms of the
one good--is thus riskless and equal to unity in each state. The priceof an indexed bond (in
—

terms of the good) on the period 1 asset market is denoted by q0.7
The nominal bonds are discount bonds paying one unit of currency in each state.
Their real returns are thus risky. The home (cnrrencv) bond has state- dependent real

return d(s) = 1/P2(s) and the foreign (currency) bond has real return d11 = 1/P*2(s). Iii
the remainder of this section, we shall refer to the home and foreign bonds as the risky
assets. \Ve let d(s) denote the return vector on the risky assets, that is d(s) =
make d and d
(d11(s),d(s)). \Ve shall later on— in section 3—— make assunsptions that
jointly normally distributed. Further, we let denote the variance- covariance matrix of the
—

risky asset returns and

and

denote the covariance (vectors) of home and foreign

output with these returns. The asset prices of risky assets (in terms of the good) are denoted
and Q is the asset price vector (QQ).
and
by
Let us now, after these preliminaries, look at the decision problem of the

representativeconsumer in the home country. There are no assets outstanding initially, so
his only source

of income in the first period is from home

output. The home consumer owns

The assurnptioilof normality is, as usual, problematic, since it implies that OutpUts
can be negative with positive probability.
7
The assumptionof one consumption good implies that the same indexed l)OUd is
riskless for all investors.
6

Ii

the borne firm and claims to output (shares) are not traded internationally by assumption.
lie can boy first period consuioption c1 and trade on the international asset market. his
imports, and thus his eisd— of— period holdings, of riskiess indexed bonds are denoted by z0,
and

his insports of risky assets (home and foreign bonds), by 5m and 5n Lettingz denote

the import vector of risky assets,

zm'zn' we can write the consnmer's period

1

bodget

constraint as

+ q0z0 + Q'z = y1,
where Q'z denotes the inner product QiZm +
c1

(2.la)

In period 2 he consomes in state a his income from period 2 ontpot and the returnson

his assets8
c2(s) = y2 + a0 + d(s)'z.
(2.lh)
The consumer's preferences are formulated as a special case of Selden (1978, 1979).
Following Selden's approach, we separate time preferences (intertemporal preferences) and

risk preferences (attitude towards risk) of the consumer in the following way. The firn
preferences are given

by the intertemporal and additively separable utility function
U(c') + fiU(c2),

where fi is a discount factor, 0

risky period

2

(2.2a)

c < 1, and where c2 denotes the certainty equivalent

of

consonsption. The risk preferences are given by the atemporalutility function

C)

V(c'(s)), by which the certainty equivalent period 2 consumption is defined as
V(c2)

= EV(c2(s)),

(2.2b)

whereE is the expectations operator.9 Further, we assume that there isconstant absolute
risk aversion,

Since outputs may be negative with positiveprobability by our assumption that
outputs are normally distributed, we have a possibility of bankruptcy if consumption is
constrained to be non- negative. We ignore this problem by letting consumption be negative
if necessary.
Selden (1978, 1979) does not restrict the time preferences to be additivelyseparable.
When the time preferences are additiviy separable, and the risk prefereisces coincide with the
time preferences (us the sense that the functions U( ) and V(S) are identical), the
preferences are identical to expected- utility von Neunsann- hilergenstern preferences.
S

7>0.

V(c2(s))

(2.2c)

that out puts and asset returns are normally
The specification
in(2.2)
and(lie
assumption
distributed imply

= 2 - 7cJ2,
where c2 is the mean and

(2.3)

the variance of period 2 consumption. Thus, the exact

exl)ression for the risk premium" depends only on (lie first two moments of period 2
consumption. Given the structure of the model, these moments satisfy

= -,2 + + az, and
z0
=
z'az + 2oldz.
Ccc chh +

(2.4a)
(2.4b)

The above specification of preferences and budget constraints leads to (lie following
first- order conditions for the home country's imports of riskless assets (indexed bonds),

f31J(c2)/U(cl)

(2.5)

q0,

and for the imports of risky assets (nominal bonds),

a - 7hd - 7CZ — q,
whereq is the vector of relative asset prices q = (qqj1)

(2.6)

(Q1/q0,Q11/q0). Repeating an
exactlyanalogous argument for the foreign country, leads to analogous first- orderconditions

=

q0,

a- 7f-7z=q.

and

(2.5*)
(2.6*)

We can now study equilibrium prices and quantities in the first- period asset markets.
Equilibrium

in the markets for risky assets requires world imports of both assets to

be zero,

viz

z+z*=0,

(2.7)

which together with the first order conditions (2.6) yields

Flere,

a 1/(1/7 +

1/)

q = a - 7wC\Vd.
(2.s)
is a measure of the world- wide absolute rate of risk aversion and

wd is the covariance (vector) between world output, w2 = 1,2 + y2, and the returns on
risky assets. The equilibrium (relative) prices on risky assets are thus determined in a very

simple way. Using the expression (2.8) together with the first— order conditions, we can solve
for the equilibrium import vector of risky assets (nominal bonds) as
z= a

where

as (1/7)/1/7) + (1/p)) and n

(aafd oahd),
a (1/7*)/1/7)

(2.9)

+ (1/p)) are normalized

measures of absolute risk tolerance (the reciprocal of risk aversiou). The equilibrium import
of risky assets thus depends on tlse attitudes towards risk in the two countries, on tlse risk
properties of the assets, and on the covariance betweee asset returns and outputs.

it is slightly more complicated to represent equilibrium in the market

for riskiess

assets (indexed bonds). To do that, let us define "certainty equivalent risky period 2 income
(net of indexed bonds)" x2 by
x2 a c2 - z0.

(2.10)

We can express x2 as

x=y+d'z-

(2.lla)
7Ucc/2
where the variance of second-period consumption, jygn equilibrium in the markets for risky
assets, satisfies

ahh a(2- a)ohdi ahd + 20*2a1d5 °d + a*2afdo
Next, define the "demand pricefunction" q0(z0) implicitly by
Ccc

=

q

flU

=

(z +

aid.

(2.llb)

x )
,

-

(2.12)

q0(z0 + q'z))
with x2 given by (2.11) and z given by (2.9). Thus,
q0(z0) is the demand price for riskless

U(y

assets given equilibrium in the markets for risky assets.

It is easy to show that the condition

for q0(•) to be downward sloping is

U/Uc < q(z0 + q'z),
where

U

denotes

Ujy'

-

q0(z0

+ q'z)),

(2.13)

etc. The left- hand side of the inequalityis

proportional to the intertemporal substitutioneffect and the right-hand side is proportional

to the income or "terms- of- trade" effect. Thus, only a strongly positive income effect-- due
to a largetotalasset export- - can make
) positivelysloped. The foreign demand price
q0(

for indexed bonds

q(z) is similarly defined.

Then,

q( ) is downward sloping under the

same coiiditioii that

=

UJtJ* with

is downward sloping, only that

(10

U(y*l -

q0(z0

the left— hand side is replaced by

+ qz)), etc. We assume that condition (2.13) and its

foreign analog are fulfilled.
Since

=

-

z0

in equilibrium, the condition for equilibrium in the market for riskless

assets can be written as
q0(z0)

=

(2.14)

q(-z0).

This condition can be solved for the equilibrium home country import

of indexed bonds.

Under the assumptions about the slopes of the demand price functions, the equilibrium is
unique.
\Ve note that we can write the budget constraint (2.la) as
(c1-y1)
and interpret it as a period

1

+ q0(z0 + q'z) = 0,

(2.15)

balance- of- payments- constraint. The first term is the current

account deficit and the second is the capital account deficit, consisting

of the value of

indexed bonds import q0z0 and of nominal bonds import q0qz = Q'z. In the two-period
framework the capital account is relative to autarky; it is not the change in overall holding
of foreign assets from period to period.

3. Money and Monetary Policy

We introduce money by postulating cash- in- advance constraints in goods markets.
Our way of modeling these constraints follows closely the approach pioneered by Helpman
(19S1) and used in many subsequent papers in international finance. A similar formulation

to the one we will use here, also in the context

of

a two- period uncertainty model, has

recently been used by Svensson (l9SSa), and we refer the reader to that paper for a detailed
discussion on the institutionalsetting. The implications of money market equilibrium (with
binding liquidity constraints) and goods marketequilibrium is that the period 1 price levels
in the home and foreign countries obey the simple quantity- theory equations

P1 = M1/y1,

and

P = N'/y,

(3.1)
(3.1*)

10

where M' and

N' denotethe home and foreign period

1

money supply. The period

'/'

1

exchange rate follows from the law of one price,

e' =

.

(3.2)

Similarly, the period 2 state- dependent price levels satisfy

P2(s) = M2(s)/y2, and

(3.3)

= N2(s)/y*2,

(3.3)

and the state- dependent period 2 exchange rate is given by
e2(s) = P2(s)/P*2(s).

(3.4)

The above simplistic formulation is obviously very restrictive. There is
uncertainty abont relative prices, and

PPP holds.

But

no

it is also very useful from a modeling

point of view and allows us to focus on how monetary policy affect real returns on nominal
assets. Since outputs are exogenous, monetary policy in the two countries will determine the
price levels and the exchange rate in each state. This means that once monetary policy is
formulated, the risk- returo properties of home and foreign currency bonds are also
determined and can be taken as given in the real equilibrium that we studied in the previous
section. The real returns on home and foreign bonds are by equations (3.3) simply given by
dm(5) = 1/P2(s)

= y2/M2(s) and

dn(5) = 1/P*2(s)

(3.5)

y*2/N2(s).

The resulting recursivity of the model simplifies the analysis considerably. If, for instance,
money demand would depend on consumption instead of on output, the recursivity would
break down.
Monetary policies in the home and foreign country determinethe period

2 money supplies. In the subsequent

1

and period

study of risk and asset trade, we shall distinguish a few

benchmark policy rules for period 2 monetary policies. The benchmark policy rules all have
the property that the target variable is stabilized in the sense of becoming
state- independent.
The first policy rule is when the government pursues a monetary

target. In our model, this requires that

the money supply is niade

or a nominal GDP
state- independent. It

11

Follows from (3.3)

that under such a target, the home government sets
M2(s)

vliere

Ni is

= NI2,

for all s,

the target for nomnisal GDP. As can he

seen

(3.6)

from (3.3), this results in home

nominal GDP, P2(s)y2, being constant across states of the world. Analogously, foreign
nominal GDP targeting requires
N2(s) = N2 for all s.
Under the second policy rule, the government PU5UCS an inflation

(3.6*)

taret.

From

(3.3), this policy requires the home government to set the second- period money supply in a

state- dependent way, namely
M2(s)
where

r

= (1+r)P'y2, for all s,

(3.7)

is the chosen inflation target. Hence the implicit period 2 price level target is

P2(s) = 2 (l+ir)P1 for all s. (In our framework, an inflation target and a period 2 price
level target are equivalent.) A foreign inflation target implies
N2(s) = (1+g*)P*ly2, for all s.

(37*)
rate
we
targets. Here, must
Finally, the governments may adopt exchange
whether
the
two
do
or
do
not
coordinate
their policies. An
distinguish
governments
uncoordinated exchange rate target adopted by the home government, from (3.3) and (3.4)
requires it to set the money supply in the following, state- dependent way
M2(s)
where

is

= N2(s)y2/y*2, for all s,

(3.8)

the target value of the period 2 exchange rate. If instead the two governments

agree to coordinate their policies and adopt a coordinated exchange rate target

,

they have

one remainingdegreeof freedom.The remaining degree of freedom is used to set the world
money Supply 112(s)
(3.4),

M2(s)

+ N2(s), which is possibly state dependent.

From (3.3) and

it follows that, given the world money supply 112(5), the two individual money

supplies must

be set according to
M2(s)
9

N(s)

= JJ2(5)y2/yV2,

for all s, and
9
9w)
= I.1(s)y*ey , for all s.

(3.9)
(3.9*)

Each country's money supply has to be set in proportion to that country's share in world

12

output in state a. The coordinated exchange rate target can be associated with either a
world nominal GDP target or a world inflation target. A world nominal (IDP target implies
112(5)

=

112

for all s,

(3.10)

which results in a constant world nominal GDP, p2(5)yw2 = 112 for all s. A world inflation

j'et, with an implicit period 2 world price level target P2(s) = P2 = P1(1 +z) for all a,
implies
H2(s) = p2w2 for all s.

That is, world money supply

is set proportional

(3.11)

to world output.

In this model it does not matter whether the governments undertake open market
operations or foreign exchange interventions to affect price levels and exchange rates. The
only thing that matters is the resulting effect on money supplies. There are two reasons for

this. First, there is is Ricardian equivalence, since consumers have rational expectations and
are as long- lived as the economy, and since lumpsum net transfers are available. Second,

the transactions structure is such that each country's representative consumer chooses to
begin period 2 with zero holdings of the other country's currency. Then any seignorage
collected by each government is a tax on their own citizens only. See Svensson (1988a) for

further discussion of this. The consequencefor our analysis is that we need only consider
monetary policies in terms of direct money supply rules.
This completes

the specification of the different possible rules for monetary

policy.

As we shall see in the next section, the risk properties of the available nominal bonds hinge
crucially upon which combination of policy rules that the two countries adopt.

4. Asset Trade

In this section

we shall examine the aggregate capital account and the underlying

trade pattern in nominal bonds and indexed bonds for the different stylized policy rules
mentioned in section 3. In particular, we shall compare the trade pattern in nomiual and
indexed bonds (zns, zn and z0) and the capital account deficit (q0(z0 + q'z)) in a situation
wisen the homeand foreign country pursues specified monetary policies, and in a situation

13

when the home country insteadadoptsan uncoordinatedexchangerate target. At the end
we shall also discuss what happens when the two countries adopt a coordinated exchange

rate target.

a) Uome Exchange Rate Tarct vs. hlonie Nominal (11)P target
with a Forcien Nominal GDP Target
\Ve start with the situation when the home and foreign countries both have an
individual nominal GDP target, as given by equations (3.6). Substitution of equations (3.6)

into the real return expressions (3.5) reveals that with
vector d and the variance/covariance matrix

-

-9

d=

y
_*9 and

y

these policy rules the expected return

are given by

=

a5 °hf

°if ff

.

In other words, home and foreign nominal bonds becomeequivalent to claims

(4.1)

to homeand

foreign Output, respectively. -We denote this circumstance by
m=h and n=f.

(4.2)

In the interest of brevity, we shall somewhat imprecisely refer to claims to home and foreign
outputs as home and foreign stocks. Substitutionof (4.1) into (2.9) immediately gives tile
trade pattern in nominal bonds, namely

z1 =

-a<0

and

= a> 0.

(4.3)

The home country exports home bonds and imports foreign bonds. Since home and foreign
bonds are equivalent to home and foreign stocks, the homeCountry diversifies its portfolio

by effectively trading homestocks for foreignstocks. In equilibrium the home country then
holds

a portfolio of both home and foreign stocks.
Substitutionof (4.2) in (2.8) gives tile equilibrium prices (relative to indexed bonds)

of home and foreign bonds,

=
q11

=2-

and q

=

qf

= y2 - 7Wwf

(4.4)

Here, q11 and qf denote the (hypothetical) prices of home and foreign stocks and °',vli and

wf denote the covariance between world period 2 output, w2 = y2 + y*2, and home and

14

foreign outlnlt, respectively. We use (4.3) and (4.4) to compute Z: the aggregate trade in
nominalbonds
Z a ('z =

—

Calf

= q11 + fif is the (hypothetical)

where

0Cll

=

rl

(4.5)

price (relative to the indexed bond) of claims to

world poriod 2 output. \Ve see that the home country effectively holds a share a of claims to
home output (the term

oq),

and that the aggregate trade in nominal bonds is the difference

if

between that portfolio and an endowment consisting of home stocks (the term q15). Tins
of course an example of a familiar mutual- fund resuk fu the CAPM model.

Numerous asymmetries between countries can he examined. In order to restrict the

numberof cases we limit the differences between countries to period 2 outputs being
imperfectly correlated, and to attitudes towards risk. Let us therefore assume that the
countries have the same period 1 output, and that the marginal probability distribution of

their period 2 output is the same, but that their period 2 output may be less than perfectly
correlated. More specifically, unless otherwise stated, we now assume
y1 =y , -2
y =y ,and abh= aff.
(Al)
It follows directly from (Al) that hf' the covariance between home and foreign period 2

1

output, is bounded by - 9hh e)f

hh

We shall also assume, unless otherwise stated, that the countries have the same time
preferences, that is the same subjective discount factor and intertemporalutility function,

fl=

and

U(.)=U*(.).

(A2)

Finally, we shall assume either that the two countries have the same absolute risk
aversion,
7 = 7* (that is,

a = a* = 1/2),

(A3a)

or that the homecountry is more risk averse,

7> y (that is, a* > 1/2 > a).
= qf aisd hence
Underassumption(Al) we have
=
Z
(a a*)q.

(A3b)

(4.6)

It follows directly from (4.6) and (4.3) that when the countries have tise same risk

15

aversion, (A3a), aggregate trade in nominal bonds is zero and the home country effectively
exports and imports exactly half of the home and foreign stocks,
(4.7)

Z=0andz=-z11-1/2.
This is of course the familiar perfectly pooled equilibrium.

When the home country is more risk averse, (A3b), the home country in the
aggregate exports nominal bonds, imports less of foreign bonds, and exports more of home
bonds,
Z < 0. z1 <- 1/2, and U

< Zn < 1/2.

(4.8)

Let us next examine the determinants of the trade in indexed bonds, z0.
Obviously, when the countries have the same risk aversion, there is zero trade in indexed
bonds,

= 0,

(4.9)

since the countries are assumed to have the same intertemporal preferences.

It follows that

the capital account is balanced,

=
(4.10)
q0(z0 + Z) 0.
is
more
risk
indexed
bonds
are
When the home country
averse,
imported by the home
Country,
z0

> 0.

(4.11)

We can show (4.11) by comparing the home and foreign demand price for indexed
bonds when no indexed bonds are traded, that is.

(O) and (0), from (2.12) with

coo
c*2c+0

= c(x2
=

and

where we have exploited (A2) and Z* = - Z. From the definitions of x2 and
have x2 -

x2 = (cs. *)(,v2 _

7\V17wW/2)

< 0, where

(4.12)

x2 in (2.11), we

is the variance of world output.

q0Z > y + q0Z. Since U(.) is decreasing, it follows that q0(0)
which implies z0 > 0 by (2.13).

Further, by (4.8) y

-

>

Intuitively, the more risk averse home country has a lower certainty equivalent risky
period 2 income (x2 < xt2). Absent trade in indexed bonds, the home country has higher

16

aeriod

consumption, since it is a net exporter of risky assets. Interteniporal substitution

1

and equal time preferences then implies that the home country imports iidexed bonds to
increase period 2 consumption and ricerease period 1 cOnsumption.
What can ve say about the capital account deficit q3(z0 + Z) when the home country
is more risk averse? Indexed bonds are imported, whereas nominal bonds are exported.

What is the net? It can actually be densunstrated (see the appendix) that there is a capital
account deficit,

+ Z) > 0.

(4.13)

The import of indexed bonds dominates over the export of nominal bonds. The home

country's higher risk aversion leads it to save more than the foreign country, which
translatesinto positive net foreign investment.
Let us next consider the situation when the foreign country still pursues

a nominal

GDP target, but the home countryinstead pursues an (uncoordinated) exchange rate target,
as specified

in (3.8). It follows from (3.5) that home nominal bonds then get the same risk

characteristics as foreign nominal bonds so that these two assets become perfect substitutes.
Foreign nominal bonds have, as before, risk characteristics equivalent to foreign stocks. In

addition to the indexed bonds, thereis now effectively only one risky asset, namely foreign
stocks. We denote this by

m=

n

= f.

(4.14)

Since home and foreign nominal bonds are perfect substitutes, only aggregate trade in

themmatters, and the particular composition of aggregate trade into trade in Isome and
foreign bonds is irrelevant. In terms of the real model in Section 2, we must then regard tbe

trade vector of riskyassets z as one- dimensional. It

is straightforward

to verify, that all the

expressions in Section 2 still hold when the relevant vectors and matrices are reinterpreted
as scalars, however. For example, expected dividends and the varianceof dividends on risky
nominal bonds are given by the scalars

=

and a =

Using (4.15) in (2.8) and (2.9) we directly get

Uff.

(4.15)

17

= zf = - Oaf/uff and i = = v qf
Cs

7ef,

(4.16)

where z denotes aggregate trade a noininal bonds.
Under assumption (A3a) equaliisk aversion, we have

=

(1

where z is nonnegative by (Al); recall that

(T1fIffff)/2
17hf

<

Uff

=

(4.17)

0,
under

(Al). The home country

diversifies its portfolio by importing the single risky asset, nominal bonds.

It follows, of

course, that aggregate trade in nominal bonds is nonnegative,
Z = qz 0.

(4.18)

It is easy to show that the importof nominal bonds is financed by export of indexed
bonds,

< 0.

(4.19)

What about the capital account? It can indeed be shown (see the appendix) that the
capital account

is balanced,

=
(4.20)
q0(z0 + Z) 0.
If instead the home country is more risk averse, (A3b), we see from (4.16) that it is
no longer clear that the home country unambiguously imports nominal bonds. If Cs*o.f <
we have z

and the larger

<

0,

that is, the home country exports nominal bonds. The closer

a relative to

Cs,

to

the morelikely is z < 0. If this indeed happens, nominal

bonds (equivalent of foreign stocks) is a bad hedge for home output risk and it is better for
the homecountry to insure itselfby importing indexed bonds, which import is financed by

export of nominal bonds. \Vith regard to the aggregate capital account, it can be shown (see
the appendix) that

sgn q0(z0 + Z) = sgn (7- 7*)[(1+z)_c/2

+ a*(ff+11f)z].

(4.21)

We see that if z > 0, the capital account is definitely in deficit. But if z < 0-- because,as
explainedabove, ehf is positive and close to

and

>> a--the capital

account may

instead be in surplus. In the latter case, a change from a nominal GDP target to an
exchange rate target thus causes the capital account to change sign.
In summary, a change from a nominal GDP rule to an exchange rate rule, when the

18

foreign country has a nominal ('.DP rule, clearly implies a different composition of the
capital account. If the two countries have the same risk aversion, the aggregate capital
account is unchanged at zero. But

if the home country is more risk averse,

the capital

account may change from deficit to surplus.

h) Ilonie Exchange Rate Target vs. Home TnflationTarget
with a Foreign Nominal GDP Target
We next look at the case when the foreign country pursues a nominal GDP target,

but the home country has an ioflation target. Then home bonds are perfect substitutesfor
indexed bonds, whereas foreign bonds remain equivalent to foreign stocks,

m=O,n=f.
It follows that the effective availability

of assets is equivalent

(4.22)

to the case in (a) when

the home country follows an exchange rate rule. Assume now that the home country instead
shifts to an exchange rate target. That makes risky nominal home and foreign bonds perfect
substitutes,

m=n=f.

(4.23)

Therefore, under our assumption that there are indexed bonds, the same array of assets is
effectively available, namely indexed bonds and risky nominal foreign bonds. It follows that
the equilibrium is effectively the same, as when the homecountry pursues an inflation
target, although the denomination of the traded assets may change.

c) Home Exchange Rate Target vs. Home Inflation Target
with a Foreign Inflation Target
\Vhen the home and foreign countries initially pursueinflation targets, home and
foreign bonds are both equivalent to indexed bonds. There is effectively only one asset
traded, the indexed bond. In our notation
m=n =

0.

(4.24)

When the countries have the same risk aversion, it follows (since the two countries

19

arc equal in all other respects) that there is no trade and the capital account is balanced,

= 0.

(425)

\Vlieu the home country is more risk averse, we have
x2 -

x= (
-

-

7*)/2 <0,

(4.26)

(we have used (Al)). Absent trade in indexed bond, the certainty equivalent period 2
consumption is lower in the house country. It follows that the house country will import
indexed bonds,

> 0,

(4.27)

and there will be a capital account deficit.
When each country pursues an inflation target, the exchange rate is constant. 1-lence

it makes no difference if the home country instead pursues an exchange rate target.
d) Home Exchange Bate Target vs. Tlorne Nominal (3DP Target
with a Foreign Inflation Target
When the foreign country pursues

an inflation target and the home country pursues a

nominal GDP target, the situation is of course the mirror image of the one discussed under
b) above. That is,

m=h,n=0.

(4.28)

The trade pattern in assets is determined by the same conditions as when the home country
has an exchange rate target under a).

If the home country instead pursues an exchange rate target, we have

= n = 0,

(4.29)

that is, the availability of assets is equivalent to the one discussed under c) above.
If the two countries are equally risk averse, (A3a), the adoption of an exchange rate
target does not change net foreign investment: it follows from the results above that the
capital account stays at zero.

Flosvever, gross

trade in assets is different.

\Vhule

the home

country trades (exports or imports) nominal bonds for indexed bonds with an inflation rule,
gross trade is indetermisiate and may very well he zero with an exchange rate rule.

20

If the home country is more risk averse, (A3b), the situation with an inflation rule is
not exactly the mirror image of h), since now the more risk averse home country can
effectively trade its own stocks (rather than the other country's stocks as in b)). The more
risk averse home country will always export its stocks, hence

z=z1<OandZ=qz<0.

(4.30)

By syllunetry one can derive an analog to (4.21),
sgn q0(z0

It follows

+ Z) = sgn (- 7*)[(1 zll)2h/2 - 0(hll+hf)Zll].

(4.31)

from (4.30) and (4.31) that the capital account is in deficit,

(4.32)
q0(z0 + Z) > 0.
of
home
nominal
Thereis import of indexed bonds, and that dominates over export risky
bonds.

With the exchange rate rule, there is

also

a capital account deficit, as under c) above.

e) Coordinated Exchanse Rate Tareets
Let us finally consider two cases of coordinated exchange rate targets. The first one

trivial, namely when both countries, in additionto the common exchange rate target,
pursues a world inflationtarget instead of individual inflation targets. It is easy to see that
is

the asset availability in this case is equivalent to the one under c) above when both countries
have individual inflation targets and the homecountryshifts to an individual exchange rate
target. As under c) asset trade is thus unaffected by the change to a common exchange rate
target.
The other case is when the homeand foreign countries adopt a world norninai GDP
target in addition

to the common exchange rate target. Then home and foreign bonds are

perfect substitutesfor risky claims to world output,
m = n = w,

(4.33)

with expected dividends and variance

w2 = 2

2 and

Using this and (Al) in (2.9), we have

= Chll + _}f + ff.

(4.34)

21

z=

z = (a - o*)a1/a

= (a - n*)/2.

(4.35)

When the countries have the same i'isk aversion, there is obviously no trade in either
risky nominal bonds or indexed bonds, and a balanced capital account:
z = z0 = 0.

(4.36)

It is natural to compare this outcome with the outcome when the two countries initially
pursue individual nominal GOP targets, w1iich is the first case analyzed under a). There the
capital account was also balanced, but there was gross trade in nominal bonds: the home
country exporting home bonds and importing foreign bonds.
When the honie country is more risk averse, (A3b), the adoptionof a common
exchange rate target makes the home countryexport risky nominal bonds
z

<0

(4.37)

(unless home and foreign Output are perfectly negatively correlated).

What about trade in indexed bonds, and the sign of the capital account? We know
from the case discussed under heading c) that in the absence of trade in risky assets, there
would be import of indexed bonds, and a capital account deficit. Indeed, it can be shown
(see appendix) that indexed bonds are imported,
z0

> 0,

(4.38)

and that indexed bonds import dominates over nominal bonds export so that that capital
account is in deficit,

> 0.
(4.39)
q0(z0 + Z)
In this case adopting an exchange rate target for monetary policies would not cause a
reversal of the capital account.

5. Conclusions
\Ve have investigated how different monetary policies affect the risk- return
characteristics of nominal assets and how this in turn affects real decisions-- savings and
portfolio allocations-- in an incomplete markets setting. Our results indicate that one should

not hope for any unambigous answers to the main question: how less exchange rate

22

variability influences trade in assetsandnet foreign investment. Depending on tbe initial
policies

at borne awl abroad, a monetary policy aiming at reduced exchange rate variability

may imply very different effects on the trade pattern in assets. Net foreign investment
may- - on the one extreme- - not be affectedat all, or- - on the other extreme— - change sign:
from positive to negative, or from negative to positive.
Nevertheless, we believe that the general question that we have addressed- - how real

trade is affected by monetary and exchange rate policy in an uncertain world with
incomplete markets- - is worth pursuing further. We can think of a number of extensions of
the simplistic framework in this paper. Withinthe context of our model, we assumed the
existence of indexed bonds throughout the analysis. Tius was mostly for analytical
convenience; the model becomes muchharderto solve if there are no indexed bonds.

the assumption that indexed bonds are traded is not innocuous; it does affect
in several of the cases that we considered. But we do believe that an extension

Unfortunately,

the results

without indexed bonds is feasible, however, and that such an extension is both well

motivatedand interesting. It

is well motivated because international

trade in indexed bonds

is not empirically significant. It is interesting because without indexed bonds savings and
portfolio decisions can not be separated

at all.

The trade patterns and capital accounts discussed in our model are relative to
autarky. This means that the "capital account"

is somewhat

a misnomer. Discussions of

capital movements meaning changes in portfolios over time requires a framework with
several periods, which raises many well known technical difficulties.1S Also, the comparisons
between different policy regimes are of course comparisons of different equilibria with given
regimes, not analysis of changes over time in equilibria from changes over time in policy. A
proper analysis of the latter is also associated with well known difficulties.

It may be that

one can make some progress ems the effect of policy changes by analyzing our model witis

arbitrary (instead of zero) initial portfolios, and then letting the initial portfolios represent

15

See Dumas (1986) for a model where portfolio adjustment takes place over time.

23

the Steady— slate portfolios

ii

particular policy regimes.

The niudel could he extended to include investment in physical capital, so as to make
possible a richer analysis of the link between exchange rate risk and foreign invcstment.11 Oie
could also include more

than one good and analyze the connection between exchange rate

risk and foreign (ateinporal) ti ade.1a It is sometimes argued that the main effect of nominal
exchange rate variabilityis to cause real exchange rate variability, that is, relative goods
price variability. For exchange rate risk to be associated with relative price risk one has to
incorporate predetermined or 'sticky' goods prices, however.
The sources of uncemainty in the model is period 2 outputs and possibly period 2
money supplies. One may wonder what effect uncertainty in money demands would have.
It is not difficult to incorporate uncertain money demand velocity as a separatesource of
uncertainty. It is easy to see that the benchmark monetary policies of stabilizing nominal
GOP, stabilizing inflation/theprice level, and stabilizing nominal exchange rates have
exactly the same consequences as when velocity is certain. These policy rules have well
defined effects on the real returns on nominal bonds independently of what type of shocks
are present. 1-lowever, with uncertain velocity a passive policy rule of constant money
supply is no longer equivalent to stabilizing nominal GOP, and in that case nonainal bonds
are no longer equivalent to claims to output.
Since the agents are optimizing and there are well- defined utility levels, it is
tempting to use the model to discuss the welfare consequences of monetary policies. This
should be done with great care, though. Our setup with incomplete markets has an inherent
bias against exchange rate stabilizing policy, since such policy generally reduces the number
of available assets and hence reduces the scope for risk- sharing. Of course, it should also he
remembered that our model does riot incorporate the informational frictions that make

internationalfinancial markets incomplete. Any normative analysis would therefore rest on

lmodel ofGordon
and Varian (1986) do include physical investment in their real one-good
asset trade.
Grossman and Razin (19S5) discuss how real trade flows are affected by uncertainty
in a Ricardia.n trade model where asset (stock) markets are incomplete.
12

24

shaky foundations.
One may, of course, also criticize our positive analysis on the sanse grounds. Put

differeoty,ee own critleisni of the portfolio balance approach for not inclnding individual
maxinlzatiooand shns being subject to the "Locas Critique', can

be made of our owil

analysis for not including the reasons why markets are incomplete. Given the svell known
difficulties to conic up with

a satisfactory

explanation for the existence of nominal contracts,

we suspect that an attempt to derive the asset structure from first principles would violate
the starting point for our whole analysis, namely the absointe preponderance of oominal
contracts in international financial markets.

25

A I)DOfldix
We

want to derive (4.13),

account is zero,

(4.20) and (4.21). Suppose temporarily that the capital

that is,
=-

(Al)

Z.

Then we have

=
q0(-Z)
U(x2 + Z)/tJ(y') and q0(Z)
Under assumptions (Al) and (A2) it fohows that

= Uc(x*2-

Z)/U(y).

(A.2)

(x2 - Z)] = sign [2Z - (x2 - x*2)1. (A.3)
First consider the case (4.2): m = n = f. Unrler assumption (Al), it follows from

sign q0(z0 + Z)

=-

sign [(x2 + Z) -

11,

(4.4) and (4.5) that
Z=

(

'

=

*)q1
after
as
discussed
immediately
(4.12),
Also,
w
2
w2
2
*
x x =
7
(A.5)
where

the last equality follows since

(

*)(2 7Wa)

eww! = (o

=

(A.4)

-2 w
)(2y - 7

*

+ eff + 2ehf = 2(ehlI+f) =

Thus, we get
2Z - (x2x*2) =

(*

(A.6)

w)7"eWh.

Substituting (AG) into (A.3) proves (4.13).
Next consider the case (4.14): m = n = f. From (4.15) and the definition (2.4), the
variances of consumption are

=

+ Zc1f + 2zehf

= iYff+ zaff

and

(A.7)
(A.7*)

2ZJ1f.

From (A.7) and the definitions of x2 and x*2, one can, after some manipulations, derive

x2 -

x2 = 2z(2- 7Cf) -

(l+z)2eff-

The expression for qf = q in (4.16) and the definition of

x2 -

It follows that

x2 = 2Z -

(

(- ')2z.

(AS)

allow us to rewrite (A.S) as

7*)((l+z)2U/2 - u*zef).

(A.9)

26

2Z - (x2x*2) =

(

-

)((1+z)2eff/2

azcf),

(A.10)

which together with (A.3) pi.oves (4.20) and (4.21).
It is easy to verify that if the conditions in the text are fulfIlled, q0(z0 + Z) may well
be negative

in this case. To see this substitute the equilibrium value of z from

(4.21). As an example let the critical parameter values be

7

(4.16) into

= and hf = 7Of/S.

2,

1

Straightforwardcalculationsshow that q0(z0 + Z) = - 1/8.
Let us finally consider the case m = n = w and demonstrate(4.3S)and (4.39). Under

(Al) we have

a = yV2 = 22, =

=

2(allll+ehf),

and eliw = fw =

hh+Jhi

(All)

It follows from (2.8) and (2.9) that
q=

= 2y2 - 2(%l5+hf) and

(A.12)

z=

(A.13)

(*)/9

This and somealgebra gives

_9,(

_9
2Z - (x - x*_) =

We have z2

1/4 by 1if

9

7)(°ll + %f)[Olth/2(o•l.ih+hf) - z].

1/4 by (A.13) (z2 <

(A.14)

1/4 for 7> 0 and 'K > 0), and we have

hh (cllIl/2(llh+elIf) > 1/4 for 1if < hh)

Hence, for either positive

absolute risk aversion or home and foreign output less than perfectly correlated, we get

2Z- (x2- x*2) >0,
and this together with (A.3) implies (4.3S) and (4.39).

(A.15)

27

Hefereiiees
Cole,

II.,

1986, Financial

StnictUFe and International Trade, mi reo.

Hransoii, \V., and I). henderson, 1985, The Specification and Influence of Asset Markets, in
Jones,

11.

and P. Kenen (eds.), Handbook of International Economics, Vol 2,

(North— I loll a id, A ins terdani)

Deardorff, A.V., 1980, The General Validity of the Law of ComparativeAdvantage,
Journal of Political Economy 8S, 941- 957.

Dixit, AN., and V.

Norman, 19S0, Theoryof International Trade, (Nisbet and Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge).
Dumas, B., 1986, Two- Person Dynamic Equilibrium: Trading in the Capital Market,

NBER Working Paper No. 2016.
Fama, E.F., and A. Farber, 1979, Money, Bonds, and Foreign Exchange, American
Economic Review 69, 639-649.
Gordon,

RH., and hR. Varian, 1986, T&xation of Asset Income in The Presence of a

World Securities Market. NBER Working Paper No.

1994.

Grossman, G. and A. Razin, 1985, The Pattern of Trade in a Ricardian Model with

Country- Specific Uncertainty, International Economic Review 26.
Grauer, F.L.A., R.I-I. Litzenberger, and R.E. Stehie, 1979, Sharing Rules and Equilibrium
in an International Capital Market under Uncertainty, Journal of Financial
Economics 3, 233- 256.
Helpman, E., 1981, An Exploration of the Theory of Exchange- Rate Regimes, Journal of

Political Economy 89, 865- 890.
Helpman, E., and A. Razin, 1982, A Comparison of Exchange Rate Regimes in the
Presence of Imperfect Capital Markets, International EconomicReview 23, 365- 388.
Helpman, E., and A.Razin, 1984, The Role of Saving and Investmentin Exchange Rate

Determinationunder Alternative Monetary Mechanisms, Journal of Monetary
Economics 13, 3307- 325.

Noun, P.J.K., 1977, International Investment and Interest Rate Linkages under Flexible

28

Exchange Hates, in: R.Z. Aliber, ed., 'Flie Political Economy of Monetary Reform,
New York.
Lucas,

RE., Jr., 1982, Interest Ratesand Currency

Prices in a Two- Country \Vorld,

Journal of Monetary Economics 10, 335- 359.
Mayers, D., 1973, Nonmarketable Assets and the Dctermination of Capital Asset Prices in

the Absence of a Riskiess Asset, The Journal of Business 46, 258- 267.
Persson, T., 1982, Studies of Alternative Exchange Rate Systems: An Intertemporal
General Equilibrium Approach, lIES Monograph No. 13, (lIES, Stockholm).
Persson, T., 1984, Real Transfers in Fixed Exchange Rate Systems and the International
Adjustment Mechanism, Journal
Selden, L., 1978, A New Representation

of Monetary Economics 13, 349- 369.
of Preferences over 'Certain " Uncertain'

ConsumptionPairs: The 'Ordinal Certainty Equivalent' Hypothesis, Econometrica
46, 1045- 1060.
Selden, L., 1979, An OCE Analysis of the Effect of Uncertainty on Saving under Risk
Preference Independence, Review of Economic Studies 46, 73- 82.
Stockman, A.C., 1983, Real Exchange Ratesunder Alternative Nominal Exchange- Rate
Systems, Journal of InternationalMoney and Finance 2, 147- 166.
Stockman, AC., and L.E.O. Svensson, 1987, Capital Flows, Investment and Exchange
Rates, Journal of Monetary Economics 19, 171- 201.

Stulz, R.M.,

1984, Currency Preferences, Purchasing Power Risks,

and the Determination

of Exchange Rates in an Optimizing Model, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking
16, 302-316.
Svenssoo, LEO., 19S5, Currency Prices, Terms of Tradeand Interest Rates: A General
Equilibrium Asset- Pricing Cash- in- Advance Approach, Journal of International
Economics 18, 17-41.
Svenssoii, L.E.O., l9SSa, Trade in Nominal Assets: Monetary Polices, and Price Level and
Exchange Rate Risk, Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.
Svensson, LEO., 1988b, Trade in Risky Assets, American Economic Review 78, 375- 394.

