                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   A BEHAVIORAL APPROACH TO COMPLIANCE:
             OSHA ENFORCEMENT'S IMPACT ON WORKPLACE ACCIDENTS




                               Wayne B. Cray
                              John 1. Scholz




                          Working Paper No. 2813




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 January 1989




This project would not have been possible without the cooperation of the
Bureau of Labor Statistics and the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration. Special thanks are due to William Eisenberg at BLS and Frank
Frodyina and Joe Dubois at OSHA. We are partially indebted to John Ruser of
BLS who performed the data merging and solved numerous problems. The project
was partially funded by NSF grant SES8420920. These institutions and
individuals do not necessarily support the conclusions in this paper. This
research is part of NBER'S research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                            NBER Working Paper #2813
                                            January 1989


                      A   BEHAVIORAL APPROACH TO COMPLIANCE:
               OSIIA ENFORCEMENT'S IMPACT ON WORKPLACE ACCIDENTS



                                       ABSTRACT




     This   study tests for effects of OSHA       enforcement,   using data   on   injuries

and OSHA inspections for 6,842 manufacturing plants between 1979 and 1985. We

use measures of general deterrence (expected inspections at plants like this

one) and specific deterrence (actual inspections at this plant). Both measures

of deterrence are found to affect accidents, with a 10% increase in inspections

with penalties predicted to reduce accidents by 2%. The existence of specific

deterrence effects, the importance of lagged effects, the asymmetrical effects

of probability and amount     of   penalty on accidents, and the tendency of injury

rates to self-correct over a few years support a behavioral model of the firm's

response to enforcement rather than the traditional 'expected penalty' model of

deterrence theory.




Wayne B. Cray                               John T. Scholz
Department of Economics                     Department of Political Science
Clark University                            State University of New York
Worcester, MA 01610                          Stony Brook, NY ll7944392
                         A BEHAVIORAL APPROACH TO COMPLIANCE:

                   OSHA ENFORCEMENT S IMPACT ON WORKPLACE ACCIDENTS



     The field of regulatory analysis has virtually ignored enforcement policy.
despite   the critical link enforcement provides between regulatory rules and

economic outcomes. Enforce.aent provides incentives for regulated entities Co

comply   with   regulatory rules. Appropriately designed enforcement policy may

also   provide souse correctives for the inefficiencies inherent in rule-based
regulatory systems (Scholz, l984a). Existing models             of   enforcement have been
limited   to a simple deterrence model which we believe provides an insufficient

basis for understanding the response of firms to regulatory enforcement.

       Recently,   the   study of   regulatory enforcement has been aided      considerably

by   the availability of detailed enforcement information from the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSRA). Unfortunately, the lack of panel data
on how individual firms respond over time to enforcement actions has been a
major impediment to this research. Theoretical models have been limited to
relatively simple notions of deterrence. Empirical estimations have been
limited to tests based on cross-sectional firm-level data (Smith. 1979;
McCaffrey, 1983) or annual data aggregated to national (Viscusi, 1979),
industrial categorization (Viscusi. l986a; Band and Thomas, 1985) or injury
category (Mendeloff, 1979). These studies have found mixed results in terms of
overall    effectiveness of OSHA inspections, and each suffers from different

threats to the validity of their empirical findings (see Viscusi, 1986b, for a

review.)

       This article reports our efforts to develop an alternative model of firm

responses to regulatory enforcement and         to   test the   model on a   dataset that
 incorporates    enforcement actions and accident experiences of individual firms
                                         2

over time. The model we use is based on the assumptions of the behavioral

theory of the firm (Cyert and March, 1963) about the limited ability of firms

to evaluate and respond to enforcement threats. The model is tested on a

unique database chat combines the accident experience of 6,842 manufacturing

plants between 1979 ad 1985 with the OSHA enforcement records for those firms.



            I. THE MODEL: ACCIDENTS, SAFETY EXPENDITURES, AND ENFORCEMENT

      The   number of accidents at a plant depends on a variety of factors.
These include the technology in use at the plant (manufacturers of lumber and

wood products averaged 11.1 lost workday incidents per 100 workers in 1979.

compared with 5.6 for manufacturing as a whole), and the   size   and quality of

the plant's workforce (more workers, less experienced workers, and more tired

workers are associated with more accidents). Other factors include the

expenditures made by the firm to increase safety, both through physical capital

(safer   equipment) and human capital (more safety training for workers).
Finally (as their name suggests) accidents have a substantial random component,
which cannot be eliminated completely by anything the firm does.
     The classical model allows the optimal level of safety expenditures by th€
firm to depend on the costs of the expenditure relative to the costs of the
accidents being prevented. Paralleling the theory of deterrence developed in
criminology (Becker, 1968), OSHA inspections provide a further incentive for
safety expenditures: avoiding the penalties for being found in violation of
OSHA regulations. Both the occurrence of accidents and OSHA penalties are
random variables, so the firm (assumed to    be risk-neutral) will   consider the

expected values of both variables when deciding how much to spend on safety.

     More formally, let the expected number of accidents, A, be a function of
                                                 3


the firm's technology (T), workforce (W) and safety expenditures (S):

      (1)      E (A) — a(T,W,S)      ,   with   a'.(O and a''>O,

where a' and a'' refer to the derivatives of a with respect to S.        Let the
expected penalties. F, be a function of OSRA's enforcement policy (X), as well

as t,e fhia-related variables:

     (2)     E (F) —    p(X,T,W,S)   ,   with   -l<p<O and p''>O

(as with a' and a', p' and p'' focus on the effects of safety expenditures).

If the average cost of each accident to the firm is C (including both direct

costs, such as damage to machinery and compensation to workers, and indirect

Costs, such as higher wages for hazardous employment), the firm will choose its

safety expenditures to minimize its accident- and safety-related costs:

     (3)     mm        (C*a(T,W.S) + p(X,T,W,S) + S).

     Examining    the first order condition for a minimum (that    this is a minimum,

not a maximum, follows from the assumptions about the derivatives of a and p),

the optimal safety expenditure, S*, will satisfy:

     (4)     a'(S*) —    -(l+p')/C
leading to

     (5) */dC > 0            and 4*/dIp'I >0
so that increases in either the expected Costs of an accident or OSHA penalties

will lead to greater expenditures on safety. In effect, the presence of OSHA
penalties reduces the cost to the firm of safety expenditures: p' of every

dollar spent on safety is paid for by reducing expected OSHA penalties. This
assumes    that safety spending reduces     both accidents and OSRA penalties.1 The

assumed risk-neutrality of the firm implies that only the expected value of

OSHA penalties matters, so that a high probability of getting a small penalty

would be equivalent to a low probability of getting a large penalty.
                                          4

     The behavioral theory of the firm    (Cyert   and March, 1963) provides an

alternative framework for modelling firm      decisions.   The theory includes four

major concepts: quasi-resolution of conflict (addressing multiple goals

sequentially rather than simultaneously); uncertainty avoidance (short-run

reaction to feedback rather than long-run planning); problemistic search

(solving particular problems, rather than general optimization); and

organizational learning (adaptation of goals and attention rules as the

environment changes). These concepts are based on observations of business

decisionmaking processes, in particular observing that firm's behavior deviates

systematically   from optimal performance (which would simultaneously maximize
expected profit over all possible behaviors) because of limitations on the
firm's decisionmaking ability.
     Research in behavioral decision theory has found consistent patterns in
which decisionmaking behavior by individuals deviates from optimality as
defined by   expected value theory,   particularly where probabilistic
relationships and expected values are involved (see Schoemaker, 1982). We
suspect that firm behavior exhibits similar patterns, as suggested by the

behavioral theory of attention allocation in which attention is focused in each
period on that area where the firm's performance fell furthest below
expectations. This sort of firm behavior, called putting out fires' •        was

examined in more mathematical detail by Radner (1975). He showed that this is
an affective strategy for 'survival' of the firm (if there are any effective
strategies), and that it tends to keep the firm's performance in the different

areas 'close together'.

     Our   model of the decision process affecting accidents leads us to four

hypotheses implicit in the behavioral model which are not implied by the
                                               S

general optimization model. First, an unexpected increase in accidents will

cause managers to pay more attention to safety. This should lead to a

reduction in accidents in later years until the firm' a attention turns back to
other areas. Similarly, a lower rate of accidents than usual should lead to
less attention and the possibility of rising accidents in later years. Since
managerial    attention and   safety expenditures are not measured directly            in the

data, we should find that the unexplained changes in the number of accidents

over time are negatively autocorrelated.

       It   is less   clear in the maximizing      model   presented earlier that S* should


depend   on unexpected changes in past accident rates. What matters for S* is
not   the number of    accidents, A, but the       effectiveness   of safety   expenditures      in
reducing expected accidents (a), which ought to be more related to the

technology of the firm than to       transitory shifts        in A. Shifts in    S* due,   for

example,     to shifts in technology   would    be relatively permanent,       and   would lead
to   positive, not negative, autocorrelation in the unexplained changes in

accidents. If safety expenditures take the form of changes in the firm's

capital stock, we would also expect to see positive autocorrelation, as one

year's increase in S* reduces A for many            years   to come.

       Second, it could take several years to observe the full effect on

 accidents of changes in OSHA enforcement. This is due to the tine needed for

 organizational learning: the firm's decision processes are only modified

 slowly, as the firm learns of the changes in its operating environment. The

 more peripheral the information to primary organizational processes, the longer

 the lag between environmental changes and responses by the firm. An increase

 in enforcement is expected to raise safety expenditures and reduce accidents as

 in the classical model, but with some time delay dependent on the capacity of
                                               6

the monitoring system and the firm's ability to act on available information.

The simple classical model presented above does not allow explicitly for such

delays, although it might exhibit some delayed effects if safety expenditures

ware embodied in the firm's capital stock, reducing accidents for several

years.

     After a major increase in enforcement a variety of patterns of lagged

effects on accidents could occur, as illustrated in Figure 1. If firms respond

with changes in operations and administration that quickly reduce exposure to

risks, but decay in effectiveness as attention turns             elsewhere.   Panel A might

result. Capital-intensive expenditures to reduce risk take more time                to   plan

and implement,     but   once in place provide a more permanent reduction in

accidents, as in Panel B. In some cases, both kinds of effects could combine,

leading to C.

         Third,   an inspection of a given firm could have a        large effect on that

firm's expenditures on safety. If the firm had been focusing on concerns other
than safety, behavioral theory suggests that the inspection might lead the firm
to focus on safety issues (similarly to the affect of a sudden increase in
accidents, mentioned above). The deterrence analyses developed in the study of
cria.tnology and deviance behavior have long distinguished between general
deterrence- - the effect of an act of legal punishment on the subsequent
behavior of the      general   populace- - and specific deterrence- - the     effect of the
punishment on the        subsequent   behavior of   the   individual being punished. These
analyses suggest that the specific deterrence effect implicit in the behavioral
model could be considerably greater than the classical effect associated with
changes in the level of general enforcement.
     Classical theory would suggest that there should be             no   specific deterrence
                                               7

effect   (other than the direct abatement of cited violations) unless the firm

concluded.   frau the inspection that it had been wrong in its estimate of

receiving    a penalty.2 Firms are assumed to hold         rational expectations, in that

they   expect to rec.ive penalties at     the rate actually experienced, on averag,
by similar firms. An alternative        basis for firms' expectations could be a

Bayesian learning model, with firms updating their prior expectations about

enforcement based on their own experience. Such a model would yield an effect

like specific deterrence, with recently-inspected firms paying more attention

to safety as they revise upward their expectations of enforcement. In terms of

the simple model. S would then be a function of past penalties (specific

enforcement) received by the firm,        in   addition to the expected penalties

(general enforcement) faced by the firm.

       Fourth, marginal changes   in the probability of a penalty and            the   average

penalty amount may have    quite different general         deterrence effects on accident

rates, depending on which of the two is            most salient to the firm's monitoring

of the external environment. It may         be     that firms   have   good information on the

number of similar firms that      are   penalized,     but not on the amount of    penalties

(or    conversely may pay more attention to a few extremely large penalties).
This issue is important in determining the optimal policy mix of wide-ranging
coverage     and intensive inspections. In our model,           general   deterrence is

represented independently by the probability and the average amount of

penalties.

       The classical deterrence model treats the probability of being inspected

and    the penalty level as perfect substitutes for risk-neutral firms,                as noted

earlier. If firms are risk-averse, they will            tend Co   react more to the penalty

level than to the probability of being penalized. If firms react more to the
                                             8

probability   than to the average penalty, risk-loving behavior (or some other

deviation from the simple classical modal) is indicated.

     In the empirical work, we measure two        separate   effects of OSHA   enforcement

on safety. The first is the specific deterrence effect (assoctat.iJ with the

behavioral theory), in which an inspection of a particular plant iill have an

effect on safety in that plant. The second is the general deterrence effect

(associated with the classical theory), in which an increase in the (perceived)

expected penalty of non-compliance will have an effect on safety in all plants.

This expected penalty is further divided into the probability of being

penalized and the average value of the penalty,        corresponding    to the separate

probability and   amount used   to   calculate   expected value. These alternative

enforcement   measures allow us to compare the relative impact of each kind of
enforcement activity on safety.


                                     II. DATA DESCRIPTION

     The dataset   assembled for this project combines information over time on
both accident rates and OSHA enforcement, data which was not available at              the

plant level for previous studies. A dataset produced by           the   gureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS) that contained plant-level accident records from 1979-1985 was
merged with the Occupational Safety and Health Administration' a          Management

Information System (MIS) file containing enforcement actions for all plants
during the same period. The BLS file matched records from the BLS Annual
Survey for all plants with data for each year from 1979 to          1985.   based on   a.


coson identification number available         in the annual files (Ruser and Smith,
1988).   All plants in this file that were located in the twenty-eigtt states

with federal OSHA enforcement covered by OSHA's MIS were then matched with the
                                             9


OSHA enforcement file.

     Since no common   identification   number was available in both OSHA      and BLS

datasets,   we employed a sophisticated record-matching program    based   on the

technique of Fallegi and   Sunter   (1969), as described in .ray (1987). Both

datasats    contain various characteristics of the plant,   ii.cludiug: firm   name,

address, zip code, city, state., employment, and industry. These
characteristics were used to match plants in. one dataset to plants in the

other, based on the probability of agreement on particular variables.3 To
protect the confidentiality of firms in the BLS Annual Survey, all merging
operations were done at BLS and no firm identifiers were provided on the final
matched data tape. Unfortunately, this precluded us from adding further firm-
specific variables potentially relevant to accident behavior.
     The final dataset consists of 6,842 plants with data from 1979 through
1985. For each year, we know employment and hours worked, as well as the
number of lost workday injuries, and the total number of lost workdays. Each
OSHA inspection of the plant during the 1979-85 period is recorded, including
information about the kind of inspection and the citations and      penalties

assessed    as a result of the inspection. The final plant-specific identifier is
an industry code, which is limited to the two-digit SIC level to avoid
breaching    confidentiality restrictions.

     The plants in the    dataset   are not perfectly representative of the

manufacturing    sector, as can be seen by the comparisons in Table 1. The BLS
surveys    are based on stratified random samples that over-sample large plants,

so plants that were included in seven consecutive surveys are considerably

 larger than the typical manufacturing plant. They averaged 523 workers in

 1979, compared with 87 workers for all manufacturing plants subject to OSHA
                                           10

enforcement.4 The average lost workday incidence rate in 1979 of 6.97 is above

the 5.9 rate for the entire manufacturing sector.

       The plants in the sample were also relatively heavily inspected by OSIIA.

About 26% of them were inspected in a given yeat. compared with 2.3% in 1980

for all plants under OSHA's jurisdiction.          Furthet.aore, plants in the sample

represented almost 20% of the    employees     covered by OSHA inspections in 1979,

and account    for an even greater percentage of accidents in the manufacturing
sector.   The sample accounted for about 4% of OSHA inspections.         tn   short, the
sample    represents a considerable if   not   necessarily   representative proportion
of   OSHA's total jurisdiction in manufacturing. We cannot be certain that our

estimates of OSHA Impacts are    generalizable to all manufacturing       firms,     but   we

believe    that this sample may be better than a representative sample for
studying the nature of the impacts of enforcement on accident rates.


                              III. ESTIMATION PROCEDURE

A.General Deterrence
       The estimation procedure for our model requires two stages. The first
equation estimates predicted probability and amount of penalty for each firm in
each year. These general deterrence measures are then incorporated in the
second stage estimation of the determinants of firm accident rates. To test
the   effect of general deterrence on accident rates, we need to measure the

expected penalty faced by a non-complying plant. Most previous studies have

used levels of enforcement activities, generally aggregated to the Industry

level,    as a proxy for expected penalties. We make use of        our data on actual

penalties    imposed in plants in our sample to     obtain plant-specific predictions

of    expected probabilities and amounts of penalties. We use a number          of
                                                11

variables,     including both the traditional enforcement measures aggregated to

the   two-digit   industry   level   and plant-specific accident characteristics, to

calculate the two     components of      predicted    expected penalties for the plant: the
predicted probability of an inspe'u.ion with penalty in a given year (PPROB)                 and

the predicted penalty amount if an insp*ction with penalty occurred (PANT).

       All   variables used in the     study   are   listed in Table 2, and the results for
the   equations   predicting PPROB and PANT are         given in Table 3. Since the

dependent     variable in the PPROB equation is either zero          or one,   a probit
estimation procedure was used. The expected penalty received, conditional on
having   bad some penalty     imposed,    was estimated using, ordinary least squares on
the subsample of 4 • 735     plant-years    in which an iusp.ction with penalty took
place. Alternative estimation methods, including a             linear   probability model for
PPROB and a tobit model (attempting to capture both the penalty amount and the
probability of     being penalized) were also tested, but did not affect the

results materially.

      In both equations, the level of OSHA's           enforcement   activities in the firm's

two-digit     SIC category were represented by the annual number of            inspections

with penalties divided by the number of firms in that industry (INDPROB). and
by the average penalty per inspection with penalty (INDANT). These measures
represent the      'enforcement   budget' devoted by OSHA to firms in a given SIC
category, which might be observed during the year through communications
centering around trade associations.
       Firm-specific measures included two measures of           size and two    related   to

accidents.        Size is important for OSHA         targeting decisions for increasing the
number of exposed workers whose working conditions are inspected; accidents are

 important because high      accident rates indicate risky environments in which OSHA
                                            12

enforcement might be most effective in reducing accidents. Federal OSHAs

records-check policy, for example, attempts to focus inspections on high

accident firms by selecting primarily four-digit SIC industries with injury

rates above the national average, and by terminating inspections if the plants

records indicate that its injury rate lies below the manufacturing average. Je

include one measure of accidents averaged over the two prior years (AVE2NUH),

and one measure of changes in accidents between the second and first year prior

to the current year (PCHNUM..1). Size measures include total hours of work in

the year (LOCHOURS) and average employment during the year (LOCEMPS), both used

in log form   to   minimize excessive influence of the largest firms     on the

estimating procedure. Year dummies were added to reflect annual         variations      in

overall OS}tA enforcement activities.

      All primary variables except changes in accidents were significant

determinants of the     probability   that a firm   would be penalized in a given year,

while only the number of penalties per firm was significant in predicting the

amount   of penalty. The prior level of accidents was significantly related to
the probability of an inspection, but the change in accidents         was   not.
Predicted enforcement variables (PPROB and          PANT) were generated from   these
equations, and used     to measure    the expected enforcement faced by the plant in
the second stage of     the estiisation.



B.   Determinants of Accidents
      The second stage of the estimation examines the determinants of a plant's
 accidents. Two different measures of accidents are used: the number of lost
 workday injuries that occurred in the year and the total number of lost
 workdays in the year. This allows us to check the independent variables for
                                          13

differences between their effect on the frequency (PCHNUK) and the seriousness

of accidents (PCHDAYS). Since PCHDAYS is heavily influenced by a few long-term

injuries (like back injuries) and those factors that     keep   some individuals out

longer than others, it is more difficult to predict than PCHNUH. Of course,

there may be measurement problems involved in either dependent variable that

would limit our ability to explain it.

       For each version of the dependent variable we use    the   percentage change

in accidents rather than the level of accidents, for a number of reasons.

First, the change form   incorporates   the bounded rationality notion of feedback,

where the firm would pay more attention to an increase in the number of

accidents than to a high number of accidents. Using changes rather than levels

helps to reduce the problem of unmeasured variables (such as the inherent

safety of a plant's production process) that change only slowly. The change

form   also minimizes the possibility of simultaneity bias      caused by OSHA's

policy of targeting inspections on firms with high accident rates, a policy
confirmed by our Initial exploratory analyses 6 Simultaneity biases due to the
impact of compliance levels (or accidents in our case) on enforcement have been
a major problem in deterrence research (Nagin. 1978); both the autoregressive
errors and the change form of our estimation are designed to minimize this
bias. Our analysis of expected penalties shows that inspections tend to be
targeted more toward firms with a high level of accidents than toward firms
with a growing number of accidents. The percentage change in accidents is used,
rather                               of accidents, to keep the very large
         than the change in the number

plants in the sample (which have large numbers of accidents because of their
 large workforces) from do.inating the results.
       The use of the change form for the dependent   variables also has
                                           14

implications    for the appropriate ways to measure the independent variables. The

general deterrence model suggests that changes in the expected penalty for non-

compliance will lead to changes in the optimal compliance level for the firm,

and nence lead to changes in the accident rate (so the general enforcement

variables enter the equation in change form). However, the behavioral model

suggests    that an inspection with penalty focuses the firm' a attention on
improving safety at that plant, so that the specific enforcement variable would
enter directly in      zero-one rather than in change form.

      The other explanatory variables include employment and hours, as well as

industry and year. Changes in employment or hours worked will change the

opportunities for accidents to happen, and hence change accident rates. In

addition, increasing employment will generally involve hiring new employees.

and   increasing hours per worker    may involve increasing worker fatigue, both of

which will increase accidents. This indicates using changes in employment and

hours    rather than levels; here percentage changes are used to avoid giving very
different values    to firms of different sizes. If controlling for      the industry
of    the plant only explains   differences in the   inherent hazardousness of the

technology    used in the plant,   then the industry   controls will not be
significant.    However, different industries could be facing different rates of

progress in developing safer equipment, which could lead to differences in the

change in accidents across industries. Year dummies are also included, to

control for any macroeconomic changes that affect safety across all industries.

        The final form of the equation to be estimated is given below.        The
residual part    of changes in accidents is allowed to depend on past residuals in

an    autoregressive   framework, to test the first hypothesis. The effects of

general as well as specific enforcement      variables on accidents are estimated
                                                   15

over a number of years to test the second and third hypotheses, and the effect

of the probability and amount components of expected penalties are estimated

separately to test the fourth hypothesis.


                    2                        2                    3
PCI1Y—   b0   +          bji*DPPROBti   +    £ b2j*DPA14Tt..j +    Z b3j*IPENt..j
                   i—o                      i—o                   i—O

                                                 85                39
       + b4*PCHHOURSt +       bs*pduEMpS + Z b6i*YEARj +           Z b7j*INDj   + Vt,
                                                i—83              i—21

with      V—       e + al*vt..1 + a2vt..2 + a3*vt.3.
       The general deterrence variables, DPPROB and DPAXT, are the change in
expected probability of penalty and the change in expected penalty amount,
respectively. IPEN is a zero-one duiy indicating whether                  an    inspection with
penalty occurred at          that   plant in that year. PCI4HOURS and    PCBEMP measure        the
percentage changes in hours worked and number of employees, and YEAR and IND
are    series of dummy variables.

       Here e(t) is assumed to be an independent, normally distributed series with

a mean of 0. The coefficients aj, a, and a represent the impact on current

accidents of unexplained changes in accident rates from one, two, and three

years ago, respectively. The behavioral theory implies that these coefficients

should be significant and negative. Furthermore, we expect their absolute

values to sum to one or less, in order for the model to be stable. By

 explicitly modeling this self-correction process, we minimize the regression to

 the mean problem previously recognized in deterrence research. This problem

would arise in our context if many enforcement actions (inspections                     with

 penalties)       tended to happen during a period of high accident rates, after which

 both accident rates and inspections fell. The drop in accident rates back to

 its long-run value might be attributed mistakenly to the effectiveness of the
                                            16

inspections in the previous period. By modeling the process driving regression

to the mean, we reduce the potential bias in estimates of enforcement effects.

       Since our data series for each firm is limited to seven years. we have

limited our estimation of lagged effects to three years of previous data for

the autoregressive process as well as for the enforcement variables.7 Given

the controversies about alternative techniques for estimating finite lag

structures (see Judge et. al., 1980) and the lack of a single, clearly defined

lag structure in our modal, we have allowed each of the lagged variables to

enter the equation directly. This would generally be expected to lead to

multicollinearity and lack of precision on individual lag coefficients, but

this appears not to be a problem, since most estimates were significant and

were   robust to alternative specifications of the equation not reported in this
paper.
                               IV. DISCUSSION OF    RESULTS

       Table   4 reports the basic estimations of enforcement effects on lost
workday incidents and lost work days. As expected, the independent variables
explain less of     the variance in lost workdays    (6%) than of the variance in lost
workday incidents (12%). Both equations support the same conclusions about the
importance     of the behavioral theory   of   the firm and   about the   impact of

enforcement     actions on accidents, although the estimated effects are slightly
different      in the two equations.


A. Hypothesis 1: Self-correcting Mechanisms
       One of the    most striking and robust findings in this      and all other

estimations we ran      is the strong   tendency of 'surprises' in the accident rate

 to   be compensated for and to return to zero within three years. The
                                          17

autoregressive coefficients al, a, and a3       are   consistently negative and highly

significant. The estimated impact on accidents decreases for more distant

shocks, consistent with the assumption that recent shocks are the most

important in driving firm   behavior.   In the estimation based on PCHNUM,       any
change in a given year is compensated by a 49% change in the opposite direction

in the following year, a 32% change in the second year. and a 13% change in the

third year. The effect of the residual (unexplained) variation is almost fully

(94%) compensated for over the next three years. This process alone explains

more variance than the other variables combined, raising the explained variance

from 12% for all independent variables to 29% for the autoregressive estimates

for the dependent variable of incidents, and from 6% to 27% for lost workdays.

     It should be noted that this autoregressive process is not explained by a

stochastic process in which an unusually       high   number of accidents in one year

is followed by a regression to the mean in the next year. since such a process

would not produce multi-year correlations among residuals. The observed self-

correcting process supports a behavioral theory in which a year with an

unexpectedly   high number of   accidents is counteracted over time by the firm's

effortsto improve safety.
    The fact that almost 100% of the initial shock is compensated for is
difficult to explain in terms of classical theory, which would predict some
permanent shift in the level of accidents when those (unobserved) factors
change which affect the optimal     level of safety expenditures. If those

unmeasured   factors changed slowly over time, we       would observe positive

coefficients   for Cl, C2 and a3, as the changes brought about in any period
would   continue to have effects in the same direction in following periods. The
strong negative coefficients indicate that self-correction rather than lagged
                                          18

adjustments to optimal levels is more important in accounting for changes in

accident rates.



B. Hypothesis 2: Lagged Effects of General Deterrence

       The results in Table 4 demonstrate that both the expected probability and

the   amount of penalties exert an overall permanent negative effect on accident
rates.    The total effect of   a unit increase in DPPROB, obtained by adding the

coefficients for the current     and lagged values, equals -.75 for the number of
incidents and - .21 for lost workdays, with the comparable figures for DPANT

being -1.57 and - .87 respectively. The significant positive coefficient in

both equations for the current     value of DPPROB is troublesome, but may be due
to    the inclusion of so many general deterrence terms (three each of DPPROB and

DPAMT).8 The insignificance of the second lag of DPPROB and the first lag of

DPAI4T in the lostworkday equation is less troublesome, given the greater
difficulty in predicting lost workdays. On the whole, these estimates support
the   hypothesis   that firms respond to increases in expected penalties by
reducing hazards in the workplace.
        The length of time required for changes in enforcement to   produce their
full    effect is longer than had been found previously. While other enforcement

studies have found one year lags between enforcement and effect (Viscusi, 1986a

and Scholz, 1987), our estimates suggest that the effect continues beyond the

first period as well, and that studies using only a single period may not

capture the full effect of enforcement changes. This length of delay is

consistent    with the assumption that implementation of changes to affect
accidents takes considerable     time. The fact   that the coefficients do not
become positive in longer lags indicates that the initial effect does not decay
                                            19

over time, so the effects appear to be permanent (most consistent with Panel B

in Figure 1).

        Of course, lagged effects distributed over a number of time periods are

not necessarily evidence of suboptilsality: some economic models .nterp:et

distributed lags as representing optimal behavior within the cor.trat:ts of

fixed investments and contractual obligations (see Gujarati, 1988). Distributed

lags   could also be specified more formally in terms of a Bayesian learning
process in which the lagged effects of changes in the objective environment are
due to the firm's utilization of a 'moving average' estimation of         its objective

environment   in safety decisions. Our attempts to force the lagged coefficients
to follow some smooth decay pattern over time (consistent with gradual
learning)   were rejected by the data in favor      of the separate (and fluctuating)
coefficients reported here.


C. Hypothesis 3: Specific Deterrence
       The results in Table 4 confirm the behavioral hypothesis that the surprise

involved in the actual imposition of a penalty has an effect on behavior over

and above the   general   deterrence effect of expected probabilities and amounts

of   penalties. In both equations,     the primary effect    occurs in the   first   and

second year after an inspection, confirming the long period of time over which

enforcement effects must be measured. Although the effect remains negative in

the third year after an inspection, the        coefficient   is not significant in

either equation. The effect of IPEN       in   the current year is insignificant for

lost workdays and relatively small for incidents. As with general deterrence,

this pattern is most consistent with case B in Figure 1. These results are

quite   robust to changes   in the   measures of   general enforcement used,   the   lag
                                             20

lengths   for the enforcement variables, or the inclusion of other controls. On

the other hand, the magnitude of the specific deterrence effect is relatively

small when compared to the     general   deterrence effect, as seen in the next

section.9



D. Hypothesis 4: Asymmetrical Effects of Probability and Amount of Penalty

      Classical deterrence theory assumes that the expected penalty for non-

compliance (represented by the interaction term PPEN            —   PPROB*PAI4T) should

capture all of the relevant information in PPROB and PANT. However, when we

added PPEN to the regression in Table 4 (not reported here), the coefficients

on PPROB    and PANT remain much the     same, and PPEN   is   only significant in one

lagged    term. The superior performance of the separate variables over the
combined version is consistent with the behavioral theory's suggestion that the
probability and the amount of      penalties   are not the perfect substitutes
suggested in classical deterrence theory.
    To test the hypothesis that changes in the number of inspections with
penalty and the average amount of penalty have different effects on accident                  -



rates, we have calculated the impact of a 10% change in each on accidents, as
reported in Table 5.      These   calculations take account of the effect each
enforcement change has on     both    the estimated probability of being penalized
 (PPROB) and amount of penalty (PANT), as determined in the estimation equations
for each of these variables reported in Table 3.           In   addition, a 10%    increase

 in   the number of total inspections is     assumed   to bring about a corresponding
 10% increase   in the number of     inspections   directly affecting the particular
plants in our    sample   (IPEN), and therefore affects accidents through IPEN as
well. Thus, for a given change in enforcement policy (dx), the effect on
                                             21

incidents (cIPCHNUH) of the change in the probability of a penalty (working

through INDPROB and IPEN) is given by:

 (dPCHNUM/dX) — (dPCHNUM/dPPROB)*(dPPROB/dINDPROB)*(dINDPROB/dX)

                      + (dPCHNUM/dPANT)*(dPAWL/dINDPROB) * (dINDPROB/dX)
                      + (dPdHNuM/dIPEN)*(d1PE/dx).

     The first effect calculates the impact through PPROB, the second through
PAMT, and the third through IPEN)° The results reported in Table 5 show that

a 10% increase in inspections with penalty is estimated to decrease lost

workday incidents by 1.61%, which      is   about 75% more than the decrease

associated with the same change in average penalty. The difference in impact

on lost workdays is similar (66%). These results reflect the general

conclusion     from most empirical research on deterrence (Lempert, 1982 and Nagin,
1978), and Viscusi's 1986 study of OSHA,          which find   that the probability of
being   punished is more likely to have significant effects on compliance than

the   amount of penalties.
      These results are difficult to explain in terms of the classical deterrence
theory with risk-neutral firms. The combined expected value term associated
with       theory is less robust than the independent terms, and the independent
        that

terms   have assymetrical effects on accidents. To explain these results as a
simple departure from risk-neutrality would require            risk-loving, not risk-

averse firms.



E.    The Impact of Enforcement on Accidents
       Contrary   to some studies (McCaffrey. 1983; Viscusi, 1979; Bartel and

Thomas, 1985; see Viscusi, 1986b), our estimates suggest that OSHA enforcement

has a significant impact on injury rates, whether measured by lost workday
                                            22

incidents or by the number of lost workdays. Furthermore, the magnitude of

effects is somewhat greater than is suggested by those studies finding

significant effects (Mendeloff, 1979; Smith, 1979; Viscusi, 1986a). For

example, Viscusi estimates the total impact of 0511k on injuries to be 1.5-3.6%,

while our results would indicate a 5-16% change in injuries from a 100%

decrease in enforcement (although such an extrapolation is so far beyond the

changes in enforcement on which the estimates are based that it is only given

for comparison, and is not likely to capture what would happen if enforcement

really dropped to zero). We believe that the availability of panel data on

individual firms, and the more appropriate model we were able to use on this

microdata, were better able to capture the relatively small true effects of

enforcement than the previous studies based either on aggregate or cross-

sectional    data. On the other hand,   we recognize that these estimates are most

relevant    for the relatively large, high-accident plants included in our sample
--   the kind of plants that have remained among the primary concerns of OSHA.
The   impact on smaller, more   transient   firms in non-manufacturing industries may
indeed be smaller than our estimates would indicate, since 0511k enforcement is
likely    to be more successful in reducing injuries among the firms on which it

focuses most,

      A   numerical example may clarify the magnitude of impacts suggested by our
estimates. If we consider a 10% increase in the enforcement effort directed
towards our sample, there would be an increase of 68 in the annual number of
inspections    with penalties, which would reduce lost workday injuries by 2130

 (31 injuries per inspection with penalty), and total lost workdays by 18243

 (268 lost workdays per inspection with penalty). Alternatively, this would mean

increasing the average penalty (per inspection with penalty) by $70 (total
                                             23

added penalties of $69,765> in order to reduce lost workday injuries by 1230

(18 per dollar of penalty) and total lost workdays by 10365 (1481 per dollar).

The magnitude of these results may depend on the extensive inspection coverage

and large size of the establishments in the sample,'so applying these

projections to the the.     entire   manufacturing sector is less sound statistically.



                                        V. CONCUJSION

       We have found   evidence in    this study that OSHA      enforcement   has a

significant impact     on   accidents. Accidents in plants do respond to changes in

enforcement     and to specific contacts with enforcement agencies, despite the
fact   that   compliance is only indirectly related to accidents (Mendeloff, 1979),

that expenditures on compliance may compete        with      more   productive expenditures
to   improve safety (Bartel and Thomas, 1985). that OSHA resources do not permit

extensive monitoring of most workplaces (Smith. 1976), and that OSHA penalties

are relatively small compared to compliance costs. The fraction of accidents

explained by enforcement is relatively small,           as   other studies have found.

This   is not surprising given the marginal role of regulation compared with the

other   forces affecting accident rates.

       Perhaps more importantly, we have demonstrated that the classical

deterrence model that dominates most enforcement analysis is relatively weak

compared with the behavioral model when it comes to analyzing compliance

effects on accident rates. The importance of self-correcting mechanisms, the

relatively long lags between enforcement changes and effects, the difference in

effects between the expected probability and        the      expected amount of a penalty.

and    the   independent effect of inspections on accidents are all more consistent

with the behavioral model than with the simplified forms of deterrence theory
                                           24

usually used in enforcement and compliance studies. Although the behavioral

hypotheses we have developed and tested fall considerably short of a well-

developed theory of compliance, they suggest that further research using the

behavioral l,eory    of   the firm can contribute significantly to understanding

compliance behaor and improving enforcement strategies.

       A richer model of compliance may    help   improve the effectiveness and

efficiency of enforcement strategies. Just as undue reliance on simple

microeconomic models in other policy domains has led to myopic policy advice

(Stern, 1985), reliance on deterrence theory alone limits the enforcement

debate to a relatively narrow spectrum of the practical concerns facing

enforcement officials. For example, our results suggest that, given OSHA's

normal   level of activities and the response of our sample firms, increasing        the

number   of penalties has about a 50% greater effect in reducing accidents than a
comparable percentage increase in the average amount of penalties. The two do
not   appear to be   perfect substitutes, as would be suggested by simple
deterrence   theory. If these results prove to be correct, OSHA could increase

its impact at the margin by shifting resources to doing more inspections, even

if that meant having lower penalties for noncompliers.

      The efficiency of safety standards in reducing accidents, while important,

may   be less important than the need to focus the firm's attention on      safety

problems. e cannot        say whether the decreases in accidents found in this study
are   efficient (from society's point of view), but to the extent that the firm's

safety expenditures were suboptimal because of inattention, the decreases in

accidents may derive more from focusing the firm's efforts on an effective

risk-reduction program than from safety improvements directly related to

compliance with regulations. If the behavioral model proves to be as powerful
                                       25

as these preliminary results suggest, then the conventional wisdom on the role

of regulation and enforcement in the economy will need to be reevaluated to

include this attention-correction function (Scholz, 1984b).
                                              26



                                     REFERENCES



BARTEL, A. and     Thomas. I..   "Direct and Indirect Effects of OSHA

   Regulation."     Journal of Law and Economics,       Vol.   28 (1985). pp. 1-26.

BECKER,   G.S.   "Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach."

   Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 76 (1968), pp. 169.

CENTAUR ASSOCIATES, Inc. The IRDact of Osha' Recent Enforcement

   Activities. Final Report Submitted to OSHA,           january   16, 1985.

CYERT, R. and March,     J.G.    A Behavioral Theory of the Firm.

   Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1963.
ERLIdH,   I.    "Participation in Illegitimate Activities: A Theoretical and

    Empirical Investigation." Journal of Politics and Economy, Vol. 81 (1973),

   pp. 521.

FELLEGI, I. and Sunter, A. "A Theory of Record Linkage." Journal of the

    American Statistical Association. Vol. 64 (1969). pp. 1183-1210.

CRAY, W.B. "OSHA MIS Matching Techniques." aiaeo, June 1987.

GUJARATI, D.N. Basic Econometrics. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1988.

JUDGE,    C.,   Hill, C., Griffiths, W.E., Lutkepohl, H. and Lee,        T.
    Introduction     to the Theory and    Practice   of Econometrics.

    New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1982.

 LEMPERT, R. "Organizing for Deterrence." Law          and   Society Review,

    Vol. 16 (1982), pp. 513-568.

 MCCAFFREY, D. "An Assessment of OSHA's Recent Effects on Injury Rates."

    Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 18 (1983), pp. 131-146.
                                               27

__________    OSHA    and the Politics of Health Regulation. N.Y.: Plenum
   Press,    1982.

MENDELOFF, J. Reaulatina Safety: An Economic and Political Analysis of

   Occupational Safety and Health Policy. Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press, 1979.

NAGIN, 0. "General Deterrence: A Review of the Empirical Evidence."

   in Blumstein, A., Cohen, J. and Nagin, D. (eds.) Deterrence and

   Incapacitation: Estimating the Effect of Criminal Sanctions on Crime Rates.

   National Academy of Sciences: Washington, D.C. 1978.

RADNER.   R. "A   Behavioral Model of Cost Reduction." Bell Journal of

   Econorsics, Vol. 6 (1975), pp.        1.96-215.
RUSER, J.W. and Smith, R.S. "The Effect of OSHA            Records Check

   Inspections       on Reported Occupational Injuries in Manufacturing
   Establishments." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty (forthcoming 1988).
SCHOEMAXER, P.J. "The Expected Utility Model: Its Variants,
   Purposes. Evidence and Limitations." Journal of Economic               Literature.

   Vol. 20 (1982). pp. 529-563.

SCHOLZ,   J.T.   "Cooperation, Deterrence, and the Ecology of Regulatory

   Enforcement." Law        and   Society Review, Vol. 18 (1984), pp. 601-646.

                 "Reliability, Responsiveness, and Regulatory Policy."

   Public Administration Review, Vol. 44             (1984),   pp. 145-153.

___________       "Bureaucratic    Environments and Regulatory       Enforcement
   Effectiveness:       A Theory of Cooperative Enforcement," paper delivered
   at APSA Annual Meeting, 1987.
                                             28

SMITh, R.S. "The Impact of OSHA Inspections          on Manufacturing Injury Rates."

  Journal   of   Human   Resources,   Vol. 14 (1979), pp. 145-170.

_________ The Occupational Saftv and Health Act: Its Coals and its
  Achievements. Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute, 1976.

STERN,   P.C.   "Blind Spots in Policy Analysis: What      Economics

   Doesn't Say about Energy      Use," Journal of Policy     Analysis and

   Hana2ement, Vol. 5 (1986), pp. 200-227.

VISCUSI, W.K. "The Impact of Occupational Safety and Health Regulation."

   Bell   Journal of Economics, Vol. 10 (1979), pp. 117.
_________- "The      Impact of Occupational Safety and Health Regulations.

   1973-1983."     Rand Journal of Economics. Vol. 17 (1986), pp. 567-580.
__________ "Reforming OSHA Regulation of Workplace Risks" in
   L. Weiss and 14. Kiass, eds., Rezulatorv Reform: What Actually Hanvened.
   Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1986.           pp. 234-268.
                                      29




                                   FOOTNOTES




1. Most analysts note, however, that mandated expenditures may not be the most
efficient way for the firm to reduce accidents, and some contend that rl'e
mandated expenditures substitute for other investments that could potentially
contribute more to decreasing risk (Bartel and Thomas, 1985).


2. Viscusi (l986b) argues that higher penalties for repeated violations may
provide an alternative reason for firms to make investments in compliance (and
safety) after an inspection that they would not have been willing to make
before being inspected.


3. Those cases where it was not clear whether the records were properly
matched were hand-checked. Hand-checking used to examine the matches on two
state samples indicated that our error rates for false matches and missed
matches were below one percent. To ensure that all plants in the final set
contained no ambiguous matches, 198 plants were dropped from the original file.
4.  Firms with 10 or fewer employees are not targeted for inspections, and are
excluded from this comparison.

5. These predicted values are not instrumental variables in the usual sense.
since we include the actual enforcement experience of the plant in our measures
of specific deterrence. They are intended to measure the firm's expectation of
the OSHA enforcement it will face (general enforcement).

6. Using regressions to explain the level (or logarithm) of accidents rather
than the percentage change in accidents, frequently inspected plants were
always found to have more accidents than less-inspected plants. We interpret
this as caused by an omitted variable bias, where the omitted  variable is the
inherent hazardousness of the plant (associated with both more accidents and
more inspections).

7. The results are not sensitive to varying from one to four years the lag
lengths on either the autoregressive process or the enforcement variables.



8. When the same regressions are run omitting the DPEN   variables,   the
coefficient on current DPROB goes to zero.
                                       30

                                                                         to
9. Both theories suggest that inspections without penalties are unlikely
have a strong effect on accidents. In earlier analyses we  tested a variable
measuring all inspections rather than only inspections with penalty, and found
it to be much less strongly associated with the accident variables.


10. The first two effects have three components each: policj affects aggregate
enforcement, which affects predicted (general) enforcement, which affects
accidents. The third effect has two components: policy affects specific
enforcement, which affects accidents.
    Let us look in detail at the calculation of the first effect. Since the
mean value of INDPROB is  about .04, a 10% increase in enforcement would raise
INDPROB by about  .004 (dINTPR0B/dX).  This affects PPROB by the coefficient on
INDPROB in Table 3, which is .79. Finally, this change affects PCHNUM
                                                                         over the
next few years, given by summing the coefficients on DPPROB in Table 4 (both
                                                 - 0.6 — -.8.
current and lagged values), yielding 1.2 - 1.4                 In total, the
 first effect is given by the product of these three terms, .004*.79*(. .8) —
 .0025, or .25% (the value of .22% in the table is based on using more precise
values for the calculations).
     The other effects in the table are based on the coefficients from Table 3
 and Table 4, and a calculation of the effect of a 10% increase in enforcement
 on INDAMT (since INDANT is based on log(penalties). we get dINDA14T/dX — .10)
 and on IPEN (the mean value is about .1, so dIPEN/dX'.Ol).
                                            31


                                         FICURE 1

                        Alternative Patterns of Delay for the
                         Effects of Enforceiient on Accidents

      Panel A                   Panel B                     Panel C

         I                         I                            I


                                   I                            I

                  ***
         I

    *****                      AAAAA
         I   **                    I**                          1*
                                                                       *
         I***
         I                                                      I


  lassediate effect            Delayed permanent           Delayed effect
    with decay                       affect                  with decay



Note: Stars represent the number of accidents (measured vertically) over time
(measured horizontally). The vertical line "1" indicates when the enforcement
action occurred.
                                          32


                                    TABLE 1

         COMPARISON OF SAMPLE WITh NATIONAL MANUFACTURING SECTOR

                                                              National
                           Sample             Sample      Manufacturing Sector
                            1979        (1979-85 average)         1979

Number of establishments    6842                 6842            209,851 a
                              523                 479               87 a
Average number employees                                        18.291,000 a
Total number employees     3,575,394           3,277,318
Average lost workday                                                       b
   injury race                6.97                6.02
Average number lost
                               25                  19                5 C
   workday injuries
Total number lost
                            171,333             132,305          1,243,000 b
   workday injuries
Average number
                              363                 303                79 C
   lost workdays
Total number
   lost workdays           2,484,704           2,073,126         18,998.000 b
Probability   of
                                                                    .023 d
   inspection                 .27                 .26
Probability   of
   inspection W/ penalty     .13                  .10
Average penalty per
   inspection               $498                  $269              $275 de
Total penalties          $1,721,063             $697,654        $14,400,000 d

Sources:
a. National Census of Manufacturers, 1977. Includes only firms with more than
   10 employees, since smaller firms have been excluded from targeted
   inspections since 1981.
b. Occupational Injuries and Illnesses in 1979: Suary (BLS, April, 1981)
c. Based on adjustments to estimate number of firms with over 10 employees in
   1979, based on change in employment 1977-1979.
d. Centaur Associates (1985). Figures are for 1980. for all industries.
e. Calculation based on all inspections and on initial penalty imposed.
   Average penalty per inspection with penalty was $1,063 in 1978 (ad4usted to
   1983 prices), but dropped to $380 in 1983. Adjustments to penalties
   averaged 33% throughout the period.
                                               33


                                      TABLE 2

                         VARIABLES USED IN ANALYSIS

VARIABLE       MEAN (STD. DEV)                 DESCRIPTION

I. Accidents
LWNUM          19.3    (40.4)    Nuaber of Lost Workday Injuries
PCHNUM     -.051       (.80)     Proportional change in LWNUM:
                                   (LWNUM(t) - LWNUM(c-1))/((LWNUM(t)+LWNUM(t-1))/21
AVG2NU14       19.4    (37.8)    Average LWNUM in past two years:
                                   (LWNUM(t-l) + LWNUM(t-2))/2

LIJDAYS        303     (731)     Nuisberof Lost Workdays
PCHDAYS    - .036      (1.0)     Proportional change in LVDAYS (like PCHNUM)

II.   Probability of Penalty

IPEN           .099    (.29)     Inspection with penalty during year (duimny var)
PPROB          .106    (.06)     Predicted probability of inspection
                                   (based on Table 3 coefficients)
                                 Change in PPROB — (PPROB(t)
DPPROB     -   .010                                           - PPROB(t-l))
                       (.02)
INDPROB        .038    (.03)     Industry probability of inspection u,' penalty
                                   (based en 2-digit SIC industry, national totals)
III. Amount      of Penalty
ANT            .600    (1.8)     Total log(penalties) assessed during year (note that
                                   eazt ANT is based on all inspections, but PANT and
                                   INDANT are based only on inspections with penalty)
PANT       5.962       (.31)     Predicted log(penalties) assessed if inspection w/
                                   penalty occurred (based on Table 3 coefficients)
DPAMI      -.086       (.17)     Change in PANT — (PANT(t)   PAZtT(t-l))
INDANT     4.833       (.69)     Industry average log(penalty) assessed if inspection
                                   W/ penalty occurred (2-digit SIC national data)
flY. Size of Fira

HOURS          926     (1912)    Hours worked during year (in thousands)
LOCHOURS       13.0    (1.1)     Log (HOURS)
PCHHOURS -.019         (.25)     Percentage change in HOURS (like PCHNUM)
EMPS           479     (982)     Average eaploylient during year
LOCEMPS        5.48    (1.1)     Log (EMPS)
PCUEMPS -.019          (.22)     Percentage change in EMPS (like PCHNUM)

Means and standard deviations calculated for full sample of 48,794
plant-year observations.
                                              34


                                  TABLE 3

            EQUATIONS PREDICTING PROBABILITY AND AMOUNT OF EXPECTED
                  PENAL!?. BASED ON ESTIMATION OF IPEN AND ANT
                     (Probit for IPEN. OLS on non-zero ANT)
                          (t-statistic      in parentheses)

To predict:           Probai1ity                   Amount
                        (PPROB)                     (PANT)

Dep. Var.:               IPEN                           ANT

Intercept                .041                        3.803
                        (6.2)                        (4.9)

AVG2NUM                  0.00050                         .000001
                       (18.4)                           (.004)

PCHNUM    Ct-i)          0.0024                       .048
                        (1.3)                       (1.7)

INDPROB                  0.793                       2.096
                       (14.6)                       (3.0)

INDANT                   0.0087                      .058
                        (2.7)                       (1.2)

LOGHOURS                -0.039                       .167
                      (-16.6)                       (1.7)

LOGEMPS                  0.044                      - .0035
                       (15.2)                      (-.03)

YEAR8O                   -0.011                     -   .173
                        (-2.7)                     (-3.6)
YEAR81                  -0.010                      - .385
                        (-2.2)                     (-6.2)
YEAR82                   -0.007                     -   .535
                        (-1.3)                     (-6.9)
YEAR83                   -0.016                     - .436
                        (-3.0)                     (-6.0)
YEAR84                   -0.010                     -.509
                        (-1.9)                     (-7.2)
YEAR85                   -0.008                     - .424
                        (-1.8)                     (-7.0)
Nun. obs.                47,894                     4.735
Mean (dep var)           .0989                          6.07
 F-test                  172.1                          52.2
 R-square                                               .115
                                             35

                                  TABLE 4
             ESTIMATED IMPACT OF ENFORCEMENT ON FIRM ACCIDENTS
                (Including Autoregressive Error Structure)
          (Maximum Likelihood estimates, t-statistic in parenthesis)

                                     Incidents         Lost Workdays
                                      (PCHNUM)            FCHDAYS

                 Intercept             -0.442               -   .245
                                       (-11.3)            (-5.2)
                 DPPROB (t)             1.208              1.023
                                        (4.6>              (3.0)
                 DPPROB (t-l)          -1.357              -.840
                                       (-5.6)             (-2.6)
                 DPPROB (t-2)          -0.591               -   .401
                                       (-2.3)              (.1.2)
                 DPAMT    (t)          -0.897               -   .446
                                       (-7.8)              (-3.6)
                 DPA11T (t-l)          -0.294               -   .140
                                       (-3.8)              (-1.5)
                 DPAMT    (t-2)        -0.381               -   .280
                                       (-4.9)              (-2.9)
                 IPEN    (t)           -0.036               -   .001
                                       (-2.4)              (-.05)
                 IPEN    (t-1)         -0.049               -.058
                                       (-3.1)              (-2.7)
                 IPEN    (t-2)         -0.043               -   .043
                                       (-2.8)              (-2.1)
                 IPEN (t-3)            -0.006               -   .006
                                       (-0.4)              (-0.3)
                 PCHHOURS               0.672                .546
                                       (16.0)               (10.3)
                 PCHEMPS                0.516                .467
                                       (13.1)               (9.0)
                 Year Dummies:
                 YEAP83                 0.354                .160
                                           (9.3)            (3.6)
                 YEAR84                 0.356                .198
                                           (9.7)            (4.4)
                 YEAR85                0.574                 .331
                                       (11.2)               (5.4)
                 Autoregressive Errors:
                 A(1)                 -0.489                -   .548
                                     (-49.8)               (-63.8)
                 A(2)                 -0.316                -.329
                                     (-29.5)               (-31.1)
                 A(3)                 -0.127                -   .141
                                     (-9.8)                (-11.4)

                 Num. Obs              27,368               27,368
                 Mean (dep var)        -   .046             -.026
                 Total R.2                 .289                 .274
                 R2 (w/o autoreg)          .123                 .063

NOTE: Industry   dummy variables    (2-digit SIC) were also included.
                                            36




                                      TABLE 5

              IMPACT OF POLICY CHANCES ON ACCIDENT MEASURES

              (Effect of a 10% change in enforcement variables on
                  Lost Workday Incidents and on Lost Workdays)


                                LOST WORKDAY INCIDENTS

                             Affecting Incidents through:

10% Change in              Expected        Expected      Actual
Enforcement:               Probability      Amount     Inspection TOTAL EFFECT
                                            (PANT)          (IPEN)



Inspections   v. Penalty     - .22%        -1.26%       -   .13%      -1.61%
(INDPROB)

Average Penalty              - .06%          - .87%                   -.93%
(INDANT)


                                      LOST WORKDAYS

                            Affecting Lost Workdays through:
10% Change in               Expected        Expected        Actual
Enforcement:               Probability      Amount     Inspection TOTAL EFFECT
                                             (PANT)         (IPEN)



Inspections w. Penalty         - .07%        - .70%         - .11%       - .88%
(INDPROB)

Average Penalty                - .02%        - .48%                      - .50%
(INDAMT)
