                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE HEALTH AND EARNINGS OF
                  REJECTED DISABILITY INSURANCE APPLICANTS




                                 John Bound




                           Working Paper No. 2816




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                January 1989




I am grateful to David Bloom, Charles Brown, Christopher Cavanagh, Zvi

Griliches, Lawrence Katz, Jonathan Leonard, Donald Parsons, Lawrence Summers,
Paul Taubman, and Ralph Treitel, to participants at seminars at the
University of British Columhia, Michigan State University, and the National
Bureau of Economic Research, to two anonymous referees, the editor of this
journal and especially to Robert Baraky, Andrei Shleifer and Gary Solon for
comments and suggestions, to Harold Luft for having provided me with the
Social Security Administration's1966 Survey of the Disabled, and to Susan
Allin for research assistance.  The National Bureau of Economic Research and
the University of Michigan supported the computations.   Needless to say, the
interpretations remain my own. This research is part of NBER's research
program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed sre those of the author not
those of the Nsrional Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #2816
                                                January 1989


    THE HEALTH AND EARNINGS OF REJECTED DISABILITY INSURANCE APPLICANTS


                                          ABSTRACT




Applicants for Social Security Disability Benefits who fail to pass the medical screening form a
natural 'control' group for beneficiaries. Data drawnfrom the 1972 and 1978 surveys of the disabled
done for the Social Security Administration show that fewer than 50% of rejected male applicants
work. Typical earnings of those that do are less than 50% of median earnings for other men their
age. These data cast doubt on recent econometric work which suggeststhat the disincentive effects
of DI have been substantial.




                                                 John Bound
                                                 The University of Michigan
                                                 Population Studies Center
                                                 1225 South University Avenue
                                                 Ann Arbor, MI 48104-2590
     The postwar period hss seen a dramatic increase both in the availabilityand in the generosity
of income maintenance programs targeted at the disabled. The Social Security DisahilityProgram
(DI) was enacted into law in 1956. Originally,in orderto qualify for Dl henefits an individualhad
to be over the age of 50 and to suffer from an impairment that could "be expected to result in
death or be of long, continued and indefinite duration." In 1960 individuals under the age of 50
were made eligible, and in 1965 the definition of disahilitywas liberalized to allow those without
permanent disabilities to qualify. In 1972 the waiting period required before an applicant for DI
could start receivingbenefits was reduced from 6 to 5 months, and the work history requirement
was effectively eliminated with the introduction of Supplemental Security Income.1 At the same
time that eligibility requirementsfor DI were being relaxed,benefit levels were beingincreased,2so
that by the mid-1970'stypicalafter-tax replacementrates reached 60%. When dependents' benefits
are included3, the total compensationcan easily replace all of a worker's lost earnings.
     With the increasingavailabilityand generosity of disabilitybenefits, the DI rolis grew rapidly
during the 1960's and 1970's. In 1960 208,000 workers were awarded benefite. By 1975 this figure
had risen to 592,000. During the same time period the fraction leaving the roles each year declined
from 20% to 13%. With a rising number of awards and a decliningtermination rate, by 1980, 2.9
millionworkers (3% of the working-age population) were receiving DI benefits. Total benefits paid
out exceeded 15 biliion dollars or 20% of those paid out for retirement benefits. With the rapidly
expanding roles, there was an increased concern that the social security administration was losing
control over the system and that many of those awarded DI benefitsmight not, in fact, be disabled
accordingto the legal definition of the term.5

    Both DI and SSI are administeredby the Social Security Administration. Dl provides benefits to disabled
    workers in anossturelated to the disabled worker's former wages in Social Security-covered employment. 551
    providescask usaintance fo, the needy aged as writ as to the needy blind and disabled, with no sequirement
    that they have worked is covered employment. As a needo-based program, SSI provides payesests based on
    the amoont of other iscome available to as individual.
  2 Dl benefitsarecalculated is essentially the same fashion us Social Secsrity retirementbenefits,and have been
    subject to the same chargm in benefit levels.
    Dl recipients receive dependents' benefitsunderthe name circumstances as do Social Securityretirement besefis
    recipients.
    Dl beneficiaries leave the roles For threereasons- Roughly  15% recover and either leave the notes voluntarilyor
     are terminated after a medical review. Another 35% die while on the roles. The remaining se% are transferred
     to the retirement program when they reach the age of as. The proportion leaving the roles foe each of these
     three reasons was d,rppirg.
     Largely m a response to such concernu, Congresspaaned legislation in lose designed to tighten administrative
    controlover the determination of medical eligibility for Dl benefit,. The Reagan administrationaccelerated the
    implementationof the law. Between 1980 and 1982 the number of new awards dropped25%, while more than
    2e% of those on the roles had theircases reviewed and were terminated. Many of those who had their benefits
     terminatedappealed their cases. Of thane that appealed, a              won eein,tatement. A growing concern
    that many of thmebeing te,minatr,l weee, in fact, disabled,majority
                                                                   and thol doe procens was not being followed lesI
    conrtuin 2e states to order that those elates lobe acre the renew procmn, while in 9 others mnratorinrnswere
    nrdeee,l. Finally, in 1981 Maegaret Ilechler, the secretary of 11115, agree,l In a mnnatoeinm as tero,inctionn
    pending the enactment and iispleoientatinnof legislation with seemed gaiclelinen. The new legielation was
    enacted in 1984, with review beginningagaio in 19Sf.
                                                                                                of older men out
       During the same time period that Di was growing rapidly, the proportion
of the labor force doubled.     Table   1  reports participation    rates for 45   to  54  and  55 to 64 year-old
        for selected         Between    1955   and  1985,  the   labor force  participation     rates for men 45
men                  years.
to 54 years old dropped 4.5 percentage points from 96.5% to 92.0%, and the participation rates
for men 55 to 64 years old dropped 19.1 percentage points from 87.9% to 68.8%. The decline in
                                                                           the increases in the proportion of
participation rates of these older men matched almost exactly
older men receiving      Di benefits  (see  Table  1).  These   parallel trends   suggest a causal connection,
with the availabilityof generous disabilitybenefits inducing older men to leave the labor force in
order to qualify for benefits The implication would seem to be that many of those receiving
                                                                                    of              insurancehave
disability benefits are, in fact, capahle of work that the socialcosts disability
                                                        —


 been high and the target efficiency      low.

        Recent econometric studies appear to confirm this view. The common strategy has been to
                                                                                        rates of those with high
 employ regression techniques to compare the labor force participation
 replacement rates (those wbose potential          DI  benefits  would   replace   a relatively   large fraction of
 their pre-disabilityearnings)   to those   with low  replacement    rates.  The  difference   in the participation
 rates betweenthese two groupsis taken to be an estimate of Dl's impact. Researchersfollowing this
 kind of strategy have typically concluded that Dl has had very large disincentive effects, inducing
 a virtually one-for-one drop in participation rates.7
         This approach is likely to overestimate the impart of DI on labor force attachment. Since
                                                                                             to determinewhether
 replacementrates for Diare decreasing functionsof past earnings,it is difficult
  it is generous replacement   rates or low  earnings   that  induce individuals    to leave  the labor force. This
                                                                                                              would
  is fundamental, since there are a variety of reasons to expect that tbose with low earnings
  be the ones most likely to leave the labor force regardless of       Dl.  We   sbould, tberefore, suspect that
  the coefficient on the replacementratio is, at        least  to some  extent, picking up these other effects
   and thus exaggerating the causal impact         of DI  itself.  Haveman    and Wolfe (19Mb) try to avoid
   the endogeneity    of the replacement    rate  by utilizing   a procedure   that initially predicts disability
             as  a function of              information,   and    then incorporates     these predicted values in
   benefits                    exogenous
   the final estimating equations. The problem with this strategy is            that   it is bard to have faith in
                                                               in order  to             instruments.
   the legitimacyof the exclusion restrictions required                     generate
         The purpose of this paper is to draw attention to an alternative source of evidence on the

                                                                                                     benefits. Caisfol
       For both Dl ssd 551 as isdividsal msst set be gainfully employed in order to qualify for                  during
       employment has ordinarily been defined in terms of earsisg mere thas a stipulated amoont—$3es/month
       the Ieee's.

       The mtimatmof Parsons (I950a, 198mb, 1982) and Slade (1984)          imply that Dl can account for the entire
       postwar decline in the labor force attachment of shIer men
                                                                     —
                                                                       with the apparent implication that virtually all
       beneficiaries would be worhing were Dl not to enint. Leonard's (1979) results haveand  usually been interpreted
                                                                    of thin muse.) llaseman      Wolfe (1984a, l9n4l')
        as supportive of Parsons'. (See Section III for a discsnsion                                disincentive effects.
                  the                          produced  estimates that imply substantially smaller
        represent     dissenting voice, having

                                                            2
 disincentive effects of DI. Such evidence comes from consideringindividuals who apply for DI hut
 fail to pass the medical screeningnecessary to qualify for the program. This rejected pool providea
 a natural control group for the beneficiaries. The assumption(documeoted helow) is that
                                                                                                rejected
 applicants are healthier and more capable of work than those who were accepted. Thus, their labor
 force performance should provide an upper bound for what could be expected of beneficiaries. It is
 thus startling that, even among prime-aged men, fewer than 50% of rejected applicants return to
 sustained work, and that the earningsof those that do are roughly 30% below pre-disahility levels
 and more than 50% helow those for other men their age.
      I infer from these facts that less than half of those on DI would work were they not receiving
 benefits. Recall that the drop in participation rates has more than matched the rise in the propor-
 tion of older men on DI. Thus DI accounts for substantially less than half of the post-war decline
 in the participation rates of older men.
      Yet if DI can arcoont for less than half of the drop in labor force participation we are left with
 a number of questions. What accounts for the other half? What would the counterparts of the
men now receivingDI have been doing prior to Dl's existence? In the last section of this
                                                                                                 paper I
 try to answer these broader questions by taking a closer look at the historicalrecord. I argue that
the record suggests that DI has pulled a substantial number of its beneficiaries from a
                                                                                            population
that would have been out of work regardlessof whether or not DI was available. Evidencefor this
conclusion comes from the fact that before DI existed (or before it had
                                                                            grown to its current size),
there was a sizable population of older men who both identified themselves as disabled and who
were out of the labor force. The natural assumption is that these men, or their counterparts in
subsequent cohorts, would be amongthose on the DI rolls. A coherent picture of DI thus emerges.
While it seems likely that DI has had someimpact on the lahor force attachment of older men, it
also seems likely that DI has successfully targeted resources to the genuinely disabled.
      The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows: In Section 1, I document the facts
                                                                                            relating to
rejected applicants. In Section II, I discuss objectionsto the inferences I am drawing from these
facts. Section III reconciles the evidence on rejectesi applicants with that from previous studies
which have suggested large disincentive effects. In Section IV, I review the historical evidenceand
conclude with a summary of the argument.8

I. The Evidence on Rejected DI Applicants
    The data on rejected applicants come from the 1972 Survey of Disabled and Non-Disabled
Adults (SDNA) and the 1978 Survey of Disability and %Vork
                                                          (SDW).5 Dot' surveys oversainpled

     Understanding the nature and 1,,nrtioning of the Social Secnrity flinabilisy lss,,raece Program is an important
    prerequisite foe any evai,,atios of the evidence on its di,iscestive effects. I have iocl,,,Ied a brief descriptionof
    the way in which Dl operateniv as appesdin.
    Ifoth surveys were 'lone by the Cco,,,s Bores,, for the Social Secority Aulmisistrotion. Detailed ulencriptioos
                                                                                                       census were
the disabled. In the 1972 surveythose that bad been identified as disabled in the 1970
                                                                  and applicants rejected in 1977.°
oversampled,whilethe 1978 surveyoversampled DI beneficiaries
                                                                                          as well as
Each survey asked respondents a variety of labor force, income and health questions,
                                                               The        data  were  then  matched
whether they had ever applied for or received DI benefits.         survey
with the Social Security earnings history for each  respondent.11
                                                                          of other men their age.'2
     Table 2 compares employmentrates for rejected applicants to those
As the vast majority   of DI beneficiaries are over the age 45,"
                                                            of      I have limited my attention to
                                              I                              on medical grounds,                     I
this group. To ensure that the sample considerwill have been disqualified
restrict my attention to those rejected applicants who had a sufficient earnings history to qualify
                                                                                       of the longer run, I
for DI benefits.'4 To ensure that current behavior is reasonablyrepresentative
restrict my attention to men whoapplied at least 18 months prior          to the  survey.

                        tell      similar  stories.  Despite   the fact that  one  must have a history of
      The two surveys        very
                                                              of the rejected applicants were working at
working in order to qualify for DI, less than one-third
the time of the surveys and less than 50% worked          sometime    during the previous year. Of those
who did work sometime during the previous year,           less than  50%   worked for the foil year      50    (
                                  levels are not  simply   functions of the fact that the typical applicant
 weeks). These low employment
                                                                            remain below 50% even if we
 is nearing retirement age. Employment rates for rejected applicants
 restrict our attention to men under the age    of  55•15

      In addition to employmentrates, Table 2 also reports infonnation on earnings for rejected
                                                                          that did work sometime during
  applirants. Median annual earnings for the rejected applicants
                                     median    of their  able-bodied   counterparts,  while median weekly
  the year were less than half the
                                           of those  for their able-bodied  counterparts.   To compare the
  earnings were less than three-quarters

      of these two surveyscan be fousd is User.' Manualfor the 1972 Surrey of Disabled and Nandisubled Adults:
                                                        asd EvanSchechter, TecF,sicnl Introduction,1978Surrey
      Descriptionand Documentation (1979) and BarryBye
      of Disability and Work, (1952).
                                                                             difficult.
       These differences   is samplingschemes make cress-year comparioons
                                                                            and 99%of the 1978 survey repondents were
       Among    men  41-54 yearn old, 94% ef the 1972 survey rmpondents
       matched to their social security earsingu history.
                                                                      record were identilled us receiving DI benefitswere
       Men who either by their own account or by adminiutrative           for DI benefitsbut who but were not receiving
       clannilled us Dl beneficiaries; men who reportedhaving applied
       Dl benefits were classified as rejected applicants.
                                                   of Dl beneficiaries were under the age of 45. (1986, Social Security
       During the period studied lens than 2e%Tkble 99).
       Bulletin; Annaul Statistical Supplement,
                                                                 29 of the 40 quarteruthat preceeded the quarter during
    14 To
           qualifyfor Dl benefitsa man must have worked for          I usedrespondents reports' to identify in which year
       which he becamedisabled. To identify covered applicants,             to determineif they have worked toin covered
       they  had   become  'dinabled'  and then sned  the earnings  histnry
                                                                                      not correctly matched      earniugn
       employmentduring 20 of the 40        quarters preceeding that year. Foc men
                                                              l'eenemployed prior to the onset of their health limitations
       histories, I usastued that these who reported having
       wosld have besn covered.
    t5 For men 41 to 54 yearn old, 48.9% of those applicants rejected in che 1972 survey
                                                                                                 and 36.7% of these in the
       1978 survey were employed us of the survey week.

                                                            4
pre- and post-application earningsI used the Social Security earnings history. Simple tabulations
showed that amongthe rejected applicants that did work some time during 1971 (1977),69% (60%)
experienced a declinein real annual earnings)6 To estimate the averageearnings drop I calculated
the earnings differential between rejected applicants and non-applicantstwo yearsprior to the year
of application, and again for the same individuals for the last available year of data, the year prior
to the surveys.17 The change in this differential givesan estimate of the drop in earnings that the
applicant experiences,with the nnn.applicant 'control' group allowing me to net out growth that
could he attrihuted to either economy-wide or cohort-wide earnings growth. The change in the
log differential ranged from .807 in the 1972 survey to .795 in the 1978 survey, implying a drop in
earnings for those who continue to work of abont 55%50
      The demographicevidence reported in Table 2 gives the clear impression that those men who
apply for DI benefits (beneficiariesand rejected applicants alike) tend to be less educated and are
more likely to be non-white than the comparablyaged non-applicants. This finding is really not
very surprising. The less educated and non-whites tend to be in worse health19 and to be in more
demanding jobs than the overall population.25 Lastly, the relative rewards for returning to work
wili be smaller for these groups.
      The 1972 and 1978 surveys contain both the respondents' ownassessmentof the degreeto which
health limits their ability to work and their responses to other more specific questions about their
health. The vast majority of the rejected applicants report important health limitations on their
 ability to work. Over 50% report that health preventsthem from workingaltogether (I will refer to
 this group as the severely disabled), while roughly 90% report that their health at least limits the
kind or amount ofwork they can perform (I will refer to this group as the partially disabled). Over
 85% report being incapable of either doing any work or of doing the same kind of work they did
 before their health limitation began. While there are many reasons to be suspicious of self-reported

  s Comparisonswere between earnings two years prior to the applicationfor Dl benefits and earnings in ssrs
     or 1977. Samples were restricted to those with positiveearnings in both years. Pm-applicationearnings were
     adjusted using the C?!.
     For the control group I noed the representative strata of each norvey, randomlyannigsisg 'application' years.
     Since Social Security earnings are troncated above, the eqoationo I estimated were tobitu, with as upper
     trsncatios point that varied with the year. Since my interest was is the changeis earnings for those who
     did work, I restricted my analysis to those with positive earnings. The actoal eqoationu ran sued the natural
     logarithm of Social Secority earnings so the dependent variable and age, age uqoared, age cobed and year
     dommiesas controls.
  to As as alternative check on those resnlts, for rejected applicants, I compared median earnings from two years
     before the applicationto those as of 1971 or 1977. I a,ljssted the pre-application earnings upwards using the
     average hourly earnings of provloctios worhers. These cnlcnlationn showed drops in earnings of between 40 and
     44%-
  t5 See Grossman
                  (l97e).
  It   Social Secority A,l,sinistratios regnlotionn esplicitly recognite this possibility. In siarginal coors Disability
       Esamisemn are enpectml to tabe account of an applicant's education and occopotiosal history is determining
       as applicant's eligibility for Dl
work limitations,2' reports of specific conditions should he considerablyless subjective. Table 2
shows that rejected applicants are substantially more likely to report suffering from any of a variety
of specific conditions than are their able-bodiedcounterparts.22
     Independent evidenceon the work capacityof rejected DI applicants is also available. In a 1969
study conductedfor the Social Security Administrationby SandNagi, independentpanels evaluated
the work potential of a sample of DI applicants.23 Thesepanels included doctors, psychologists,and
occupational and vocational counselors. They were authorized to enter the homes of applicants,
to conduct any of a variety of tests, and to collect any information they felt relevant to the study
case. In short, it is hard to imagine having available any more reliable informationon a person's
health or work capacity.
     The Nagi teams evaluated applicants on sn eight-pointscale ranging from "fit for work under
normal conditions" to "not fit for work." Table 3 shows the Nagi study's eight point evaluations of
work capacity for both SSA allowances and denials. According to these evaluations, many rejected
applicants do suffer substantial health limitations. Of the population denied benefits, 35.6% were
found incapable of any work, and another 12.3% were only capable of work at home or in sheltered
environments. Only 33.7% were capable of work under normal conditions. The proportion of the
rejected applicants that the Nagi teams determined were incapable of work lines up very closely
with the proportion we found who do not, in fact, work. Thus it seems natural to infer both that
the rejected applicants are in fact in poor health, and that this is the reason they do not go hack
to work.
     If the majority of those disability insurance applicants who have been denied benefits do not
return to regular work, it is quite natural to wonderhow they survive. Table 4 provides a partial
answer to this question. Using the Social Security surveys, I tabulated sources of income for
rejected DI applicants. I report the proportion of men receiving each kind of income together
with the average amount received (for those whodid receiveincome from the source). These were
computed separately according to whether the respondent worked at all during the year prior to
the survey, and also included tabulations on DI beneficiaries and on the overall population. Table
4 shows that a large number of rejected applicants,especiallythose whodo not go back to work, do

    21   Tbene last tabulations are probably bent thought of as one tailed-tents. Were we to have found only a small
         percentageof the rejected applicanto claiming tbat tbey weredisabled,we would have trouble maintaining that
         their weakattachment to the labor force reflected health. Finding what we do in compatible with both a otory
         that emphasizes the importance of poor health in explaining the behavior of rejected applicants and one that
         emphasiom the role of poor health as a jnntiflcation for early retirement.
    22   In  1972 respondents were asked: "Here in a list of conditionu...Which of these conditionn particolarly bother
         yon?" In 5978 they wereasked "Which of the following conditions or illnessesdo yen have NOW that a doctor
         has told you about?" The qoentionn were a bit different as were the 1mb of conditions. I aggregated the more
         than 38 npecific conditions into 18 more combinedcategories according to their diagnostic category. Still the
         differencm between the two qneotionnimply that these aggregatedcategories will not be completely comparable
         across gronpo.

-        The Nagi team's evaloationo were done at the name titne as were the Social Secority .&dminiotration'n.
receive some kind of public income maintenance, mostly from programs that target the disabled.
The availability of alternative sources of income helps explain whymore of these individuals do not
return to work. What is crucial for using rejected applicants as a control group, however, is the
question of whether the sources of income available to the rejected applicants would be available
for beneficiarieswere they not on Dl. What we see is that for most sources of non-labor income,
the DI beneficiaries are at least as likely to be receiving some as are the rejected applicants. The
major exceptions to this pattern are the state-run welfare programs (e.g. Aid to the Permanently
and Totally Disabled (APTD), SupplementarySecurity Income(SSI), and General Assistance),but
these are, to a large extent, substitutes for DI, and there is no reasonto believethat DI beneficiaries
would be any less likely to be eligible for these programs than are the rejected applicants.24
     The numbers reported in Table 2 are comparableto those reported on a number of occasions by
staff researchersfor the Social Security Administration.tm The most recent exampleis a 1976 study
where Ralph Treitel used administrativerecords to follow up applicants initially denied benefits in
1967Y6 Of the men who had been denied benefits on medical grounds, 13.8% had died by 1973.
(This comparesto roughly 7% for the comparablyaged population.)27Another 16.1% had reached
retirement age, and only 36.2% had any Social Securityearnings the previous year. Of those with
earnings, only 52% had earnings above $3600 (median Social Security earnings in 1972 for prime
aged men were above $9000).25 Furthermore, 39.7% of the rejected applicants had not worked at
all in the four years after having been denied benefits, and only 24.1% had worked for as much
as three-quarters of the time. For men under 50, the picture was only slightly better. By 1973,
8.0% of these men had died (as compared to 2.4% for the population29).Thus mortality rates for
the rejected applicants were once again more than twice that for the comparablyaged population.
Only 51.7% had any Social Security eamings the previous year, 25.9% had not worked at all in
the four years after they were denied benefits, and only 33.0% had worked for as much as three
quarters of the time.

  24   The sboervast reader will sste that set every mao identified aa a Dl beseficiary reports receiving Social
       Secsrity Disability Besefits. Thassfer iscome is nstorisssly poorly reported asd this, prmsmably, is jsnt
       asstherindicaties of this problem. At the same time, as lesg as the ssder reportisg doe, sot systematically
  '°   vary with beneficiary utatsu the, qualitative impemsion we get form the data ,hoold he accurate.
       Cuff (5970), Smith asd Lilieofield (1971), Theitel (1976).
        Unfortunately, this worh has not been updated with data from the 1970'sor 1900's.
       7% representsthe weighted average of the a year mortalityrate reported to the 1967 VitalStatistics, wherethe
        weighta represestthe fraction of New Dl beneficiaries as of 1967 falling into 5-yeae age categorim. 7% oeerntateu
        the actual 5-year mortality rate foe the comparablyaged popalatios for two reasons: I) New beneficiarim tend
        to be somewhat older than rejected applicanto, 3) the croon-sectional mortality tables tend to overstate trite
       cohort mortality.
        Restricting attention to denied applicooto who were soder the age of 65 as of 1967, 10.7% had died by 1973,
       only 41.7% had woeheel some ti,oe daring the previous year.sod 44.0% of those with some earnings had earoml
       income, bellow $3600.
        See the preceding footnote for a devcriptioo of how the 2.4% was calcslstecl.
     In someways, Treitel's data are better tban tbe surveysused for Table 2. His samples are much
larger (75,633 cases). Sincethey come from administrativerecords there is no need to worry about
self-reportingbiases. Moreover, he could follow his cohort for a full five years. The impressionwe
draw from his tabulations is, if anything, stronger than what cast be derived from my own. Fewer
men are working, they earn less, and both of these effectsappear to be permanent. These differences
can be largely accounted for by the fact that by using retrospective information,I eliminate those
whowere the worst off — those who had died by the survey year. Of those still alive and of working
age in Treitel's sample, 46.8% worked some time during 1972. This number is in line with the
numbers I arrived at for the proportion of rejected applicants who worked some time during the
year prior to the survey (45% in 1972, 40.4% in 1978).
      Relying either on the disability surveys or on Treitel's tabulations, the conclusion is that less
 than 50% of the rejected DI applicants work. As long as the Social Security Administrationscreen-
 ing procedures are even partially effective, this finding should be viewed as a conservativeupper
 bound on the proportion of DI beneficiaries whowould work were they not receivingDI. While there
 has been much concern over the ambiguityand arbitrariness of the Social Security Administration's
 medical screenings, no one has seriously suggested that it is completely ineffective. The tabulations
 reported in Table 2 show that beneficiaries are more likely to report themselves severely disabled
 and are more likely to claim that they suffer from any of a variety of specific conditions than are
 the rejected applicants. The Nagi results reported in Tahle 4 show DI beneficiaries twice as likely
 to be incapable of regular work as are their rejected counterparts. The hardest evidence on the
 effectiveness of DI screening comes from mortality data. For example, Treitel (1976) reports that
 even adjusting for age, applicants arcepted onto DI were more than twice as likely to die within
 five years after their initial determinations as those rejected.ae Viewed together, these pieces of
 evidence certalnly seem to suggest that DI beneficiaries are in substantially worse health than are
 the rejected applicants.
      The employmentrate of rejected applicants as an spper bound on the potential employment
 rate of beneficiaries has implicationsfor how much of the drop in participation rates DI can explain.
 Some illustrative calculations will clarify this point. In 1980, 4.2% of the total male population
 between the ages of 45 and 54 was on DI. According to the 1978 survey, 50% of the rejected
 applicants in that age range were in the labor force. Thus we calculate that in 1978 DI was
 removingless than 50% of 4.2%, or 2.1% of the men this age from the labor force. This 2.1% is
 40% of the 5.3 percentage point drop in participation that this age group experienced. For 55 to
 64 year olds we find a similar pattern. The 1978 survey shows that 34% of rejected applicants in
 this age range were in the labor force, while 11.3% of this age group were on DI. If 34% of this

      Overall, 39.7%of the altowascenas agatsot 13.8% ef the desisto had died by 1913. For sppticasto osder the
                                                                   it
      age of 50, the compaeisos was 27.2% vs. 8%, for those 50 to 59 was 42.4% vs. 14.e%, and
                                                                                              for those 60 to 64
      itwas 4e.7% vs. 24.6%.

                                                       8
11.3% were to work, they would add 3.8 percentage points to the labor force participation rate.
Tbis 3.8% is roughly25% of the 15.8 percentage point drop that actually occurred.
     Tbe data on rejected applicants suggest that most Dl applicants do, in fact, suffer impairments
that limit their ahility to work. While my evidence does suggest that a portion of DI applicants
are quite capable of gainful employment and return to jobs where they earn as much as they did
prior to their application, the vast majority either do not work or have earnings well below their
pre-disability levels. Under the conservativeassumption that DI beneficiaries, in the absence of DI,
would work no more than rejected applicants do, DI cannot be responsible for most of the decline
in the labor force participation rates of older working-agemen.


2. Some Objections
     So far I have been maintaining that what accounts for the low earnings and labor force at-
tachment of rejected applicants is health limitations on their ability to work. Along with this
interpretation it is quite natural to presume that the rejected applicants do better in the labor
market than would beneficiaries, were the latter not receivingDI benefits.
     There are, however, two alternativeexplanations for the weak labor force attachment of rejected
DI applicants. One possibility is that the behavior of rejected applicants does not reflect what it
wouldhave been were they neverto have applied for DI benefits. Another is that rejected applicants
differ from beneficiaries in characteristics unrelated to health, and that it is these characteristics
that lead to the low labor force attachment of this group. Either of these two possibilitiesposes a
potential problem for my maintained hypothesis that rejected applicants are a conservativecontrol
group for beneficiaries. The next two subsectionsdiscuss each of these possibilitiesin turn.
     A. The Effect of the Applicntion Decision on Employment.
    There are a variety of reasons to think that the behavior of rejected DI applicants may not
be comparable to what it would have been had they not applied for Dl benefits. One reason
might be that somerejected applicants still hope to qualify. Some do appeal their initial decisions
while others simply re-apply. While this rationale might explain why some rejected applicants do
not return to work, it is harder to see how it could explain the low earnings of those who do.
Furthermore, if this were a major part of what was going on, we would expect that over time,
rejected applicants would return to work. however, there is no evidence of this effect in either
my own or Treitel's data. Treitel actually has the data to do separate tahnlations for men that
neither appealed nor found their way onto DI by re-applying. The proportion among this group
who work in only slightly higher than it is for rejected applicants as a whole (40.9% of those that
had not appealed their decisions and 41.9% of those who had neither appealed their decisions nor
sucressinllyreapphied worked sonic time during 1972. These fignres compare to the overall figure
of 36.2%).

                                                 9
                                                                                             affect an applicant's
     Alternatively, we might imagine that the very act of applying could
              or         to wock.  This  could   occur  for a  vaciety  of reasons.    The    time that applicants
willingness      ability
must spend welting for a determination could cost them             both   general    and  specific human capital.
                                                                                 — in ill health and with some
                                                                  older  ones
Employers may be unwilling to hire men especially
                                                  —


indication of a weakattachment to the labor force.
                                                                                    is probably real, it is hard
      Although each of the effects mentioned in the last paragraph
to imagine that they, rather      than  ill health, provide     the major     explanation     for the low earnings
             force  attachment  of            applicants.   Though     it is  true   that  older workers who lose
and labor                          rejected
their jobs typically have a more difficult time finding new jobs than do younger workers, available
evidence suggests that few of those men under the age of 60 who lose their jobs leave the labor
force.3' Nevertheless,employmentrates are low even among the yoonger rejected applicants.
      In addition, itis possibleto gauge the importanceof the processingdelay for limiting applicants'
                                                                                   involves. The Social Security
job proepecteby looking at the time that application for Di actually
                                  of the  dates  that individuals   apply    for benefits   and when they become
 Administration keeps records
                                       the  date  on          the               became    disabled,  as determined
entitled to   them   (5 months  after                 which        applicant
                                                 This  information    clearly    indicates   that  meet individuals
 by  the  Social  Security Admlnietration).
                                                                      when they are already out of work. It
 apply for benefits some months after becoming disabled,32
 then takes   about   two months  for the   initial determination    to be made." It seems doubtful that by
            their  search for work  hy  a  few  months,   applicants    significantly   reduce their employment
 delaying
 prospects.
      B. AlternativeFactors InfluencingReemploymentProspects ofRejectedApplicants.
      There are a large number of reasons why older working.age men might leave the labor force.
 Some presumably do leave for poor health, but others may simply be tired of workingor face poor
 labor market prospects. (For convenience, I will refer to this second 'group'as poorly motivated.)
 Such men might find DI an attractive alternative and apply for benefits. Applicants for DI would
 therefore include those who are poorlymotivated as well as those in poor health.
      This situation does not, in and of itself, invalidate my conclusion that rejected applicants are
 at least as       to return to work as beneficiaries would be in the absence of DI. The variety of
               likely


        For esamde, Diamond and Hannman (lee4), nniag the NLS data, Cad that             only 2.e% of men as to 54 and
                                                                                                  from their Joba. Parnen,
        se.s% of men 55 toCS leave the labor force after having been invslnntarily terminated
                                                    55 to 79 in 1976 the proportion   of thom in the labor force was no
        Gagen and King (lees) find that for menlmt                    the          59        than  it wan among men who
        lower among those whohad involnotarily          their Johnin      previ000    yearo
        had not.
                                                                                    wan 7.71 monthn, with little year-to-
        Leihy (1979) reportn that, between 1968 and 1979 the average filing delay
        year variation.
    "    For the pant few yearn the average length of time between
                                                                     the application ror Of and the initial determination
         han ranged from60 to 70 dayn (Social Secarity Adminintration, 1905). Appealo
                                                                                            involve mach more time, bat
         lena than 30% of applicanto initiallydenied beoefitnappeal.


                                                            10
 factors affectingthe behaviorof rejected applicantscould also be expected to influencebeneficiaries
 (were they not receiving benefits). A problem could arise in a situation where the Social Security
 examiners accepted the disabled but rejected the poorly motivated. In this situation, beneficiaries
 would tend to be in poor health but well motivated, and rejected applicants would tend to be in
 good health but poorly motivated. If, in addition, the poorly motivated were less likely to work
 than those in poor health, then we would conclude that the labor force attachment of rejected
 applicants understates the labor force potential of beneficiaries.
      There is little reason to believe that among the eligible population, the Social Security ex-
 aminers take explicit account of anything other than health and work capacity.34 Still, if health
 and motivation ace negativelycorrelatedamongst the applicant population, selectionbased on poor
health would also imply selectionin favor of the highly motivated. While health and motivation are
probably not negatively correlated in the overall population, the self-selection of applicants could
generate this kind of correlation in the applicant pool.
     To see this more concretely, imaginethat there are two kinds of men whoapply for DI benefits:
those who are in poor health (the disabled) and those that are poorly motivated (the lazy). In
this situation, knowing that an applicant is not in poor health implies that he must be lazy (and
vice versa). There would, therefore, be a negative correlation between these two factors within
the applicant population. Now imagine that the medical screening is effective, thus permitting the
disabled to pass the medical screening to get onto DI while the lazy do not. Effective screening
implies that the rejected applicants are lazy but not disabled,while the beneficiaries ace disabled but
not lazy. Regardlessof whetherthere are actually two distinct populations, as long as both health
and other factors such as motivation affect a man's decision to apply for DI benefits, knowing that
an applicant is in relativelygood health raises the odds that he is poorly motivated. The correlation
between health and motivation will tend to be less positive or more negativeamongst the applicant
pool than it is among the overallpopulation.
     To get somenotion of the merits of the above scenario, we can use the 1972 and 1978
                                                                                               surveys
to identify non-health differences between the rejected applicants and beneficiaries. Table 2 has
already confirmedthat, whileapplicants tend to have less education and are less likely to be white
than non-applicants, the differences between rejected applicants and beneficiaries on these scores
are small.
    The Social Security earnings history allows us to compare the pre-disability earnings and
employment experience of rejected applicants and beneficiaries. The typical Dl beneficiary had
earned substantially less than had other men his age even before applying for benefits (37% lower
in 1972 and 24% lower in 1978). The difference between beneficiaries and rejected applicants was,

    Social Security ene.nhinern Follow detailed rules and regulation, that are written to emphasize",nedicolly deter-
    minable (emphazinadded) physical and mental in,pairn,entfrj"
                                                        vs. 24%). Tocompare the pro-disability
however, quite small in comparison(40% vs 37% and 33%
work attachment of the two groups, I used the information from the Social Security earnings
record to calculate the number of quarters of Social Security-covered employment applicants had
experienced  in the 10 years prior to their application. In 1972 the median number of quarters
worked in covered employment for beneficiaries was 36.5 as against 32.4 for rejected applicants.
                                                                                               and the
In 1978 the difference was again about one year (38.8 vs. 35.7). Both the earnings
                      data  do show  differences  between rejected applicants  and  beneficiaries, with
           of
quarters coverage
                                                                              and  somewhat     more of
the beneficiaries showing both somewhat higher pro-applicationearnings
                                                                             these differences  are not
an attachment to the work force than did rejected applicants. However,
dramatic.
      We do see someindication in these tabulations that rejected applicants differ from beneficIaries
in ways unrelated to health, but it seems unlikely, at least to me, that these relatively small
                                                                        the two groups. Perhaps the
 differences can swamp the rather large differences in health between
 most convincing  evidence here is Nagi's: his teams found that 80.8% of allowances as against 49.9%

 of the denials were incapable of gainful work (see table 3).

 3.   OtherResearch
     The data on rejected applicants suggest that DI has bad much smaller disincentive effects
 tban a variety of cross-sectionalstudies have seemedto suggest. In this section I consider possible
                                                                      best known but not the only
 explanations for these discrepancies. Parsons' 1980a article is the
 example of this work. Using      data on men   who  were between  the  ages of 48 and 62, Parsons
 estimates a labor  force participation equation  with a measure of tbe  DI replacement rate as one
 of his explanatoryvariables. His coefllctent estimates imply an elasticity of non-participation with
                                                                                  of men this age to
 respect to benefit levels of .63, and imply that DI has induced more than 5%
 withdraw from the labor force.
      As mentionedin the introduction, an important limitationofthis approach is that the replace-
 ment ratio is a decreasing function of past earnings. We cannot tell from Parsons' work whether
                                                                                                   This
 it is those with low earnings or high replacement ratios who are leaving the labor force.
 distinctionis fundamental,  since most theoriesof  why  some  work while  others do not would  predict
 that those with low earnings would be the ones less likely to work. Moreover, individual wages
 and earnings are themselves in part fnnctionsofprevious work history, and the replacement ratin
                                                                                                but are
 will pick up some of this heterogeneity. These problems are not specific to Parsons' work
 endemic to the use of cross-sectional data. Still, they should lead us to suspect that his coefficients

 overestimatethe true impact of Dl itself.

      ss   Poe both rejected applicaste and beollciaeies, afser adjsstieg los inflation svisg average   hoorly earnings of
                                                                            so their application. These s,e,liass werethen
           prodoctios workers, I competed meslaisearnings two years priorand
           cospared to those of men ss-54 is ls7s (for the 1972 servey)        1975 (for the  1979 sorvey).

                                                              12
     Some illustrative calculationswill give an indiration of the potential magnitude of this problem.
Using tbe 1972 survey, I follow Parsons as closely as possible. I restrict my attention to men who
worked for at least one quarter in covered employment during 1966 and who were between the
ages of 48 and 62 in 1972. For this sample I compute both average earnings (through 1966) and
potential disability benefits (the, so called PL4), using the schedule applicable as of 1966.36 I then
estimate non.employmentprobabilities as a function of the log of the replacement ratio, age and
different health indicators.37
     Results are reported    in Table 5. The first three columns come close to replicating Parsons'
results. Depending on what measure of health       I use, I estimate elasticities of non-participation
with respect to the replacementratio ranging hetween .24 and .72. These estimates are remarkably
close to Parsons' .63.. In the 4th through 6th columns I restrict my sample to those who have
never applied for DI benefits. The estimated coefficients move little, with two out of three of the
estimated elasticities rising somewhat?8 For this population of non-applicants I have estimated
effects very close to those Parsons does despite the fart that in this case there can be no possible
causal connectionbetween high benefit levels and labor force withdrawal. While these estimates do
not prove that DI had little impact on participation rates, they do seem to suggest that estimates
using this kind of specificationshould not he interpreted causally.
      Studies that focus on either applications or program participation, rather than on labor force
participation, typically obtain results that imply much smaller disincentive effects than those of
Parsons. Leonard (1979), using someof the same data that I do, estimates that for 45 to 54 year-
old men a 10% increase in benefits will induce a 3.5% increase in the number of Di beneficiaries.
While an elasticity of DI participation with respect to benefit levels of .35 looks quite close to the
.63 elasticity that Parsons reports, what this means in terms of labor force participation depends
on how an impact on program participation translates into an impart on labor force participation.
If it is assumed that each of the beneficiaries attracted by the higher benefits would have been
workingwere they not receivingDI benefits, then each new beneficiarymeans one less labor force
participant. But to convert this one-for-one change in the number of labor force participants into
an elasticity, it is necessary to take into account the fact that there are more than twice as many
older men out of the labor force as there are men the same age on Dl. Even assuming that all

                                  I
    To calculate average eaeningn used the same one that the Social Security Adminiutration would in calcslating
    the average monthly earnings (the ÂME) for the purpose of benefit determinations. Programn to calculate
    both the ÂME and the PtA were hisdly provided by Daniel Frnsberg. The cede was originally based on the
    nnmmary of the law that appears each year in the Statistical Supplement to the Sociul Security Bulletin.
    I also eliminate individuals whoseaverage mosthly eatningnwere below      $20.   Thin rmtcictiuu on untlirrn had
    no qualitative impact on my rmaltn.
                                   I
    In uprcificationn not reported allowed the log of the nocial orcurity henrfitu anI avcragr earnings to have
    ueporate coefficient,. Doing no had a negligahleelfectu on Iog-libolihoo,l ntotinticn changing them my at ,nmt
    .5. Iudividttal coeeficieutn were always of the 'correct' rigs but were often innigoificant (It nrenln neon that
    l'arronr facml the name problem. See footnote Is Parnonn (1900n).).

                                                       13
of those who were attracted to DI by higher benefits would have otherwise been working, the .35
elasticity of program partiripation with respect to benefit levels implies something less than a .16
elasticity of labor force non-participation with respect to benefit levels.39 Leonard's results thus
seem to imply non-participation elasticities of at most one quarter of those of Parsons.40

     Studies using aggregate time series statistics on applicants (Lassdo et. a!. 1979, Halpern
1979) have estimated that a 10% increase in
                                                  DI benefits will raise applications by roughly 5%.
Assuming    tbat  the new applicants are no less likely to pass the medical screeniug than were those
already on the program, this 5% increasein applications sbouid translate into a 5% increase in the
number of beneficiaries but a less than 2.5% increase in the number of older men out of the labor
force, If, as seems likely, the new applicants would be less likely than the earlier ones to pass the
medical screening,this 25 should be decreased correspondingly.Either this 2.5 or Leonard's 1.6 is
substantially below Parsons' 6.3.
      To summarire, no one has disputed the claim that there are disincentives and social costs
 associated with DI. The questions are about magnitudes. Data on rejected applicants give es-
 timates of magnitudes in line with much other research in this area. The real contrast is with
 the cross-sectional econometric estimates, but there are independent reasons to believe that these
                                41
overestimatetrue effects.

4. The Historical Record
     So far I have argued that data on rejecteddisability insurance applicants suggest that no more
than half of DI beneficiaries would work were it not for DI, and, thus, that DI can account for no
more than 50% of the postwar drop in the participation rates of older men. Yet if these claims
are valid, how is it possible to account for the trends in labor force participation and program
                                                                 on DI have been doing before DI
growth? What would the counterparts of those men currently
existed? If DI cannot account for the drop in participation, what doss? What accounts for the
dramatic growth in DI that occurred during the 1960's and 1970's? Without plausibleanswers to
these qsestions the foregoing asalysis may appear unconvincing. In this section I will addressthese
broader issues.
    If those currently receivingdisability benefits are truly incapable of gainful employmentwe
should expect to find during the 1950's and 1960's—beforethe major growth of DI—a sirable pro-

  s'       1972 there were2.2345 to t4-year-ohl men out of the lahor force for every one on the Dl roles: .35/2.23 .16.
  40                                                                                             I
        Leonard trannlaten program partiripation ioto labor force participation differently than have. Using annual
        time series data, he runs a regrmnion of lahor force non-participation rates on Dl participation rates, fiodo a
                           I                                                      I
        coefficientof ahove and concludesthat DI huu induced a more than 1 for decre,ae in participation. Leonard
        himself does not seem to put much stoch in these tims series results.
                                                                                  the literature, hot rather to pot my
        My purpose in thin section has not trees to give as entenoive review of
   41

        tabulation, on rejected applicants within the content of the existing literature. For a much more extensive
        review of the liteeatsre, ,ee Leonard (1996).

                                                           14
portion of men reporting themselves disabled and either out of work or not in regular employment.
On the other hand, if many of those currently receiving disability benefits are perfectly capable of
work, we wouldexpect to find many of their counterparts workingin the period before DI existed.
In this case we would expect to find many fewer men reporting themselves disabled and out of work
in the period before tbe expansion of DI. Two surveys of the disabled during the early postwar
years suggest the truth is closer to the former than the latter pattem.
      In September 1949 two relevant questions were included in the Current Population Survey:
           First of all, I wouldlike to check persons (in this household) who aren't able to
           do their regular work or other duties today because of illness or disability.
           Is there anyone else (in the household) under 65 years old with a physical or
           mental condition that allows him to work only occaaionai.ly or not at all?

    For each person identified as disabled, the enumerator asked the duration of the disabllity.
3.7% of men 45 to 54 years old and 8.0% of men 55 to 64 years old had been disabled for at least 6
months. Were their counterparts on DI 30 years later, they would have accounted for roughly 75%
of the older men receiving benefits. Not all in this group were out of work (78.4%were), nor would
all of them have qualified on technical grounds. (Over 96% of these men had been working at the
time that they became disabled, so it can be presumed that many wouldhave had a sufficient work
history to qualify for DI.)42 Dependingon exartly what assumptions are made about the portion of
the 1949 disabled who would have counterparts currentlyon DI, it is probably advisable to adjust
the 75% downwardsomewhat. Still, what these numbers showis that before DI existed there was a
stock of older men who were both disabled and out of work. Their counterparts should constitute
a substantial portion of those currently receiving DI benefits.
     In 1966 the SocialSecurity Administrationsurveyed the disabled.43 By that year DI had grown
to about one-half of its maximum size with 2.0% of 45 to 54 year old men and 5.8% of 55 to 64 year
old men receivingbenefits(in 1979 4.3% of 45 to 54 year old men and 11.5% of 55 to 64 year old men
received benefits). Accordingto the survey36.4% of 45 to 54 year old and 55.1% of the 55 to 64 year
old severely disabled men were receiving some kind of Social Security Benefits.44 Another 46.3% of
the severely disabled 45 to 54 year olds and 32.7% of the severely disabled 55 to 64 year olds had

 42   The above tabulations are from Moore and Sandern(loss).
      The1966 survey was conducted using a two-stageprocedure. A mail survey was used to screenfoe the disabled,
      and then, for those idestised as disabled, an in depth personal interview was conducted The sample for the
      mailsneveyinclsded population frames from the Current Popslatios Ssrvey (CI'S), the Dl rolls, the welfare
      rolls, and the population denied Dl besefitn. For a detailed description, see llaher (1967). 1 am gratefsl to
      Harold Laft foe having provided me with copiesof the 1966 nsrvey and to Mordechai Lands for having provided
      me with the survey isstrsment.

      The 1966 survey does sot allow me to dietisgsinh between Social Security retiree,vnt an,l disalility benefits.
      All of those benefits going to men nuder the age of 62 will l,edisal,ility besvfitr as will a large portiosof the
      besefit, going to men between the ages of 62 and 64.

                                                          15
never applied for Social Security benefits.45 Again, not all of these men were out of work, but the
                                                                                           out ofwork as
majority were (93.6%of the 45 to 64 year old severely dieabled nonapplicants were
of the survey week, 60% did not work at all during the year preceding the survey). Furthermore,
of those that did work the vast majority either worked part-time (56% reported usually working
                                                                                                 50 weeks
less than 35 hours per week) and/or part of the year (76% reported working less than
                      all ofthese   men would  have           for DI  benefits but many could have  — 42%
during 1965). Not                                   qualified
 of the non-applicants and 82% of those denied benefits bad a sufficient earningshistory to qualify
 for benefits.46 It seems clear that as of 1966 there was a rather large population of potential
                                                                                                        DI
                                                        who   were  not                     and who   were
 beneficiaries — men who were eligible for benefits                     regularly employed
 not yet receivingbenefits.
      What were these men living on? Unfortunately,the 1949 NovemberCPS contained no infor-
 mation on sources of income. We do know that as of 1950 more than half a million working-aged
                                                                                             welfare bene-
 individuals were receivinggeneral assistance.47 Another half miffion were receiving
                             at   the disabled such as Aid  to  the  Permanently   and Totally Disabled.46
 fits specificallytargeted
                tbere were             two hundred  thousand   severely disabled individualsreceivingVet-
 Beyond    this             probably
  erans benefits.49. These numbers would seem to imply that many of the 1.3 millionmen identified
 in the CPS as severely disabled were probably receivingsomekind of public income support.50
       The Social Security's 1966 survey of the disabled doss include information on income sourcea.
                                                                               old men not receivingSocial
  Accordingto thia survey,65.4% of the severely disabled 45 to 64 year
                      were  still           some kind  of public  income  malntenanre.51   Furthermore, of
  Security benefits               receiving

   4                                                                                                            the iaet survey.
        Unlessotherwise stated the sourceforthese tabulationswill be the author's computationsusing
        Frequencies are basedon weighted counts.
                                                                                                                            The
   46   The version if the lass survey in my possession does sat have the informationto deterosiseeligibility.
        numbeen is the text came team Frolich (1970).
   4    Table 221 is the 1996 rae Social Security Bulletin;Annual Statistical         Sspplesnentshows.a23 million general
                                                                                     not specifically targeted at the disahled,
        assistancecases as at 1950. Generalassistance, a state rus program, inbecause       of beingdisabled. As at this date,
        but wecas assume thatmany who wereon the rollswere is tactthe        there
        roughly 40% of those goisg onto general understates
                                                      assistance reported        prosimate cause as being disability (Social
                                                                   the proportion of those on general asuistascewho were
        Security Bullrtin, 1950). This probably be less
        disabled, both becausethe disabled would               likely to leave the program asd becansesome of those who
        were disabled wouldn'thave      identifiedthis an the  reason  they wrre goingauto general assistance.
   4    Is this category I include recipients of pnbllc employee disability     benefits togetherwith those receiving Aid to
                                                                                               Tablm 210 and lea in the 1986
         the Blind or Aid to the Permanentlyand Totally Disabled. Numbem are from
         The Social Security Bulletin; Annual Statistical Supplement.
   s     As sf1950 there were over 2 million men receiving Veterans Disabilitythose    Benefits, but probably not much more
         than 10% were, in tact, severely disabled. The numbers are based on               reported in Table 171 of the 1966
          The Social Srrsrily Bulletin;Annual Slslisiirsl Supplement.
                                                                                                    Slstisliml Supplement.
         The above figures are derived tram the 1980 The Sorisl Security Bulletin; Annual
                                                                              restricted     attention  to those ores for whom
         Since income uorurcmare for 1961, 1 have,for these labulatious,                 my
                                                                                               income maistesance Aid to the
          the asset of their health limitationwas prior to lOea. I have inclrrded as psblic
                                                                      other welfare (2%),  Veterans   disability benefits(11%),
          Permanentlyand Totally Disabled (24%), AFDC (6%), insurance benefits               (6%) and worhrrn cosrpessation
         public employee    disability benefits (8%), rrnemployment
         (2%).

                                                                16
the 61% who were married (spouse present) almost half had wives that worked. Finally, although
few of these men worked full-year or full-time, a fairly large number did work at least part-time.

     As an indication of the relative importance of these different sources of income, for married
men, the men themselvescontributed on the average about 17% of the family's incomes, their wives
 contributed about 29% and 41% came from public income maintenance. Median yearly family
income for this group amounted to $2735. (The Current Population Survey shows the median
family income for comparably aged married men that year was $8044.)" For unmarried men the
men themselves contributed 21% of the total, while public income maintenance contributed 71%.
Median family income for this group was $1212. (Medianincome for 45 to 64 year old single men
in 1965 was   $5200.)
     The simple historical trends presented in the introduction to this paper appeared to suggest
that DI was drawing from a population which would otherwise have been gainfully employed. A
closerlook at the historicalrecord suggeststhat DI was, toalarge extent, drawingfrom a population
already out of work. What DI did was to substitute a federal earningsrelated program for the more
meager state run programs that already existed."
    The historical record is quite consistentwith the previously presented informationon rejected
DI applicants, which found that less than 50% of DI beneficiaries would work were they not receiving
benefits. This analysis indicates that, before Dl existed or before it had grown to its present size,
there was a sizable population of men both disabled and out of work. In 1949, for example, 5.6%
of all males 45 to 64 years of age reported themselves disabled. Assuming that two thirds of the
counterparts of the 5.6% would he on DI 30 years later, this population could therefore account
for 50% of the current DI population.54 Similarly, in 1966 there seemed to he a population of men
identified as severely disabled, but who had not applied for DI benefits. This population was of
comparablesize to the one already receivingbenefits. Thus it seems likely that much of the growth
of DI that occurred between 1966 and 1979 camefrom this population.55

    This number is basedno the author's tabolatiosu ssisg the March lafifi Correst Popolation Survey Tape.
    The federal role varies acress programs. Dl operates usder a ssiform set of roles and regulationsnet out by
    Congress and the Social Sernrity Administration,though these are administeredby each state. Benefitsand
    administrativecosts are borne solely by the federal gnversmest. With Aid to the Permanently asd Totally
     Disabled, states designed their own programssubject to federal guideliorsboth in terms of what constituted
    disability and in terms of benefit schedules. Cuutu were shared approximately eqnally between the federal
    gsvernmentand the states. With general assistance, the states set their own guidelines and bear the full casts.
    With 551, the federal government determineseligibility utandardsand minimum benefit amounts, while states
    are allowed to supplement these amounts. (See the SocislSecsrily Ja'sndhooh,1982)
 54 By 1979, the year that Dl reached its peah nine, 7.5% of 45 to g4 year old men were
                                                                                            receiving Dl benefits.
    Whilesot all severely disabledmen were receiving Dl benefits is 1979, more than twn.thirdswere. le.e% of this
    age grosp were identified by the Nationalllealth Interview Snrvey as severely disabled (see Wilson and Drnry
    (1981)). We have seen that virtnally all those on 1)1 report themselves severely disabled. Thus we calculate
    that in 1979 7.5% / te.a% = 70% of the older severely disabled men were receiciug Disability Benefits.
    The reader may assume that with the improceoievt iv medical technology the health status of the population
    vhould hace i,uprored, hut thin in not necessarily vo. For one thive, to the estent that medical advances hare
                                                                                                             four factors
    What can account for Di's rapid growth during the 1960's and 1970's? There are
to which I think this growth can plausibly he attributed. First, evidence suggests that, partly
                                                                   was spreading.56 Second, dejure and
through the government'sefforts, knowledge of the program
                              standards  were  being   relaxed   over this period of time. Third, the
probably dcfocto eligibility                                                                       norms as
relative attractiveness of benefits rose substantially over this period of time. Fourth,
                                                                          While  the   third   and  fourth of
to what constitutes a health problem may have been changing.57
                                       that DI  drew   from   the          population,     the  first two are
these effects would certainly suggest                              working
compatible with the view    that DI drew  from a  population    already  out of work.
                                                                                                          the
     If DI can explain only a part of the postwar drop in participation rates, what explains
                                            the          of this paper.   Nonetheless    it is  worth  noting
rest? Answeringthis question is beyond           scope
                                                                                                the first half
that labor force participation rates have been falling throughout the century. During
                                                                                      while   in more recent
of the century these trends were concentratedamong men over the age of 65,
                                                   in their fifties and early  sixties.
years they have been concentratedamong men

Conclusion
                                                                                                     are
     Data on rejected DI applicants seem to provideclear, direct evidencethat DI beneficiaries
                       and that      of them  would  not be working  even  ifthey  were not on DI. We
on the whole disabled,          many
saw that therewere other interpretations of the weaklabor force attachment of rejected applicants,
                                                                              that emphasizeshealth.
but also saw that the availableevidenceseems to support an interpretation
There were two remalning pnzzlest  how  to explain  what  seemed  to be a  preponderance    of evidence
                                                                the historical  trends.  In  section 3 I
suggestingsubstantial disincentiveeffects, and bow to explain
                                                                either had  been   misinterpreted or is
argued that the evidence pointing to large disincentiveeffects
flawed. Cross-sectionalwork focusingon participation     has produced   the  large estimates, but here
                                 that these                    the true  causal effects. Research that
 we have ample reason to believe            effects exaggerate
                 the          has            estimates of  substantially  smaller  disincentive   effects,
 has focused on      program      produced
                                                                                                                         tend to
        means lower age-specific mortality rates, we would    expect to and that the ssevivieg popalatios woold
                                                          Life tables chow that 3.9%, of men 60 years old in 1980 would
        be more frail. This effect could he non-trivial. sot
        not havebeen alive in 1970 while 5.4% would          havebeen slice is sore (see Poterba asd Ssmmsrs, (1986)).
                                                           have led to a de-institstiosalization we would expect thin         to
        Similarly, to the extent that medical advancesthe  noninstitutionalired    popslation, the basis foe the labor force
        increase the peoportion of the disabled is                              have probably had the largest    nnch   impact.
        statistics. I suspect this effect is qsite small. Psychiatric drsgs
                                           of 55-59 year old men were institutionalised in 1960, 1.13% is 1970 and .83%
        According to the censns, 1.58%               of the           ill can   account  for, at most, a one percentage poist
        is 1980. Thus, the de-inatitstionalination          mentally
                                                                              we would ales expect that rbasges in medical
        decreaseis labor force participation rates. On the other band,
                                                             incidenceofcertain diseases and toincreasesin thewould  functional
         technologywould haveled both to decreases in thewe     wosld expect that changes in the work place                 hare
         capacity of those in poor health. Furthermore,         of these   various  effects dominates   is probably impossible
         lowered the physical demandingnensofjobs. Which
         to determine. (we Wilson and Drury (1981)).
    "    In 1962-1963,17% of working heads of households reported         that they knew that cash benefits were available
                                                                                                                       the same
         for disabled worhern(ltatona, (1981)). Is 1978,ge% of the comparable popslstiosreported knowing
         thing.
                                                                            literature (we, for example, Verbrsgge (1994)).
         It in this last view that seems to donrisate the non-economic        stan,lar,ls as income or wealth effects.
         An economint might very well wast to interpret these changing

                                                                18
 effects whose magnitudes are very much in line with those
                                                             suggested by the evidence presented
 in this paper. In section 4 1 turned my attention to the historical record. Closer examination of
 available postwar data suggested that DI has polled a substantial nomber of its
                                                                                 beneficiaries from
 a population that would have been out of work regardless of the availabilityof DI.
      Data on rejected DI applicants together with available historicalinformationpresent a consis-
tent picture. It is a picture that suggests that most of those on DI suffer from substantial health
limitations ou their ability to work, and that less than half wouldbe working even in the absenceof
DI. Thoughthere are reasonsto question the interpretations of this informationthat I have
                                                                                            favored,
it does seem to provide direct evidence on the potential disincentive effectsofDI, and should cast
 doubt on the large estimated effects drawnfrom cross-sectional studies.
      Though I have been arguing that, by and large, DI is successfully targeting its intended bene-
ficiaries, this is a far cry from saying that the program is beyond improvement. None of the above
evidencecan answer questionsabout what, on the margin, wouldbe the precise impact of changing
benefit levels or screeningstringency on the composition of either the applicant or beneficiary
                                                                                               pools.
Answeringsuch policy-relevantquestions clearly requires a kind of data we simply do not have. In
fact, it is hard to imagine that we could possibly get credible answers to these particular
                                                                                            questions
in the absenceof artual social experiments.53
       One might want to read a methodological point into this paper. To study behavioral
                                                                                          responses
to   social programs (e.g., disability insurance, unemployment insurance, workers'
                                                                                   compensation),
researchershave often used replacement cates, potential benefits or other program parameters as
explanatory variables,even when these variables could not plausibly be taken to be exogenous.59
This paper should underline the potential dangers in auth exercises. The results of such excercisea
simply cannot be informative about any causal relationshipbetween program design and behavioral
response.t3
      More generally, I believe we have been seduced by our tralsing in
                                                                          regression techniques to
believe that, with the arbitrary addition of a few extra controls or a dubious instrument, we can
turn non-experimental into experimentaldata. At the same time we learn of the potential biases
involved in econometric estimation, we also learn of techniques sometimes available for
                                                                                        undoing
these biases. What we seem not to leam is that not every disease has a cure, nor will
                                                                                          every
cure improve our patient's health. Too often we take potential problems seriously only when our

     Is tact 1980 legislation asshonioed  the Social .Secr.nity A,tministration to "develop and carry out experiments
      and demonatratios projects...inclsdieg sock methods      as a red oction is benefits based os eursisgs, designed to
      encourage the retsrs  to work ofdisahlrrl hesrtciaries." Despite plassiug by thr Serial Security Administration,
      a eomhisation of adwioictrative h,trdlrs as,l b,tdgetury pressures has
                                                                              precested soy such demonstration projects
     -from beisg carrir,l oat.
 ss For example, the
                     program variables typically are fttsctions of the past hehacior of the potential heseficiarien

     lam, quite ebeioanly, sot the first to make this poittt.   See,   for exaorple, Welch   (lair) as,l Asheefelter (1983).
                                                          19
                                                                                         such a strategy
estimates contradict our priors. The absurdityis that we then take the results of
as "strong support" in favorof "the [i.e., our] theory".
                                                                                   of ourselves as Sher-
     To repeat Edward Leasner's (1983) message, perhaps we should think
                                                                 our        rather than as experimental
lock Holmeses piecing together hits of evidence to develop            story
                                                  in  the      can  ever be informative  about the mag-
scientists measuring an effect. Since no data,            end,
                                            in  our              we  should put an  emphasis  on natural
nitude of the specification error iuvolved           estimates,
                                 we can  be         confident  that  what  generates the variation in our
 or quasi experiments  in which              fairly
                                                      we are studying. We should also look beyond our
 explanatory variables is exogenous to the process
                                                                      of evidence that either support or
 noses, beyond the data we begin analyzing, for bits and pieces
 contradict the story we are telling. The point    is  not completely to disclaim econometric method-
                                                                                             a natural or
 ology, but rather to make   the obvious  (if often  forgotten)point that, without either
                                                                                       there is little that
 actual experiment generating exogenous variation in our explanatory variables,
 econometric techniques can do to generatecredible results.




                                                      20
                                           References

Ashenfelter,Orley, "Determining Partiripation in Income-Tested Social Programs," Journal of the
    AmericalStatistical Association,September 1983, 78, 517-525.
Dailey, Martin N., "Aging and the Ability to Work: Policy Issues and Recent Trends," in Gary
    Burtless, ed., Work, health and Income Among the Elderly, Washington DC.: The Brookings
    Institution, 1987, 59-102.
Dye, Barry aod Schechter, Evan, Technical Introduction, 1978Survey of Disability and Work, U.S.
    Department of Health and Human Services, Social Security Administration, Office of Research
     and Statistics, 1982.
Collins, Katharine P., and Erfie, Anne, "Social Security Disability Benefits Reform Act of 1984,
    Legislative History and Summary of Provisions,"SocialSecurity Bulletin, April 1985, 48, 3-27.
Colvez, Akinand Blanchet,Madeleine,"DisabilityTrends in the United States Population 1966-76:
    Analysis of Reported Causes," American Journal of Public Health, May 1981, 71, 464-471.

Diamond, Peter A. and Hausman, Jerry A., "The Retirement and UnemploymentBehavior of
    Older Men," in HenryH. Aaron and Gary Ductless, eds., Retirement and Economic Behavior,
    Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, 1984, 97-134.
Dixon,Robert G., Jr., Social Security and Mass Justice: A Problem in Welfare Adjudication, New
    York: Prager, 1973.

Frolslich, Philip, "Denied Disability Insurance Applicants: A Comparisonwith Beneficiaries and
     Nonapplicants,"Report No. 11, Social Security Survey of the Disabled: 1966, U.S. Department
     of Health, Education and Welfare, Social Security Administration, Office of Research and
     Statistics, 1970.
Galhicchio, Sal and Bye, Barry, "Consistencyof Initial Disability Decisions Among and Within
    States," U. S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, Social Security Administration, Office of
    Policy, Office of Research and Statistics, Staff Paper No. 39, Social Security Administration
    Publication No. 13 -11869, 1980.
Goff, Phoebe H., "The Post Denial Experience of Disability Insurance Applicants, 1957-1962,"
    Office of Research and Statistics, Social Security Administration, Staff Paper No. 5, 1970.

Grossman, Michael, "The Correlation Between health and Schooling,"in Nestor Terleckyj, ed.,
    HouseholdProduction and Consumption: Studies in Income and Wealth, VoL 40, New York:
    National Dureau of Economic Research, 147-223, 1976.
Halpern, JaniceH., "The Social SecurityDisabilityProgram: Reasonsfor Its Growth and Prospects
    for the Future,' New England Economic Review, May/Jane 1979, 30-48.
llamber, Lawrence D., "Identifyingthe Disabled: Concepts and Methods in the Measurement of
    Disability," Social Security Llulleti,i, December 1967, 30, 17-34.

                  "Disability, Work, sad Income Maintenance:    Prevalence of Disability, 1966,"
    Social Security Bslletin, May 1968, .11, 11-23.

Ilaveman Robert 11. and Wolfe, llarl,sra 1., (1984a) "1)isshitity Transfers and Early Retirement:

                                              21
    a Causal Relationship," Journal of Public Economics, June 1984,   22, 47-66.
                                                                                   Journal of
                  (1984b) "The Decline of Male Labor Force Paricipation: Comment,"
    Political Economy, June 1984, 92, 532-341.
Katona, George, Private Pensions and IndividualSavings, MonographNo. 40, Survey Research
    Center, Universityof Michigan,Ann Arbor, MI., 1965.
                                                                                               the
Koitz, David, "Social Security: ReexaminingEligibility for Disability Benefits," issue Brief,
    CongressionalResearcb Service, 1984.
Lando, Mordechal E., Coate, Malcolm B. and Kraus, Ruth, "Disability Benefit Applicationsand
    tbe Economy," Social Security Bulletin, 1979, 42. 3-10.
Lando, Mordechal, Fsrley, Alice V. and Brown, Mary A., "Recent Trends in tbe Social Security
    Disability InsuranceProgram," SocialSecurity Bulletin, October 1982,45, 3-14.
                                                        Benefit Loss Due to Delays in Filing, 1968-
Leihy, Robert E., "An Analysisof Disability Insurance
     1976," U.S.Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Social Security Administration,
     Office of Research and Statistics, Note No. 11, 1979.

Leonard, Jonathan S., "The Social Security DisabilityInsurance Program and Labor Force      Partic-
                                                                                        1979.
     ipation," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 392, August
                                                                                        in Monroe
                    "Disability System Incentives and Disincentives for the Disabled," ILR
     Berkowitz and M.Ann Hill, eds., Disability and the Labor Market, Ithaca, NY:            Press,
     1986, 64-94.
 Masbaw, Jerry L., Bureauacratic Justice: Managing SocialSecurity Disability Insumnce Claims,
     New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1983.

 Moore, Marjorie E. and Sanders, Barkev S., "Extent of Total Disability in the United States,"
      Social Security Bulletin, November 1950, 12, 7-14.
 Nagi, Sand Z., Disability and Rehabilitation: Legal, Clinical, and Self-Concepts and Measurement,
      Ohio State UniversityPress, 1969.
 Poterba, James M., and Summers, Lawrence H., "Public Policy Implicationsof Declining Old-Age
      Mortality," in Gary Burtless, ed., Work, Health and Income Among the Elderly, Washington,
      DC: The BrookingsInstitution, 1987, 19-58.
 Pnrnes,Herbert S., Gagen,Mary C. and King,Randall II. "Job Loss Among Long Service Workers,"
      in herbert J. Parnes, ed., Work and Retirement: a LongitudinalStudy of Men, Cambridge,
      MA: MIT Press, 1981, 93-131.

 Parsons, Donald 0., (1980a) "The Decline of Male Labor Force Participation," Journal of Political
      Economy, February 1980, 17-34.
                    (1980b) "Rarial Trends in Male Labor Force Participation,".4mericanEconomic
      Review,December 1980, 70, 911-20.
                     "The Male Labor Force Participation Derision: llealth, Reported Ilealth, and
      Economic Incentives," Economica, February 1982, 49, 81-91.


                                                22
Robertson, A. Haeworth, 'Social Security in the United States," Record Society of Actuaries,
   December1975, 1, 745-780.
Slade, Frederic B., 'Older Men: Disability Insurance and the Incentiveto Work," Industrial Rela-
     tions, Spring 1984, 22, 260-269.

Smith, Richard T. and Lilienfield, AbrahamM., The SocialSecurity DisabilityProgram: An Evalu-
    ative Study, Office of Research and Statistics, Social Security Administration,Research
                                                                                           Report
     No. 39, 1971.

Treitel, Ralph, 'Appeal by Denied Disability Claimants," U.S.Dept. of Health, Education and
     Human Services, Social Security Administration, Officeof Research and Statistics, Staff Paper
     No. 23.

                 'Disability Clalmants Who Contest Denials and Win Reversals Through Hear-
    logs," U.S. Dept. of Health, Education and Welfare, Office of Research and Statistics, Staff
    Paper No. 34.
                 "Recovery of Disabled Beneficiaries: A 1975 Followup Study of 1972 Allowances,"
    Social Security Bulletin,April 1979, 42, 3-23.
Verbrugge,Lois M., "Longer Life But Worsening Health? Trends in Health and the Mortality of
    Middleaed and Older Persons," Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, Summer 1984, 62, 475-
    519.

Welch, Finis, 'What Have We Learned From Empirical Studies of UI.," Industrial Labor Relations
    Review, July 1977, it 30, 451-461.
Wilson, Ronald W. and Drury,Thomas F., "Factors Affecting the Use of Limitationof Activity as
    a Health Status Measure," manuscript, U.S. DHHS, 1981.
                "Interpreting Trends in illness and Disability: Health Statistics and Health Sta-
    tus," Annual Review of Public Health, 1984, 5,83-106.
Wise, David A., "Disability and Work, Insurance and Choice: Descriptive Evidence," mimeo,
    harvard University, undated.
The Beilmon Report, Social Security Bulletin, May 1982, 45, 3-27.
General Accounting Office, Report to Congress: The SSA Should Provide More Management and
    Leadership In Determining Who is Eligable for Disability Benefits, Report No. 1IRD-76-105,
    1976.

General Accounting Office, Report to Congress: More Diligent Follow-up Needed to Weed Out
   Ineligible SSA Disability Beneficiaries, Report No. IIRD-81-48,1981.
"Reasons for Opening Cases for Public Assistance, 1947-49," Social Security Bulletin, July 1950,
    13, 11-15.
'Social Security Disability Amendmentsof 1980, Legislative History and Summaryof Provisions,"
    Social Security Bulletin, April 1981, 44, 14-31.
U. S. Congress, House Committee on Ways and Means, Status ofthe Disability Insurance    l'rram,
     Print 97-3, Washington D.C.: Government PrintingOffice, 1981.

                                               23
U. S. Congress,House Committee on Ways and Means, Hearing Before the Subcommittee of So-
    cial Security, Print, 98th Congress,1st Session, Print 98-78, Washington D.C.: Government
    Printing Office, 1984.
                                                                     Material and Data on Pro-
U. S. Congress, House Committee on Ways and Means, Backg,vund
                                                                                           100th
    grams Within the Jurisdiction of the Committee on Ways and Means, Committee Print,
                                                            Government Printing Office, 1987.
    congress, 1st Session, WMCP: 1004, WashingtonD.C.:
U. S. Department of Health and Human Services, Social Security Admin., Users' Manual for the
     1972 Survey of Disabled and Nondisabled Adults: Description and Documentation, 1979.
                  SocialSecurity Bulletin, Annual Statistical Supplement, 1986.
U. S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Public Health Service, The Vital Statistics of
     the United States, Vol. 2, Mortality, 1967.

U. S. Department of Labor, Employmentand Earnings, January 1986, 33, No. 1.
                  Employmentand Earnings, January 1981, 28, No. 1.
                  Employmentand Earnings, January 1976, 22, No. 7.
                  Employmentand Earnings, January 1971, 17, No. 7.
                  Employmentand Earnings, January 1966, 12, No. 7.
                  Employmentand Earnings, January 1961, 7, No. 7.
                  Employmentand Earnings, January 1956, 2, No. 7.
U.   S. Senate, Committee on Finance, Staff Data and Material on the Social Security Disability
      Insurance Program, Committee Print, 97-16, Washington D.C.: GovernmentPrinting Office,
      1982.




                                                24
               Appendix 1: The Social Security Disability Insurance Program
      The Social SecurityDisabilitytnsurance Program providesearly retirementbenefitsfor
                                                                                                 working-I
 aged men and women who are found to be incapable of gainful employment. To be eligible an
 individual must have worked in 'covered' employmentfor 5 of the 10 years preceding the onset of
 his or her disability.' The major groups excluded by this provision are governmentworkers who
 have their own programs and individuals who have always shown a weak attachment to the
                                                                                                   labor
 force. Until 1974 this latter group had to rely on state-run and financed
                                                                              general assistanceor on
 Aid to the Permanently and Totally Disabled. Since 1974 they have been
                                                                              eligible for 55f2
      Social Security Disability and Retirement benefits are calculated in the same way. Monthly
 benefits rise as a function of past earnings, but less than proportionately. Since the mid 1970's the
 typical worker in Isos or her 50's could expect to have about 60% of alter tax earnings replaced.
In contrast, a worker earning the maximum taxable amount could expect to have about 40% of
those earnings replaced, while a worker earning close to the minimum wage would get something
over 70% of his or her earnings replaced. Dependents of beneficiaries also receive benefits usually
amounting to 50% of those of the primary beneficiary. These dependents' benefits can easily push
the effective alter-tax replacementratio up to tOU%3
      Since 1972 DI beneficiaries who have been on the rolls for two years become
                                                                                      eligible for medi.
care. DI beneficiaries often also qualify for other transfer income, including Veterans Benefits,
Workers' Compensationand Government Disability. In some cases (e.g. Workers Compensationor
Government Disability benefits), there are offsets built in so that if total transfer income exceeds
80% of a beneficiary'spre-disabilityearnings SSDI benefits are reduced accordingly;in other cases
(e.g. for Veterans' Benefits) there are no such provisions.4 As an indication of the extent of these
overlaps, the 1978 Survey of Disability and Work shows more than 50% of DI beneficiaries receiv-
ing some other kind of transfer income, with the average amount for those receivingsome almost
matching average DI benefits.
      The statutory definition of disability requires that the worker moat be unable "to engage in
any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinablephysical for mental impair-
ment...of such severity that he is not only unable to do his previous work but cannot, consirlering
his age, education and work experience,engage in nssp(emphasis added) substantial gainful work."5

     Esceptionoate made for thone who become disabled before toening30.
    591 eeplacerl stale-r,in APTD programs with a national program. The effect was         to make the progeam    Iroth
    more availableand woee genesoos.
    Thme llgsres come from A. llaeworth Iloberlson(1075)
    A mote complete description of the intverelation,between varies, trerrgeams can he lost,,! is eithee Veonran
    (1983) or Hsrkhaareran,! lt,cesta, (1902).
    The esact wordingis "any rolrstontial gainful work which esist, is the nationaleconomy, regarrllmr of whether
    nrtch wrr,h enintn in rhe sat io,al economy." '1km wording was added try Crrngreso in 1967 to clearly rliotitrgrrrsh


                                                         25
The determination ofwhether an applicants meets the medicalrequirementsfor disability involves
                                                                                                     that the appli-
a sequential process. The local Social Security office accepts the application, verifies
                                                                                  relevant   medical     information
cant isn't currently engaged in gainful activity and then forwords the
to the State Disability Determination Service (DDS). There applicant's the                record    is evaluated    by
a two-personteam, at least one of      whom    is  a  doctor,  and   the  initial determination       is  made.   His-
                                                                                    this level.6 Applicants who
torically somewhat over 50% of applicants have been denied benefits at
are rejected   can appeal  their cases first to  an  Administrative      Law   Judge   (ALl) and then through
 the District Court system, hut by far the majority of determinations are made at the initial level.7
                                                                                                                    for
      Once on DI, a worker will he followed to make sure that he or she continues to qualify
                                                             file is monitored     to make     sure   the  individual
 benefits.  The  individuals'  Social Security   earnings
 doesn't go back to work.8 Furthermore, all beneficiaries who have not been specifically
                                                                                                               deemed
                                                                              three              If  an   individuals'
 permanently incapable of work have their cases reviewed every                        years.9
                                                                                               of                   the
 medical conditionimproves, or if there are medical advances that are capable ameliorating
                           he or  she will loose   benefits.   In  order  to encourage     beneficiaries     to return
 conditions in question,
                                                                                                              continue
 to work, those who do so voluntarily are considered to he engaged in trial work. They
                                                                                to  reinstatement      for  one  more.
 to receive benefits for one year and continue to malntaln the right
                                                    of  the late   1970's             15%   of  those    receiving   DI
  Medicare coverage continues for three. As                                roughly
  benefits left the rolls each  year.  Of these,   15%    were   terminated    because   it  was   determined      that
                                                                                               and 35% died while
  they no longer met the medical listings, another 50% reached retirement, age
  on the roles.15
       While the basic structure of the way that DI operates has remained
                                                                                            the same since it was
                                                                              increases   in  both the availability
  originally enacted into law in 1956, there have been important
  and generosity of benefits since that     time.    In  1960  individuals    under   the  age   of 50 first became
                        while in 1965  the  definition   of disability  was   liberalized   to  allow those without
  eligiblefor benefits
                                                                               more rapidly than wages.11
  permanent disabilities to qualify. At the same time benefits rose
       During the 1960's and early 1970's,        the  number     of workers    being awarded DI benefits rose
            In 1960, 208,000  workers  were   awarded     benefits.  By   1975  this figtsre had risen to 592,000.
  rapidly.

       Dl from snemploymentinsurance.
     a Since the late lore's there has hues a downward trend in the proportion of DI applicants passing the isilial
                                                                             denied benefits.
       screening. In recent yearn naughty 70% oF applicants were initially
       In loot 64.7% of alt allowances were   made at  the initial level (Lasdo et. at., 1062).
     a More precisely, indisidaala are allowed to wsrh as long as they do not earn more than a stipulated a,oount
       (currestly $300 per month).
                                                                                                of much controeeruy
       These reviews, called 'Costisuiug Diuahility Investigations" (CDt's) have been the center
       lately. I will come bach to the,u in the nest section.
     to Social                                                         selected pears.
                 Suc,trit Batletis, .4 usual Statistical Sspptewent,
                                                                                      from .33 to 51 (US.Congress
        ttot,vevs 1060and 1000 replace,srut rates forace,ageearners rose,ao,r than 50% for me,hiea,r benefits.
        ttooso Cois,aittes on Ways aod Mvass, 1005), white brarficiasiesbecame rtigihte

                                                               26
 At the same time, largely due to administrativeoverloads,'2 the proportion of DI beneficiaries
                                                                                                 being
 reviewed dropped with the consequence that the proportion
                                                                 leaving the rolls each year through
 recovery also dropped by more than 50% from 3.2% in 1967 to 1.5% in 1976.12 With a rising
 number of awards and a decliningterminationrate, DI expanded rapidly
                                                                              through the 1960's and
 early 1970's. In 1960 roughly half a million workers were receivingDI benefits. 15 years later over
 2 million were. The program was doubling every seven years. As a result of both the growth in the
 number of beneficiaries and in the average payment per beneficiarythe DI trust fund was
                                                                                              nearing
 bankruptcy by the mid 1970's. Actuarialprojections put it in deficit as of 1978.
       With the rapidly expanding roles, there was an increased concern that the social
                                                                                              security
 administration was losing control over the system and that many of those getting on DI might not,
 in fact, be disabled accordingto the legal definition of the term. This concern was magnified by a
 number of phenomena turned up by congressional committees. Wide discrepancies were discovered
 between the proportion of claimants denied benefits both across states and across AU's. There
 was an almost twofold difference between the most liberal and the most
                                                                            stringent states in terms
of the proportion denied benefits.14 Discrepancies across AU's was even more dramatic, with
some judges almost never reversingthe initial determination while others usually would.'1
                                                                                              Finally
a 1981 GAO report suggested, based on the medical reexamination of random sample 3154 DI
beneficiaries, that as many as 20% of the DI beneficiaries might not be entitled to benefits.
      In 1980 Congresspassed legislation designed to tighten administrative control over DI. There
were several major features of the law'6:
      1. The Social Security Administration had always reserved the right to review initial state
DDS determinations before they were transmitted to the applicant, but during the 1970's were
reviewingonly 5% of cases. The 1980 amendmentsrequired that they review a full two-thirds of
the successful applications. Moreover, to enforce some kind of administrative control over AU's
the secretary of IIHS was empowered to appeal AU rulings that were favorable to the applicant.
      2. Priorto 1980 the law provided for disability determinations to be performedby State agen-
cies under an agreement negotiated by the State and the Secretaryof lIDS. The 1980 amendments
required that disability determinations be made by Stateagencies according to regulations of tl,e
Secretary. It also required the Secretary to issues regulations specifying performance standards
to be followed in performing the disability determhlations. The provision further provided that
  II    Increases in the numberof workersapplyingfor Dl benefits were not matched with anything like
       increaoes in the number of Dl)S examiners.                                                    proportional


 ''°   Actuarial Study No. 81

    Wine, nndatrnl
    During 1980, 34% of judges reversed the initial deter,ninationsless than 50% of the jute, while a,iotl,er 15%
    reversed the initial ,leiern,in,tioes over 70% of ho ti,ne (Vayn and Means Co,,,uittee Print 97-3, 901).
 IS See "Social Security lJioability Amendments of 1988." Soi,ial
                                                                   Secsrity !lnllclis, 1981.

                                                        27
if the Secretary found that a state agency was       failing to make disability determinations consis-
                                                    terminate   the State's authority and take over the
tent with regulations that the     Secretary should

determinations himself.
      3. Before the 1980 law the only beneficiaries targeted for CDI's were those who had conditions
                                                                                                               be
that were likely to improve over time. The 1980 law stipulated that all beneficiaries should
                                              to have permanentdisabilities should          be  reviewed   every
reviewed, and that all but the ones deemed
                                                                                              unless therewas
3 years. Moreover, as practire had evolved,beneficiarieswouldnot be terminated
                                                                                                    in the CDI's
evidenceof actual improvement. The 1980law changedthis so that the standards used
                                                    used  while  initially  evaluating    claimants.
became identical with those concurrently being
       Severs] provisionsof the 1980 hill were designed to encouragethe return
                                                                                        to work of DI benefi-
                                                         his or her  benefits   terminated     12 months after
 ciaries. Under the old law, a beneficiary would   have
                                              The   1980  amendments       extended    the   trial  work period
 returning to substantial gainful activity.
                          Medicare  benefits were  extended   to cover   the  36  months    after   cash benefits
 from 12 to 24 months.
                                                                       law also eliminated the 24 month
 cease for a beneficiary who voluntarily returns to work. The
                                              benefitsfor those becoming reentitled to benefits.
 waitingperiod for eligibility for Medicare
                                                                                                      demonstra-
       The 1980 amendments also authorized the waiver of benefit requirementsto allow
                                                         to  test        in  which   to  stimulate    a return to
 tion projects by the Social Security Administration              ways
                                                    Administration's      Office  of Research      and  Statistics
  work by DI beneficiaries. The Social Security
                                                reductions   in  the  benefits   offsets  for   individuals    who
  designed demonstration projects involving
                                                                                                           to   the
  decided to return to work and changes in medicaid eligibility requirements. Due mostly
                                                                              foresaw    in the   administration
  difficultythat the Social Security AdministrationsOffice of Systems
  of these demonstration projects, they were nevercarded out.
                                                                                                             accel-
        The 1980 law left much discretion to the administration. The Reagan administration
                                                                                     between            and
  erated the mandated reviews. The number of new          awards   dropped     25%                1980        1982,
                                                          and   the number     of  terminations      by 5-fold. In
  while the number of CDI'a increased by     over  4.fold
                                                         reviewed and over 40% of these individuals had
   two years' time 25% of beneficiaries had their cases
                                                                                                       their cases.
   their benefits terminated. Many of those who had their benefits terminated appealed
   Of those that appealed a majority won reinstatement. A growing          concern   that  many those being
                                                                                                    of
                                             that  due            was  not   being   followed    led courts in 20
   terminated were, in fact, disabled, and              process
                                                the review             while   in 9  others   moratorinms      were
    states to order that those states take over              process,
   ordered)7
                                                                                   to a moratorium on CDI's
         Finally, in 1084 Margaret Heckler, the secretary of 11115, agreed
                                                 of             with  revised   guidelines   for CDI's. The new
    pendingthe enactment and iniphemenlation legislation
                                                                       in late 1985, and the review process
    legislation was enacted,in 1984, the regulations promulgated

        Banns of Represeetalives. 15e4.

                                                          28
  was started again in 1986. The 1984 legislation shiftedthe burden ofproof onto the Social
                                                                                                  Serurity
  Administration to show that beneficiaries'health had improved
                                                                   sufficiently to allow them to return
  to work. It also called for a moratorium on the reevaluationsof the most troublesome
                                                                                              cases, those
  that involved mental impairments and those that involved pain, until sensible
                                                                                     guidelinescould be
  developedfor these cases. Finally it provided that an individuals' benefits should be continued
  pending appeal. The effectsof this new legislation have yet to be felt.tt
       Given the controversy over DI and the screenings used to determine an
                                                                                     individuals' initial
  and continued eligibility, it makes sense to review what is known about the
                                                                                 reliability of disability
 determinations. A number of much- publicized GAO reports have
                                                                        suggested that many of those
 on the DI rolls are in fact able-bodied. I will argue that a careful look at the available evidence
 suggests a quite different picture.
      Both Congressand the Social Security Administration have been concernedabout the relia-
 bility of DI screening since tbe program's inception and, as a reault have commissioned a variety
 of studies of the issue. Different studies have bad somewhat different
                                                                            focuses. A 1980 study by
 Sal Gallichio and Barry Bye (GB) of the Social Security's Office of Research and Statistics
                                                                                                    exam-
 ined the degree of consistencyin initial decisions across states. They
                                                                           arranged for pairs of teams
 acrosseight states (chosento be representative) to evaluate a random sample of 504 recent claims.
 The probability of disagreement within state' ranged from 5.1% to 16.8%
                                                                                averaging 12.0%. The
 probability of disagreementbetween states ranged from 11.0% to 21.5% with an average of 15.6%.
      Two studies have examined the eligibility of those already on the DI roles. A 1971
                                                                                                study by
 Robert Smith and Abraham Lilienfeld (SL) includedre-evaluationsby the Social
                                                                                       Security Admin-
istration of a sample of over 1000 applicants from Baltimore. Applicants were re-aasesed under the
same eligibility requirements and medical standards and non-medical guides as those used in the
initial determination. At the time of the reassessment, the disabilityexaminers were instructed to
evaluate each case by using current medical data, the up-to-date earnings record and the informa-
tion reported by the applicant on the interview schedule as to current health and work status. The
applicant's disability status from the previous determination was excluded from considerationin
the reassessment. 19.5% of those whose applications were accepted were determinesias
                                                                                           ineligible on
the re-assessmentwhereas 23.6% of thoseoriginally denied benefits were deternsinedto be
                                                                                                 eligible.
     A second study was conducted by the Social Security Administeation during 1979 and 1980.
The Social Security Administration selected over 3000 cases that were representative of the Dl
population as of April 1979, collected medical evidence, and in some cases interviewedbeneficia-
ries about their impairments. Based on this evidence, Social Security Asinsinistration exansisers
deternsinesl that about 20% slid not meet current eligibility standards.


  '   5ee   Kasha,ine Collins an'! Anne Erlie(last)   a ,liscansionot the 1984   legislation

                                                       29
                                                                                   nor do they give us any
     None of these studies get to the issue of the validity of DI screening
                                                                 re-evaluations.      A 1969 study by Saad
sense of whythere might be discrepancies betweeninitial and
                                                                   panels  evaluated     the work potential
Nagi is helpful on this point. in the Nagi study independent
of a sample of DI applicants.    Tbese panels included  doctors,  psychologists,      and  occupationaland
                                                                                    conduct  any of a variety
vocational counselors. They were empowered to enter applicants' homesto
                                                                  case.                in their deliberations
of tests and to collect any informationthey felt relevant to the         Moreover,
                                                of              In  short,  it  is  hard  to imagine  having
 they were not bound by the legal definition        disability.
                                   on a          health  or  work   capacity.
 avallable any better information       person's
                                                                                    from "fit for work under
      The teams evaluated applicants on an eight point continuum ranging
                                           Table  3 in the text reproduces     a table  from the Nagi Study
 normal conditions" to "not fit for work."
                                           evaluations   of work  capacity    with    SSA allowance-denials.
 comparing the clinical teams eight point                                                                that
 It is interesting to observe that even regarding those parts of the clinical teams' evaluationsthose
                                                                     of difference.    For           of
 would seem to be non-borderline there is a 30 to 40% margin                                example,
                                                                            had nevertheless been denied
  found by the clinical team to be fit for work only at home 30.5%
                                                                         to be fit for work under special
  benefits. On the other hand of those found by the clinical teams
 circumstances,36% received DI allowances.
       The Nagi study also allows us someinsight into the limitations of the screening process. First,
                                                                 do suffer significant health limitations.
 the study suggests that the vast majority of DI applicants
                                                    deemed fit for work under normal circumstances,
 Only 9 out of the 2,454 applicants studied were
                                                                                 under normal conditions.
 with another 165 deemedfit for specific jobs includingtheir ownformerjob
                                                            former  jobs, under  normal conditions. Thus
  Another 261 were deemedfit for specific jobs, excluding
                                     deemed  to be fit for some   kind of work  under   normal conditions.
  under 20% of the applicants were
                                          have  considerable   difficulty  distinguishing   the more from
  Second, among applicants     the DDS's
                                                                       cases  that          either multiple
  the less deserving. They have particular difficulty in evaluating
                                                                                   involve

  impalrments, or ones that involve psychological or vocational components.
                                                                                      the impression that
       What about the General AccountingOffice reports that have generated
                                              These reports presented      evidence  in  such a way as to
  osany on Dl are ineligible for benefits?
                                                               Office        10 State  agencies  were asked
   maximize this impression. In a 1976 GeneralAccounting              study
                                                                           in only 21.7%  of  the cases, but
   to evaluate 221 cases. The GAO study reports complete agreement
                                    on         comparisons.      Complete   agreement    on  21.7% of cases
   gives the reader no information      binary
                                                                                    Other GAO work has
   is compatible with binary discrepanciesin as few as 16% of the cases.19
                                                                 are
                                                   DI benefits ineligible.       This  sosnds like a rather
   seggested that roughly 20% of those receiving
                                 that what it means  is that  on  re-examination   20%   of beneficiaries are
   high number until we realire


     '   aoppo,e that is all raw"
                                    where there is a rliwreponcy this issolven one hold out. lhiv irupliev
                                                                                                             that at the
                                                                                 30 wonld involve agreements. Thus we
         45 poesilde hisaey rornparie.onn, 5 would involve rliuagreements, whilrwhile is 21.7% of the time none do.
         culvolute that 883% of the time 20% of the cases have discrepancies,

                                                            30
deemed   to be capable of work. This   is precisely the kind of magnitude we would expect
                                                                                          given the
SL or GB results.

      The evidence on the reliability and validity of the medical screening required to qualify for
 DI benefitsis quite consistent. Roughly 20% of DI beneficiaries were judged ineligible for benefits.
This seems to have been true for beneficiaries admitted during the 1960's as well as for beneficiaries
admitted during the 1970's. Since even with exactly the same evidence different determination
teams seem to disagree 15% of the time, this 20% figure would seem to be more a reflection of
ambiguities in the initial determination than dramatic but unnoticed recoveries among beneficiaries.
Moreover, Nagi's evidence would suggest that many of the 20%, even if these is some ambiguity
about whether they meet the criteria used to establish eligibility for DI, do, in fact, suffer major
impairments. The qualitative evidence would suggest that discrepancies arise not because there is
muchquestionabouttheevidence but becausethereare disagreementsover whether an impalcment
is of sufficient severity to qualify the claimant as legally disabled. While there may be a social cost
involved in the ambiguity of such decisions the available evidence suggests quite clearly that the
vast majority of DI beneficiaries suffer severe health limitations.

      With generous benefits and an only very imperfect screening mechanism it would seem likely
that SSDI would have had at least some disincentive effects. At the same time, I think that the
very large disincentive effects that have been suggested in published work on the subject are much
too large to be believable. In this paper I present simple direct evidence that does suggest that
there have been some disincentive effects but suggestmagnitudes more in line with those suggested
by the clinical and legal research mentioned in this appendix.




                                                 II
                         Table 1: Percentage of Men In The Labor Force
                                     And Percentage On DI

                                                   45-54                 55-64
                               age
                               year       %inLP %onDl %inLF %onDI
                               1555         96.5           0.0    87.9           0.0
                                            95.7           0.8    86.8           3.5
                               1960
                               1965         95.6           1.8    84.6           5.3
                               1970         94.3           2.5    83.0           7.3
                               1975         92.1           3.9    75.6           10.4
                                            91.2           4.2    72.1           11.3
                               1980
                               1985         92.0           4.0    68.8           10.5
                              1955-1980     —4.5           4.0   —19.1           10.5
                                             (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)
                                   civilian labor force                rates.  Even-aamaereu    coiumns are rue
.\ote: oou-numnrrro columns are                         participation
                                                                                       the calendar year divided
                            beneficiaries                     benefits at  the end  of
number of diuablrd workrr                 currently receiving
by the non-institutionalized population.
Universe: Civilian non-institutionalized population.
                                                                      Bulletin Annual Statistical Supplement,
Sources: Sources: Employment and Earnings, The Social Security
various years.
                               Table 2: Ernployo:eot, Earoiogs nod Othec Characteristics
                                      of Rejocted Disability IosoraascnApplicants

                                                                  1972                                1978
                                                    Popnla-     Rejected    flene6-     Popala- Rejected        Ilenefi-
                                                      lion     Appl:coota    ciaries      tion    Applicants     ciuries
          labor oopply
               % employed                            77.7        32.6         3.2        69.3         28.7        2.3
              % worked 71/77                         01.0        45.0         7.5        86.7         40.4        3.3
               % lull year ( 50 weeks)               76.6        47.4        31.4        83.3         41.2       22.2
               96 fulltime ( 35 hoors)               95.4        75.9        23.0        92.4         79.6       38.3

          earoiogs anaoog positive earssera
            median annual earoiogu 7l/77             $0000       $4000       $700       $14000      $5300       61000
              n:edian weekly earnings1                   173       120         25          399        218          70

         deosographioa
              median age                             38.7        37.9        58.1        33.0        33.6        38.3
              median education                       11.0         0.1         0.1        11.7         9.2         9.1
              96 non-white                            0.9        17.0        10.2        10.4        13.2        i2.4
              96 married                             07.0        77.3        03.6        87.2        74.3       79.9

         96   reportingwork lilssitatioos
              96 aeverely disabled                   12.0        50.3        02.7        14.3        94.0       97.0
              96 partially disabled                  14.8        39.2         6.0        13.2        26.4        1.9
              96 capableof the snare kind of work     —
                                                                 14.3        07           —          11.0        9.0
                as kefore henltk limitation

         96   with health condition
           mosculoskeletal                           22.3       40.0        41.1        17.6        38.6        31.3
           cardiovascular                            28.8       36.4        60.4        21.0        38.6        67.4
           mental/nervous                             6.8       16.4        27.4         3.1        26.3        31.0
           respiratory                                6.7       22.7        26.7         6.0        26.3        28.2
           digeative                                  9.6       21.3        24.7         9.t        13.0        21.3
           neorologicul                               0.7        2.2         6.7         0.6         1.3         3.2
           neogenital                                 2.4        4.9         6.3         3.0         6.8         7,3
                                                      3.7        6.2         6.0         2.6         2.3         7.7
                                                      6.9        8.8         9.9         4.6        11.3        13.9
           blind                                      3.8       10.7        11.1         2.3        13.3        13,4

        a:ed:un: year applie:l for DI                -          68.7        67.0         -          74.3        74.4

        n::osber of ohservotionn                     2779         273        390        1272         138        1722
  A a percent of tl:one who worked in 1971/1977.
  Restricted to those with ponitive ear::i::gs.
Note. Coants Inc the rejected utrplico:rts ore
                                                ose'e:ghie:I, whereon those for the popnlotion ore a'eigt:te:I.
Universe: Cic:l:an non—ioctit::tjoooljee:tmien aged '13-61.
Source. Aothor's tot::: latimno::sh:g tIc Scc:ol Security Ad mm istrntio:m 1972nrr:l
                                                                                      1978 Sorveys cf the t)isot:le:t
    Pt                                                                      Team
               Table 3: Final Determinations of Disability and the Clinical
                          Evalnations of Work Capacity of Applicants

                                                   Final Determinations
                                                  .Allowasre    fl9jgj                  7Q1
                                                 No.   %     No. %                    No.    %
\Vork Capacity
                                                   -         -          9     1.0       9    0.4
 Fit for work under normal conditions
Fit for specificjobs, including former                                 142    15.0     165   6.7
                                                   23        1.5
job, uoder oormsl cooditions
Fit for sperifi jobs, excluding former                       6.3       167    17.7     261   10.6
                                                       94
job, onder oormal conditions
                                                       92        6.1    90     9.5     182    7.4
Fit for work under special conditions
                                                       82        5.4    84     8.9     166    6.8
 Can work part-timeunder normal conditions
                                                   134           8.9    87     9.2     221    9.0
 Can work uuder sheltered conditions
                                                       66        4.4    29     3.1      95    3.1
 Can work at home only
                                                  1019 67.5            336    35.6    1355 55.2
 Not fit for work
                                                  1MC       lflflfl    ttAd   sitne   94S4 inns
 Total
                                                                                                       and
 Source: Derived from Susd Z. Nsgi, Disability and Rehabilitation:  Legal, Clinical, and Self-Concepts
                         Ohio State University Press, 1969), p. 94.
 Measurement (Columbus:
                                 Table4: Sources of Incomefor Disability InsuranceApplicants

                                                                   1971
                                         Population                         Rejected   Applicant.                     Becetciuciea
 Icconce   source                                             Workedin 1971               Didn't Work 1971
                                       %            clear     %        meac                 00       mess           00           mean
 Total FamilyIncome                  100.0          13413    100.0     9765               100.0      4087         100.0          5745

 Eucoiogu'                            02.0          12787    100.0            8296         36.9          3579      45.4             3640
  Own Earnings                        91.9          10626    100.0           6732           0.0              -      7.5             1854
  Wife's Earnings                     42.5           5110     48.4           3102          32.9          3909      39.0             3836

 Public lacome Msisteaaoce            25.7           3980     52.9           3463          63.2          4039     99.0              0131
   Social Security                     8.9           1742    25.6            1373          52.4          1750     90.0           2300
 P.1.91. set of SocialSecurity        19.9           2401    33.1            2714          51.0          2663     46.7           3922
   Veteran. Besrfits                  8.5            1284     13.2           2177          22.2          1833     30.0           2116
   Woekeen Cerepoenation              2.2             919      3.3           1374           2.9          2154      4.3              197!
   Welfare                            2.0            1740      0.3           1854          28.2          2026      9.5           2949
      APTO                            1.0             968     4.1            1017          18.8          1140      8.2            902
      AFOC                            0.6            1737     3.3            1417           4.0          1725      2.4           1178
      Other Welfare                   9.9            1121     3.3            2685           7.4           698      2.2            674
   Gnvoree,eat Disability             3.3           4207      3.3            5597           3.4          1849      5.3           2745
   Usemploymrat Insurance             5.7            843      8.3            1052           2.0           292      0.7           1027

Priest. Peaaione Etc.'                8.0           2631       0.3           1109          16.!         2668      20.3           2309
Asset Income                         39.3            1371     22.9           2493          20.1         1064      22.4           1256
Number ofOhaeecatina,                        4617                    122                          149                     590

                                                                                                                                .
                                                               1977
                                       Population                          Rejected   Applicael.                   Beneficiaries
Incomesource                                                Workedin 1977                Didn'tWoek 1977
                                     %           'rican     %        irwin                 %            reran     %             mean
Total Fierily Income                195.0        17784      100.9          13472         110.9          8272     100.9          L0737

Earningf                            06.5         17337      100.0          10659          46.0          6060     46.1           6689
  Own Earning.                      86.5         14466      100.0           7027           0.0            -       5.5           2924
  Wiles Forsieg.                    41.6            6672    32.7            7230          39.5          4930     33.0           5909
Public Income Maintenance           37.5            3409    68.5            3481          96.!          4740     99.0           5706
  Sociol Security                   16.2            3329    42.6            3300          70.4          3907     99.3           43.59
P.I.M.set of SoulslSecurity         27.5            2706    37.0            2800          44.4          3390     50.2           2917
  Veteran. Benefit.                  9.6             640    11.1            1265                        2199
 Workers Cumpees.iiun                2.6            2806     3.7             .            16.1
                                                                                           6.6          3790
                                                                                                                 27.6
                                                                                                                  5.6
                                                                                                                                2039
                                                                                                                                9651
 Welfare
    001
    AFDC
                                     4.3
                                     2.8
                                     0.0
                                                    1964
                                                    1910
                                                    1734
                                                             0.3
                                                             5.6
                                                             7.4
                                                                             i-'
                                                                            3062          17.3
                                                                                          12.4
                                                                                                        2740
                                                                                                        2174
                                                                                                                  12.2
                                                                                                                  9.8
                                                                                                                                1573
                                                                                                                                1274
                                                                                           6.2          2353      2.2           1803
    Other Welfare                     1.2           1100     0.0             .'            2.5           -'       2.0
  GocerenceetDisability              3.3            6709     00              .'            49            -        20
                                                                                                                                1129
                                                                                                                                6430
  UnemploymentInsurance              9.7            1241                                                 -
  Other Benefits                     2.9            4332
                                                             14.8
                                                             1.9            -
                                                                            2297           3.7
                                                                                           1.3           .        2.4
                                                                                                                  7.0
                                                                                                                                1026
                                                                                                                                3385
I'nicate Pensions Etc."           21.0       2976          236         1674          28.4     3121       37.4        3572
Asset Income                      53.9        942          30.9         416          28.4      321       38.2        603
Number of Obsorcelion.                 1272                      55                       8!                    1722
     • Includes eanenigafrees sO householdfancily
                                                  :uvlud:cgchildren ned other relatives.
       Include, sick pay, companyand odividoal esornure,   retiremeet peroom, di.ability pon.mns sod acouitie..
       len than five oh,eevnticon.
                           Table 5: Probability of Non-Employment


                                                 applicants and
                                                 non-applicants              lion-applicants
                                             .090     .079     .079       .036     .034    .033
          Age
                                            (.011)    (.011)    (.012)   (.016) (.016) (.016)

                                            1.010      .334      .617     .645   .420   .535
          Ln(replaeemenl   raie)'
                                            (.247)    (.190)    (.267)   (.345) (.251) (.351)

                                                                  X                        X
          Specific Health Conditionsi

                                                       1.861                      .647
          Self Reported Work Limitation
                                                       (.109)                     (.135)

                                            -1351.2   -1181.3   -1218.2 -760.2 -748.9 -745.6
          log likelihood                                                        1813
           Number of Observations                      2311
                                                       70.8                     85.1
           % employed

           elasticity of non-                                     .437     .549    .357    .455
                                              .719      .236
           participation with
           respect to benefits
'Defined as the PTA/AME. See the text for details.
                                                   6.
5The same ten conditions as listed in Table 5 and
 Eva1uated at the sample proportion:
                                          x %Employed.
                                                                 in parentheses.
 Note: Parameters are logit coefficients. Standard errors appear
                                                          in 1972.
 Universe: Civilian non-institutionalized men aged 48-62
                                                        Administration's 1972 Survey of the Disabled.
 Source: Authors tabulations using the Social Security
