                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              BUDGET DEFICITS, TAX INCENTIVES AND INFLATION:
              A SURPRISING LESSON FROM THE 1983-84 RECOVERY




                              Martin Feldstein

                            Douglas W. Elmendorf




                           Working Paper No. 2819




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                January 1989




This research is part of NBER's research programs in Economic Fluctuations,
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics, and in Taxation. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #2819
                                       January 1989

               BUDGET DEFICITS, TAX INCENTIVES AND INFLATION:
               A SURPRISING LESSON FROM THE 1983-84 RECOVERY

                                  ABSTRACT


        The first two years of the economic expansion that began in
1983 were unusually strong and were accompanied by better
inflation performance than would have been expected on the basis
of experience in past recoveries.
     Our evidence contradicts the popular view that the recovery
was the result of a consumer boom financed by reductions in the
personal income tax. We also find no support for the proposition
that the recovery reflected an increase in the supply of labor
induced by the reduction in personal marginal tax rates.
        The driving force behind the recovery of nominal demand was
the shift to an expansionary monetary policy.      The rapid
expansion of nominal GNP can be explained by monetary policy
without any reference to changes in fiscal and tax policy.
        But the growth of real GNP was more rapid than would have
been expected on the basis of the rise in total nominal spending
and the increase in the price level was correspondingly less. The
most likely cause of this favorable division of the nominal CNP
increase was the sharp rise in the dollar that occurred at this
time.

        Although part of the dollar's rise can be attributed to the
successful anti-inflationary monetary policy, the dollar also
increased because of the rise in real interest rates that
resulted from the combination of the increase in anticipated
budget deficits and the improved tax incentives for investment in
equipment and structures.
        Thus, expansionary fiscal policy did contribute to the
greater-than-expected rise of real CNP in 1983-84 but it did so
through an unusual channel. The fiscal expansion raised output
because it caused a favorable supply shock to prices and not
because it was a traditional stimulus to demand.   The budget
deficit and investment incentives were expansionary in the short
run because, by causing a rise of the dollar, they reduced
inflation and thus permitted a faster growth of real CNP.



Martin Feldstein                         Douglas W. Elmendorf
National Bureau of Economic Research     National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138                      Cambridge, MA 02138
              Budget Deficits. Tax Incentives and Inflation:
              A Surprising Lesson from the 1983-84 Recovery

                             Martin Feldstein *
                           Douglas W. Elmendorf



     In November 1982 the unemployment rate reached 10.6 percent, the

trough of the worst recession of the postwar period. During the next 24

months, the unemployment rate fell by 3.5 percentage points and real CNP

expanded by 11.9 percent. This stronger than normal expansion was          -




accompanied by a declining rate of inflation; the annualized rates of
increase of the CNP deflator fell from 3.6 percent in the fourth quarter of

1982 to 3.0 percent in the fourth quarter of 1984.

     The saying that failure is an orphan while success has many self-
proclaimed fathers can be applied to business cycles in general and to this

one in particular. The battle over paternity is joined here by supply

siders, by Keynesian fiscalists, and by monetarists.           -




     Some supply side economists argue that the recovery reflected the

favorable incentive effects on individual work effort of the January 1983

reductions in personal tax rates. In the extreme version of this view,

workers reduced their labor supply when the prospective tax cuts were

legislated in 1981, preferring to consume more of their lifetime leisure

when aftertax wages were relatively low, and then to increase their work

effort after the tax rate reductions raised net wages.




* Martin Feldstein is Professor of Economics at Harvard University and
President of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Douglas Elmendorf
is a graduate student at Harvard University. This paper was prepared for
the NBER Conference on Tax Policy and the Economy, Washington, D.C.,
November 15, 1988. We are grateful to Creg Mankiw and Lawrence Summers for
helpful comments.
    The "Keynesian fiscalists" regard the 1983-84 expansion as a

traditional demand-determined recovery driven by increased defense spending

and by the rise in consumer demand that resulted from the personal tax

reductions. We use the term "Keynesian fiscalists" to emphasize that these

economists disregard the role of monetary policy in the expansion.

     Finally, monetarists point to the sharp reversal of the Federal

Reserve's policy in the summer of 1982, some six months before the business

cycle trough. With inflation falling rapidly, the rate of change of the

real money stock increased even more rapidly than the rate of change of the

nominal money stock. The Fed cut the discount rate sharply throughout the

summer and fall, and short term market rates dropped dramatically.

     In an earlier report on this research, Feldstein (1986a) argued that

none of these claims provides an adequate explanation of the more rapid

than normal recovery in real GNP and suggested an alternative analysis of

how the changes in monetary policy, budget deficits and tax incentives for

investment acted together to produce the unusually strong recovery. The

present paper elaborates on that previous discussion and presents evidence

in support of that alternative view.

     Before turning to the evidence, it is useful to summarize the

explanation that the evidence suggests:

     (a) The iücreaaed employment and output did not reflect an increase

in the deaire to work, but was the result of an increased demand for labor

that permitted unemployed job-seekers to return to work. While the

unemployment rate fell from 10.6 percent to 8.3 percent in the first year




                                       2
of the expansion, labor force participation rates showed virtually no
            2
movement.

     (b) The sharp change in monetary policy was the driving force in the

expansion of nominal demand; the rapid expansion of nominal GNP can be

explained by the shift in monetary policy without any reference to the

changes in fiscal and tax policy. The composition of the CNP change also

suggests the dominant importance of monetary policy.

     (c) However, the growth of real GNP was more rapid than would be

expected on the basis of the rise in total nominal spending and the

increase in the price level was correspondingly less. The most likely cause

of this favorable division of the nominal GNP increase was the sharp rise

in the dollar that occurred at this time.

     (d) Although part of the dollar's rise can be attributed to the

successful anti-inflationary monetary policy, the dollar also increased

because of the rise in real interest rates that resulted from the

combination of increased budget deficits and the improved tax incentives

for investment in equipment and structures. The changes in fiscal and tax

policy thus contributed to the unusually strong reel GNP growth by causing

inflation to be less than it otherwise would have been. Stated differently,

with monetary policy given, the fiscal expansion temporarily reduced

inflation and thereby contributed to temporarily stronger real CNP growth.




     2 The labor force participation rate for women 20 years and older
increased only from 52.9 percent in November 1982, the trough of the
recession, to 53.2 percent in November 1983, one year into the expansion.
The corresponding rate for men actually fell from 78.8 percent to
78.4 percent during the same period. And the labor force participation
rate for all people aged 16 to 19 fell also from 54.5 percent to
53.3 percent.

                                       3
     (e) The tax incentives for business fixed investment also affecred

the composition of the recovery in real CNP. Despite the rise in real

interest rates, the recovery was characterized by a much greater than

normal increase in business investment while the increase in consumer

spending was similar to the increase in previous recoveries.

     Section 1 of the paper presents the evidence that the rise in noeinal

GNP can be explained by the shift in monetary policy. Detailed evidence on

the relative strength of different sectors, presented in Section 2,

supports the importance of the change in monetary policy and interest rates

and implies that neither increased government spending nor personal tax

cuts was a significant factor in the demand recovery. The third section

shows that real CNP grew faster than might have been anticipated on the

basis of past experience but that this discrepancy can be explained by the

favorable effect of the rising dollar on the overall level of domestic

prices. There is a brief concluding section.

     We are, of course, aware that the evidence that we present msy be

subject to different interpretstions. We hope that our analysis will

encourage others to provide additional tests of our proposed explanation of

the recovery of 1983-84 and of the implied theory of the interaction of

monetary, tax, and fiscal policies.



1. The Rise in Nominal ON?

     The path of nominal GNP changed dramatically at the end of 1982. After

rising at a rate of only 3.0 percent from the fourth quarter of 1981

through the fourth quarter of 1982, nominal ON? then rose 9.8 percent in

1983 and 8.2 percent in 1984. The seasonally adjusted quarterly rates of


                                       4
change of nominal CNP are presented for 1982:1 through 1984:4 in Row 1 of

Tahle 1.

     The simplest explanation of this increase is the change of monetary

conditions during the preceding year. The rate of increase of the real

money stock (i.e. ,   the difference between the rate of increase of 142 and
the rate of increase of the GNP deflator) rose from 2.2 percent in the

first half of 1982 to 5.0 percent during the second half of the year.3

Real short-term interest rates dropped dramatically; the 3-month Treasury

bill rate plummeted from over 12 percent in June 1982 to 8 percent within

three months. The Federal Reserve reduced the discount rate in parallel

with very little delay, cutting it from 12 percent in June to 10 percent in

September and then 8.5 percent by the end of the year.

     To assess the proposition that the 1983-84 expansion of nominal demand

can be explained without reference to fiscal changes, we present two types

of evidence. The first, presented in Table 1, shows the forecast errors in

predictions of nominal GNP in 1983-84 based on distributed lags of money

alone and of money and alternative fiscal variables. The second, presented

in Table 2, shows formal F-tests of the significance of the fiscal

variables in the explanation of changes in nominal CNP in both a long

sample and in the recent quarters.



1.1 An Analysis of Forecast Residuals

      The forecast residuals associated with an equation relating nominal

GNP growth to past changes in the money stock (nominal M2) shows that the


       The rate of growth of Ml increased from 4.6 percent in the first
half of 1982 to nearly 12 percent in the second half of 1982. The rate of
growth of 142 rose from 7.8 percent to 9.6 percent.

                                          5
increases in nominal GNP in 1982, 1983 and 1984 are fully predicted without

any reference to the shifta in fiscal policy. More specifically, we

estimated the relation between the quarterly change in the logarithm of

nominal GNP and three lagged values of the change in the logarithm of M2.4

The equation was estimated by ordinary least squares for the period from

the first quarter of 1960 through the business cycle peak in the third

quarter of 1981. The equation was then used to predict the rates of growth

of nominal GNP in the out-of-sample period beginning with the fourth

quarter of 1981.

     Row 2 of Table 1 presents the forecast residuals, i.e., the difference

between the actual quarterly GNP growth rates and the rates predicted on

the baaia of the lagged changes in money. For comparison, the table

includes the forecast errors for 1982, the last four quarters of the

recession. The standard error of each of these quarterly forecasts is

approximately 0.01, i.e., one percentage point of nominal CNP.

     The striking thing about the errors in the out-of-sample forecasts for

the recovery period is that they are generally negative, indicating that

the actual rise in nominal GNP was less than the rise predicted by the

historic relation between nominal 01W and money. During the first two

years of the recovery, the forecast error was negative 5 times; however,

only two of the forecast errors (one positive and one negative) exceeded

the standard error. The cumulative forecast error for the first four

quarters of the recovery was negative and 1.7 percent of GNP, slightly less

than the four-quarter forecast standard error of 2.0 percent of CNP. The



       All of the data used in this paper were drawn from the DRI database,
updated for data revisions through September 1988.

                                      6
forecast error for the first eight quarters was also negative and, at

1.4 percent of GNP, less than the associated standard error of 2.9 percent

of GNP. There is no "surprisingly strong" rise in total nominal CNP that

needs to be explained by the budget deficit or by tax law changes.5

    We would, of course, be the first to acknowledge that an equation

linking nominal GNP growth to money growth alone is an extremely simplified

model. But we regard its predictions and the associated forecast residuals

as useful benchmarks and reject as unnecessarily nihilistic the view of

those economists like Friedmsn (1988) who believe that the velocity

fluctuations of the 1980s mean that nothing can be learned from quantity

relationships like those considered here. First, we are studying growth

rates and not relations in levels, so a one-time shift in velocity of the

type that occurred in 1982 would not affect the residuals for 1983 or 1984

from our equations. Second, if velocity fell sharply in 1982 because of

suddenly expansionary monetary policy (acting through a sharp fall in

interest rates, as Poole (1988) has suggested, then our emphasis on the

importance of monetary policy to the recovery is not misplaced. Morenver,

the increase in nominal GNP from 1982 to 1983 predicted by our equations

represents part of the increase in actual growth of nominal GNP between

those years.


       It might be argued that the residuals in 1983, although negative,
are smaller absolutely than the residuals of 1982, suggesting that
"something" had made nominal GNP grow more rapidly in 1983 than would have
been predicted on the basis of lagged money alone. There is no way to test
this view that the unobserved and unobservable shock that caused velocity
to drop in 1982 persisted into 1983 and was offset by fiscal policy. We
take the more conventional view that 1982 was the abnormal year in which
velocity declined and that there was no   priori reason to expect the
negative disturbance to persist into 1983. More formally, we believe that
the residuals for 1983 and 1984 should be tested against the null
hypothesis of zero and not against the values for 1982.

                                      7
    Adding measures of fiscal policy to the basic equation does not

improve the explanation of the rapid growth of nominal CNP in 1983 and

1984. On the contrary, since fiscal policy was "expansionary" at this

time, the forecaats that include fiscal variables overpredict CNP gm-tb by

an even grearer margin, thereby increasing the absolute size of the

forecast residuals. The basic fiscal variables in our expanded equstion

are the ratios of cyclicslly-sdjusted tax revenue and government outlsys to

cyclically-adjusted ON?, each represented by three lagged values. Since

the difference between these measures of receipts and outlays is equal to

the cyclically-adjusted deficit as a fraction of ON? in each quarter, the

coefficient values could make this equivalent to a distributed lag of

deficit-ON? tatios.

     Row 3 of Table 1 reports the forecast residuals based on an equation

in which fiscal variables are added to the distributed lag of M2 growth

rates. The cumulative forecast error is 3.6 percent of ON? for the first

four quarters of the recovery snd 7.3 percent of ON? for the first eight

quarters. The point to be stressed is that the monetary variables more

correctly explain the rism in nominal ON? without reference to the fiscal

variables.

     We are, of course, aware of the ususl arguments that equations of this

type understate the importance of fiscal policy (e.g., Blinder and Solow,

1974). In the current context, a stronger fiscal effect would by itself

cause an even greater overprediction of ON? growth. While not suggesting

that the estimated coefficients are appropriate estimates of true reduced

form parameters, we emphasize that they imply no support for a role for

fiscal policy in explaining the nominal ON? expansion in 1983-84.


                                       8
    The results represented by these two equations are not sensitive to

the measurement of monetary and fiscal policies. As part of our

sensitivity analysis we redefined the government outlay variable to exclude

the component of government interest outlays that just compensate

bondholders for the inflation-erosion of the debt.6 The result, shown in

row 4, is similar to the basic estimates of row 3.

    We also tested the sensitivity of the results to the change in bank

regulations that shifted the demand for money in 1983. The changes in

regulations that took effect at the start of 1983, including the

introduction of national NOW accounts and changes in the interest rate

ceilings, caused an increase in the demand for Ml and M2 balances. The Fed

accommodated this increase, permitting M2 to rise at a 16.1 percent annual

rate. A mechanical interpretation of the relation between nominal GNP and

the increase in the money stock may overstate the expansionary effect of

monetary policy.7 We have therefore re-estimated the analysis of equations

corresponding to Rows 2 through 4 with an adjusted money stock constructed

to eliminate the effect of the deregulation-induced shift in the demand for

money balances. More specifically, the growth rates of M2 in 1983:1 and

1983:2 are reduced to smooth the path of M2 from 1982:4 to 1983:3 by


     6 We construct an inflation-adjusted outlay measure by subtracting the
product of the quarterly change in the CNP deflator and the stock of
outstanding government debt at the beginning of the quarter from the
traditional measure of outlays.
     7
       Federal Reserve Cha,.rman Volcker and the Federal Open Market
Committee emphasized in testimony and official statements on several
occasions that the Ml growth rates from 1982:4 through 1983:2 and the M2
growth rates in 1983:1 and 1983:2 were really adjustments to the new
regulatory environment and therefore not directly comparable to past
increases in the money stock. See also Economic Report of the President,
1984, Chapter 1.


                                       9
replacing the actual growth rates during the two transition quarters by the

average of the prior and subsequent quarter growth rates. The effect is to

leave the level of M2 3.5 percent lower beginning in 1983:3.

     The results for this adjusted M2 variable are shown in Rows 5 through

7. The forecast residuals for the basic equation with no fiscal variable

(Row 5) are rapresentative of the effect of using the adjusted money stock.

The equation no longer systematically overpredicts the growth of nominal

CNP. Three of the forecast residuals are positive, three are negative and

two are zero; only one is larger than the standard error. The cumulative

forecast error for four quarters and eight quarters are 0.008 and 0.009,

both substantially smaller than the corresponding standard errors.

Including the fiscal variables with the adjusted money stock once again

raises the forecast growth of nominal GNP and by approximately the same

amounts as in the equations represented by Rows 3 and 4. These equations

again overpredict CNP growth but by less than the equations using the raw

money values. In short, the adjusted money stock variable provides better

point estimates, but the choice between adjusted and unadjusted money stock

variables does not alter the conclusion that the rise of nominal GNP in

1983-84 can be explained without reference to the changes in tax receipts

and outlays.

     We have also examined the residuals based on equations using Ml and

adjusted Ml instead of M2 and adjusted M2. The results were qualitatively

similar although not identical. In general, the underprediction of nominal

CNP growth was worse in the Ml equations than in the M2 equations. The

addition of the fiscal variables (inflation-adjusted or not) magnified the

negative residuals.


                                      10
      The analysis has also been repeated with the sample restricted to

begin in 1968:1 instead of 1960:1. We did this because some authors

(e.g. ,   Friedman, 1986 and 1988) have stressed that the relation between the

monetary aggregates and nominal GNP may have changed in the mid-l960s.

We find that the results based on the shorter sample are essentially the

same as those based on the full sample.



1.2 The Incremental Explanatory Power of Fiscal Variables

      The conclusion that the expansion of nominal GNP in the 1983-84

recovery can be explained without reference to fiscal policy is consistent

with a long line of monetarist thinking and of econometric evidence in the

St. Louis equation framework of Andersen and Jordan (1968). Both the

theory and the empirical research remain controversial and are likely to

Continue to do so in the future.

     Although Blinder and Solow (1974) and others have argued that the

Coefficient estimates and statistical tests of the impact of fiscal policy

in the Andersen-Jordan framework are biased, McCallum (1986) has recently

provided a strong defense of these procedures. We will not enter into the

debate about whether the tests of the efficacy of fiscal policy based on

this framework are correct or not. But for those who want to see the

evidence for the most recent recovery within this framework, we provide

formal tests of the relevance of the fiscal variables as determinants of

the growth of nominal GNP are presented in Table 2. The tests are based on

estimating the nominal GNP growth equations for the entire period from

1960:1 through 1985:4 and testing whether the addition of the fiscal




                                        11
variables reduces the sum of squared residuals.8 We allow for a change in

the constant term and in the coefficients on the distributed lag on money

after 1981:3. We test separately for the effect of the fiscal variables in

the early sample (through 1981:3) and the late sample (from 1981:4 to

1985:4); in Table 2, Test 1 refers to the effect of the fiscal variables

during the early sample while Test 2 refers to the effect of the fiscal

variable during the late period only.9 Separate tests are presented for

adjusted and unadjusted money stocks and with and without the inflation

adjustment to the fiscal variables.

     Consider first the test based on the unadjusted definitions of the

money and fiscal variables. Test 1, for the early sample period, has an

F-statistic of 1.30 (shown on the first line of Table 2) which corresponds

to a statistically insignificant probability level of 0.25. Test 2, for

the later sample, has an F-statistic of 2.16, which because of the more

limited number of observations, also corresponds to a statistically

insignificant probsbility level.

     The second line of Table 2 presents results when the government outlay

variable is adjusted to eliminate the effect of debt erosion. When the

     8
       Regressing the absolute value of the estimated residuals on a dummy
variable for the period 1981:4 through 1985:4 (as suggested by Pindyck and
Rubinfeld, 1981, p. 152) reveals significant heceroskedasticity.
Therefore, we weight the observations using the mean absolute value of the
estimated residuals in the early and late samples and reestimate the
equstion.

       There are only sixteen observations in this later period, so there
are few degrees of freedom in the estimation and the five percent critical
values for the F-statistics shown below will be fairly high. Although
these exclusion tests therefore have low power, the F-statistics are
generally so small that even a powerful test would be very unlikely to
reject the null hypotheses. See Fisher (1970, p. 365) for a discussion of
testing similar hypotheses with insufficient degrees of freedom.


                                      12
adjusted M2 money stock is used (lines 3 and 4 of Table 2), the fiscal

variables are even less significant statistically in the late sample.1°

     Similar tests have been done (but are not shown) with adjusted and

unadjusted Ml and with the period truncated to exclude the years before

1968. The results are quite similar to those presented here, with the

probability levels even higher in the Ml equations. This reinforces the

basic result of this analysis that fiscal variables contribute to the

explanation of nominal GNP in the l980s only (if at all) when no adjustment

is made for the effects of inflation on the fiscal variables.

     It is important to note that all of the results of this section apply

to nominal GM? and do not consider the possible importance of fiscal policy

to real GNP gjyj3 the level of nominal GM?. In Section 3, we examine the

impact of recent fiscal policy on the division of nominal GM' growth into

real GM? growth and inflation. First, however, we provide further evidence

of the importance of monetary policy in the 1983-84 recovery.



2. The Composition of Real GMP Growth in the Recovery

     The conclusion that the recovery of nominal GNP can be attributed to

the increase in money growth and the fall in interest rates is also

supported by an analysis of the relative rates of increase of the major

components of r!al GNP during the first two years of the recovery. Table 3

compares the growth rates of these real GNP components with the average




     10 The early sample tests are identical to those for the unadjusted
money variables because the adjustment (described above) only affects
quarters after 1981:3.

                                      13
growth rates for each of these components during the five previous postwar
               11
recoveries -

     Consider first the relative growth rates of total real CNP. The first

column in the upper portion of Table 3 (labeled Current) shows the

seasonally adjusted quarterly growth rate of real CNP in each qusrter from

1983:1 (denoted Ql) through 1984:4 (denoted Q8). The corresponding growth

rate for the four quarters ending in 1983:4 is denoted Tl and the annual

average growth rate for the eight quarters ending in 1984:4 is denoted

Yl-2. The average of the real GNP growth rates in the corresponding

quarters12 of previous recoveries is shown in the second column (labelled

Avg. for Average), and the estimated standard error of that mean is shown

in the third column.

     These data show that real GNP rose 0.9 percent between the final

quarter of 1982 and the first quarter of 1983, just about half of the

average first-quarter growth rate of 1.7 percent during the previous five

recoveries. With a standard error of 0.3, it can be said that the first

quarter rise of the current recovery was significantly slower than the

average of the past increases. Although this difference is reversed in the

second and fourth quarters, for the year as a whole the rate of growth of


     11 These are the recoveries that began in 1954:3, 1958:3, 1961:2,
1971:1, and 1975:2. The analysis excludes the recovery that began in
1950:1 (which was unusual due to the Korean War) and the most recent 1980-1
recovery which was so short-lived that the next downturn occurred within
two years of the start of the expansion. The real components of CNP are
directly from the National Income and Product Accounts, with the exception
of Federal government military spending, which is converted to real values
using the overall Federal government spending deflator because the military
deflator is not available for the whole postwar period.

     12 The quarters are aligned so that Ql always corresponds to the first
quarter after the trough of the recession, Q2 to the second quarter after
the trough, etc.

                                      14
real GNP at 6.5 percent was only slightly greater than the 6.0 percent

average real GNP increase in the first four quarters of previous

expansions; with a standard error of 0.8 percentage points, this difference

is not statistically significant. The start of the second year of the

current recovery was, however, much stronger than the average of the

corresponding quarters of previous recoveries. As a result the rate of

increase of real GNP for the eight quarters as a whole was substantially

greater than the average of previous recoveries: an average annual rate of

5.8 percent in compariaon to the previous average of 4.8 percent with a

standard error of 0.2 percentage points.

     It might be argued that real GNP grew especially fast in the recovery

because it had fallen especially far during the recession. Without

entering into the current macroeconomic debate about the time series

properties of real GNP, we note simply that there is no evidence for a

correlation between the depth of a recession and the pace of the initial

recovery; the GNP growth rates for the first four quarters of each postwar

recovery (as well as for the first eight quarters) display no correlation

with the depth of the receasion as measured by the decline in real ON?

between the previous cyclical peak and the trough.

     When we examine the major components of real GNP we find that the most

striking difference between the 1983-84 recovery and previous recoveries

was in the strength of investment. By the second quarter of the recovery,

the percentage increase in investment was approximately twice as great as

the average of previous recoveries. For the first four quarters,

investment roae 41.2 percent in comparison to the 22.6 percent average in

previous recoveries, an increase four times the standard error of


                                      15
4.6 percentage peints. For the two years as a whole, the average anneal

rate of increase of investment was 26.] percent versus the 12.7 percent
                                    -        13
two-year average in previous recoveries.

     In contrast to the relatively powerful response of investment, the

expansion of consumption was no stronger in this recovery than in pre'Thua

recoveries. The figures in Table 3 show that the annual rate of increase

of consumption in the four quarters of 1983 was 5.4 percent, almost exactly

equal to the average rise in the first four quarters of previous

recoveries. For the eight quarters through 1984:4 the annual rate of

increase was 4.8 percent, slightly less than the 4.9 percent average in

previous recoveries, but the difference is not as large as its standard

error.'4 Table 3 shows that this normal cyclical expansion of consumption

in the 1983-84 recovery characterized both durable and nondurable

consumption.

     The rate of increase in the federal government component of final

demand was also not greater in the first year of the recovery than it had

been at the same stage in previous recoveries. Real federal government

purchases of goods and services15 actually fell by 8.1 percent. a

     13
        Although the rapid rise of investment in the recovery might be
thought to be attributable to particularly weak investment performance
during the recession, investment in past recoveries was uncorrelated with
investment during the preceding recessions.
     14
        Consumption relative to CNP was in fact stronger during the first
year of the recovery than in previous recoveries. There is no evidence
that the tax cut was offset by an equal rise in household saving, but only
that the pace of increase in consumption was not unusually strong in this
recovery while the increase in investment was unusually rapid.

     15 Note that this measure of government spending as a CNP component is
very different from total government outlays which include transfers as
well as purchases of goods and services.


                                        16
substantially larger decline that the 2.3 percent decline in the first four

quarters of previous recoveries.

     The initial decline and fairly standard two-year rise in real

government purchases occurred despite a stronger than normal increase in

military spending. Table 3 shows that military spending rose by

5.2 percent in 1983 but actually fell by an average of 4.5 percent in the

first year of previous recoveries. For the two years as a whole, the

5.3 percent annual rise in military spending is significantly larger than

the previous average of -3.3 percent. But although military spending is a

large part of total federal government purchases of goods and services, the

reductions in other purchases kept the overall contribution of increase in

government spending relatively small.

     The relatively sharp rise in investment and the relatively modest

increases in consumption and in government spending support the conclusion

of the previous section that the 1983-84 recovery was primarily due to an

easing of monetary policy and not to budget policy. The relatively weak

rise in consumption shows that the 1983-84 recovery was not driven

particularly by personal tax cuts while the relatively slow rise in

government demand shows it was also not driven particularly by government

purchases of goods and services. Of course, all three major components of

GNP contributed to the overall expansion of output but the unusual feature

 of the 1983-84 recovery was the much larger than usual rise in investment

 while consumption and government spending increases were close to their

 historic values. Moreover, the absolute rise in real investment during the

 first two years of the expansion (1982:4 to 1984:4) was greater than the

 combined increase of consumption and government outlays. In 1982 dollars,


                                        17
personal consumption expenditures rose $202 billion, federal governaen:

purchases of goods and services rose $33 billion and investment rose $247

billion. Even fixed investment alone rose $146 billion.

     Monetary policy was certainly not the only factor influencing

investment outlays. The major investment incentives enacted in the 1911

tax legislation also contributed to the strength of business investment.

The maximum potential resi net return on investment in plant and equipsnt

rose from 5.8 percent in the late 1970s to 7.5 percent in 1983, the hitnest

level in more than 20 years.16 The special safe-harbor leasing provisions

were a particularly strong stimulus to equipment investment until they were

repealed.

     Investment in producers' durable equipment wss far stronger in this

recovery than in previous ones. The growth in the first year was

20.9 percent, more than twice the average of 8.1 percent in previous

recoveries. For the two years, spending on producers' durable equipment

rose at 17.8 percent, again more than twice the 8.8 percent average in paat

recoveries.

     Investment in nonresidential structures actually declined sharply

during the first two quarters of the expansion, pulling down the average

for 1983 and for 1983-4. But after the first two quarters, investment in

nonresidential -structures grew nore rapidly in each quarter than the

average of past recoveries.




     16 See Feldatein and Jun (1987). The maximum potential real net
return is the maximum return that firms can pay on an investment. Ita
variations are reflections of changes in tax rules and in the interaction
of tax rules and inflation.

                                      18
    Residential fixed investment was particularly strong at the starr of

the recovery and was significantly atronger than usual for both the one-

year and two-year periods. About 62 percent of housing starts were for

single-family units, a fraction that remained constant during the first two

years of the expansion.

     The clear implication of all of this analysis is that the rate of

expanaion was relatively greatest in the components of GNP that are most

sensitive to interest rates and to business investment tax incentives.

In comparison to past recoveries, the expansion of 1983-84 can be

characterized as led by investment rather than by either consumption or

government spending. There is no evidence in the composition of spending

to suggest that the very large personal tax cuts caused either consumption

or total GNP to rise by more than their usual rate of increase during the

early stage of a recovery.



3. The Division of Nominal Growth into Inflation end Real Growth

     Although the 1983-84 rise in nominal CNP can be explained without

reference to the fiscal deficits, our interest in the more rapid than usual

expansion of j GNP requires us to look beyond monetary policy.The

evidence in the current section shows that the division of nominal GNP

growth was more favorable than would be expected on the basis of past

experience. More specifically, we estimated the regression of the current

rate of change of real GNP on the current rate of change of nominal GNP, on

four lagged values of the rate of change of nominal GNP and on four lagged

values of the rate of change of real CNP. Because of the identity that

changes in nominal GNP equal the sum of changes in real CNP and in the GNP


                                      19
implicit price deflator, tins specification is equivalent to one including

lagged inflation rates instead of lagged real growth rates. The equation

reflects the fact that the decomposition of changes in nominal ON? into

changes n real ON? and inflation may depend on the history of inflation

and therefore on expected future inflation. Extensions of this

specification are discussed below.

     We estimated this equation for the period from 1968:117 through the

business cycle peak in 1981:3 and then used the parameter estimates to

forecast real CNP changes during the recovery period. We found that the

actual rates of increase of real GNP during the recovery period exceeded

the predicted value in every quarter. It follows therefore that the

observed inflation (measured by the change in the implicit ON? price

deflator) was lower by an equal amount in every quarter than would be

expected on the basis of the past responses to changes in nominal ON?.18

     The specific results are shown in Table 4. The first three columns

show the quarterly changes in nominal ON?, real ON? and the implicit price

deflator. All figures are seasonally adjusted and expressed at quarterly

rates. Column 5 presents the predicted quarterly changes in real ON? based

on the equation described above and column 6 presents the differences

between the actual real ON? changes and the predicted changes.




     17 The exchange rate series used below is only available (with the
necessary lags) after 1967.

     18 Our evidence is not directly relevant to the controversy about
whether the 1982 recession and 1983-4 recovery fit the traditional
historical relationship between reductions in inflation and increases in
unemployment, since we focus on the recovery period (not the recession) and
study real output growth (not unemployment).


                                      20
    The traditional relation between the changes in real GNP and the

distributed lags of nominal GNP and inflation substantially underpredicts

the strength of the real CNP increase in the 1983-84 recovery. The

prediction error is positive in every quarter. For 1983, the equation

predicts 3.4 percent real GNP growth while the actual real 01W growth was

6.4 percent. The cumulative prediction error for the four quarters of 1983

was thus 3.0 percentage points, twice the standard error for this

prediction of 1.5 percentage points. For 1984 the actual real GNP growth

exceeded the predicted amount by an even greater 3.6 percentage points

(with a prediction standard error of 2.6 percentage points). Because of the

identity linking nominal CNP, real GNP and the implicit price deflator it

follows that the observed inflation rates were 3.0 percentage points and

3.6 percentage points lower than the predicted values for 1983 and 1984.

     One possible explanation of this favorable division between inflation

and real GNP is that the Federal Reserve's demonstrated commitment to

reducing inflation caused a change in expectations that in turn led to

smaller price increases than would otherwise have been expected. There is

no doubt that the Federal Reserve had permitted the most serious recession

of the postwar period, had emphasized its commitment to controlling the

monetary aggregates along an anti-inflationary path, and had permitted

interest rates to reach unprecedented levels. It is difficult, however, to

assess how much all of this actually changed market expectations and the

extent to which that change in expectations caused smaller increases in

product prices and wages.

     One reason to be skeptical about the role of changed perceptions of

monetary policy is that, despite the Fed's rhetoric about slowing the


                                       21
growth of the monetary aggregates, Ml and M2 actually continued to increase

quite rapidly. Based on the monetary statistics available at the start of

1983, the increase in M2 actually accelerated from 8.2 percent in 1978 and

1979 to 9.0 percent in 1980, 10.1 percent in 1981 and 9.7 percent in 1982.

A year later the Federal Reserve revised the 1982 M2 growth down to

9.2 percent but reported the 1983 M2 growth to be 11.5 percent. Although

the Fed emphasized that the rapid money growth reflected regulatory

changes, many financial market participants were quite skeptical. That

skepticism extended also to those who watched interest rates rather than

monetary aggregates and saw a sharp decline in interest rates that they

feared had been engineered by the Federal Reserve. The prospect of large

budget deficits also added to this concern that the recently achieved

reduction of inflation might soon be reversed.

     The best direct measure of the change in the inflation expectations of

informed and influential market participants is probably the survey

conducted by Richard Hoey, the chief economist at Drexel Burnham Lambert

(Hoey, 1988). Hoey regularly surveys the 10-year inflation expectations of

a group of several hundred senior financial executives and business

economists. He found that the average 10-year inflation expettation fell

along with the decline in actual inflation from a high of 8.8 percent in

October 1980 to 6.8 percent in April 1982 but that it then remained

essentially unchanged during the next two years, varying between 6.3 and

6.8 and ending at 6.8 percent in March 1984.

     Unfortunately, since Hoey's survey only began in 1978, it is not

possible to compare the behavior of price expectations during the 1983-84

recovery with price expectations during the previous postwar recoveries. It


                                      22
is possible that the stability of inflation expectations during the first

two years -of the recent recovery is unusual and that the stability of

expectations contributed to the more modest increases in prices during this

period. But even if both parts -of that statement are true, it is not cleat

whether the stability of inflation expectations during the recovery period

was due to faith in the Voicker-Reagan policies or simply to the fact that
                                                                             -
the observed inflation was itself so moderate during this period.

Moreover, the expected one-year inflation rates reported by Hoey were
higher than the prevailing inflation rate during the entire recovery.

     We believe that the most important reason for the unusually good price

performance during this period was the sharp rise in the value of the

dollar)9 The Federal Reserve Board's multilateral trade-weighted index of

the dollar's nominal exchange value rose from 105.4 in the fourth quarter

of 1981 to 122.2 in the fourth quarter of 1982, 130.2 in the fourth quarter

of 1983 and 147.2 in the fourth quarter of 1984.

     This forty percent increase in the dollar's exchange value directly

lowered the cost of imports and put deflationary pressure on the prices of

U.S. products that compete with imports. The sharp rise in the nominal

value of the dollar was accompanied by a 33 percent increase in the

corresponding real value of the dollar. This increase in the dollar's real


     19 Other usual suspects for changes in domestic inflation are the
behavior of agricultural and energy prices. The producer price index for
crude "foodstuffs and feedstuffs" was quite stable during this period,
equalling 257 in 1981, 248 in 1982, 252 in 1983, and 260 in 1984. Although
sharp shifts in energy prices have been important at other times during
this decade, they too were relatively stable during this initial recovery
period. The producer price index for crude energy prices stood at 783 in
1981, 802 in 1982, 791 in 1983 and 785 in 1984. The strong dollar no doubt
also contributed to this energy stability since the rising dollar
automatically increased the cost in marks and yen and other currencies of
oil and other imported energy products.

                                      23
value reduced the demand for U.S. exports and increased the U.S. demand for

imports, thereby inducing stronger domestic price competition and smaller

wage increases than would otherwise have occurred.2°

     To assess the impact of the dollar's rise on the division of nominal

CNP growth between real CNP growth and inflation, we expanded the basic

equation to include the current and four lagged values of the multilateral

trade-weighted nominal exchange rate. Column 4 of Table 4 displays the

exchange rate values for 1983:1 to 1985:4. Column 7 of Table 4 shows the

resulting predicted values of the real CNP changes and column 8 the

corresponding prediction errors.

     The rising dollar explains the unusual strength of real CNP and the

unusually favorable inflation experience during the expansion. More

specifically, including the distributed lag of exchange rate changes

reduces the 1983 real CNP prediction error from 3.0 percent to 1.9 percent.

For 1984 the prediction error is reduced from 3.6 percent to only 0.3

percent (relative to a standard error of 1.2 percent) and for 1985 it falls

from 4.1 percent to -0.1 percent.

     Some part of the dollar's strength was no doubt due to the shift in

monetary policy and the fall in inflation expectations that accompanied the

recession and the observed price decline. The tight monetary policy in

1981 temporarily raised expected real long-term interest rates and thereby

made dollar securities more attractive. The I-they surveys show that the

expected real pretax yield on 10-year government bonds rose from a low of

only 1.6 percent in June/July 1980 to a high of 8.3 percent in September



     20 On the effect of the dollar's strength on U.S. inflation during
this period, see Sachs (1985).

                                      24
1981. But by late 1982 the expected real interest rate was down to about 4

percent   and it stayed at that level through mid-1983. The easing of

monetary policy in the second half of 1982 reduced nominal interest rates

and thereby accelerated the decline in real interest rates. Although post-

1982 monetary policy may have continued to contribute to a strong dollar by

reducing the uncertainty of future inflation, we believe that the pricrary

reason for the dollar's continued rise was the change in U.S. fiscal

policy.

     The budget deficit climbed from 2.6 percent of GNP in 1981 to

4.1 percent of CNP in 1982, 6.3 percent of GNP in 1983 and then stabilized

at 5-plus percent of GNP for the next three years. Although there remains

much academic controversy about the link between budget deficits and

interest rates, we believe that the concurrent and especially the expected

future budget deficits raised real interest rates and increased the

attractiveness of dollar investments.2'

     There can be little doubt that real interest rates did rise during

this period. The nominal interest rate on 10-year Treasury bonds remained

essentially unchanged, starting at 10.5 percent in December 1982, rising to

11.8 percent by December 1983 and then falling to 11.5 percent in December

1984, while the inflation rate as measured by the CNP deflator fell from

5.2 percent for 1982 to 3.6 percent for 1983 and 3.4 percent for 1984. The

Hoey measure of expected real pretax yields on 10-year Treasury bonds rose




     21 In this emphasis on expected future budget deficits as the cause of
the high real long-term interest rates and the strong dollar, we agree with
the analysis of Blanchard (1981), Branson et al. (1985), and the 1984
Economic ReDort of the President.

                                       25
from 3.9 percent in December 1982 to 5.3 percent in January 1984 and

7.5 percent in May 1984 before subsiding to 5.9 percent in December 1984.

      The leading alternative explanation to the proposition that current

and future budget deficits were the cause of the rise in real interest

rates is the increased investment demand that resulted from the 1981

changes in tax rules. Although we believe that those tax changes did

increase investment demand (see Feldstein, 1987, and Feldstein and Jun,

1987), we do not believe that this increase in investment demand was nearly

as important as the sharp climb in the budget deficit. The increase in the

cyclically-adjusted deficit from 1.8 percent of cyclically-adjusted GNP in

1981 to 3.7 percent in 1983 and 4.6 percent in 1985 was substantially

bigger than the increase in fixed investment.

      But this paper is not the place to resolve the controversy about the

relative importance of expected future budget deficits and investment

incentives as causes of the rise in real interest rates and the dollar.22

The important matter for current purposes is that these two fiscal changes

--   the   budget deficit and the increased investment incentives --   increased

the attractiveness of dollar investments and thereby raised the value of

the dollar. The stronger dollar in turn meant that the inflation rate was

lower than it otherwise would have been. The expansion of nominal GNF was

 therefore divided in a more favorable way between inflation and real CNP.




      22 Feldstein (198Gb) provides estimates of the impact of the expected
 budget deficits and of changes in tax rules on the dollar-mark value and
 concludes that the deficit effect is substantial but that the effect of the
 tax incentives cannot be discerned in the data.

                                          26
4. Conclusion

     The evidence presented in this paper contradicts the popular view that

the 1983-84 economic recovery was the result of a consumer boom financed by

reductions in the personal income tax. We also find no support for the

proposition that the recovery reflected an increase in the supply of labor

induced by the reduction in personal marginal tax rates.

     The timing of the expansion and the composition of the real output

changes make it clear that the primary cause of increased output was the

shift to a more expansionary monetary policy that occurred in 1982. In

particular, short term nominal interest rates fell throughout the period

while nominal CNP rose, indicating that the supply of money was increasing

faster than the demand for money. Formal tests of the impact of monetary

and fiscal policy imply that the increased budget deficits played no role

in the rise of nominal GNP. Any positive effect of the deficits on total

demand was presumably offset by the contractionary effects of higher

interest rates.

     An important distinguishing feature of the 1983-84 recovery was the

unusually rapid increase of business investment while consumer spending and

Federal government purchases of goods and services were not unusually

strong. This pattern also points to the roles of monetary policy and the

enhanced investment incentives contained in the 1981 tax reform.

     The expansion of total demand in 1983-84 was divided more favorably

between real output and inflation than would have been expected on the

basis of past experience. Our analysis shows that this important

difference can be explained by the sharp increase in the value of the

dollar during this period. Although the strong dollar depressed exports and


                                      27
induced a rise in imports, its net effect on total real output was

favorable because it reduced the rate of inflation and thereby permitted

more of the rise in nominal GNP to be channelled into increased real GNP.

     The dollar's rise and the resulting fall in inflation also may have

induced the Federal Reserve to permit a more expansionary monetary policy

during this period than they otherwise would have. To that extent, our

analysis understates the impact of the strong dollar on the pace of real

expansion.

     The dollar's sharp rise during this period occurred despite the easing

of monetary policy because of the expansionary fiscal polity. The increased

budget deficit and the enhanced incentives for business investment raised

real interest rates and thus made U.S. securities more attractive to

foreign and domestic portfolio investors. The result was an increased

value of the dollar.

     The expansionary fiscal polity did contribute to the greater than

expected rise of real GNP in 1983-84, but it did so through an unusual

channel. The fiscal expansion raised output because it caused a favorable

supply shock and not because it was a traditional stimulus to demand. The

budget deficit and the investment incentives were expansionary in the

short-run because, by causing a rise of the dollar, they reduced inflation

and thus permitted a faster growth of real GNP.




                                      28
                                References



Andersen, Leonall C., and Jerry L. Jordan. 1968. Monetary and fiscal
     actions: A test of their relative importance in economic
     stabilization. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 50: 11-24.

Blanchard, Olivier J. 1981. Output, the stock market, and interest rates.
     American Economic Review 71: 132-43.

Blinder, Alan S. , and Robert M. Solow. 1974. Analytical foundacions of
     fiscal policy. In The Economics of Public Finance. Washington:
     Brookings Institution.

Branson, William H., Arminio Fraga, and Robert A. Johnson. 1985. Expected
     fiscal policy and the recession of 1982. National Buresu of Economic
     Research Working Paper No. 1784.

Economic Report of the President. 1984. Washington, D.C. :   Government
     Printing Office.

Feldstein, Martin. l986a. Supply-side economics: Old truths and new
     claims. American Economic Review 76: 26-30.

Feldstein, Martin. 1986b. The budget deficit and the dollar. In ThR
     Macroeconomics Annual 1986, ed. S. Fischer. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT
     Press.

Feldstein, Martin. 1987. Tax rules and business investment. In Taxes and
     Capital Formation, ed. M. Feldstein. Chicago: The University of
     Chicago Press.

Feldstein, Martin, and Joomung Jun. 1987. The effects of tax rules on
     nonresidential fixed investment: Some preliminary evidence from the
     1980s. In The Effects of Taxation on Capital Accumulation, ed.
     M. Feldstein. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Fisher, Franklin. 1970. Tests of equality between aeta of coefficients in
     two linear regressions: An expository note. Econometrica 38: 361-66.

Friedman, Benjamin M. 1986. Money, credit and interest rates in the
     business cjc1e. In The American Business Cycle: Continuity and
     Change, ed. R. J. Gordon. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Friedman, Benjamin M. 1988. Lessons on monetary policy from the l980s.
     Journal of Economic Perspectives 2: 51-72.

Hoey, Richard B. 1988. Decision-makers Poll. New York: Drexel Burnham
     Lambert Inc.



                                      29
Holloway, Thomas M. 1986. The cyclically adjusted fedei-al budget and
     federal debt: Revised and updated estimates. Survey of Current
     Business 66: 11-17.

McCallum, Bennett T. 1986. Monetary vs. fiscal policy effects: A review
     of the debate. In The Monetary vs. Fiscal Policy Debate, ed.
     R.W. Hafer. Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Allanheld.

Pindyck, Robert S. , and Daniel L. Rubinfeld. 1981. Econometric Models and
     Economic Forecasts. New York: McGraw Hill.

Poole, William. 1988. Monetary policy lessons of recent inflation and
     disinflation. Journal of Economic Perspectives 2: 73-100.

Sachs, Jeffrey D.  1985. The dollar and the policy mix: 1985. Brookins
     Papers on Economic Activity 16: 117-97.




                                     30
                                                                           Table 1
                                             Effects of Monetary   and Fiscal POlicies on Nosinal GNP Growth


                  Specifications                1982                            1983                             1984                    O,.unulative
                            Debt
      Money         Fiscal Erosion
      Van-          Van- Adjust-                                                                                                                 1983/
      ables         ables nEnt        Q1        Q2      Q3      Q4      Ql      Q2       Q3      Q4       Ql     Q2      Q3       Q4     1983    1984


                                                                                       Actual Crcath

(1)                                  —.001      .015    .006    .010    .016    .031     .022   .029   .036     .021     .014    .011    .098    .180


                                                                                     Forecast Residuals

(2)         112      No      —       —.025 —.009       —.016 —.011     —.008   —.001    —.015   .007   .016     .000    —.005   —.008   —.017   —.014

(3)         112     Yes      No      —.027    —.012 —.022      —.020 —.013      .001    —.025   .001   .006    —.009    —.015   —.019   —.036   —.073

(4)         112     Yes      Yes     —.025    —.009 —.017      —.015 —.011 —.004 —.019          .004   .011    —.007    —.014   —.016   —.030   —.056

(5)   112    Adj     No      —       —.025    —.009    —.015   —.011 —.008      .008     .000   .008   .015     .000    —.006   —.008    .008    .009

(6)   112    Mj      Yes     No      —.027    —.012    —.022   —.020 —.013      .005    —.009   .000   .005    —.009    —.015   —.020   —.017 —.056

(7)   112    Adj     Yes     Yes     —.025    —.009 —.017      —.015 —.011      .005    —.006   .001   .009    —.007    —.014   —.016   —.011 —.039


All figures relate to seasonally-adjust&1 quarterly rates of thane. See text for definitions of variables and prooeures. The
standard errors of the forecast residuals are all 0.010 for sinle quarters, between 0.020 and 0.023 for the
                                                                                                            one—year cumulations,
and between 0.028 and 0.040 for the two-year cunulations.
                                  Table 2

                 Tests of the Contribution of Fiscal Policy
                      to Explaining Nominal GNP Growth


           Specifications           F-Statistics and Probability Levels

    Money   Fiscal Variables'          Test I                  Teat 2
  Variables   Debt Erosion        1960:1 - 1981:3         1981:4 - 1985:4
               Adjustment        F-stat. Probability   F-stat. Probability


(1)   M2            No            1.30       0.25         2.16       0.24

(2)   M2            Yes           1.42       0.24         1.24       0.37

(3)   M2 Adj        No            1.30       0.25         1.10       0.50

(4)   M2 Adj        Yes            1.42      0.24         0.95       0.48


The F-statistics based on the adjusted fiscal variables have 8 and 78
degrees of freedom for Test 1 and 8 and 4 degrees of freedom for Test 2;
the statistics based on the adjusted fiscal variables have 4 and 86 degrees
of freedom for Test 1 and 4 and 8 degrees of freedom for Test 2.
                                                                 Table    3

                            Growth   Rates of Real GNP      Components:    1983—84      and Previous Recoveries

                  GP                   Invesbnent                  Consumption             Fnderal Government         National fense
       Current     Avg.    S.E.   Current Avg. S. E.           Current    Avg.     S.E.    Current Avg. S. E.        Current Avg. S. E.

Qi       .86      1.70     .34       4.48    4.53 2.22           .74 1.55         .06      —3.90      —.85 1.00        .22   —1.92   1.03
Q2      2.25      1.39     .39    14.00      7.28 1.70          1.95  .96         .27         .11     —.60 1.04       1.61   —1.33   1.02
Q3      1.48      1.51     .32     7.78      4.47    1.36       1.31   1.23       .22       —.32      —.04   1.13     1.15    —.31   1.00
Q4      1.78      1.24     .35     9.98      4.66    2.14       1.33   1.52       .19      —4.18     —1.02   1.24     2.16   —1.15   1.04
Q5      2.57       .91     .44    13.51       .80    2.24        .92   1.02       .11       2.07       .90    .70     1.65    1.39    .71
Q6      1.34      1.00     .25      .49      2.43    1.05       1.57   1.12       .25       8.88      —.26    .63      .76   —1.59   1.09
Q7       .65       .68     .37        .88     .50    1.82        .47   1.01       .24       —.03     —1.16    .80     —.61   —1.41    .93
Q8       .41       .95     .39    —1.28        .44   2.79       1.05   1.19       .36       1.69      —.14    .72     3.56    —.20   1.G4

11      6.51      5.97     .79    41.19      22.64   4.64       5.44   5.37       .48      —8.12     —2.30   3.70     5.24   —4.45   3.51
11—2    5.78      4.76     .16    26.65      12.71   .75        4.76   4.88       .28       1.88     —1.58   1.91     5.34   —3.26   1.56


                Durable               Nondurable                   Producers'                 Nonresidential            Residential
               Consunptiori            Consumption            Durable Equipment                    Structures         Fixnd Investsent
       Current     Avg.   S.E.    Current Avg. S. E.          Current Avg. S .E.           Current    Avg.   S. E.   Current Avg. S. E.

Q1       .51      3.35    1.76         .98   1.23    .27       —.32      .39     1.22      —7.27     —1.84   .65     10.36   4.56 1.19
Q2      6.35      4.23     .94       1.20      .63   .35       5.67    1.16      1.05      —3.82       .17   .50     15.34   7.89 1.11
Q3      3.03      4.36     .63       1.32      .58   .28       5.60    2.73      1.33       2.04       .60   .68      9.84   6.24 1.18
Q4      4.16      4.31     .67         .81   1.14    .33       8.69    3.63      1.53       4.57     1.34    .82     —1.24   3.87    1.48
Q5      4.01      1.72     .41        .22     .77    .17       1.84 3.44 .82                4.66     2.36    .66      6.63    1.81 1.79
Q6     3.17       —.07 1.10          1.68    1.33    .34       5.37 2.16 .88                4.80     1.08    .63      1.52   —1.79  .90
Q7      .56        .86 1.59           .17     .96    .19       3.42 .26 1.32                1.03       .80 1.20      —1.62    2.48 2.51
Q8     2.72       2.79 1.11           .20     .82    .35       3.50 3.53 1.79                .91       .03 1.27       —.41     .28 2.26
11     14.71 17.25 2.30              4.38    3.63    .84      20.90 8.10         2.58      —4.83       .26 1.53      38.08 24.60     3.94
11—2   12.76     11.11 1.75          3.32    3.78    .35      17.84    8.77       .52       3.17     2.26 1.55       21.02   13.05 3.22
                                           Table 4
                         Decomposition of Nominal CNP Changes
                             into Real GNI' Changes and Inflation

                                                                       Exchange Rate
                                                     Basic Equation A djusted Equation
                                                               .
                                                                                         —
                  Actual Changes          Index
                                            of       Predicted        Predicted
                                Implicit Dollar        Real    Actual   Real    Actual
         Nominal      Real       Price   Exchange      GNP      less    GNP      less
           CNP         CNP      Deflator   Rate       Change Predicted Change Predicted
           (1)         (2)        (3)      (4)         (5)      (6)       (7)     (3)



1983:1    .016        .009        .008    119.4        .000     .009     .000    .003


1983:2    .031        .022        .008    123.0        .014     .009     .013    .009

1983:3    .022        .015        .009    128.7        .007     .008     .010    .005

1983:4    .029        .018        .011    130.2        .013     .004     .020   —.003

1984:1    .036        .025        .010    131.6        .018     .007     .026   —.000

1984:2    .021        .013        .007    132.8        .004     .009     .012    .001

1984:3    .014        .006        .008    141.7       —.002     .009     .005     .002

1984:4    .011        .004         .007   147.2       —.006     .011     .004   —.000

1985:1    .019        .012         .006   156.5        .000     .012     .010     .002

1985:2     .014        .006        .008   149.1       —.004     .010     .009   —.003

1985:3     .017        .010        .006   139.2        .000     .010     .009     .001

1985:4     .015        .007        .008    128.2      —.002     .009     .008   —.001



The exchange rate index is the Federal Reserve Boards multilateral trade-
weighted nominal value of the dollar.   The standard errors of the forecast
residuals are .005 for single quarters in column 6 and .004 for single quarters
in column 8, .015 and .009 respectively for the full year 1983, and .026 and .012
for the full year. 1984.
