NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON THE POSSIBILITY OF PRICE DECREASING BUBBLES

Philippe Weil

Working Paper No. 2821

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetta Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1989

I thank J. Tirole for a helpful diacussion; all errora are of course mine.
This research is part of NBER's research program in Financial Markets and
Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2821
January 1989

ON THE POSSIBILITY OF PRICE DECREASINC BUBBLES
ABSTRACT
It is often argued that a rational bubble, because it is poaitive, must
increase the price of a stock.

This argument is not valid in general:

as

soon as bubbles affect interest rates, the fundamental value of a stock
depends on whether or not a bubble is present.

The existence of a rational

bubble then might, by raising equilibrium interest rates, depress the fundamental to such an extent that the sum

of

the positive bubble and decreased

fundamental falls short of the fundamental, no-bubble price.

Under condi-

tions made precise below, there can therefore be price decreasing bubbles,

and an asset can be "undervalued."
Philippe Weil
Department of Economics

Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

A rational speculative bubble on a stock which can be freely
— is non-negative by
disposed of — a form of limited liability

definition:' it represents what an investor might be willing to pay
to buy a stock forever stripped of its dividends. The fundamental,
on its part, represents the present discounted value of the dividend
stream. In legal terms, the fundamentalis the value of the u.sufruct,
while the bubble measures the value of the stock minus its usufruct.
For instance, a claim to an apple tree could be split into two assets: a claim to the apple crop (whose value is the fundamental),
and a claim to the useless2 wood itself (the bubble). Because of
the free disposal assumption, the price of the latter claim cannot
be negative; a rational speculative bubble on an asset which can be
costlessly destroyed is, therefore, non-negative.
Much has been made of this fact in some recent discussions.3
It has been in particular argued that the definition given supra of
a rational bubble poorly captures the essence of bubbles in actual
economies. Two reasons are advanced. Firstly, it is proposed, "a
bubble cannot start; to exist, it must be present since the origin
of time." This is true, but in the somewhat trivial sense that the
equilibrium price today of something which has even an infinitesimal
probability of being valued tomorrow cannot be zero; by backward
recursion, every bubble which may conceivably arise tomorrow must
exist today. Secondly, and more importantly, the above definition
of a rational bubble is judged to be unsatisfactory because it cannot
account for the existence of "undervalued" assets. "Because bubbles
are positive," it is claimed, "the presence of a bubble increases the
equilibrium price of an asset.".
The latter argument is of course correct if the fundamental is
independent of the presence or absence of a bubble: the sum of a
positive bubble and a fixed fundamental indeed exceeds the funda— is,
mental, and the "bubbly" price — in Tirole's terminology
therefore, larger than the non-bubbly price. As soon as either dividends or discount rates depend on the presence or absence of a
'In the following, I adopt Tirole's [1982, 1985] definition of a rational bubble.
21 assume, for the sake of discussion, that apple wood can neither be burned nor serve any
other useful purpose, and is costless to destroy.
3See, for instance, Diba and Grossman [1987] and West [1988].

1

bubble, however, the fundamental is affected by the presence of a
bubble. For instance — and this is the scenario explored in this
paper,4 the existence of a bubble may lead to an increase in interest rates which so depresses the fundamental that the sum of the
positive bubble and of the bubbly fundamental falls short of the nonbubbly fundamental. Hence, a positive rational bubble may in fact
decrease the overall price of a stock, contrary to what is commonly
believed.
The purpose of this paper is to formalize the foregoing argument,
and to determine conditions under which price decreasing bubbles
on a stock may indeed exist, in general equilibrium, when the discount rate is not exogenous. In section 1, I construct a simple general equilibrium model in which a stock need not be priced at its
fundamental. In section 2, I derive existence conditions for price decreasing rational bubbles. The conclusion summarizes the results.
research.
1.

The model

To make sense of the question asked in this paper — can price decreasing bubbles exist in general equilibrium ? — it is of course
necessary to first construct a model in which asset bubbles are at all
possible. This is achieved, most simply, by considering a simple twoperiod overlapping generation model without intergenerational altruism which provides, through the perpetual arrival of new cohorts,
the new entrants into the market required, as shown by Tirole [1982],
for the existence of a rational speculative bubbles. What is therefore
crucial, in this overlapping generation setting, for the existence of
bubbles is not the finiteness of the agents' horizon but, instead, the
fact that successive generations are economically distinct.5
4The other possibility — namely that managers may pay attention, when setting dividends
or issuing new shares, to the existence of a bubble on their company's
stock — is not analyzed
here. A result akin to Wallace's [1980] theorem on the maximum rate of growth of the money
supply is likely to hold in that setting: the bubble on a stock must be driven to zero if new
bubbly shares are issued "too fast" by the firm.
5See my [1987] paper for an example of an economy in which bubbles are possible, despite
the infinite horizon of every agent alive, because of the continuous arrival into the economy
of new infinitely-livedfamilies.

2

1.1.

Consumers

Consumers live for two periods. Population is constant, with reproduction assumed to take place by parthenogenesis.6A11 consumers
are identical, both within a generation and across cohorts. There
is only one non-storable good, call it a fruit. A (selfish) representative consumer born at time t wishes to maximize the time separable

utility

U

U(Cit)

+ V(C2t)

(1)

he derives from his consumption bundle (cii, c2t) when young and
old. The functions u(.) and v(.) are defined on R+, are continuous,
increasing and concave, and satisfy the following assumptions:

Assumption 1 lim_.o u'(c) = lim_+o v'(c) = +00,
Assumption 2
u'(c) = lim_+ v'(c) = 0.
Each agent receives an endowment (e1, e2), e1 > 0,

e2

0 of the

consumption good. It is in addition assumed that the following
inequality holds:
Assumption 3 u'(ei)/v'(e2) < 1,
which implies the dynamic inefficiency, in this zero population
growth economy, of any competitive equilibrium yielding (e1, e2) as a
consumption allocation. This crucial assumption will be used infra.
To smooth out, if desired, his consumption profile, our consumer
can buy Xt fruit producing trees, at a price of Pt fruits each. His
budget constraints are thus:7
cit +PtXt = ci,
C2t

=

e2

+ (pt+i + yg+i)xt,

(2)
(3)

0,
(4)
where Yt+i > 0 denotes the fruit output of a tree at time t + 1. The
first-order condition for an interior8 utility maximum is simply
Clt,C2t

Pt U'(Cit) = (pt+i + yt+i) V'(C21),

i

(5)

6See Bernheim and Bagwell [1988] for the complications introduced by marriage.
do not explicitly introduce a consumption-loans market, as it will be inactive in
equilibrium.
8Corner solutions are not characterized,as equilibrium considerations impose interiority.

3

Equation (5) can be solved, using (2) and (3), for the optimum tree
holding:
PtXj

=

(pt+i+yi+i\

S1

pi
where S(.) denotes the savings function.
1.2.

\.

I

Technology

Trees have the following features. There is a constant number of
identical trees, normalized without loss of generality to be equal to
the size of the population; the number of trees per capita is therefore
equal to 1. It is known from the origin of time that

_fy>O forO<t<T—1;
fortT.
where T is a possibly very large but finite integer.. In other terms,
a tree produces fruits for only a finite number of periods. In the
long run (t T), trees become sterile. It is further assumed, in the
spirit of the discussion above, that the wood of the tree is intrinsicálly useless and costless to destroy; the only reason a consumer
might therefore choose to buy a tree in or after period T — 1 is for
speculative purposes: "buying in order to resell." Prior to period
T — 1, however, trees have a positive fundamental — the piesent
discounted value of future dividends.
The rationale for specifying the dividend process in that fashion is best understood by remembering Tirole's [1985] results: if i)
dividends are capitalized ex ante (i.e., all the trees ever present in
the economy are traded today ), and ii) dividends per head do not
become zero in the long run, there cannot be a bubble on a asset
with a fundamental. Our setup violates the second condition — the
dividend per head becomes zero after time T — which leaves open
the possibility that a bubble may exist on trees.9
9See Tirole's [1985] Proposition 1.

4

1.3.

Competitive equilibria

In a competitive equilibrium, a representative consumer must hold
— because of the choice of units — precisely one tree:
Xt

=

Vt0.

1

(8)

Therefore, substituting (8) into (5), one finds that the equilibrium
fruit price of trees must satisfy the following first-order difference

equation:

p u'(ei — Pt) = (Pt+i + yt÷i) v'(e2 +Pt+i + yt+i),

(9)

which is forced by the dividend process given in (7). Equivalently,
the equilibrium fruit price of a tree must follow
Pt

=

s(Pt+i±1).

(10)

Given the structure of the dividend process, it is simplest to divide
the solution procedure into two parts: t T — 1 and t < T — 2.
1.3.1. Long run (t T — 1)
Trees become intrinsically useless as of period T. Their fundamental value is thus zero as of period T — 1 whether or not a bubble
is present. Determining the equilibrium price of trees thus amounts
to studying whether or not a bubble on an intrinsically useless asset may exist in this economy starting in period T — 1. Now we
know, from Gale [1973], from Wallace's [1980] results on fiat money
equilibria and Tirole's [1985] related work on bubbles, that, in many
cases, the dynamic inefficiency of the bubbleless economy is necessary and sufficient for the existence of bubbly equilibria. As the
following shows, this holds true in the present model.
If trees are not valued in and after period T — 1 (Pt = 0 for
t T — 1), the competitive equilibrium consumption allocation is,
trivially, the autarkic one (e1, e2) — which, by construction [see (3)],
is dynamically inefficient. This equilibrium is one in which there is
no bubble: the price of a tree is equal to its zero fundamental.

5

But then, because Assumption 3 holds, it is easy to check that
there also exists a stationary golden rule bubbly equilibrium characterized by

pg

=

VtT—l,

where j3 is given, from (10) and the fact that the dividend is zero

after T —

1,

by

= S(I) >

0,

with the inequality implied by the dynamic inefficiency of the autarkic equilibrium imposed by assumption 310 Because the long run
fundamental is constructed to be zero independently of equilibrium
interest rates, j3 represents a pure bubble. Bubbles are thus trivially
price increasing in the long run in this economy — in accordance
with the intuition given in the introduction.
Before proceeding further, it is necessary to note that there exists
many non-stationary equilibria in addition to the stationary equilibria described above. Following standard11 arguments, it is easy
to show that if the interest elasticity of savings is not too negative,
these non-stationary paths converge to the inefficient non-bubbly
steady state. If income effects are strong (S'(.)
0), however,
cyclical or chaotic equilibria may occur. For the sake of simplicity, I
henceforth concentrate on equilibria which are stationary as of period T — 1 —i.e., equilibria which are such that either pg = 0 or
pg = j3 for all t .T — 1.
1.3.2. Short-run (t <T — 1)
In the short run, trees have a positive fundamental. Let
—

Pt)

v'(e2 +pgj. + y)
denote the (implicit) interest rate on consumption loans between
periods t and t + 1. The fundamental value f. of a tree at some
— 1 is
date r
simply the present discounted value of dividends
'°Equivalently, 73 is the stationary solution to (9).
"See, for instance, Grandmont [1985], Tirole [1985], and Wallace [1980].

6

distributed by trees until T — 1, i.e.,

ir+1 fls=r+i

s

(14)

Note that the discount factors depend on the asset price itself, so
that the fundamental will differ in general differ across bubbly and
non-bubbly equilibria.
The equilibrium behavior of tree prices in the short run is characterized, from (7) and (10), by backward'2 iterations of the difference

equation
—
pi
pt) = (p1+1 + y) v'(e2 +Pi±i + y),
subject to either of the following "terminal" conditions:

(15)

or
PT-i = j3.
(16)
PT-i = 0
Because the function p u'(ej — p) is increasing and maps, using (1)
and (2), the interval [0, e1) onto [0, +oo), it has an inverse, so that
the backward perfect foresight dynamics are uniquely defined, and
can be represented, from (15), as
Pt

= '(pt+i),

(17)

where cp, continuous and differentiable, maps [0, oo) onto [0, ei).
Using (17) and the terminal conditions (16), two competitive
(long-run stationary) equilibrium paths emerge:
• a non-bubbly equilibrium path ii =
..
0,0, . .

• a bubbly equilibrium path = (j3o,j3,,. . . ,13T2,I3,,•
where's and 's henceforth denote, respectively, the non-bubbly and
bubbly price sequences. Notice that, for each type of equilibrium,
the associated fundamental (which need not be explicitly computed)

is unique.'3 It of course differs across equilibria.
Although in the long run a bubble is necessarily price increasing
since j3 > 0, it is possible, as the next section will demonstrate, that
it be price decreasing in the short run.
'2Backward perfect foresight dynamics are the appropriate solution concept in this model,
and not just an analytical device as in Grandmont [1985].
13This is true in this model because the asset stops paying dividends in finite time. In
more general frameworks,there might be, for instance, several non-bubbly fundamentals (e.g.
Obstfeld and Rogoff [1983].)

7

2.

Price decreasing bubbles

,

I now turn to the comparison of the non-bubbly and bubbly price
sequences, and and ask whether it is possible to have, for some
—
r
1, j3. <j5.. From basic economic reasoning, the answer to
this question must crucially depend on the preferences of consumers,
and more precisely on on the sign and magnitude of their interest
elasticity of savings.
To understand why this is so, it is necessary to consider in detail
the channels through which the presence of a bubble might lead to
a decrease of the overall price of the asset. As mentioned supra, the
main requirement is that the presence of a bubble decrease the asset's fundamental. In this world in which the dividends distributed
by the tree are exogenous, such a decrease can only occur if the
interest rates at which future dividends are discounted are higher in
the bubbly path then in the non-bubbly path. The existence of a
price decreasing bubble therefore must require that higher equilibrium interest rates be associated with a lower overall real value of
the stock of trees — which cannot occur if the interest elasticity of
savings is positive. The critical role of income effects is formalized
in the following proposition:
Proposition 1 If the interest elasticity of savings, S'(.), is positive,
bubbles are price increasing in the short run as well as in the long

run.

Proof. The long run part of the proposition was proved in 1.3.1. The short
run part is proved by backward induction. We know that, as ofT—i, the bubble
is price increasing, since j3> 0. Can it be non-price increasing at T—2? Suppose
it is, so that j3T—2 PT—2. Then (3 + y)/73T—2 > Y/PT—2. But if S'(.) > 0, this
implies in equilibrium that T—2 = S[(15+ y)/13T—2] > S[y/T_2] = PT—2 — a
contradiction! Hence T—2 > pT_2: the bubble is price increasing at T — 2. By
a similar argument,one shows that if the bubble is price increasing at r T —2,
it is price increasing at r—1 if S'(.) > 0. Therefore the bubble is price increasing
at every date, in the short run and in the long run.

The intuition underlying the proof of this proposition is
straightforward. For interest rates to be higher in the bubbly equilibrium than in the non-bubbly one (a necessary condition for a
8

bubble to be price decreasing), it must be the case, if the interest
elasticity of savings is positive, that trees crowd out consumption
loans in the bubbly equilibrium relative to the non-bubbly case.14
But if the bubble is price decreasing, the real value of the stock' of
trees is lower in the bubbly than in the non-bubbly equilibrium —.
i.e., trees crowd consumption loans in, not out! Whence the contradiction on which the proof is based, and which can only be resolved
by allowing for a negative interest elasticity of savings.'5
What happens when the interest elasticity of savings is negative
critically depends, as in endogenous business cycle theory,'6 on the
particular specification of the utility function and of the endowment
vector. The striking pattern of a bubble which is price increasing'
in, say, even periods and price decreasing in odd periods emerges in
the following case:

Proposition 2

Suppose the interest elasticity of savings in négative, and that the secpnd period endowment is zerO. Then, in the
short run, the bubble on the tree is price decreasing in periods T— 2k,
and price increasing in periods T — 2k + 1, where k is a positive integer.
Proof. Since e2 = 0 (a specification which satisfies, becauseof assumption 1,
condition 3), it is straightforward to show from (5) that the interest elasticity of
savings is negative if the function g(x) xv'(x) is decreasing over the interval
[0,ei). But then, from (15) and (17), the map ça is decreasing. Therefore,
PT—2 = Q3) < so(O) = T_2: the bubble is price decreasing at T — 2. This
implies that T—3 = cp(fiT—2) > lp(15T_2) = pT_3: the bubble is price increasing
at T — 3. Similarly, it is price decreasing at T — 4, price increasing at T — 5,
etc., until the origin of time is reached.

Proposition 2 applies, for instance, to the case of isoelastic utility: u(c) = v(c) = clP/(l — p), with p > 1 to, yield a negative
interest elasticity of savings. Extending this Proposition to allow
for a non-zero second period endowment or an interest elasticity of
savings non-uniformly negative presents little interest, except that
14This crowding out is of course only incipient, since the interest rate adjusts to make the
consumption loans market inactive in equilibrium.
15The borderline case in which intertemporal substitution and income effects cancel each
other out to yield S'(.) = 0 is not consideredfor the sake of brevity. It can be agglomerated
into the positive interest elasticity of savings case with a slight change in the proofs.
16Ses Grandmont [1985].

9

of a theoretical curiosum, since Proposition 2 decisively establishes
that there is indeed no reason to presume, as is often done, that
the presence of a bubble always raises the price of an asset. On the
contrary, complex patterns — in general more complex than the one
exhibited here and related to those described by Grandmont [1985]
— emerge as soon as even a small (in absolute value) but negative
interest elasticity of savings is allowed. As for the argument that
economies with negative interest elasticities of savings are pathological so that their behavior can be disregarded, it is best countered
by the remark that the empirical evidence on the sensitivity of lifecycle savings to changes in interest rates is mixed and can not rule
out an S'(.) negative but close to zero.

Conclusion
This paper has established that, contrary to what is often claimed,
rational speculative bubbles, which are positive by definition, need
not increase the price of the asset to which they are attached
because the fundamentalis not in general independent, in equilibrium, of the bubble. It is therefore possible to observe situations in
which bubbles are price decreasing: the price of an asset subject to
a bubble might be lower than the price of that asset in the absence
of a bubble.
Whether that situation should be construed as one in which the
asset is "undervalued" is mainly a question of semantics. If by undervaluation it is meant that the price falls short of the fundamental
in the particular equilibrium under consideration, an asset is indeed,
by this narrow definition, never undervalued: the price of an asset
which can be freely disposed of always is never lower than the value
of its usufruct. If undervaluation is taken in the broader acceptation
of "existence of a bubbly equilibrium with lower asset prices than the
non-bubbly equilibrium", then an asset can indeed be undervalued.
Psychological factors, "animal spirits" and extraneous waves of
pessimism can, in any case, depress as well as raise an asset price
relative to its "fundamental" non-bubbly value.

10

References
Bernheim D. and K. Bagwell (1988): "Is Everything Neutral?" ? Journal of•
PoliticalEconomy, 96, 308—338.

Diba B. and H. Grossman (1987): "On the Inception of Rational Bubbles,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 697—700.
Gale D. (1973): "Pure ExchangeEquilibrium

els," Journal

of Economic Theory, 6, 12—36.

of Dynamic Economic Mod-

Grandmont J.-M. (1985): "On Endogenous Competitive Business Cycles,"
Econometrica, 53, 995—1045.

Obstfeld M. and K. Rogoff (1983): "Speculative Hyperinflations in Maxiniizing Models: Can We Rule Them Out?" Journal of Political Economy, 91,
675—687.

Tirole 3. (i982) "On the Possibility of Speculation Under Rational Expectations," Econometrica, 50, 1163—1181.
Tirole 3. (1985): "Asset Bubbles and Overlapping Generations," Econometrica, 53, 1071—1100.
Wallace N. (1980): "The Overlapping Generation Model of Fiat Money,"
in Models of Monetary Economies, ed. by .1. Kareken and N. Wallace, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,. Minneapolis.
Weil P. (1987): "Overlapping Families of Infinitely Lived Agents," mimeo,
Harvard University.
West K. (1988): "Bubbles, Fads, and Stock price Volatility Tests: A Partial
Evaluation," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 2574.

11

