                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 MONEY, TINE PREFERENCE AND EXTERNAL BALANCE




                                Philippe   Well




                           Working Paper No. 2822




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF' ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 January 1989




This research is part of NBER's research program in Financial Markets and
Monetary Economics. Arty opinions expressed are those of the author not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper #2822
                                          January 1989


                   MONEY, TIME PREFERENCE AND EXTERNAL BALANCE


                                    ABSTRACT


     In   monetary economies, international differences in rates of time pref-

erence do not in general lead to long run trade imbalances -    - in   sharp
contrast with Butter's 119811 results on non-monetary overlapping generation

economies. This claim is documented within the context of a simple two-

country framework in which new immortal families enter each economy over

time, with the two countries differing only in their subjective discount

rates. Even if consumers are more "impatient" at home than abroad, trade

is balanced in the long run in the presence of valued fiat currencies in

constant supply, and the current account is indeterminate.


                                         Philippe Veil
                                         Department of Economics
                                         Harvard University
                                          Cambridge, MA 02138
     The existence of differences in subjective time preference and
thriftiness is often invoked to account for the pattern of international
capital movements. Countries, Buiter [1981] has argued, whose res-
idents are, ceteris paribus, more impatient to consume than their
international trading partners will experience a long run current
account deficit     thus confirming, in a nonmonetary, two-country
overlapping generation model, the presumption that "a nation con-
sisting of people with a high rate of time preference will tend to be
net foreign borrower" [ibid., p. 782].
   In. this paper, I argue that the common sense results of Buiter
do not carry over to monetary economies — i.e., to economies in
which the menu of assets is enlarged to allow for the possibility
that intrinsically useless assets, such as fiat money, bubbles, or old
paintings, are held, for purely speculative purposes, by consumers.
The reason is that the presence of "unbacked" financial assets en-
ables economies to reach the golden rule, and thus breaks the link,
crucial to Buiter's conclusions, between time preference, autarkic
interest rates, and trade patterns. As a consequence, trade is shown
to be balanced, and the current account indeterminate, in a long
run monetary equilibrium.
   To formally establish these results, I consider a simple continuous-
time economy in which new infinitely-lived dynasties, which are de-
fined to be families not linked to their ascendants through operative
bequest or gift motives, enter the economy over time. As I have
shown elsewhere,' this model possesses, despite the infinite hori-
zon of every agent alive at any date, all the features of a standard
two-period overlapping generation model — and in particular the
feature, important for this analysis, that all wealth is not held, in
the long run, by the most patient consumer. Because every agent
alive has the same (infinite) remaining lifespan, age-effects are how-
ever eliminated from individual optimal consumption programs —
so   that the linear consumption functions of agents with isoelastic
preferences can be very easily aggregated.2
        Weil [198Th, 1987b]
   2This solution to the aggregation problem is essentially the same as Blanchard's [1985],
who assumes that conditional death probabilities are independent of age. By setting those
probabilities equal to zero, one can abstract from issues related to the compulsory annuitiza-
tion of wealth; by letting new infinitely-lived cohorts enter the economy, one introduces the
intergenerational effects at the core of standard overlapping generation models.


                                             1
   The analysis proceeds as follows. Section 1 derives individual and
aggregate consumption functions. Section 2 characterizes autarkic
and trade equilibria. Section 3 studies equilibrium trade and current
account patterns. The conclusion summarizes the results.

1. Consumption
I characterize optimal consumption at the individual level, and then
turn to the derivation of the aggregate consumption function.

1.1. Individual consumption
Consider the problem faced at time t > 0 by an infinitely-lived
dynasty "born" at time s, t    s    0, and living in country i,
i = 1,2. Assume, for simplicity,3 that the family's utility over future
consumption is

                      U(s, t) = j          e_$'T    lii c1(s, r) dr,                   (1)

where 51 > o denotes the country-specific pure rate of time prefer-
ence, and c'(s, t) represents the consumption at time t of a family
born at time s in country i.
   Residents of country i can freely trade claims on output among
themselves and with foreigners — which leads to the equalization,
in equilibrium, of real interest rates. It is assumed that legal restric-
tions prevent residents of any one country to hold foreign currency.
Since each currency can individually be traded against international
mobile financial claims, these legal restriction in fact do not matter
in equilibrium, as triangular arbitrage ensures that real rates of re-
turn on money, i.e, deflation rates, are equalized across countries,
and equal to the real interest rate. Formally, letting r1(t) denote
the real instantaneous real rate of return on loans in country i, and
ui(t) the instantaneous inflation rate in country i, it must be the
case, if all currencies are traded and there are international capital
  3This analysis can be easily extended to the more general class of HARA utility functions,
which delivers consumption functions which are linear in wealth.




                                             2
flows4 that
                  r1(t) = r2(t) = —ir1(t) = —ir2(t) Vt                   0,               (2)
an arbitrage condition henceforth assumed to be satisfied.
   Letting e(t) denote the exchange rate between home and foreign
currencies, an important implication of (2) is that
                              è(t) = ir2(t) — ir'(t) = 0,                                 (3)
where a dot represents a derivative with respect to time. Equation
(3) simply indicates that the exchange rate between the two (in-
directly) traded useless fiat currencies must be constant. This is,
of course, one of the striking conclusions of ICareken and Wallace
[1981].
   The instantaneous budget constraint faced at t by a family born
at s is then simply
  th1(s t) + th1(s, t) = r'(t)w'(s, t) — ir1 (t)m1(s, t) + y — c1(s, t), (4)
where w1(s, t) denotes the non-human, non-monetary wealth at I
of a family born at s in country i, and rn1(s, t) the (real) monetary
wealth at t of that family. Each family, independently of the date, its
age, or the country it lives in, receives a constant endowment y> 0
of the perishable consumption good. It is moreover assumed that
the initial non-human wealth of any family, born in any country, at
any date s > 0, is zero, i.e, that w1(s, s) = m1(s, s) = 0.6
    Letting
                            at(s,I) = w'(s,t) +m(s,t)                                    (5)
denote total non-human wealth at I, and using (2), the budget con-
straint (4) can be rewritten more compactly as
                       a1(s, t) = r1 (t)a1(s, I) + y — c(s, t).                          (6)
   Maximization of (1) subject to (6) and a transversality condition
designed to rule out private Ponzi schemes7 leads to the following
   4This will in general be the case in a monetary equilibrium.
    Note that (2) implies that the nominal interest rate is zero in this economy: "money"is
not a dominated asset.
                                                                -
   6What original families find in the Garden of Eden namely w'(O, 0), and the initia' nominal
stocks of currency are, however, given and non-zero.
   tOne must impose limg..,oeL r(r) drUl (a      1)   0.


                                             3
well-known individual consumption function and law of motion:
                          c1(s,t) = 61 [a1 (s,t) + .ff1(t)J,                          (7)
                          è1(s,t) = [r1(t) —      61]c1(s,t),                         (8)
where
                         H'(t)_=y J eL r(r)dr ds                                      (9)
denotes the (age-independent) human wealth at time t of a country-i
family. Notice, from (9), that human wealth satisfies
                             ft'(t) = r1(t)H'(t) — y,                               (10)
an expression which will be used below.

1.2. Aggregate consumption
Suppose that, in each country, new dynasties, which are not by
definition linked to pre-existing ones through operative intergen-
erational áltniistic bequest or gift motives, continuously enter the
economy at the constant and country-independent exponential rate
n > 0. Letting superscripted uppercase letters denote the aggre-
gate per capita counterpart of the lowercase superscripted concepts
defined above,8 consumption per head in country i is simply, from
(7),
                                 C1 =51 [A'-i-H1],                                  (11)
with time arguments dropped for simplicity.
    Since the newly born families have, by assumption, zero non-
human wealth (but the same human wealth as older dynasties), it
is easy to show that non-human wealth per head only grows at rate
   — n [instead of r1 for human wealth, as shown in (10)1. More

precisely:
                     A' = — n)A'+y— C1.                     (12)
Combining equations (10), (11) and (12), one obtains the law of
motion of consumption per head in country i:
                                = (r' — 6')C1 — riS'A'                              (13)
   8Notice that this definition unfortunately implies that M' denotes per capita real money
balances in country i.


                                            4
Because the newly born have no non-human wealth, "each" of them
consumes 6'A' per unit of time less than the average, and the arrival
of new dynasties at rate ii > 0 depresses aggregate consumption per
head by nbtAi per unit of time.

2. Equilibria
I first consider, for the sake of reference, autarkic equilibria, and
then characterize the pattern of international capital movements
once trade is opened.

2.1. Autaricy
Given that the (non-produced) consumption good is perishable by
assumption, goods market clearing in country i requires, in autarky,
that per capita consumption be equal to the endowment at every
instant. In other terms:

                            C(t) = y Vt.                            (14)

Moreover,   since all agents at home are identical and there is no
foreign trade, all non-human wealth must be held in monetary form,
so that
                        A=M1 (.W1=0).                               (15)
Inserting these market clearing conditions into (13), one finds that
in an autarkic equilibrium it must be the case that
                  0 = [r(t) — 61]y — n6M1(t)      Vt.               (16)
Moreover, we also have

                      M(t) = [r(t) — n]M1(t),                       (17)
because M1 represents per capita real balances, population grows at
rate ii, inflation rate is the negative of the rate of return on (inside)
loans, and the nominal money supplyis assumed to be constant.
   Equations (16) and (17) fully characterize the equilibrium au-
tarkic dynamics of: interest rates and real balances. It is easy to
show that there always exists a non-monetary equilibrium (M' = 0)

                                   5
in which the interest rate is equal to the rate of time preference 6.
Non-monetary autarkic interest rates reflect, as in Buiter [1981], dif-
ferences in time-preference. Provided, however, that non-monetary
autarkic allocations be dynamically inefficient, in the sense that
                                 8'<n i=1,2,                                        (18)
there also exists a stationary, golden nile monetary equilibrium in
which
                  r(t)=n and M(t)='>0
                                nô'                                                 (19)
for all tY
   Autarkic interest rates are hence equalized, in a long-run mon-
etary equilibrium, to the common rate of population growth a
property which severs the links between time preference and autar-
kic interest rates.10

2.2. World equilibrium
Assume that the two countries have the same size (as measured by
population). In a world equilibrium in which there is trade between
the two countries, world consumption per number of inhabitants in
one country ("average" world consumption) must be equal to the
average world endowment:
                                   C' + C2 = 2y.                                    (20)
Non-human wealth can be held either in claims against foreigners
or in home real balances,'1 and the market for foreign claims must
clear:
                                A' = W'+M1                                          (21)
                                A2 = W2+M2                                          (22)
                               MT'         -W2—=W.                                  (23)
    9As I show in Weil {1987aJ, there also exists non-stationary equilibria which, although
monetary in the short run, are asymptotically non-monetary.                 . -
   1011 nominal money grows at rate 0 in country i, equation (17) becomes M'(t) = [r'(t) —
ii + e']M'Q), and the steady state interest rate is r' = n — & in a monetary equilibrium.
Autarkic interest rates then reflect population growth and monetary policies, but not time
preference.
   "No claim can be held in equilibrium against one's fellow countrymen.


                                            6
   Assume that the dynamic inefficiency condition (18) holds. It is
then easy to show that there exists a unique equilibrium in which
both currencies are valued in the long run.12 It is a golden rule,13
stationary14 equilibrium which has, from (2), (9), (11), (13), (17),
(20) and (23), the following features:
                               = = —ir1 =                  = n,                         (24)
                                     C' =C2=y,                                          (25)
                            (it —   5')y = n61[M' + W],                                 (26)
                            (it — 62)y    = n62IM2 — WJ.                                (27)
   The implications of this (monetary) equilibrium allocation for
international trade patterns are examined in the next section.

3. International capital movements
I first characterize the trade balance, and then study the behavior
of the current account.

3.1.     Trade balance
From equation (25), consumption per head is equal, in each country,
to endowment per head. The trade balance of each country is thus,
in this golden rule monetary equilibrium, zero.
    To understand this result, it suffices to remember that trade im-
balances, can arise, in our model, only from differences in domestic
consumption       since output is exogenous, equal in each country,
and perishable. But it is a very general property that, at the golden
rule, aggregate per capita consumption is equal to the per capita
endowment, which is the same by construction in every country.
Aggregate per capita consumption being the same in both coun-
tries, trade must be balanced.
  '2Long-run non-monetary equilibria are not studied here due to space limitations. They
would confirm, of course, Buiter's conclusions.
  1311 nominal money supplies are not constant, the wortd interest rate differs, however, from
the growth rate, and reflects monetary policies. See footnote 10.
  "The long-run is reached immediately in this exchange economy. 'fransitional dynamics
would arise in the presence of a state variable like, say, capital.



                                              7
    Differences in pure rates of time preference have, therefore, no
influence whatsoever on the pattern of real trade flows in an economy
in which the asset menu is enlarged to include fiat currencies and
other like assets.

3. E.   Current account
The instantaneous current account of country i, CA', is by definition
equal to the change in the country's indebtedness per unit of time.
Given that W denotes the country's per capita claim on foreigners,
the current account of country i is simply
                          CA' = W' + nWt.                          (28)
In a long-run monetary equilibrium, the current account balances of
the two countries are then, using (23):
                   CA1 = nW and CA2 = —nW.                       (29)
    Unfortunately, there are only two equations, (26) and (27), to de-
termine the three equilibrium values of M', M2 and W, and thus of
the current accounts. This feature of the model is not coincidental;
it is instead a reflection of the fundamental indeterminacy of the ex-
change rate between the home and foreign currencies. Both are, in
our setup, essentially identical (they are intrinsically useless and are
held only for speculative purposes). The only constraint imposed by
equilibrium considerations is that, as emphasized by equations (2)
and (3), the two currencies offer the same rate of return and, as a
consequence, the exchange rate be constant. But there is nothing,
as first noted by Kareken and Wallace [1981], to pin down the value
of that exchange rate in equilibrium. It is, as the exchange rate
between nickels and dimes, purely conventional.
   To say that the exchange rate is indeterminate or conventional
does not, of course, entail that it is irrelevant. On the contrary, it
determines, in this economy, the current account pattern. Suppose,
by choice of units, that the nominal money stocks are equal in both
countries. Then, since population is the same in both countries,
the ratio of home to foreign per capita real balances is simply the
exchange rate:
                             e = M1/M2.                            (30)

                                   8
Fix, by convention, the exchange rate. From (26) and (27), the
current account of, say, country 1 is then:
                                n—S'     n—82
                       CA' =     6'
                                                y.                (31)
It is clear that the exchange rate, because it allocates world real
balances (and thus initial wealth) between the home and foreign
countries, determines which country is a net borrower or lender.
  In general, equation (31) establishes that there is no presumption
that the impatient (high 5) country should run a current account
deficit, in sharp contrast with Baiter's [1981] results. Note, however,
that Buiter's conclusions carry over to this monetary economy in the
special case — without much economic content in which e = 1,
and that the current account of country 1 does deteriorate if, ceteris
pat-i bus, it is more impatient (5' large).

Conclusion
This paper has demonstrated that international differences in rates
of time preference need not lead, in monetary economies, to long run
trade imbalances — in contrast with Buiter's [1981] non-monetary
conclusions.
   This result was established within the context of a simple two-
country framework in which new immortal families enter each econ-
omy over time, with the two countries differing oniy in their sub-
jective discount rates. Even if consumers are more "impatient" at
home than abroad, trade is balanced in the long run in the pres-
ence of valued fiat currencies in constant supply are valued, and the
current account is indeterminate.
    These conclusions easily generalize to the case in which nominal
money supplies are growing, and remain valid when the useless fiat
currencies analyzed here are reinterpreted as public debt. Autarkic
long run interest rates reflect, in equilibria in which money (debt) is
held, biological factors and monetary (fiscal) policies, but not time
preference; when trade is opened, the pattern of international capi-
tal movements depends in a complex fashion on tastes, technology,
demography, and monetary (fiscal) policies — so that no straight-

                                  9
forward inference can be made about trade patterns from differences
in time preference

References

   Blanchard Olivier, 1985, "Debt, Deficits and Finite Horizons," Journal of
Political Economy93, 223—247.
   Buiter Willein, 1981, "Time Preference and International Borrowing and
Lending in an Overlapping Generations Model," Journal of Political Economys9,
769—797..

   Kareken John and Neil Wallace, 1981, "On the Indeterminacy ofEquilibrium
Exchange Rates," Quarterly Journal of Economicsg6, 207—222.
   Tirole Jean, 1985, "Asset Bubbles and Overlapping Generations," Econo-
metrica53, 1071—1100.

   Wallace Neil, 1980, "The Overlapping Generation Model of Fiat Money," in:
John Kareken and Neil Wallace, eds., Models of Monetary Economies (Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis), 49—82.
   Weil Philippe, l987a, "Overlapping Families of Infinitely Lived Agents,"
rnimeo, Harvard University.
   Weil Philippe, 1987b, "Permanent Budget Deficits and Inflation," Journal
of Monetary Econornics2O, 393—410.




                                     10
