                         NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         EXCHANGE RATE HYSTERESIS:
          THE REAL EFFECTS OF LARGE VS SMALL POLICY NISALIGNNENTS




                              Richard Baldwin

                               Richard Lyons




                           Working Paper No. 2828




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                January 1989




We gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments and suggestions of Ricardo
Caballero, Mike Gavin, Rick Mishkin, Alberto Ciovannini and workshop
                                                                    research
participants at Oartmouth University. This paper is part of NBER's
         in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
program
authors not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER   Working Paper #2828
                                                January t989

                              EXCHANGE RATE HYSTERESIS:
              TIlE REAL EFFECTS OF lARGE VS SMALL POL1CY MISALIGNMENTS


                                          ARSTRACT




Using the sticky price monetary model ofexchange rate determinationand the sunk cost model nf
trade hysteresis, we show that a sufficiently large policy misalignment can inducehysteresis in
the trade balance and thereby alter the steady—state real exchange rate. Thus in our model

exchange rate dynamics are path dependent,   PPP need not hold and money need not be neutral
even in the very long run.
       We presentonly positiveanalysis but conjecture that the results have strong welfare,
policy, and econometric implications. Since hysteresis in our model can entail industrial
dislocation and the scrappage of sunk assets, we suggest that these factors may constitute a
welfare cost of large policy misalignments that have not been formally considered. On the policy

side, one could sensibly argue against the dollarvolatilityof the 1980s withoutat the same time

arguingfor a return to a formal exchange rate regime (because 1980s—size swings may involve
welfare coststhat 1970s—size swings do not). Lastly, since the long—runexchange rate is path

dependent, standard empirical tests of exchange rate models may be misspecified.




Richard     Baldwin                              Richard Lyons
 Columbia    Business   School                   Columbia Business School
Columbia University                              Columbia University
New York, NY 10027                               New York, NY 10027
                                                 on external balance, as well as for the sake
aggregate demand (equation 2.2). Given our focus
                                                                                                    1

                                                                        the net export
clarity, westreamlinethe price adjustment specification to include only

component   ofaggregate demand,    which we model as a linear function of both the real exchange
                                                                                       ual zero
rate and the current marketstructure. In the steady state of the system net exports eq
                                                     value of K (using (1.1)), and use it in
(trade is balanced). Firms can determinethe current
                                                      and expected foture real exchange rates.
making their entry/exit decisions based open curcent
        Per equation (2.4),uncovered interest parity holds; however, thereis a non—standard
                                                                        hand. The band implies
component to the expectation of e due to the presence of the hysteresis
                                                                                         have
that the expected change in K need not be zero, even though the money stock innovations
mean zero. Indeed, the closer the systemis to an edge of the band, the more likely it is that next
                                                                   in K induces additional
period's realizationof swill inducea change in K. Since any change
                                                                 market would include t Isis in
exchange rate movement, rational agents in the foreign exchange
their forecasts. The first component of the right—handside of(2.5), tet+1,capturesthe standard
                                                                               includes dt) is
endogenous dynamics conditional on a constant K. The second component (which
linear representationofthe role ofthe expected change of K. The variable dt tracks the center
ofthe inactionband of real exchange rates (recall stwet—wt). Thelower the real exchange rate is
relativeto themiddleoftheinaction band, the greater the chance that K will rise (firms will
                                               K        an additionalrise in e, depreciation of the
enter) in the following period. Since a rise in induces
 homecurrencyconditional on a constant K should be slightly less than the interest differential.6'
 An interestingimplicationof this necessary change in the standard model is that the possibility
                                                                                                   of


 market structure change exerts a stabilizing effect on the exchange rate within the             range

 (see also Kruginan (1988a)).8
       It should be noted that an innovation that changes market structure will also necessarily
                                                                  also has an impact effect one,
 change the value of dt according to (1.12). Since a change in dt
 albeit a slight one, the coefficient   Gin   the linear representation must capture this too.
                                                         are monotonic, this added condition
 Nonetheless, since both effects occursimultaneously and

 hardlyseems to make the original linearityassumption any more egregious (and the linearity was
                                                  is
       'ilie extreme   movements of the US   dollarin the   1970s and 1980s have led many   to lllIl5l.IIITI
the market—knows—best philosophythat has dominated the fixed versus flexible exchange raft

debate. Indeed, several serious proposals have been made to peg formally the usajor currencies III

a commodity or currency basket. Many economists remain skeptical of such proposals suice, liii:
alia, the arguments against floating rates are typically made withoutthe aid of anytlsing eves

vaguely approaching welfare analysis (volatility is just taken as an evil in itself). This absence is

particularly detrimentalin light of the fact that much of the exchange rate fluctuationis
attributed to a lack of internationalpolicy coordination. Yet, the various policies of the 70s a sd
80s were chosen by governments facing the difficult economic and      politicaltradeoffs of the llerolL
It is conceivable that no formal exchange rate regime would have significantly altered the
tradeoffs that were ultimately responsible for most of the observed exchange rate movement.

        Despite this counter—argument, a general uneasiness with the performance offloating
rates in the 1980s remains. The exchange rate volatilityofthe 1970s, although quitehigh relative

to the previous decades under BrettonWoods, did not result in the extensive industrial
dislocation and persistent trade imbalances observed in the 1980s. ft seems therefore that we need
to distinguish between the two types of volatility: the 1970s' "gyrations",and the l9SQs'

prolonged cycle. Conventional models, however, ignorethis distinctionsince they assume that

temporaryexchange rate swings—irrespective of their size—can have only temporaryreal effects
(apart from changes in externaldebt).
       This paper provides a theoreticalbasis for the distinctionbetween the volatility of the

lObs and lOSOs. We show that sufficiently largepolicy misalignments can lead to hysteresis is
trade and the long—runexchange rate while small misahignments cannot.' Therefore, a coniplele
comparison of managed and floating rate regimes (which we take as a shorthand for policy
coordinationregimes) cannot ignore the possibility that large and small exchange rate
movements have qualitativelydifferent effects. Whileour paperpresents only positive analysis,
we conjecture that the results have strong welfare and policy implications.

       In the model, hysteresis   can entailindustrial dislocation and the scrappage ofsunk assets.
Our exploratory modelis not rich enough to gauge the welfare impact of this, but it suggests [list

time sunk   asset wastage involved in industrial dislocation may he an important cost of prolonged

currency swings. On the policy side, our analysis suggests that one can sensibly argue against tin
enornsous dollar movements of the l980s without arguing for a return to a formal fixed rate

regime. The reason is that   at least one type of welfare cost is due to 1980s—size policy
misalignments rather than thoseof 1970s—size.
       From the perspective of exchange rate theory, our results show that the long—run

equilibrium real exchange rate is not unique.2 Indeed, we show that it is path—dependent,

implying that standard empirical tests of exchange rate models may be misspecified.
Additionally, our results contribute an item to the list of reasons why purchasing power parity
should not hold even in the long run. This added item, however, differs greatlyfrom the others iii

that it is a nominal (as opposed to real) change that ultimately shifts the long—runrate. To put it
a bit differently, the possibility of exchange rate hysteresis provides anotherchannelfor the
long—runnon—neutrality of money.
       Our model combines a simplified sticky pricemonetary model of exchange rate

determination (Dornbusch 1976,Mussa 1982) with a simple sunk cost model of the trade sector

(Baldwin 1986). The basic economics of the combined model is accordingly simple. A sufficiently
largeovervaluationcan induceadditionalforeign firms to enter the domestic market. If market
entry costs are sunk, a return of the exchange rate to its pre—overvaluedlevel will not force out all
the new foreign entrants. This hystereticshift in marketstructure (number       ofcompetitors)would
cause a hysteretic shift in the relationship   between the real exchange rate and tradeflows. If any

sort ofintertemporalbudget constraintis to hold at the countrylevel,a temporaryshock cannot
lead to a permanenttrade imbalance; clearly, hysteresis in tradewill feed back into hysteresis in

the long—runequilibrium exchange rate. Consequently,       alarge temporaryshockcould, in the
absence of future compensating shocks, lead to a hysteretic reallocation    ofresources in the traded
goods sector and the abandonment of sunk assets.
       The sticky pricemonetarymodel has been criticized for the fact that it is not derived from
tiaxi nizing behavior. This of course detracts from its intellectual elegance, hut more import

implies that the model's paranieters may not be structural. 'l'hat 15, Some of the paranlctrs    :
actuallyvary systematically with the variables in the model. The first best solution to this
problem would be to work out a maximizing model of exchange rate determination starting with

preferences and technology. however, to date such efforts (e.g., Lucas 1982, Stulz 1984, Svcnsso

1985) have failed to provide models that are capable of accounting for the short— and
rrtedium—run dynamics     of exchange rates in the 1970s and 1980s.
          here we take a second—bestapproach. Thereis a broad spectrum ofindustry and macro
level empirical evidence suggesting that the relationship between the real dollar and US trade
flows has shifted significantly in the 1980s (Mann 1986,1987a, 1987b; Baldwin 1988a, 1988b;

Feinberg 1986, 1987; Froot and Klemperer 1987). This implies that the ad hoc nature of the sticky

price model is particularly irksome with respect to the link between net exports and the excha nge
rate. We develop a fully rational, maximizing model to investigatethe structural relationship
between trade flows and the real exchange rate. We then integrate this model into a highly

stylized sticky price monetary model of exchange rate determination. The purpose ofthis exercise
is   not to present a realisticmodel of the world economy. Rather it is intendedto clarify our

thinking on (1) the feedback effects that sunk cost hysteresis in tradehas on short— and long—run

exchange rate dynamics in the context of a standardexchange rate model, (2) whether

endogenizing exchange rate dynamics might in some way eliminatethe possibility of hysteresis in
trade, and (3) the importanceof distinguishing between largeand small policy misahignments.
          We are fully aware that the mis—matchin the degree of microeconomic justificationof the
two components of our model may appearawkward to some readers. However, we view this
mis—match as one of the strengths ofthe approach: the industrial organization model allows us to

clean up an empirically questionable aspect of the sticky price model, without fundamentally

altering its appealing dynamic properties. We choose the sticky pricemodel because the two
standard competingmodels ofexchange rate determination are not appropriategiventhe

questions   at hand: the flexible price monetary model imposes purchasing power parity and
therefore is useless for investigating pronounced real exchange rate variation; the portfolio

balance model emphasizes issues that are not our primary concern.
       'l'he idea that largeexchange rate shocks can have qualitativelydifferent trade effects
small shocks dates back   at least to the quantumeffect of Orcutt (1950). The sunk cost model of
hysseresis in tradewas introduced by Baldwin (1986). That paper and a later version Baldwin

(1988a), defined the basic sunk cost model and demonstrated the possibility of hysteresis in trade
price and volume. Kemp and Wan (1974) showed that the Heckscher—Ohlinmodel is subject to

hysteresis in the long—runtrade pattern when factor prices are not equalized instantaneously
labor is internationallymobile. Their model does not involve sunk costs of any type. The

intellectualhistory of the sticky price monetary model (Dornbusch 1976 and extensions) is
well—known.

       The feedback ofsunk cost hysteresis into exchange rate determination      is examined in

Baldwin and Krugman (1986) and Krugman (1988b). Both papers use the income—elasticity

approach to the balanceofpayments as a model ofexchange rate determination. Essentially, net
capitalinflow is taken as an exogenous process and the exchange rate is determined in the goods
market. That is, the exchange rate is assumed to jump to whatever point is necessary to movo tlie

balance oftradeto the level where it just offsets this period's exogenous capital inflow. While

these papers help define the basic issues, they do not truly work out the feedback effects of

hysteresis. The valuesofthe world's majorcurrencies are generally thought to be determined by
asset market conditions; therefore, net capitalflows and exchange rates should be co—determined

by more elemental policy or real shocks.
       The paper has four sections. The first examines an industry—levelmodel of trade

hysteresis. The second examines the dynamics of a bare-bones sticky pricemonetarymodel

allowing for the possibilityof trade hysteresis. The third presentsanumber ofthought—

experiments   to spotlight the policy implications   of the model. The last section presentsa

summary and concluding remarks.


                                             4
                                 1. Hysteresis   in the Trade Balance


       The trade flows of a country are often modeled as dcpciidiiig on real exchange rates and

national incomes. Our simplified exchange rate model in section II takes national outputs as
constant, allowing us to highlight the exchange rate—tradebalance link. In this section we first
work out the evolution of the numberof competitors in an import sector marked by stink

market—entry costs (the hystereticsector), showing that hysteresis in imports is a possibility.
Then we aggregate the hysteretic sector and a normal (non—hysteretic) sector to show that
hysteresis in the trade balancecan occur.


A. Hysteresis and The Evolution   of Market Structure
       Consider a representative foreign firm located in the foreign countrywhich has the

possibility of selling to the home country. In orderto sell to the homemarket the firm must incur
a sunk cost F; to continue selling during subsequent periods, it must incur a fixed maintenance
cost M. IfM is not expended the firm is said to exit. Re—entry then requires Fto be re—incurred.
We assume that    F> M and both are fixed in home currency terms. Tithe firm is active in the
home marketin period t, it earns operating profits       (in home currency units) which are related
to the log of the real exchange rate, s (price home goods/price foreign goods), and the number of

foreign firms competing in the market, n, by the function r[st,nt}. The function is assumed to be
bounded above and below, and non—increasingin both s and n. We assume all firms are identical

and entry is not restricted. Also, we ignorethe integer constraint on n. A special case which would

lead to such a profit function is that of period—by—period Cournot competition among symmetric

firms producing   a homogeneous product. It may be useful to think ofF as the cost of setting up a
distribution and after—salesservice network,and M as the cost of maintainingthese assets. The
timing is as follows: at the beginning of the period thefirm observes the current period's
monetary shock and then decides whether to be active on the basis of the implied real exchange
rate (sand n are thus jointly—determined).
                                            5
        Given the function, ii, we re—phrasethe firm's entry—exit decision in termsof an

active—inactive decision: Each period the firm decides whether or not to buy a "license" to lx-

active. If the firm buys the license, it receives sr{st,ntl. if it does riot,   it receives notlong
Introducing a bioary state variable A (At= t if tire firm was active last period, At= U otherwise),
the cost of the activity license is F DA where- C a M —- F.

Odiresu Fntn:—Ex;t Strategy
        Since the derivation of the representative firm's ectimal entry--exit strategy is rather

involved, we first provide an intuitive explanation      of the eptiroal strategy. To fix ideas, coesider
for the moment the standard case of a firm facing a fixed cost in a statirsetting. The optinsal

strategy in this case is that the firm should- choose to be active only if this period's profits can at
least coves the fixed cost; that is, only if   srG, where'S ic the fixed cost. In a multi—period

setup, this entry condition must be modified when at least some ofthe entry cost is sunk. With
sunk costs, the firm finds it cheaper to stay "in" the market Lhan it is to get into the market.

Consequently, being active this period may providethe firm with an advantage during future

periods. We sefer to the expected value of this advantage as the "incumbency" premiumand
denoteit as   'P. Thus the entry condition with sunk coet can be viewed as          a modification of the
standard entry condition: the firm should choose to be active only if the sum of the incumbency

premium and this period's profits can at least cover the costsof being active (which will be F or

M); that is, sr + SW > F + DAt, where die a constant discount factor.
      More formally, the state variables are st—i, '—1' At, and  For notational convenience,
the first three are grouped in the vector x= (st1 nt 1,At)- The control variable is U (U= Ii

the firm chooses to be active, U= 0 otherwise). The discrete—timesystem function f,



(1.1)           xt+i = f[x,Ut,ct],     conveniently summarizes the laws of motion:

(1.2)                                                   =
                                                  At+i
                                              =                    and
(1.3)                                    st     h[st 1.,nti,ct],

(1.4)                                           n= n[stnti]
where the function h is implicitly defined by (2.11) and (1.4), and            is an independently and

identically distributed (i.i .d. ) random variablerelated to the i.i.d. money supply disturbancetj       ii
(2.8). We denotethe random variable as and its realizationsas

        The typical firm    chooses an   optimal entry—exitstrategy,z, to maximizethe discounted
cash flows (p states       as a function of        and
                                                         ct)
                                              xt


                                      =       { y stg[x
(1.5)                      VLx0,c0]       E                    p[x
                                                                     c]c] },    where


                                                                                        1
                                              =
                       g[xp[xt,ct],ct}
                                                    0,                   ifp[x,ctJ=O
and                                                =
                                          xt+1


                                 c. The two primary goals of this subsectionare to characterize
Here the expectations are over all

the optimal entry—exitstrategy, p and to characterizethe evolution ofthemarket structure

isnplicit in (1.4).
        The solution to (1.5) is characterized using Bellman's optimality principle. That is, we

obtain a characterizationofp by askingwhat is optimal this periodgiven that we alreadyknow

the optimal strategyfrom next period onward. The apparent circularity ofthis approach can he

avoided by first characterizingthe optimal strategy for a similar finite horizon problem (working

backward from the last period), and then studyinghow the strategy changes as the horizon tends

toward infinity. However, standarddynamic programming techniques allow us to obtain a

characterizationmore parsimoniously. To this end, we suppose for the moment that the value

function V[xt,ctj (which depends on p) is known and the firm can use this together with its

knowledge of the i.i.d. shock to form an expectationof its optimal valuein period t+1 conditioii:ul

on information availablein period t. This allows us to study p by solvingthe much simpler

sub—problem: choose          to maximize,
(1.6)                               gLx1,tJ,f1] + SE{V[flxtutct]c]       '

where the expectationis over the period         t+1 realizationof c.
The Decision     ofa Potential Entrant
        A firm   that was inactivelast periodcan enter or remain inactive. An optimizing finn
calculates the value of (1.6) nnder each option, compares the two values and chooses the option

that yields the highest. Consequently, its optimalvalue in period t is:




             V[xt,ft} a
                                          —F
(1.7)                                          _DAt+ 6EV[f1xtiet]f]
                          Max[r{stnt]                                        sEv[f1xtoe]f]]i

where agaln the expectationsare over the realizations of fin t+1,and           s and n are related to
and     by (1.1). This equationimplicitly defines the function V[xt,etj. It also implicitly defines
the decision rule as (recall that we are considering the case whereAt= 0): Be active only if is
such that:



(1.8)                                                           + SflExt,f] > F + DAt, where

               fl[xt,etl a EV
                                                            —
                                        1,nt
                                t1(st          lAt)1et]dI EVf[(st_i,n._i,At),0,et], C].

The expectationsare over the periodt+1 realizationof C. The function 12 gives the incumbency

                                                                                   t
premium (which is a conditional expectation) as a function ofthe period state variables.
        To get a handleon the decision rule implicit in (1.8), we focus on the value of e that
makes all potential entrants just indifferent to entry. This borderline value partitions the state

space into two decision regions, and is equal to the         that solves (recall
                                                                                   At= 0):


(1.9)                                                              + Sfl[xt,] = F + DAt,
Ily assumption,st1,            ntl , At, and    are observed by the firm prior to its activity—inactivity

decision, so the most mathematicallyelegant solution to (1.5) is to write jt in termsof these foe

variables (as is done implicitly in (1.9)). however, the economics of the problem comes out more

clearly when we make the mathematicaldetour of writing an equivalent decision rule in termsol

s, n1 and At (we call this rule fs1,n,A]). This detour is             possible since (1) firms can infer
                from
St
     and
           mm          x and     using (1.1), and (2) the triplet (st,nt,At) constitutesa sufficient statistic
for the state of the system.       In other words,   we can express the period t valueof the firm as a

function, JLst,nt,At], such that J[st,hlt,Atl V[xt,] for all xt and Heuristically, this is due to
                                                                                r.
the single lags in (2.11) and (1.4) so that s and nt summarizes all effects ofhistory. Formally this

can be shown       by construction, using(2.11), (2.3), and the definition of g in (1.5). It may seem
strange that a firm can determinent before any firms (including itself) have decided to be active

or not. However, givenour assumptionof free—entry and no integer constraint, the firm's own

activity decision       has no effect on the numberof firms in the market.      Ifentry looks advantageous,
firms will enter up to the point where the marginal firm is just indifferent to entry. This will be
true regardless of whether any particular firm is among the entrants. Incidentally, since all firms
are symmetric,         if the marginal entrant is indifferent to entry, snare all other non—incumbents.
           The equivalent decision rule expressed in terms of                            Be active only if:
                                                                          and
                                                                                At is:


(1.10)                                                     suchthat

                                                + SW[at,nt]= F + DAt, and
                         a
                             EJ[h[atnte]n[h[atntE]ntJ1]                                              ,f]

Here we could have used the fact that          ifs= a, no firms enter so n= nt_i. Notice that as long as
     does not change, the critical value         depends only on At. The importanceof this is that the

entry—exitstrategy is time—invariantduring intervals when              n is stable.
           Figure 1 depicts the optimal decision rule and a. We refer to         a when At= 0 as s since
tins is the   s winds nsakes entrants just indifferent to cosoing "in". The NC line shows the net ecs
of being active tins period (F net of the incumbency presoiuns). It is positively sloped since high

(nnfavorable) realizations ofst snake lsigh realizations ofs sisore likely in all future periods 'Ihis
reducos the incumbency premium since it makes it less likely that tlse firm will benefit in fnLiir

periods from being active in t. Any realizationof      s that is greater than or equal to 4    does   net

induce previously inactivefirms to enter. For         t'   more favorable (lower) than 4, firms wonid

enter up to the point where the marginal firm is just indifferent to entry. Thus        n would be
implicitly defined by the condition that (recall      At= 0):


(1.11)                                          + LW[st,nt] = F + DAf,

This relationshipimplicitly defines one part of the law ofmotion (1.4). Clearly, for         s < 4 tue
morefavorableis      s, the largerwill be nt.
The Decision Facing an Incumbent
         Consider the problem of a typical firm that was active during the previous period (so

                       are to exit or to stay active. Its value in period t is thereforegiven by (17)
At= 1). Its options
takingAt= 1. The decision rule can be characterized by (1.9) and (1.10), taking At= 1. To pin
down the optimal decision rule we focus on the borderline value,    at which an incumbentis
just indifferent between staying active and exiting. This value is defined by the           which solves

(1.10) for At= 1. It can be seen graphically in figure 2 which is similar to figure 1 except that the
NC line is drawn atM — 6'I5[. ,n_1], instead ofF           —
                                                                             s
                                                                 ,nt_1]. Any less than or equal to
                                                               55I5[.

will not lead any incumbents to exit. Values of       s    greaterthan this will lead some firms to exit
Indeed, they will exit up to the point where the remaining numberof firmsis givenimplicitly by

(1.11), taking At= 1. This characterizes anotherpart of the law of motion (1.4). Clearly, for
values of 5t greaterthan        the larget is      the smaller will be n.
         Putting together the problems of the incumbents and potential entrants completes ossr
characterizationof qs[s,nt,At}, and the law of motion for n implicitly givenby (1.4). Figure 3
                                                 10
  which combines figures 1 and 2, divides the realizations of
                                                                s into three regions. is favorable
  enough (less than si), firms enter until (1.11) holds for
                                                               A= 0. If s is bad enough (greater than
       firmsexit until (1.11) holds for
                                           At=   1. Any
                                                          s in the s—s range induces neither entry nor
  exit. Firms that were active last period remain active; firms that were
                                                                          inactive last period remain
  inactive. This is the no—entry—no-—exitor hysteresis band. The decision rule is:



                                                 ri ifs<
                                   [st,1,AtI =
                                                               rSt
  (1.12)                                                             ,   suchthat
                                                 (0,   ifs     a
    is the solutionto (1.10). Equation (1.4) is:


                                           + S'I[st,n1 = F, for      s <s
 (1.13)                   nt   =
                                   nt—i,                        for s (
                                                                        s           s   -

                                   ir[st,ntl + 5W[s,n = M,      for s >


 Definition ofthe Expectations

           Up to this point we have simply assumed that the value functions, V and J, and their

expectationsexist. The proof that they do, and that (1.9) and (1.10) indeed describe
                                                                                                  optimal
decision rules, is a straightforwardapplication of standardtextbook results
                                                                            (e.g., Bertsekas 1076,
Bellman 1957). The proof is therefore omitted (a sketch ofthe
                                                              proof can befoundin Baldwin
1988c). The important assumptions are that Iris bounded, 0 < 5< 1, and the
                                                                           underlying
disturbanceis i.i.d.. Nonetheless, to build intuition we examine these
                                                                       expectations more closely.
       The expected value (at time of the firm in ti-i can be
                                     t)                         foundby              what
                                                                                    determining        the
value in t+1 will actually be for any realizationof           and then integratingover all possibilities
weighted by the probabilitymeasure of              Consider first the expectation       of a firm that chooses
to be active in t, so that it faces the incumbent'sdecision rule in
so its value is
                                                                          t+1: For
                                                                                            ?÷i it stays iii,
                               —M                       for
                  irlst+i,nt+iJ      +SEJ[st+2,nt+2,1J;     5+>                the firm exits, so it is worth
                                             11
                                                                          the laws of motion to express 5t4 2
                Integrating over these possibilities (using
and 11t+2
            i
5EJ[st+2nt+2,O].
          terms of St and n):


            S
                0
                    r [z,n[zn]]—M+J            {z,niz,nti,e] ,n [h [z,nrz,nti,eJ n[znt]] ,1}dP{z
                                                                                                     I

(1.14)          {
            J                            [It


                                    [z,n[z,nI,c] ,n[{z,ncz,n],f] niznti],O} dP5(z s,ntI,
                                                                                           I
                      +
                          =JEJ [h
                            t +1
                                                                 is   the conditional distribution function of
 where z is the variable ofintegration and          5F
                                                                on and n) ofthe firm's value in
                                                                                s
      Equation (1.14) expresses the expectatioo (conditioned
                                                              conditional expectation ofa firm's
 t+1 when it chooses to be active in period t. Similarly, the
                                            in
 value in t+l when it chooses to be inactive period
                                                    t is:


                s
                                                            r},n[h{z,n[z,nt},e} n[z,n11]       dP5[z I
  (1.15)            { ir [zniznti]—F+SEJ
                f                          [h[zncznt1

                                                                                 I st,ntl,
                          + !SEJ                [is[z,niz,nti,e]n[zntI] o] dP5[z
                                 [h[zinIznt]eI;n
                          z=s+1

  Actually, (1.15) is zero for all t. A firm
                                                   that chose to be out in periodt may enter in t+1 if       5t
                                                                                                        of the
                                                        so will other firms, driving the expected value
  turnsout to be favorable enough. However,
                                                                               is greaterthan the criticalvalue
  firm to zero, as pointed out in (1.11). Ifthe realization
                                                           of

                                                                          in the future,it will have zero value, it is
           the firm stays out. Since ifthe firm ever does enter
   obvious that EJ[st+1,nt+i,O1is zero.
                                                               in a similarmanner,using                           and
          The expected value ofV in (1.9) could be constructed
                                                       12
         as the limits of integration,and the density of c.

          As it turns out a good deal of intuition can be gathered by examining the value of the

incembency premium 4' more closely. For realizations of
time
                                                                  less than
                                                                              s    firms will enter
       value of potential entrants is zero. Since the incumbents pay only M instead of F, the
                                                                                                      intl

difference between the value of an incumbent firm and a non—incumbentin this situation is

simply (F — M). For realizations ofst+i between        and
                                                               ?+i'a previously active firm will
remain active but no new firms will enter. The difference over this rangewill therefore be

              ii M + E4[s+i,nt+
                —
                                        i
                                      Lastly for 5ti greaterthan        the difference is zero
becausefor such realizations, firms either exit and are worthzero,or stay in and earn operating
profits which exactlyequal M net of the incumbency premium (as in (1.11)). Taking expectations
over these outcomes, 4'Is,ntJ is:


                                             0
                           s+1              5t+l
(1.16)           (F—M)JdP5[zI st,n} +J {r[zn[znt]]—M+SW                  st,nt]
                                                        [zn[zntJ}}dPsEzI
                                            St +1




B. Trade Balance Hysteresis

         To study the feedback of import hysteresis to the exchange rate dynamics, we assume that
there are two trade sectors: a hysteretic sector and a normal or non—hysteretic sector. For

simplicity, the possibility of hysteresis in exports is ignored4 We assume the hysteretic sector's
import level, H, is related to the real exchange rate and the numberoffirmsin the market:


                           = hjt,zm1,
(1.17)                Ht                Hj•,•] <0,   OHF,.110n1 >0 (everywhere),


In the normal sector, the relationship between the real exchange rate and the value of the trade

                                               13
                                              rate shocks. That is:
balanceis assumed to he invariant to exchange

                                                               > U (everywhere)
                       l3'fsi = X{s1j
                                         —
(118)                                        Mist], dB"f .J/ds


                                                                 of         and norm al—sector
whore X and M are the real value (in termsofthe importgood) exports
                                           of firmsoperating in the normal sector could affect the
imports respectively. Clearly the number
                                                                 not face asymmetricentry and we I
level of trade. However in absence of sunk costs, these firms do
                                                                     on the real exchange rate.
conditions.The number of firms would thus depend monotonically
                                                       B" and the s with a reduced form such as
Civen this, we can describe the relationship between
                                          wehave that the balance of trade, Bt, is:
 (1.18). Putting the two sectors together


 (1.19)            B[st,nt]
                              =   &'j_HEst,nj, oBE.,.J/&t >0,        OBI.,.)J0n1 CO.


                                                                                  and (1.12).
 The dyoamic behaviorofBt is implicitlycontrolled by the equations (1.1)


                                  H. The Macro Implications of Hysteresis


                                                                                       an elasticities
          Baldwin and Krugman (1986) model the macro effects ofhysteresis using
                                              The driving force in their systemis an exogenous,
  approach to exchange rate determination.
                                                                    trade balanceadjustment induced
  stochasticnet capitalflow each periodwhich must be offset by
                                           are quickto point out, this approach to the relevant macro
  by real exchange rate changes. As they
                                               Here we implementthe sticky price monetary model of
  linkages clearly leaves muchtq be desired.
                                                                                    this model clearly
   Dornbusch (1976). Giventhe state of the art in exchange rate detersnination,
                                                               at hand: flexible pricemonetarymodels
   dominatesthe two principal alternativesfor the questions
                                                                   difficult context in which to talk
   assume purchasing power parity (PPF) holds at all times—a
                                                                    Portfolio balance models, which do
   about the persistent effects of largereal exchange rate shocks.
                                                                       are not of primaryconcern here.
   allow real exchange rate changes, emphasize considerations that
                                                  14
        liefore launching in, however, a couple of the characteristicsofthe standard setup need
 be considerc(l. First, the system as typically specified implies a long—run
                                                                             steady state at l'l'l'.
 Yet, hysteresis should   involve a shift in the long—run exchange rate as market structurechanges
 l'hat is, the System should have a "memory" of its past states that the standard
                                                                                  system does uo
 \Ve will refer to this propertyas path—dependent—PPP (PDPPP): the path of the real
                                                                                          exchange
 rate will determinethe market structure,which in turn determines the real
                                                                           exchange rate towa id
 which the system regresses. And, second, we want the direct effect of real
                                                                            exchange rate changes
 on net exports to be governed by a constant parametersince, empirically, this
                                                                                elasticity appears
 stablein the face of adjustmentsthat do not induce a change in marketstructure.
         These characteristicsare captured   in thesimplified, sticky priceeconomy:


(2.1)   mt_wt                                                                     LMCurve
(2.2)   w1       _Wt =        y(e_wt_Kt)                                          Price Adjustment
(2.3)   1        —a    + flnt                                                     Market Structure
(2.4)   E[et+i     I
                          —
                            et
                               = —i                                               Uncovered Parity
                          =
(2.5) E[et+i       I
                            tet÷i + O[d—(et_wt)1                                  Expectations
(2.6)   d s + (1/2)(s—s)
             a                                                                    Centerof Band
                 =
(2.7)   mt+i           mt +                                                       Money Process
(2.8)   i   - i.i.d.
                       Uniform (mean zero)                                       Innovations


Here, in is thelog ofthe nominalmoney stock; w is thelog of the domestic pricelevel; i is the
nominal interest rate (asteriskdenotesforeign); and e is the log ofthenominal
                                                                               exchange rate
(home/foreign).5  As in section I, we assume that output remains at the full employment level.
The variable K captures the effect on the system of market structure
                                                                      change; the more
competitive is the import sector (as indexed by the numberof foreign firms
and the lower is net exports.
                                                                             ") the larger   is K


        As   is standard with sticky pricemonetarymodels, price
                                                                adjustment is tied to the level of
                                             15
necessary to maintain the tractability of the model).
        Normalizing   i=0, the solution of the model generates the saddle—path equation:9


                                  e = Cw + Qmt + Kt + QAIiJt
                                                   p+ 7—1
where                                     C   a

                                                  Q si—C
                                                         47
                             p51+ [2i-21{l+        [i+ "(0--I)211/21

Note that C+Q=1—money is neutral in the bog run in the event there is no change in market
structure. Now the role ofmarket structure,as captured by K, is quite clear: the entry or exit of

foreign firms induces a shift in the saddle—path.Moreover, any non—zero value of K implies that
the steady—state value of the real exchange rate, (e—w), is no longerzero.
At any point in time, the expected evolution of the systemis described by:

                         e            1                        m+A0d+K
                                                           +
                                                               [mt+Aodt     t]

where C1 is a constant determined by initialconditions. Note that since the role ofdt in the

long—runvaluesofe and w is the same, dt playsno role in the determinationof the long—runreal

exchange rate (e—w). Equation(2.10) implies that the real exchange rate follows an
autoregressive process that admitsa role for market structure:


                             =      + (Kt—pK_) + (QAO)(dt—dt           i+
where   t a Qs.
        The responseof the system to a negativemonetary innovation is illustratedin figure 4.

The initial equilibrium is at point A along the 45 line (K0=0). The dotted lines represent
                                              17
"profitability contours' for the foreign firms, with higher profits iii the northwesterly direction Ii
the shock is not largeenough to md ice a change in market structure then the adjustment       is i to

standard jump to   11   then movement along SI' 1 to steadystate at C. If, on the other hand, till eel

appreciation is large enough to induce foreign firms to enter then the saddle—path SP2 is

appropriateand the steady state now must fall on the line along which e=w+K. Thus, the jump
to D with gradualadjustment to steady state at E.
       The illustrationmakes another point clear. Baldwin and Krugman (1986) focus oil large
real exchange rate shocks. Yet, what matters to firmsis which profitability contourthe system           is

on, not how it got there. Consequently, a series of positively autocorrelated small shocks can sine
be a source ofmarket structure change. This is particularly important in a context where agents

are learning,and these correlatedsmall "shocks" are their rational revisions over time [see Lewis

(1988) and Lyons (1987)]. For example, one mightarguethat the upswing of the dollarcycle
resultedfrom a series ofrevisions of agents' expectations of fiscal deficit decay. Sucha series of
revisions (autocorrelated small shocks) could push the real exchange rate to the point where it
induced a change in market structure.


                                      Ill. Exchange Rate Hysteresis


       As we show in the previous section, the dynamics of exchange rate adjustment and the

long—runequilibriumexchange rate depends upon the marketstructure (number of competitors)
in the trade sector. Consequently, a shockthat leads to a hysteretic change in the market
structure will lead to exchange rate hysteresis.10 In this section we showthat hysteresis in the
marketstructure is a possibility even allowing for feedback, and show that there is a qualitative
difference between   a policy regime which entails only small policy misalignments    and one in

which largemisahignments are possible.



A. A Range ofSteady—State Exchange Rates
                                              is
          'I'o i nvesttgate the properties of the model we first consider the benchmark case where    Ii


system is   at steady state and is expected to remain thereforever. Using '    to indicate that the
value of the variable is a steady—state value, the optimal expected value of a representativefi riii

that is operating in the hysteretic—sector is:


(3.1)                                '   =
                                                             i
If n' is itselfa steady—state value, then it must be that neither additional entry nor exit is
optimal. This condition places the following bounds on the value of V':



(3.2)                                        O J'    (F—M)


The bounds on J' can be directly translatedinto bounds on ii' (assuming that the inverse of r with
respect   ton exists):


(3.3)                        r[s', (F—M)(1—5)+M]         < n' <   xjs MI
Likewise the balanced trade condition (which is implicit in (2.2)) defines an implicit link between

s' and n'. That is the pair s', n' must satisfy the condition:


(3.4)                                         0 = B[s ,n}.



AssumingB[.     ,• is monotonic and continuous, thereexists a function,

(3.5)                                             s =s[n],



which relates the steady-state values of s and n.

                                             19
                                                                                      model the iuodel
             Putting this all together,we see that, unlike the standardsticky price
     can now support a whole rangeof steady—state exchaege rates and market structures. As we shall
--   illustrate below, hysteresisis a possibility since a sufficiently largeshock could shift the system
     from one steady—state equilibrium to another.



     II. The Possibilityof Exchange Rate Hysteresis
             To demonstrateformally the possibility of hysteresis in market structure we take the
     usual circuitousroute of showing that the contrapositive implies a contradiction.Assuming that.
                                                                 a                          then even
     hysteresis is not a possibility and that the systemstarts at steady-state equilibrium,
     a shock large enough to inducesome entry should be expected eventuallyto reverse itselfin the
     absence of additional shocks. That is, while a shock may change the number of firms and the real

     exchange rate, these changes are only temporary. Our task is to show that this is not possible.
           The argument is facilitatedby first establishing three facts. A negativemonetary
     innovation this period (call it period 1) will lead to an immediatereal appreciation. The first fact
     is that a representativefirm expects the real exchange rate to decayin a strict monotoriic fashion

     back up to s, and the probability density function (p.d.f.) of s to also shift monotonically back up

     to the p.d.f. of s as pictured in figure 4. This fact followsdirectly from the section II analysis.

      Second, the firm expects that expected operatingprofits 1r will decaymonotonically (although
      not necessarily strictly monotonically) back down to ir[s,n}. This follows directly from fact 1, the
      law of motion for   n given by (1.13), and the assumption that iris decreasing in both its
      arguments. Third, if a firm never exitedits value decays monotonically back to J[s,n,1].
                                                                                               Since

                                                                  this establishes a lower bound on V.
      J[s,n,1]     J. a E    ot_r[ir(st,nt)_MI (for all sir' ni),

              Now for the argument. For s and n to be steady-state values,      it must be that for a
      representativefirm in the market:


      (36)                                  0 J[s,n,fl    (F—M), where


                                                   20
                                        J[s,n,lI =    H     -M]

Consider   a period one shock,      ,   that inducesentry. As was shown in section I,         must satisfy:



(3.7)                                  irfs1,nJ
                                                  + EE{J[s2,n2,1]I s,n} > F.




           ,                                                                                          s and
where E{J[s2,n2,l] s1,n} is the expectation of the firm's value in period 2 conditioned on
                       I



n. Given    firms wouldenter until n1 satisfied:


                                                                         = F.
(3.8)                                sfs1,n1] + t5E{J[s2,n2,lJI s,n2}


Sinceall firms including the new entrants have the same value from period2 onwards, the third

fact implies that the new firms expect their value to decrease monotonically from its period 2
level. Furthermore,the representativefirm's valueis never less than             J, so it is also never less
than J[s ,n,1]. This   is   a contradiction. If the value of the firm is decreasing to the steady—state
value, but the steady—state value is greaterthan zero, by (3.1), then none of the new entrants
would ever exit, so n1 would not return ton.

Hysteresis with One-Time-OnlyShocks

        Although this constitutes a proof, we illustrate the possibility of hysteresis by working

through a simpleexample. The equations              (2.1)—(2.8) allow for the system   to be continually
subjected to shocks. However, one useful simplification is to ask: Starting from a steady—state

position, how would the system react to a one—timeunexpected shock in the absence of additional
shocks? Given the standard assumptions on the eigenvalues of the system, the size ofa

one—time—only shock is a well—defined concept.            That is, a negative shock of size f0 will lead to
adjustment path as depictedin figure 4 as SP. This path could be described by a function
relatingthe level ofthe real exchange rate to the size of the one—timeshock, c, and time:
  = s[e,tl. A slightlylargernegative shock e'< e° will lead to the adjustment path 5P2 which is               ..



                                                    21
 parallel to and everywhere to the left of SF1 In other words we know that s[c°,t] < s[c',t] for ill I
                                                      -




'[Ins fact will allow us to divide once—and—forever c'5 into those that cause hystecesis in trade a
the exchange rate (large c's) and those that do not (small c's).
       Consider first the case when the shock is such that it induces no entry or exit. 'l'he optimal

expected value of a firm UOfl realization of the unexpected once—and—forever shock is (call till'

period in which it occurs period1):



(3.9)                                 1             8t
                                                          [
                                                                     t]     —




For anygiven n we define the rangeelf's [mln 5max] that are small as thosethat satisfy:



                                    =                                       —
                                                    [ r[siemax,t],n] M], and
(3.10)                         0          >2   St


                                   (F-M)=E           St
                                                                  [5{mint(] M]
                                                                                  -
                                                              {




This rangeis depicted in figure 5. For any given n                    is a decreasing function off, so the above
condition holds for values    off between []bnm and f[n]max. If the benchmark numberof firms is
                                                   ,,min and ctn'max
higher, say n , then the rangess shifted down to f[n I
       For any value off outside this range, firmswill either enter or exit in period 1. As was
shown in Baldwin (1988a), such large shocks can themselves be classified into two types: those

for which n changes only once (in period 1) and thosein which n jumpsin period 1 and then
returns to a steady—state value that is different from the original value. We only consider the

simpler first case here. The first category of large shocks consists of all that meet two conditioss.
The first is:



                              5t                     —            > (F—M)       for appreciation or,
 (3.11)
                        t=1        [ [5[f];o]             M]
                                                     22
                                                                   fur depreciation.
                        tI                                 ]<
                                                  —M          0
                                    lr[s[tI,°]

If eithercondition holds, firms will enteror exit until the new steady state n' is given by:


                              St                  —         = (F—M) or
(3.12)                             [ sr[s[ctn']       M]

                        t=1   5t[.[s1] —M] o
To insurethat n actually stays at n', the case we are considering here, it must be true that exit
and entry are neveroptimal in future periods. This gives us the second condition:



(3.13)                         (F—Id)>                                       >0,
                                           r=0 sr{ r{s[et+r1r'] —Id]


for all t = 2   .   Since s is monotonically depreciating over time        towardits new steady—state

value, we can easilyrule out future entry and exit: any firm that found it optimalto enter
                                                                                           in a

future periodwould do better by entering in period 1.
         In summary, small shocks as defined by (3.10) lead to no change in n and therefore no
                                                                                            in n
change in K in the macro model. Large shocks, on the other hand, lead to a hystereticchange
and K. Consequently, hysteresis in the long—runequilibrium exchange rate can be induced by a
sufficiently large e.


C. Effects of Largeversus SmallPolicy Misallgmnents
         In this section we make the argument that a monetary            regime that entails only small

policy misalignments would be qualitatively different than one that entails large policy
                                                           involve hysteresis and thereforethe
misalignments. In particular we show that the latter would
possibility of the abandonmentof sunk assets.
                                                      23
         In our macro model the foreign interest rate is           constant, so that any deviation of t lie
(loinestic rate from the foreign rate can lie thought of as a monetary policy misalignment.

Consequently we can rigorously define a convenient (although certainly not a perfectly general)
metricfor the degree of policy coordination: The larger is the supportof the distributionoff in
givee regime, the less coordinated is policy in that regime. Perfect coordination corresponds to a

degenerate distribution of c; the probability that                 0 is unity and the probability that        a

zero. As the hounds of c's distribution widen, greaterpolicy misalignments are possible.

         We first examinethe case offixed exchange rates, showing that               if the policies are perfectly
coordinated then hysteresis cannot occur. Next we show that even if c follows a non—degenerate,

bounded distribution, then we can rule out hysteresis as long as the bounds are not too wide.

         The case offixed exchange rates is in fact a trivial extension of our benchmark analysis.

We therefore know that hysteresis cannot occur when policies are perfectly coordinated. The
second step is somewhat more involved since with a stochastic c the value ofthe firm takes
account of the possibility of future entry and exit. However, having assumed that the shocks are

bounded, we know that the realizations of s are also bounded. Indeed it is straightforwardto show
that ifK dues not change:


                                                                    max and
                                       5max =           +
(3.14)                                                      r2 1      mm
                                            5mm
                                                  =K+1—c

where K reflects any steady—state market structure. Consequently, we can relate bounds on the

value of the firm to 5mm and 6max Specifically, the bounds are:


                                     max          1          max
(3.15)                          .J
                                            =i-—-(ir[s             ,n]—M),and
                                           mm         1        minnj—SI).
                                      .1
                                                =1—(irfs

         Now if 3min is greater than zero, firms would never exit, and if jmaxis less than (F.—M)

                                                   24
then firms would never enter. For distributions of for which this holds, n and K are constant      -




'I'his   rangeof 's is (lCfincd by:


                                                                              = (F—M)
° = T__5 [x[K                  n]
                                    —
                                        M]
                                             and —1—
                                                       [r[           i]
                                                                          —




Combining these arguments, we know that for regimes with a sufficiently narrow rangeof policy

misalignments, there will be no hysteresis, since:


                                                                                    = (F—M).
                                                                  -i--i ] _M]
                                                        1
            o=
                  1
                           + max                <EJ <           + mi0,
                             '=1
where     EJ is the actual expected value of the firm in any period r.
                                    W. Summary and CondudingRemaxks


           This paper shows that hysteresisin trade and the exchange rate can occur if monetary

policiesget sufficiently misaligned. That is, uncoordinated policies may lead to the hysteretic
                                                                                              sunk
entry or exit of firmsin the traded goods sector. Sinceexit here entails the abandonmentof
costs, the possibility of hysteresis means that a regime which permits largepolicy misalignments
will involve the scrappageof sunk assets. Furthermore we showed that to avoid such hysteresis

would not require a return to afixed exchange rate regime. Rather, it could be avoided by an
                                                                                      We conjecture
exchange rate regime in which policies were never allowed to get too far out ofline.
that these positive results have several interesting implications for exchange rate policy and
welfare analysis of managedversus floating rates.

            The policy implication is that it may not be necessary to return to aformal, tightly
                                                                                 of       rates
 managed exchange rate system in orderto avoid muchof the undesirable effects floating
 observed in the 1980s. The industry—levelmodel in this paper is not rich enough to allowus to

                                                 25
deternonetheoretically how large the policy inisalignments can be without inducing hysteFesis
I lowever, the empirical studies discussed in the introduction support the hypothesisthat the

exchangerate fluctuations    of the 1970s did not induce hysteresis in trade, while the 1980s dolla   F



cycle   did. Thus loosely speaking it seems that a hysteresis—inducing shock must be of the
magnitudeof the 1980—1987 dollar overvaluation. Dixit (1987a), using the basic sunk cost model.
makes a numberof highly special assumptions about the nature of the industry—levelcompeti lice

and the exchange rate process which allow him to relate the width of the no—entry—no—exit baud

to readily observable values.Plugging in reasonable estimatesfor these valueshe finds that the
band is quite wide. In his central case, the real exchange rate would have to move to a point when'

an importer's marginal revenueis 48 percent above total costsin order to induceentry; to force
exit would require that the marginal revenue is 31 percent below variablecosts. Thus Dixit's

reasoning seems to lend further credence to the conjecture that policy coordinationneed not he

extremelytight in order to avoidhysteresis.
      On the welfare side, the exploratory model in this paperis not rich enough to study the
welfare effects of sunk asset abandonment. However it may be taken as an indicationthat such

hystereticindustrialdislocation may be an importantissuein the debate between fixed and
floating exchange rate regimes. To pin down the welfare costsef the scrapping of assets would
require a model in which the amount of available capitalin the economy were in some way
limited. To keep such models tractable (for instance Solow's growth model with vintage capital)

it is usually necessary to make assumptions   (e.g.,perfectly flexible prices and continuously
clearing markets) which eliminate the appealing dynamic properties of the sticky price monetary
model of exchange rate determination. A reasonable approach to gauging the welfare effects of

hysteresis would thereforebe a study ofwhat happens to real incomes in a two—sectorgrowth
model (with sunk costs) when the economy is subjected to largeversus small exogenous terms of

trade shocks. However, as pointed out in Baldwin (1986), import hysteresis has pro—compotitive
effects following largeappreciations and anti—competitiveeffects following large depreciations.

Any complete welfare analysis would need to include these effects.
                                            26
       l'rom the perSpeCtiveC) ft he exchange rate determination literature, our model Shows

the long—run equilibrium exchange rate is not unique. In fact we show that the steady—state

exchange   rate is path dependent. This conclusion suggests that the standard tests of the sticky

price monetary model are misspccified since they typically impose a unique steady—state
exchange rate level. It also adds another item to the already long list of reasons why PPP should
not be expected to hold even in the very long run. Yet, this reason differs greatly from the othei
in that it is a nominal (as opposed to real) change which shifts the long—run exchange rate. 'lo III
this in other words, the possibility of PDPPP implies that in our model money need not be

neutral even in the very long run.




                                           27
                                           FOOTNOTES




  hysteresisis said to occur when an external shock alters a system in such
                                                                              a manner that the
system is not expected to return to its original state in the absence of future corrective shocks.


2 Of
    course, a number of factors are known to shift long—runreal rates such as productivity
                                                                                constraints.lii
growth differentials, shifts in comparative advantage, and intertemporalbudget
our model the shift is due to an effect outsideof this traditionalset ofexplanations.


    All we really need is that e has a bounded support. The uniform distribution, however, reduces

the complexity of the formal analysis.



  Allowing for hysteresis in exports would amplify the effect ofa largeexchange rate swing. For
instance,a large appreciation could force home firmsto exit the foreign market as well as induce
additionalforeign firms to enter the homemarket. Both effects work in the same direction as far
as   shiftingthe exchange rate—trade balance link is concerned.

' Augmenting the specification of real money supply by using a priceindex defined over both
domestic and foreign goods, with appropriateweights, does not involve any qualitativedifference
in the results and for that reason is not included in this streamlined model.


 6
  This asymmetrycreatesa type ofpeso problem. Note that deviations from uncovered parity

 would be serially—correlated in this model, which is in accord with empirical results.



   Our simple i.i.d. mean zero money process is not meant to capture reality here. Richer, more

 realisticspecifications, such as those in Lyons (1988), would involve only quantitative rather tha;i
                                             28
qua!i tati ye differences.


8i the Kruginan (1988a) model, when the intervention policy is credible, the exchange rate
cannot go outside of the hand and investors know it. Our model differs in that the exchange rate        i
free to go outside the
                         s_.s? range.   Nevertheless, since crossing the boundary exerts a regressive
effect on the nominalexchange rate through K, e does not respond to innovations as much as it

otherwise would when within the range.



  We make the standard assumption that 'yandA are such that the system is saddle—path stable.
We also assume that and A are such that the eigenvalue of absolute value less than one, p, lies in
the interval (0,1) in order to ensure monotonic convergence. Empirical magnitudes for these

parameters suggest that this assumptionon pis very weak.

10
     It should be notedat this juncture that this hysteresis does not imply that the exchange rate
deviates from fundamentals (as specified in our models). What changes are the fundamentals,
market structure in particular.




                                               29
                                      REFERENCES



Baldwin, Richard. "hysteresis in Import Prices: The Beachhead Effect." American Ecosu,tir
      Review, September 1988a,  7.
__________• "Some Empirical Evidence on Hysteresis in Aggregate U.S. Import Priccs."   NilEli
       Working Paper No. 2483, January 1988b.

_________ "On The General Existence and Nature of Sunk Cost Hysteresis in Trade." NilEli
      Working Paper No. ??? (1988c).

__________• "Hysteresis in Trade." M.I.T. mimeo, prepared for the 1986 NBER Summer
      Institute, April 1986.
Baldwin, Richard and Paul Krugman. "Persistent Trade Effects of Large Exchange Rate
      Shocks." NBER Working Paper No. 2017, Septemher 1986.

Baldwin, Richard and Richard Lyons. "The Mutual Amplification Effect of Exchange Rate
      Volatility and Unresponsive Trade Prices." NBER Working Paper No. 2677, August
      1988.

Bellman,Richard. Dynamic Programming. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press,
       1957.

Bertsekas, Dimitri P. Dynamic Programming and StochasticControl. New York: Academic
       Press, 1976.

Dixit, Avanash. "Entry and Exit Decisions of Firms Under FluctuatingReal Exchange Rates."
       Mimeo, Princeton University, September 1987a.

_________ "Hysteresis, Import Penetration, and Exchange Rate Pass—Through." Mimeo,
      Princeton University, November 1987b.
Dornbusch, Rudiger. "Expectationsand Exchange Rate Dynamics." Journal of Political
      Economy, December 1976, 84, 357—371.
_________ Open Economy Macroeconomics. New York: Basic Books, Inc., 1980.

Feinberg, Robert M. "The Effects of Foreign Exchange Movements on U.S. Domestic Prices."
       ITC mimeo, December 1986.
__________ "Recent Foreign Exchange Movements, Prices, and U.S. Trade Flows." I.T.C.
      mimeo, March 1987.

Frankel, J. and Richard Meese. "Are Exchange Rates Excessively Variable?" In Stan Fischer
       (ed.) NBERMacroeconomics Annual 1987.
Froot, Kenneth A. and Paul C. Klemperer. "Exchange Rate Pass--Through When Market
       Share Matters." Mimeo, Sloan School of Management, M.I.T., December 1987.
Froot, Kenneth A. and Takatoshi Ito. "On The Consistency of Short—Run and Long—Run
                                        30
        Exchange Rate Expectations."NIIER Working Paper No. 2577, May 1988.

llu per, 1'eter and Catlieri ne Manii. ''The. hIS. External Deficit: Canses and Persistence.''
        listernational Fisance Discussion Paper no. 316, November 1987.

lensli, Murray C., and Ileisry Y. %Van, Jr. "Hysteresis of Loug—Run Equilibrt 105 FF0!))
        Realistic AdjustmentCosts," in George Ilor svich and Paul Samuelsee (eds.) Trade.
        Stability, and Macroeconomics. New York: Academic Press, 1974.
Erugosan, Paul R. "Target Zones and Exchange Rate DvnsrnRs." NDFB Weckiog Paper Fe.
      2481, January 1988a.

___________ "Deiodustrializatiou,   Reindustrialisatien,and the Real Exchange Rate." NBE!t
        Working Paper No. 2586, May 19Mb.
Lewis, Karen K.   "The Persistence of the 'Peso Problem' Whee Policy is Noisy." Journal ci
        International Money and Fina e. 7 (March 1988): 5—-22.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. "interest Bates and Currency Prices io a Twa--Country World."        Joursa
       pf Monetary Economics. JO (Nove.soher 1982): 335—259.

Lyee.s., Richard K. "Whnoce Oversh"otiog: Money Stock cc Flow?" Mimeo, Colusnhia Graduate
        School of Business, October 1i87.

Mann, Catherine. "Prices, Profit Margins., and Exchange P.ates."
      June 1986.

_________   "Prices, Profit Margins, aud ExchangeRates:After the Fall." DIE Discussice
        Paper, Federal Reserve Beard, July l9S7a.
________     "The Puzzling Behaviorof Non-il Import Price:;." Mimeo, November           Mlii..
Mussa, Michael L. "A Model of Exchange Rate Dynamics." Journal of Political Ecc.nere;.           'ii
      (February 1982): 74—104.
Orcust, Guy. "Measurement of Price Elasticities in InternationalTrade.' Review of Economies
      and Statistics. 32 (May 1950): 117—132.

Stulz, Rene M. "Currency Preferences, PurchasingPower Risks, and the Determination of
       Exchange Rates in an Optimizing Model." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking. 16
       (August 1984): 302—316.

Svensson, Lars E. 0. 'Currency Prices, Terms of Trade, and Interest Rates: A General
      Equilibrium Asset—pricing Cash—in—Advance Approach." Journal of International
      Economics. 18 (February 1985): 17—41.




                                            31
                                         —I
           —I
                                         CD
           CD



           ><     I—I                    rt
           '•-•   Gi                     -)   Gi
           r1
           0 :ijrn
 If)       0
rtD        I-i.
           U)

           0
                                   z
                                   C-)

                             U)
       r                           j1
                        CM

                                   U)
                                  -r

                                  rt
                                  I—
              FIGURE 3
    The Three Exchange Rate Regions

                             NC=F—o4(         nt—I]



                             NC=M—ö t' t—i1

                              '1t[s.   n_1l

                                       St
                     So
         SI
          t            t


              FIGURE 4
System Response to Different Shocks

w                             e=w (K=O)


                              e=w+K (K>O)




                                   e
                I-
                0)
                -3
                tO
                CD

                <    11
:3)             In   I—
                UI

                     P1
                     Ui
                UI
Ni              an
      rt
                In
(I)




r1         rt
