                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 VENTURE CAPITAL AND CAPITAL GAINS TAXATION




                              James M. Poterba




                           Working Paper No. 2832




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                January 1989




 I am grateful to the National Science Foundation for research support and to
Thomas Barthold, David Cutler, Jerry Hausman, and Lawrence Summers for
helpful comments. This research is part of NBER's research program in
Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                      NBER Working Paper #2832
                                      January 1989


                VENTUkE CAPITAL AND CAPITAL GAINS TAXATION


                                 ABSTRACT




This   paper investigates the links between capital gains taxation and

the level of venture capital activity.        I examine two explanations

of how reducing the personal capital gains tax rate may spur venture
capital: the first focuses on the supply of funds to the venture
industry, and the second on the supply of entrepreneurs. The supply
of funds is unlikely to be the principal mechanism through which the

tax affects venture capital, since less than half of venture invest-
ors face individual capital gains tax liability on their realized
gains. Moreover, most of the growth in venture funding during the
last decade has come from tax-exempt investors. Individual capital
gains taxes may however have a significant influence on the demand
for venture funds. These taxes have an important impact on the
incentives of entrepreneurs and other employees of start-up firms

who forego wage and salary income and accept compensation through
corporate stock and options. The paper closes by noting that
reducing the tax rate on all gains is a relatively blunt device for
encouraging venture investment. Venture investments account for
less than one percent of realized capital gains.



                                      James H. Poterba
                                      Department of Economics
                                      MIT
                                      50 Memorial Drive
                                      Cambridge. MA 02139
