                         N B ER WORK I NC PA I'ER S ER! KS




                         HOW INCENTIVE-INCOMPATIBLE
                        DEPOSIT-INSURANCE FUNDS FAIL




                                Edward J. Kane




                           Working Paper No. 2836




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                February 1989




The author ia Everett D. Reeae Professor of Banking and Monetary Economics at
Ohio State University and Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic
Research. He wishes to thank Richard C. Aspinwall, Stephen Buser, Ronald
Bolton, Charles Calomiris, W. Arthur Cullman, Myron Dale, Susan Faller,
Benjamin Friedman, Benson Hart, J. Huston McCulloch, Anna Prochnow Educa-
tional Foundation for financial support. This paper extends Kane (l987a).
Opinions expressed are the author's alone and should not be construed to
represent those of the Prochnow Foundation or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                             NRER Working I'aper u28 36
                                             Ii) ma my 1959


                           110W INCENTIVE- I NC0NI'A'I'tlIl.E
                          DEPOSIT- INSURANCE FUNDS FAlL


                                      ABSTRACT

     An incentive-incompatible deposit-insurance fund (IIDIF) is a scheme Lot
guaranteeing deposits at client institutions that deploys defective systems
of information collection, client monitoting, and tisk management. These
defective   systems encourage voluntary risk- taking by clients and by managers
and politicians tesponsible for administeting the fund.
     The paper focuses on how ptincipal-agent conflicts and asymmetries in
the distribution of information lead to myopic behaviot by IIDIF managers and
by politicians who appoint and constrain them. Drawing on data developed in
legislative hearings and investigations and in sworn depositions, the paper
documents that managers ef IISIFs in Ohio and Maryland knew well in advance
of their funds' 1985 failures that important clients were both economically
insolvent and engaging in inappropriate forms of risk-taking. It also
establishes that staff proposals for publicizing and bringing these clients'
risk-taking under administrative control were repeatedly rejected.
     The analysis has a forward-looking purpose. Congress and federal
regularors have managed the massively undercapitalized Federal Savings and
Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC) in much the same way Ohio and Maryland
officials did. Unless and until incentives supporting political, bureau-
cratic and private risk-taking are reformed, the possibility of a FSLIC
meltdown cannot be dismissed. To encourage timely intervention into insol-
vencies developing in a deposit-insurance fund's client base, the most
meaningful reforms would be to force the development and release of estitsates
of the market value of the insurance enterprise and to require fund managers
to use the threat of takeover to force decspirslized clients to recapitalize

well before they approach insolvency.


                                             Edward J. Kane
                                             Center for Financial System Research
                                             Arizona State University
                                             College of Business
                                             Tempe, AZ 85282
            HOW INCENTIVE-INCOMPATIBLE DEPOSIT-INSURANCE

                                    FUNDS FAIL

                                   Edward). Kane
     In late 1984, eleven state-based guarantee funds underwrote deposit insurance

for about 650 state-chartered thrift institutions. Since then, as Table I indicates,
state-based funds have shrunk greatly in importance. Four have been declared
insolvent, one no longer has any thrift clients, and three others are winding down
their operations. The remaining three have decided to limit sharply the business
they underwrite. This paper argues that these funds' problems and prior insol-
vencies of deposit-insurance funds in Mississippi (1976) and Nebraska (1983) illus-

trate the virtual impossibility of preventing incentive-incompatible insurance
schemes that are not reformed from being overrun eventually by client insol-
vencies.

     Incentive incompatibility exists when an insurer's pricing, client-monitoring,

and risk-management procedures lead contracting parties to pursue risks that
undermine fund reserves. Incentives supporting innovative forms of risk-taking are

particularly defective. The aggregate size of these incentives increases with the
volatility of the financial environment, with opportunities for degrading the flow of
information to regulators or taxpayers, and with the extent to which regulators

count on exacting implicit post-government compensation (i.e., an cx post settling
up) for their term of regulatory service (Kane, 1988).

      The analysis begins with the hypothesis that information asymmetries and
other principal-agent problems make government-based deposit insurers slow to see

the extent to which clients' reliance on innovative financial instruments and
activities threatens the solvency of the funds they administer or protect. Even
when fund administrators finally see the dangers inherent in client innovations,
absence of takeover discipline makes them slow to control their funds' exposure to
these risks.   These two lags permit aggressive clients to extract unintended
subsidies to risk-taking. If and when risks taken by these clients produce hidden

losses that loom large relative to fund size, the political pressure and short
horizons under which the administrators operate make it advantageous for officials

to temporize and to tolerate endgame gambles by failing clients. Opportunities for
effecting a reputationally dean getaway to a better job encourage regulators to
provide relief from capital requirements precisely when the continued solvency of
associated insurance funds most strongly demands that such requirements be

enforced.
      The paper &aws on a variety of court and legislative documents to slow
empirically that this model of recognition and action lags and joint regulator-client
gambling accounts for the' 1985 demise of both the Ohio Deposit Guaranee Fund

 (ODGF) and the Maryland Savings-Share Insurance Corporation (MSSIC). The
 analysis has a forward-looking purpose. Congress and federal regulators have taken

 the massively undercapitalized Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation

 (FSLIC) far down a parallel road. Unless and until incentives supporting incom-
 patible bureaucratic, political, and private risk-taking are reformed, the specter of
 a parallel meltdown by FSLIC cannot be dismissed. However, the successful
 adjustments made by state-based funds in Pennsylvania and North Carolina indicate

 that FSLIC's affairs could be put in order without crisis if the political will could
 be developed to acknowledge and allocate hidden losses.

       The fundamental issue in financial reform is the need to restructure
 government regulators' and politicians' incentives. These officials are engaged in a

 complex game of rescue.        In this game, officials are rewarded for solving
 "problems" that they first exacerbate by implicit subsidies that are long-lived and
 addictive arid for helping persons and institutions that they or their predecessors

 first victimize.
       The recurrence of regulatory scandals and crises testifies to the ability of
                                                                                   3


both private and governmental regulators to conceal for tong periods relevant
information on the effects and quality of their performance. This experience
suggests rhat,once a substantial amount of adverse information is being covered up,

regulators become more concerned with avoiding a bad press than with delivering
their best—efforts regulatory performance. Given officials sensitivity to criticism,
the most meaningful regulatory reforms promise to be those that would either
improve the [low of timely information on regulator performance or
otherwise restrain the production of hidden regulatory subsidies and attendant

losses by regulatory bureaus.
I. An Overview of the ODGF and MSSIC Crises

      In March 1985, the partial banking holiday associated with the failure of
ODGF sit shock waves reverberating through the world financial system. These
shock waves contributed to the May 1985 failure of MSSIC two months later.
However, as it became clear that Ohio, Maryland, and federal taxpayers were going

to pick up the bill f or these failures, the system settled down again.

      This paper portrays both ODGF and MSSIC as small-scale versions of the

massively undercapitalized Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation
(FSLIC). We study the pathology of the ODGF and MSSIC failures and bailouts to

learn how ODGF's and MSSIC's longstanding economic insolvency degenerated into

a crisis of confidence. Given FSLIC's continuing economic insolvency, this
knowledge may help us to avoid a replay of ODGF and MSSIC experience on the

federal level. Observers need to understand that the ODGF, MSSIC, and FSLIC
became insolvent because incentive-incompatible deposit-insurance contracts in-
duce undesirable political, bureaucratic, and private risk-taking behaviors. Incen-
tive defects make the occurrence of de facto insolvencies in unreformed insurance
funds inevitable.
      A lesser theme of the paper is that the ODGF failure occasioned a worldwide

financial disturbance, not because of the size of the insolvency, but because State
and federal politicians made a sulprising (albeit short-lived) attempt to duck Out of

what the market conjectured to be their responsibility for backing up ODGF
resources. The temporary unwillingness of State authorities to make good the
losses suffered by ODGF amounted to their calling the equivalent of a timeout to

assess the relative willingness of State taxpayers and federal authorities to bear
the costs of keeping ODGF-insured depositors whole.          In calling a prolonged
banking holiday for ODGF institutions instead of promptly promising to recapital-

ize the guarantee fund, Ohio's Democratic governor challenged the Republican-
controlled State legislature and federal regulators and politicians to a multisided
game of chicken. Playing Out this game confirmed market participants' long-
standing presumption that in a political showdown the concentrated interests of
depositors in troubled institutions tend eventually to overcome the diffuse interests

of the various taxpayers that the U.S. financial system makes into risk-bearers of

last resort.
      The spectacular and corrupt failure of a securities firm (E.S.M. Securities in
the case of ODGF and Bevil, Bresler, & .Schulman for MSSIC) and the imprudently

large exposure of one or more. large client thrifts to this single credit were the
proximate causes of both ODGF's and MSSIC's demise. However, the ultimate cause

was the false security that extensive ODGF and MSSIC guarantees gave to
depositors in insolvent clients and to other insured firms. The insurers' official
seals arid corporate names were widely mistaken as evidence of formal state
backing. As unrealized losses at ODGF and MSSIC institutions grew increasingly

larger than fund reserves, this security became more and more illusory because it

placed a correspondingly greater burden on state regulators to oversee insured
institutions ever more skillfully.
      Common sense holds that it is not sensible to depend on others (particularly

politicians and bureaucrats) always to act sensibly.       In driving one's car, for
example, depending on other &ivers to behave optimally is a sure formula for
                                                                                    5


eventual disaster.   Using this perspective, the paper maintains, not that the
colorful individuals involved in these funds' demise were blameless, but that
deposit-insurance incentives sorely and perversely test the limits of participants'
moral and financial integrity. No guarantee scheme could endure forever whose

information, monitoring, and regulatory-response subsystems put the interests of so

many politicians, regulators, and S&L executives so deeply into conflict as ODGF's
and MSSIC's did. The analysis develops the premise that only by refusing to let the

search for individual scapegoats serve as a political palliative can we make
progress on the vital task of building a more durable system of federal deposit
insurance.

     Adam Smith notes man's natural propensity to truck, barter, and exchange.
Kane (1988) develops a model of incentive cross-over points for regulators that
implies a parallel natural propensity for otherwise-honorable politicians and
bureaucrats to deny and cover-up massive insolvencies at government-insured
financial institutions and to bailout affected parties once a shortage is incontro-

vertably revealed. Congress' repeated resistance to adequately recapitalizing
FSLIC exemplifies this propensity. This proclivity toward deception and myopia is
rooted in officials' desire to project a favorable image of their capacity to control
the events that fall within their administrative purview, their interest in develop-
ing and sharing regulatory rents, and their belief that current taxpayers are rela-
tively insensitive to the deferred costs o( following cover-up and bailout policies.

Presuming that regulators engage in self-interested, career-enhancing conduct
rather than purely altruistic behavior makes it unreasonable for taxpayers to

expect public servants charged with managing deposit-institution insolvencies to
give them voluntarily either an honest count or an honest deal. If taxpayers truly
want an honest count and an honest deal, they are going to have to demand laws

that apply meaningful sanctions to public servants that do not promptly disclose
information indicative of poor performance.
                                                                                         6


             11. Preliminary Concepts: Insolvency, Insolvency Resolutir
                          Runs, and Information Suppression

Insolvencl. Insolvency exists de facto when an institution loses the autonomous
capacity to discharge      its liabilities. To an economist, this condition   is synonymous

with an institution's net worth becoming negative. Economic insolvency occurs
when the market value of an organization's nonequity liabilities exceeds the market

value of its assets.        This definition proceeds in terms of the firm's expanded
balance sheet, recognizing all explicit and implicit sources of value to the firm and

all explicit and implicit nonequity claims against it. To the economist, the idea of
an "off-balance-sheet item" is an oxymoron (i.e., a contradiction in terms).
      Accountants employ different concepts of insolvency and net worth. For
many items, accountants substitute book values (which often embody adjusted or

unadjusted historical costs) for market values and typically neglect potentially
important categories of assets and liabilities.          Rules which dictate permissible

substitutions and omissions are embodied in what accountants call "generally

accepted accounting principles."
      U.S.   deposit-institution regulators' closure rules turn on an inherently more
 discretionary concept of de j or legal insolvency. This concept is even more
amorphous than accounting insolvency. If regulators choose, they may selectively
 and asymmetrically recognize sources of income or capital gains and defer losses

 or capitalized costs that generally accepted accounting principles would treat more
 conservatively. In practice, regulators tend to focus primarily on a troubled
 institution's liquidity     its capacity to cover its debts as they come due or accrue.

 Since (except in the most extreme cases of economic insolvency) collateralized
 last-resort lending from an institution's Federal Reserve or Federal Home Loan

 Bank can maintain this capacity, using a liquidity criterion puts the legal solvency
 of deeply troubled firms squarely into the hands of federal officials.



 Methods of Insolvency Resolution. When a firm becomes economically insolvent,

 the downside risk from its continuing operations accrues predominantly to its
creditors or (when the debt is guaranteed) to Its guarantors. Given their exposure

to moral hazard in an undercapitalized finn, creditors and guarantors typically
insist on covenants that effectively give them the right either to accelerate their
claims or to take over an insolvent borrower unless its stockholders promptly inject

new capital into its balance sheet.

     Fecause it is politically awkward to permit a deposit institution to operate in

an ofhcially insolvent condition, until recently a de jure insolvency generally
impelled regulators to close its doors. An institution's formal failure   may     be

resolved in either of three ways: by a liquidation and payoff (in which the proceeds

from disposing of the firm's assets are divided among creditors and guarantors), by

a private acquirer's undertaking a comprehensive or selective asset-purchase and

deposit-assumption transaction, or by a government takeover (which is invariably
conceived to be temporary). .However, instead of declaring an official insolvency,
authorities may demand that stockholders go to private capital markets to
recapitalize the firm or act to bailout the firm by providing it or its acquirer
explicit or implicit financial assistance on below-market terms. While the concept
of explicit financial assistance is a straightforward one, implicit assistance can
take many and subtle forms. The subtlest and quantitatively most important form
of assistance a guarantor can give consists of turning a blind or nearly blind eye to

a debtor's economic insolvency. A guaranteed, but insolvent debtor faces strong
incentives to make risky financial plays. It is uneconomic for a guarantor not to

protect itself against these incentives by exercising takeover options established by
the guarantee contract when they are "in the money" or by at least negotiating a

quid pro quo for its forbearance, such as by taking an explicit warrant position.
Neglecting a dient's insolvency implicitly transfers capital funds from the guar-
antor (in these cases, the Ohio and Maryland taxpayer, including other ODGF and

MSSIC members) to managers, stockholders, and unguaranteed (or imperfectly
guaranteed) creditors of the insolvent firm. Moreover, such neglect sets up
                                                                                   8


incentives for managers of the decapitalized firm to engage in risky endgame plays

that tend to increase the value of the implicit transfer the longer and more
completely the guarantor forbears from intervening to control its exposure to
tosses from the firm's continuing operations. Forbearance occurs primarily because
agents that are supposed to act on behalf of the guarantor find it in their own
career interest to try to deny, cover up, or use taspayer resources to buy their way

out of recognizing particular classes of insolvency.
      In Ohio, Home State Savings Bank was destroyed primarily by $145 million in

losses incurred through inappropriately heavy and apparently corrupt securities
tending to E.S.M. Securities, Inc. (ESM). Examiners for the State first discovered
this problem in 1980 when losses were still small and went on to recommend strong

and immediate action. However, in ostrich-like fashion successive state super-
intendents of the Ohio Division of Savings and Loans (ODSL) chose to forbear.
Table 2 shows that, for several years before its 1985 failure, Home State Savings
was economically insolvent. Moreover, the addendum documents ODSL examiners'

concerns about the firm's exposure to losses in ESM. The not-insubstantial
contemporaraneous value of Home State stock traced to its managers' ability to
keep ODGF and State officials from dosing the firm. Although Home State's de
facto insolvency and its exposure to further losses in ESM were recognized by
ODSL examiners, the State's regulatory braintrust chose not to enforce in full the

economic interests of other ODGF members and Ohio taxpayers. It settled for
negotiating a series of nonbinding supervisory agreements that, until March 1985,

 Home State's management abrogated with virtual impunity. Instead of getting
 tough with Home State management and stockholders, the ODGF approved each

 dividend requested and political appointees heading the ODSI repeatedly approved
 new branch offices and deferred meaningful disciplinary action, leaving the
 problem festering for their successors. As Home State's difficulties grew in size
 and complexity, the situation became as hard to handle as a box of unstable

 explosives.
                                                                                         9


      In Maryland, the net worth of several large S.&Ls was destroyed over a period of

years by a variety of fraudulent self-enrichment activities. Although State
examiners uncovered considerable evidence of irregularities, these institutions

were permitted to adopt aggressive growth strategies in which high deposit rates
were used to raise funds for use in highly speculative acquisition, development, and

Construction loans. As late as April 29, 1985, MSSIC's management refused to
acknowledge either the depth of client insolvencies or the risks their operations
imposed on MSSIC reserves.



Runs. What finally forced both the closwe of Home State Savings and the MSSIC
crisis were depositor runs. In talking about the abstract problem of depositor runs,

authorities invariably focus on the concept of an irrational run. An irrational run
occurs when, in response to false rumors, a substantial percertage of depositors try

at the same time to remove their deposits from an economically solvent deposit
institution. Such a run can be stopped by a credible flow of accurate information.
Customers waste resources in that they would never have engaged in panic
withdrawals if they could have been reliably informed about the institution's true
condition.
      In the face of concealed insolvencies, deposit-institution managers and
regulators would be better-advised to contemplate the dangers of rational runs. In
1985, the runs experienced in Ohio and Maryland were rational, not irrational.
They were based on quick-breaking information, not on inaccurate rumors. The
largest institution in the ODGF insirance pool (Home State Savings) became
economically so insolvent that its unrealized losses exceeded the insurance fund set

up to support not only the deposits of this large firm, but also those issued by other

members of what was a legislatively approved insurance pool. As news of this
firm's problem began to reach the public, depositors lined up to withdraw funds
first from the massively insolvent firm (and from a second, sister institution) and
eventually from several of the weakest other institutions in the pool. Similar
                                                                                   l0


sequences of events encountered by other state-sponsored systems are described by

Saulsbury (1985 and 1987).

    In a rational run, the time and trouble of wending ones way through a long
queue is not wasted. It represents an investment in pi-eserving one's wealth. This
is because anyone who manages to withdraw his or her deposits before an
insolvency is officially declared is able to escape whole. Absenting government
bailouts, depositors of record as of the instant an institution is closed have to
absorb net insulficiencies in its and its guarantors' resources.
      ODGF member associations were required to hold a teserve with the ODGF equal

to two percent of their outstanding deposits (less if they were growing rapidly).
Although these institutions were weakened by secular increases in interest rates
 and by the direct loss of roughly one third of their accounting net worth in the
ODGF banlouptcy, the run on their deposits was directly occasioned by the
 unexpected reaction of Ohio politicians to the official discovery of Home State

 Savings' insolvency.
      In Ohio, at the beginning of the run, authorities acted as if it were an
 irrational one. Depsite their lack of access to good information on the current
 extent of Home State's insolvency, State officials dared to presume that the ODGF

 could keep even its weakest client in operation. When the ODGF proved unable to

 demonstrate the truth of that claim, for almost a week politicians dared to
 presume that they could easily (i.e., at little cost to the Ohio taxpayer) support the

 deposits of all but the massively insolvent Home State. Instead of backstopping the

 resources of ODGF or its member institutions, State authorities declared the
 ODGF banloupt, and the governor and legislature set up a new and grossly
 undercapitalized insurance fund to support the deposits of surviving ODGF mem-

  bers. Given the lack of private economic equity in many of the surviving ODGF
  member institutions, the resulting deterioration in the perceived (or conjectural)
  backing that Ohio politicians appeared to offer depositors in the wake of the Home
                                                                                  11



State failure made it eminently rational for depositors to line up to take their
savings out of the weakest of the Ohio-insured S&Ls.

     When it became clear that many of the other ODGF firms might have to be

closed at potentially great depositor or taxpayer expense, the governor decided to
suspend operations at the 70 remaining ODGF-insured institutions. The ostensible

purpose of this partial banking holiday was to keep all existing depositors on an
equal looting while buying time for a massive task force of examiners (borrowed
largely from federal agencies) to develop reliable information by which which
regulators could distinguish the set of roughly 20 hopelessly insolvent ODGF firms

from the rest of the pool. However, I believe that, consciously or uconsciously,

this unexpected and apparently panicky move had two deeper political purposes.
These purposes were to put the ball into the Republican legislature's court and to

pressure federal officials to relieve Ohio taxpayers by contributing financial
resources to an ODGF bailout.

     I draw this inference for three reasons. First, the absence of adequate
accounting information on the condition of individual institutions cannot justify a
decision to punish the managers, stockholders, and customers of the 50 som.rid and

the 20 unsound ODGF members alike. A more proportioned response would be to

impose dollar and frequency limits on depositors' withdrawal rights at ODGF firms

or to suspend operations only at firms whose solvency definitely appeared ques-
tionable. In Maryland, rather than declaring a banking holiday, the governor halted

crisis-creating rsis by limiting depositor withdrawals at MSSIC institutions to
$1,000 per month. Second, the move's broader effects were almost certainly
anticipated.   By increasing market participants' rational expectations of the
probability that federal authorities might similarly mishandle pressures on the
federal insurance h.ntds, the banking holiday could be expected to weaken the dollar

on foreign-exchange markets and to put upward pressure on deposit rates at
federally insured banks and S&Ls. Extending the damage to out-of-state parties
seems a likely strategy for loosening federal purse strings. Third, the alternative
                                                                                   12



to this interpretation is to presume that, instead of following maximizing strategy,
                                                                                   -
Ohio officials created so much havoc foolishly or incompetently.


Information Suppression. The element in the ODGF and MSSIC regulatory systems

that most facilitated the coverup and most complicated the resolution of fund
insolvencies is their reliance on historical-cost accounting. Although some S&L
spokespersons want to blame all industry ills on "deregulation," post-1980 federal
deregulation of deposit rates could have had only a secondary effect on the net

worth of nonfederally regulated institutions. These institutions, which were not
subject to federal deposit-rate ceilings, had been paying market rates of explicit
interest throughout the 1970s said 1980s. Table 3 compares average explicit
deposit rates paid by Home State and FSLIC-ins'.red institutions between 1978 and

1985. What ODGF and MSS!C ficms faced was a shift of the focus of federally
insured institutions' future competition from implicit deposit rates (i.e., service
and merchandise premiums) to explicit deposit rates.
      It is important to recognize that weaknesses in insurers' information systems
are design defects and not acts of God. Authorities showa propensity to keep
 themselves uiderinformed that suggests an intention of maintaining a deniability

option.
      If a system of market-value reporting had been in place and examiner ratings
 were public information, other fund members would have felt strong economic
 pressure to help with the pref allure monitoring of troubled clients. State officials
 could have determined far more quickly and more simply which of their member
 institutions were strong enough to survive without a sizeable government bailout.
 The determination would have been simpler because the primary task would have

 become to detect the presence or absence of fraudulent or flawed appraisals. This

 could have been accomplished by checking each firm's records on a sampling basis.

 Solvent firms whose appraisals checked out and those whose estimated irregular-

 ities did not exhaust the institution's capital could have been reopened promptly.
                                                                                  13



In this way, customers and managers of strong, well-managed firms could have
been spared considerable suffering and examiner and regulatory resources could

have been concentrated on weak and badly managed institutions. As things were,
with book values based on historical cost, meaningful balance sheets for each
institution had to be produced virtually from scratch.
     It is also important to note that, in the absence of state-based or federal
guarantees, the S&Ls in question would have had to release on a regular basis
information sufficient to convince potential depositors of their continuing sol-
vency. By assigning to state employees the task of examining in secret ODGF and

MSSIC institutions for insolvency, State officials reduced the natural interest of
depositors and other members of the state-based insurance pool in receiving timely

information on the financial condition and investment strategies of insured firms.

This effectively relieved deposit-institution managers of responsibility for comm-
unicating such information to their customers and cross-guarantors.

      Another way to see both the rationality of the March, 1985 rn on ODGF
institutions and the way that ODGF guarantees and confidential monitoring
reduced the quality of the information that insured S&Ls passed on to their depos-

itors and cross-guarantors is to look at the experience of the six completely
uninsured S&Ls that operated in Ohio at this time. To compete with government-
guaranteed firms, market discipline had long ago forced these firms to indicate
what their policies and financial condition were. One thrift (founded in 1895) had a

resolute and well-publicized policy of demanding 35 percent equity on its mortgage
loans, of never making a mortgage loan that was more than 15 years in initial
maturity, and of employing a number of other well-publicized safeguards. Con-
cerned and knowledgeable customers could clearly see that its cautious approach to

mortgage lending preserved the market value of its net worth. This institution was

able to gain deposits when state-insured institutions in other states were losing
them and when metal safes in which to store currency at home became impossible

to buy locally.
                                                                                 14



     It is important to recognize that, although they were created at the behest of
member institutions and operated outside of the civil service, each fund was a
unique creature of its state legislature.     Whenever a government-sponsored

insurance corporation parcels Out essential risk-management functions to govern-
ment employees, the electorate is going to hold politicians responsible to some
extent for any problems that ensue. This means that, no matter how long it took

Ohio and Maryland politicians to recognize it, the public perceived the credit of
the State to be backstopping OOGF and MSSIC resources.



     Regulators Suppress Information. In view of such perceptions, why do state

and federal politicians permit regulators to suppress information on the condition
of insured deposit institutions?    The short answer is that suppressing this
information shields elected politicians from timely criticism for poor monitoring
and regulatory performance. It also increases the credibility of politicians' att-
empts to deny responsibility for any mistakes that do emerge and leaves them
asymmetrically free to bring forward information on whatever regulatory successes

their regulatory agents may have achieved. In effect, restricting the flow of
relevant information lessens market pressure on politicians and regulators and
creates rents for them to share.

      A longer answer is that it is a mistake to regard the recognition and action
lags, featured in the profession's standard model of dynamic policymaking (Kareken

and Solow, l%3) as exogenous variables. For those charged with operating an

incentive-incompatible deposit-insurance scheme, the recognition lag is lengthened
by psychological propensities to deny painful facts and by natural as well as
artificial blockages in the flow of information about the extent and consequences
of client riskiness. A further danger is that, by the time the need for corrective
 action is recognized, the implicit losses the insurer has experienced may have
                                                                                  15



become large relative to its reserves. The larger a fund's hidden economic
insolvency, the more a public acknowledgement of this insolvency threatens to
damage the careers of incumbent politicians and regulators. Large insolvencies
dispose officials to adopt "best case planning." This means they elect to postpone
effective action until the occurrence of an unrealistically "convenient" event which

would have the capacity to replenish fund and client resources.

     The idea that regulators' and politicians' careers would be damaged merely by

alerting taxpayers to the insolvency is enshrined in the ancient practice of killing
any messenger who brings bad news. The length of the odds against having their

deception revealed by an exogenous meltdown during their watch tempts regulators
and politicians to gamble on making a clean getaway. However, the probability
that officials' getaway will be aborted — as well as the size of the hidden economic

losses eperienced by the insurance fund -- increase at an increasing rate the
longer the coverup is kept in place. Because transactions costs that decapitalized

institutions incur in making the endgamne financial plays that exploit an incentive-

incompatible insurance fund are small, the speed with which hidden losses develop

is subject to an acceleration that is absent from incentive-incompatible bureau-
cratic arrangements in the real sector. Whereas neglected physical capital (such as

priceless marble monuments) decay at a fairly slow and steady pace, a benignly

neglected deposit-insurance insolvency accelerates rapidly.

      At any premeltdown date, each ODGF, MSSIC, and FSLIC regulatory gamble
may be modelled as a dichotomous decision to coverup or not. To underscore the
source of incentives to sacrifice the public interest, we assume a wholly self-
interested and myopic (i.e., single-period) concern for maximizing the human
capital of incumbent politicians and bureaucrats. (Myopia would follow from self-
interest to the extent that one's career is not damaged by poor previous
performance that does not reveal itself until after a new job has been secured.) We

distinguish three states of the world: a clean getaway, an exogenous fund
                                                                                            16


meltdown, and a truth-telling reform scenario. The value of officials' human
capital in these states is designated as VCG, VM, and VR, respectively. We assume

that VM and VR are conditioned on, and fall with, the extent of the fund's hidden

insolvency and that VCG>Vg)VM. Finally, we let p represent the probability that a
coverup will sicceed.
      A bureaucracy that sought only to maximize the expected value of incumbent

officials' human capital would follow a policy of forbearance and coverup as long
as:

      pvcG+O_p)VM> VR.                  (I)

Whenever           is    substantially further below VCG than                    lies above
VM and the probability of a dean getaway remains                               high,   it   is

tailikely   that        trsaupulously         self-interested   and   myopic      regulators

would ever choose truthful reform. To illustrate the argument by
numerical example, we may set:

      VCG "R = 3VM.
Criterion (1) now specializes to:

      PVCG + (l-p) (1/3 VCG) ? 1/2 VCG.               (2)

In this case, not tntil the probability of a clean getaway fell below 1/4, would
truth-telling and reform be selected.
      The straightforwardness of incentives for officials to lie should lead one to

wonder why official misrepresentations of the conditions of ODGF, MSSIC, and
FSLIC were so long accepted at face value by watchdog institutions such as the
popular press. Part of the answer lies in the high costs and low expected payoffs to

investing in information extraction. Sticking one's neck Out can hurt one's career

prospects if an accuser fails to uncover a 'smoking gun". It is dangerous to
undertake a fishing expedition 'that challenges the conventional presumption that

high-ranking public servants are predominantly (and extraordinarily) ethical, altru-

istic, and far-sighted individuals.
                                                                                    17


     One of the ways in which this conventional presumption can be reinforced
without invalidating the model just laid out is by insured institutions and lower-
level officials selectively degrading the information about the size of hidden losses

that flows to higher officials. Cultivating ignorance about the true state of affairs
gives top officials a deniability option that makes it easier for them to scapegoat
subordinates when and if a meltdown occurs. Deposition testimony given in ODGF

litigation shows that, in the last months before the meltdown, the ODSL super-
intendent sought to inform the governor about the ODGF's worsening state, but
that he deliberately chose to do this through channels rather than calling or writing

the governor directly.
                 Ill. Chronology of ODGF Crisis and Its Resolution

      Figure 1 shows that the ODGF promised to ensure member deposits in full.

The seal posted by its clients prominently featured the word "Ohio" and a
silhouette of the State.

     Table 4 provides a rough chronology of salient events in the development and

resolution of the ODGF crisis. This chronology identifies six stages to the crisis
and its aftermath. Evidence of political and regulatory gambling is extensive. Once

ESM's insolvency surfaced publicly, ESM, Home State, and the ODGF fell like a line

of dominoes. Events support the view that the failure of the ODGF was a failure
not of private enterprise, but of government regulation —a failure whose resolution
was made more difficult by inadequacies in the ODGF information and regulatory-

response system. Contr&y to one popularly held view, federal policies of financial
deregulation played at best a peripheral role in bringing about the failures of either
ESM, Home State, or the ODGF.

     IV. Six-Stage Chronology of MSSIC's Crisis and Resolution.

     Table 5 is organized to show that the MSSIC case traverses the same six
stages observed in Ohio. During a long loss-generation and regulatory-forbearance

stage, a few large clients adopted high-flying investment strategies: in this case,
placing furmds raised by offering high deposit interest rates into a series of
                                                                                     IS


aggressive acquisition, development, and construction loans. Losses imposed by this

strategy on the insurance fund were aggravated in several cases by corrupt activity

by sometimes-desperate managers of economically insolvent member firms. MSSIC

and State officials proved slow to face up to the growing economic insolvency of

their fund, preferring to back the go-for-broke gambles being made by their
troubled clients rather than to take the politically tough actions necessary to bring

joint risk-taking under control.
      The second stage developed when doubts about the insurance fund's re-
payment capacity and unfavorable publicity about individual firms occasioned a set

of slow depositor runs. These runs eventually flowered into a fund meltdown when

these runs were accelerated by a spectacular loss (e.g., in a failed securities firm)

and breaking scandals. This acceleration forced authorities to dose a particularly
insolvent firm without at the same time being able to resolve the distribution of
accrued losses.

      Once the previously hidden insolvency of the insurance fund had been
revealed in this way, three prolonged and partly overlapping stages ensued. First,
the extent and terms of a politically optimal depositor bailout had to be worked
out. This amounts to deciding the amount and distribution of taxpayer's contri-
bution to ameliorating the losses suffered by aggrieved and politically activated
depositors. Second, triage had to be performed to determine which of the 102
members of the fund could resume normal operations and when to allow them to do

so. Finally, as an aftermath to the other stages, the legal system was asked to
identify scapegoats, to punish guilty parties, and to force full or partial restitution
of expenditures or commitments the State made for the benefit of MSSIC
depositors.
                  V. Myopic Assessments of the Benefits and Costs of
                            Restricting Information Flows
      These dsronologies are consistent with at least six generalizations, most of
                                                                                  19


which illuminate FSLIC's problems. First, economic insolvencies at thrift insti-
tutions and at deposit insurers seldom develop overnight and often involve
regulatory failure, wild speculation, and managerial fraud. For example, ESM was
insolvent de facto for at least six years and engaged in questionable transactions
from its very inception. Second, weaknesses in an insurer's information, moni-

toring, and regulatory-response system cloak dishonesty and create opportunities
that tempt even honest managers of economically insolvent firms to speculate
more and more boldly the longer a de facto insolvency persists. Third, when
information on the unsafe and isound practices of individual firms is uncovered by
private accountants and government investigators, it does not flow freely to other

regulatory entities or to managers and depositors of firms sharing a common
insurer. Fourth, once an insolvency is discovered, top regulators and elected
politicians as short-termers have career-oriented incentives to deny and cover up

the insolvency. The Costs of deferring the distribution of insolvency losses may be

hidden from taxpayers for at least several years and the blame for the problem
may even be shifted to representatives of the rival political party, while con-
fronting the insolvency directly could "unfairly" damage politicians' and bureau-
crats' professional reputations and re-employability in the private sector. Fifth,
lack of information on the market values of troubled institutions' individual assets
and liabilities makes depositor runs a rational response to bad news and tends to

prolong any insolvency crisis by complicating and delaying regulatory efforts to
measure the size of net-worth shortfalls. Sixth, once the size of an insurer's
insolvency has been determined, aggrieved depositors become a potent political
force (see Bowyer, Thompson, and Srinivasan, 1986). Political forces unleashed by
the process of negotiating the distribution of insurer losses across different dasses

of taxpayers have a tendency to impose especially heavy burdens on surviving close

competitors of the insolvent entities.
      While all six points deserve study, the first two are treated extensively in
other sources (e.g., in Benston et at., 1986 and Kane, 1985) and the third is an
                                                                                    20


obvious consequence of bureaucratic competition between State and federal
agencies and of opportunities for managers to corrupt individual accountants and
investigators. The last three points receive primary emphasis here.
      Restricting the flow of information on insed institutions' earnings and
financial condition has the benefit for agency heads and for politicians of insulating
them to a large extent from timely outside criticism of their performance as
regulators. Voters can't knock what they can't see. This insulation increases public

servants' personal autonomy, their immediate opportunities for reappointment or
reelection, and their current value to potential outside employers. Having an
option to understate the number and extent of troubled firms permits regulators
and politicians to defer taking either responsibility or corrective action, if not
indefinitely, at least until a politically or economically more convenient time. This
option is valuable for two reasons. First, managers and stockholders pf insolvent
firms may be willing to pay a high price in political contributions for authorities to
overlook their insolvent condition. Second, on average, the explicit compensation
of top government officials is inferior to what they could command in the private
sector. Presumably, government service offers sufficient implicit compensatipn to
overcome this differential. In the short run, the option of concealing a developing

problem may be used to increase implicit compensation by simplifying the jobs of
individual regulators and politicians and by cosmetically enhancing their current
reputations and immediate economic and political prospects by making their
efforts appear far more successful to outside observers than they truly are.

      Delayed insolvency resolution generates financial and political costs. Avail-

able evidence indicates that continually delaying the treatment of insolvency
 problems over long periods of time is bound to increase the discounted present
 value of the amount of insolvency observed (Barth, Brumbaugh, Sauerhaft, and

 Wang, 1986; Kane, 1987). Whether recognized fully or not, the political cost of
                                                                                   and
 having government regulators shape deposit institutions' information system
                                                                                    21


carry out their monitoring functions in secret is that the public is led to hold
politicians and regulators at least partly responsible for whatever de j insol-
vencies emerge. When a massive insolvency is observed, victimized depositors are

bound to view weaknesses in the informational system and ineffective monitoring
by public servants as governmental failures for which they should be recompensed.

No flatter how carefully formal arrangements may limit the government's de
obligations, the governments de facto responsibility for overseeing the solvency of

insured institutions imposes on government officials a conjectural obligation to
make good the bulk of the losses that de            insolvencies threaten to visit on

individual depositors.
     The frequency of legislative and executive elections and the rapid turnover of

agency heads makes it reasonable for regulators and politicians to accept a more
myopic tradeoff of clear and immediate benefits for distant and highly uncertain

penalties than the representative taxpayer might be expected to prefer. Authori-
ties must discount potential bailout costs not only for their futurity but also for the
probability that these costs may accrue largely to rival    politicians or to the
successors of current officials (who may well belong to a rival party) rather than to
themselves. This second round of discounting makes myopic officials all the more

myopic.
               VI. The Rationality of Runs in the Face of Politically
                             Managed Information Flows



      During the two months of political jockeying that followed the shutdown of the

ODGF, Home State depositors who had not bothered to participate in the run

objected vociferously to being labeled 'unsophisticated." Spokespersons for these
depositors claimed that their only mistake was "to believe politicians' assurances
that their money was safe." Whether or not such misplaced trust can be dassified
as an archetypical form     of naivet'e, it is clear that financially sophisticated
depositors recognized that State authorities made assurances that went beyond
                                                                                 22


their knowledge base.

     Although accounting data available in March 1985 could not tell State
officials how massively Home State and the ODGF were economically solvent,
Table 2 shows that the kind of information on file at the ODSL suggested that
these entities were at the time deeply under water. As highly leveraged long
lenders and short borrowers, many S&Ls found that the run-up in interest rates
observed since 1965 had long since wiped Out the economic value of firm-
contributed capital. For years, the continued viability of these firms depended
entirely on the credibility of deposit-insurance guarantees. In turn, the value of
these guarantees did not rest on the accumulated reserves of state and federal

deposit-insurance agencies. At all deposit-insurance agencies, reserves had fallen
below the value of the unrealized losses that a careful analyst would assess to be

potential claims against these reserves. Rather, the value of these guarantees
depended on the conjecture that, in a crisiS, incumbent politicians (no matter what
their party affiliations happened to be) would invariably find it in their joint
interest to recapitalize insolvent deposit-insurance funds.
      During the run on Home State and its immediate aftermath, the applicability
 of this rational conjecture was undermined (albeit temporarily) in several ways.
 First, anyone familiar with the information system that State regulators had to
 work with recognized that the Governor's assurances as to the solvency of Home

 State and the adequacy of ODGF reserves dearly exceeded his capacity to know.
 This raised doubts about his veracity and his financial acumen. Second, his
 political ties to Home State's chief executive officer raised the possibility that
 conflicts of interest might be douding his judgment. Third and most important,
 partly because of partisan skirmishing, the Governor and legislature simultaneously
 refused to backstop ODGF losses in the Home State failure and contributed only
 $50 million of State funds to a successor fund that was being asked to guarantee
                                                                                        23


almost $4 billion in deposits at the 70 surviving S&Ls. Depositors of economically

insolvent former ODGF member firms saw these actions as an attempt to get the
Ohio taxpayer off the hook for unrealized losses at their firms, too. Even though
engaging in a run on these institutions Cost a depositor the sure time and trouble of

standing in line and establishing new depository connections, doing so would Cut off
his (or her) exposure to losses from this unexpected turn in State financial policy.

4et returns to an individual from running would grow with the size of his deposit

balance and with his perception of the size of the unrecorded insolvency at his
State-insured S&L. For all depositors, the incentive to withdraw deposit balances
became stronger as state politicians tried to pass the buck.

      In contrast to calling a banking holiday, the accepted way to stop a run is to
keep an institution's offices open and to convince people in line and those
contemplating joining them that the firm or its guarantor is able and willing to
meet their demands. When a series of deposit institutions are simultaneously

threatened by insolvency, the governments first job parallels that of the triage
performed by medical off icers in combat situations. It needs to decide formally
and in a credible manner which should close and which can safely remain open. In

implementing an indefinite banking holiday, Ohio officials underscored their
inability to distinguish solvent institutions from insolvent ones. At the same time,
they made it harder for the stronger ODGF institutions to maintain the confidence

of their depositors or, by opening their books, to gain support from outside lenders.
     The loss of confidence spread to other state's deposit-insurance systems. In

Massachusetts and Pennsylvania, for example, institutions insured by state-spon-
sored corporations came under pressure from March on.              It is particularly
instructive to contrast the regulatory approaches followed in North Carolina and
Maryland. In North Carolina, a well-capitalized and well-run private deposit-
insurance corporation acted to strengthen its system while implementing a plan to
phase itself out of the business in an orderly manner. It urged its clients to apply

for federal coverage immediately. In Maryland, authorities followed a completely
                                                                                    24



opposite tine of action, claiming that for the Maryland legislature to prepare
publidy for a run would undermine faith in the Maryland system and generate more

trouble than it would save. In May 1985, Maryland found itself limiting with-
drawals at state-insured institutions when it experienced a similar insolvency at
the second—largest institution in its state-sponsored insurance system. North
Carolina avoided the systemic problems Maryland experienced.             This can be

attributed in part to the unwillingness of Maryland authorities to swallow the
unpleasant medicine of producing reliable information and shoring up its troubled

insurance fund in timely fashion.
      Rumors that a deposit institution or its insurer are insolvent are hard to
refute when reliable information on their current financial conditions simply does

not exist. In the short term, authorities can most reliably maintain confidence not

by mindlessly denying and covering up the insolvency, but by demonstrating their
willingness to back up the troubled entity. The more likely it is that politicians
wiil fail to cover the losses of any class of depositor in full and in short order, the
more sensible it is for depositors in that class to move their funds when credible

flows of adverse information occur and/or depositor runs develop. If the troubled
 entity either turns Out to be solvent or is bailed out with public funds, cx-
 depositors lose only the time and trouble of switching their business to a new firm.

 However, if an institution they could leave is eventually closed on disadvantageous

 terms, continuing depositors' percentage exposure to losses increases with every
 dollar of deposits that succeeds in leaving the firm before its demise becomes

 official.
                        VII. The Distribution of Bailout Costs
       Resolving the Home State insolvency cost Ohio and federal taxpayers in two

 ways. First, the State legislature committedOliio taxpayers to kick in whatever part of

 the $120 million promised to Hunter Savings as compensation for acquiring Home
                                                                                  25


States institutional corpse proves not recoverable from court awards and nego-.
tiated settlements. Federal taxpayers share in this burden to the extent that
affected taxpayers subsequently deduct incremental expenses and taxes from their

federal tax bill. Second, in five ways explained in the last part of this section,
taxpayers have had to pay the freight for recapitalizing the weakest of the S&Ls
formerly insured by ODGF and MSSIC.

      Because it was made essentially in cash, the first dsarge is easy to value.
What is hard to assess is the extent to which these Costs will ultimately be
recovered as a result of legal settlements, the extent to which incremental burdens
were shifted to federal taxpayers, and the extent to which Hunter Savings' winning

bid was implicitly underwritten by federal taxpayers through FSLIC guarantees of
Hunter itself. (Parallel issues arise in the .Steubenville, DeGraf, and Valleywood
deals.)

      Neither type of assessment is attempted here. The rest of this section seeks

instead to identify the Conceptual components of the implicit costs of recapital-
izing surviving S&Ls.
      One element of this cost may be identified with the time that various
depositors of surviving ODGF and MSSIC institutions were unable to withdraw
deposits freely. At least some of these depositors and some of the parties with
which they wished to do business suffered costly disruptions in their affairs.
Moreover, firms that were on the verge of closing anyway gained the right to keep
interest-rate bets on the table and, with the depositors of insolvent institutions,
were able to develop additional political leverage on State legislators. The
consequences of these further plays and disruptions must be counted as part of the
cost of managing the ODGF and MSSLC failures.

      A second element Consists of a reduction in the value of customer relation-

ships at surviving institutions. The holiday and withdrawal limitations are bound to
have alienated some depositors and to have persuaded others at least to diversify
                                                                                  26


their deposit balances over a wider class of institutions and deposit insurers. This
damage is also time-related, in that for solvent firms a speedy determination of
the viability of member firms and a policy of timely triage using some form of

modified depositor payoff would have lessened losses of this type.
      The third element (which developed only in Ohio) consists of the cx ante Cost

to Ohio taxpayers of transferring to FSLIC future liability for guaranteeing the
deposits of reopened S&Ls. Although hard to evaluate, the present value of the
interim contingent indemnifications the State promised the FSLIC through :June 30,

 1987 on the almost-$3.8 billion in deposits whose guarantees FSLIC took over was

appreciable. The risk associated with this gamble cannot be ignored just because
the State won its bet. Given the average extent of these firms' de facto
undercapitalization and the volatility of the economic environment, it is doubtful
 that these contingent commitments could have been sold in the open market for

 less than 1 to 3 percent of the amount guaranteed. This implies an additional cost

 to Ohio taxpayers of between $38 and $112 million.
       The fourth cost of bailing Out the ODGF and MSSIC is subtle and much
 smaller. This component consists of the capitalized value of the speed-up in entry

 privileges that Ohio and Maryland politicians sold to out-of-state acquirers of
 moribund firms. (In October 1985, the Ohio legislature voted to open the state to
 interstate banldng on October 1988.) The entry fees that Ohio and Maryland
 politicians collected from the likes of Chase Manhattan and Ahmanson came out of

 the hides of local banl and S&Ls. This is because they may be seen to have owned

 all "beneficial" interests in the entry barriers whose conditional lifting was
 conveyed. One does not have to favor such barriers to recognize that local trade
 associations had won and maintained them by investments in lobbying and other

  forms of political activity.    Moreover, state officials may have sold these
  privileges too theaply. Putting regulatory privileges on the auction block for
                                                                                  27


distress sale is not a good way to maximize the price at which they are sold.

     The fifth and final cost belongs entirely to federal taxpayers. It Consists of
massive Federal Reserve and Federal Home Loan Bank System efforts to keep the

survivors open during the lxelneltdown period and to assist surviving firms to
transfer speedily to FSLIC insurance after the meltdown occurred. These Costs
consist of below-market lending, an enormous reallocation of federal examination

efforts, and (although FSLIC officials appear to have tightened rather than bent

their qualification standards) lighter-than-market capital requirements that FSLIC
sets in qualifying clients.
                VIII. Lessons for Players in the Parallel Federal Game

      What lessons should different parties learn from these crises. As a way of
summarizing the previous analysis, this section lists the major players in what is a

continuing and multilayered gane of federal deposit-insurance "chicken" and the
lessons they might draw from the ODGF and MSSIC debacles.

Politicians and Regulators. Politicians and regulators should learn at least four
lessons. First, the absence of comprehensive market-value reports (even in the
form of information that is held in confidence and not made available to the
marketplace) encourages individual insolvencies and makes them hard to unwind

promptly in cases where de facto insolvencies become public knowledge. Second,

in the face of widespread economic insolvency and the increasing perfection of
financial markets, differences in the party affiliation of the executive and
legislative majority (as we have in Washington today) encourage political efforts to
slip financially off the hook for uwealized deposit-institution losses that threaten

to sulect undercapitalized deposit-insurance agencies to the pressure of client
runs. Third, when the dust settles, the regulatory bureaus that are held responsible

for an observed crisis lose clients and administrative resources.          Similarly,
politicians and parties who can be made to appear responsible suffer some
                                                                                     23


disruption. For Ohio and Maryland governors, political punishments can be inferred.

Both governors experienced a subsequent collapse of campaigns for nomination to
federal office. Fourth, half-baked efforts to stop an incipient run can easily make
matters worse. In the face of a run, governmental assurances of an institutions
solvency that are not backed by reliable information can undermine confidence in

the government      itself, as can inadequate efforts            to   recapitalize    a

threatened insurer. The $50 million injection of State funds the Ohio legislature
first voted was so small as to insult the intelligence of most depositors. Sophis-
ticated depositors saw that the mandated S&L "contribution" of $40 million
provided no net increase in resources to the threatened firms so that, in pretending

to create a $9 million fund, State legislators were being less than forthright. $90
million was probably too little anyway. Surviving S&Ls had to write off about $76
million in capital in the ODGF shutdown. It would have been safer to establish a
fund whose aggregate size or reserve ratio equalled that of the prefailure ODGF.
This would have required at least $120 million in State funds. Given existing
surpluses in state income-tax collections and in the lottery, an appropriation of this
size could have been handled as a commitment (i.e., as a contingent liability)
without too much pain.
      Politicians and regulators need to recognize that what transformed pre-
existing structural imbalances into a full-fledged crisis was not the insolvency of
Home State Savings, but the absence of reliable and comprehensive information on

the condition of other ODGF-insured S&Ls and authorities failure to enunciate in
 timely fashion a credible policy for resolving the fallout of further insolvency
 generated by Home State.
      Unlike the Governors of Ohio and Maryland, federal politicians have not been
 made to face up to the need to protect federal taxpayers from the secularly
 increasing costs of FDIC and FSLIC guarantees. As long as federal guarantees are
                                                                                   29


underpi-iced and unreported, risk-taking at federally insured institutions will grow.
Unless meaningful deposit-insurance reform      is undertaken, bureaucratic break-

downs similar to those Ohio and Maryland experienced will occur eventually in the

federal system. Regulators and politicians need to think through the problems such

a breakdown could create and set up mechanisms to deal with them.

      If faced with a series of official S&L insolvencies that exhaust FSLIC's liquid
resources, a politically attractive solution that has the look of a contingency plan

is for Congress to merge FSLIC into the FDIC. Given the solvency problems that
the FDIC fund already faces on its own and the great diffei-ece in their corporate
cultures, I believe that merging the two funds in the midst of a crisis in confidence

might prove a recipe for disaster. Once one allows realistically for the contingent
liability for potential FDIC assistance to actual and potential problem banks, the
net reserves of the FDIC shrink to no more than a few billion dollars. Unless
Congress and taxpayers are prepared to pledge unlimited amounts of crisis aid, the

only effective alternatives are to recapitalize the federal insurance funds (perhaps

most easily by putting both insurance funds on to the books of the U.S. Treasury)

and to rationalize their information systems before a bureaucratic breakdown

actually occurs.



Taxpayers (Including Well-Capitalized Deposit Institutions). Appropriate lessons
for federal taxpayers are equally harsh. Incompletely financed and imperfectly
monitored implicit subsidies to financial risk-bearing are currently hidden in the
operations of government producers of financial regulatory services in the U.S. and

other free-market countries (Benston et a]., 1986; Kane, 1985). Reductions in
regulatory burdens that can be affected by aggressive financial firms are typically

generated by shifting real costs surreptitiously onto various taxpayers. Most
important of these hidden costs are unintended subsidies that flow from the

 improper pricing of explicit and implicit government financial guarantees. Con-
 coaling these subsidies from taxpayers makes their long-run effects destabilizing in
                                                                                   30


that disinformation policies make it hard for taxpayers to fill the disciplinary role
that stockholders and creditors play in a private firm.

     The ability of powerful groups to extract government subsidies nay be
deeried to be part and parcel of the American system ol free enterprise. No one
should suppose that improving the flow of information about financial regulatory
performance can end subsidies all together. A more reasonable goal is merely to
make the production of selective subsidies more painful to the agents who benefit

from their creation. The ODGF, MSSIC, and FSLIC cases provide evidence that a

strong sense of shame usderlies the subsidy-production process. In each case, givers

and receivers of subsidies have devoted considerable energy to packaging their
dealings in forms that prove hard to see and hard to measure even when seen.
Perhaps because the need to obtain public esteem and approval is particularly great

for those who seek political office, preserving at least the appearance of a public
servant's personal honor and integrity appears to be an important goal, one that
raniG above merely winning reelection or holding on to an agency job. A better-
informed electorate might or might not force the prompt dismissal of regulatory
rascals from their jobs. Nevertheless, the chance to engage in a post-goverrunent

cx post settling up forms an important part of the implicit compensation earned by
top government officials. Requiring authorities to provide appropriate evidence of
how well public responsibilities are being handled would lessen the salaries that

poor regulators could command in post-government employment.
      Designing financial regulatory structures that work with rather than against
efficient client adaptation provides the best chance of achieving society's long-run

regulatory goals. First and foremost, this means preventing regulators and regula-
tees from continuing to distort the flow of information by which taxpayers assess
their performance and finances.

      The initial mswi1lingness of state authorities to back the ODGF and MSSIC
reflects their closeness to taxpayers.       State politicians recognize that state
                                                                                  31



taxpayers didn't want to be riskbearers of last resort. However, at federal level,
taxpayer obligations are more diffuse. The Cost of FDIC and FSIIC guarantees has

not yet become a pressing political issue.

     The first lesson for taxpayers to learn is that contingent government
guarantees are not costless.     This can be brought Out fl cartoon fashion by
picturing Ohio politicians as marrying insolvent ODGF institutions en masse to

FSLIC and various institutional acquirers while ODGF depositors cheer and bound

and gagged taxpayers and Ohio banks grimace in pain. To bring deposit-insurance
costs back under control, the market value of each insurance fund's contingent
guarantees should be reported regularly in ways that taxpayers can understand and

monitor.
      The second lesson is that, when the burden of bearing unrealized losses is
finally distributed, some taxpayers are bound to be hit harder than others. The
most exposed taxpayers figure to be surviving close competitors of the types of
institutions whose losses actually bring down the system. Firms of the same
institutional type as hose who fail must expect to face higher post-failure
insurance fees, while they and other close competitors will watch legislators and
regulators sell off hard-earned regulatory privileges to entrants from outside the

industry. To preserve their capital and markets in the long run, economically
solvent institutions would be well-advised to separate themselves from the rest of

the industry and to lobby for meaningful deposit-insurance reform.
      It is important to note that in part healthy ODGF and MSSIC institutions
contributed to their own victimization. First, they acquiesced in the defective
information and monitoring systems that allowed other members' insolvencies to be

hidden from public view. Second, in the face of the risk signal sent out by these
members' high deposit rates, it is hard to believe that all of them could have failed
                                                                                  32



to learn of their competitors' developing problems. To some extent, they engaged
in ostrich-like acts of looking away from unpleasant evidence. Particularly in Ohio
where ODGF firms were members of an insurance pool that required them to
guarantee one another's liabilities, they faced incentives to monitor one another
and to press for timely resolution of developing insolvencies. In the absence of an

adequate State regulatory response to their whistle blowing, solvent institutions
might have petitioned to switch their insurance to the FSLIC or (even better) the
FDIC. In addition, well before any run actually began, ODGF firms might have
established a continuing borrowing agreement with the Cleveland Fed as authorized

by the 1980 Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act. Table

6 summarizes the limited extent to which the nation's 4,000-plus thrift institutions

have used the Fed's discount window since it was opened to them in 1980.



Depositors. The principal lesson for depositors is that insured deposits are not

necessarily riskiess, even when they are issued by an apparently well-capitalized
firm. During the Ohio banking holiday, depositors at economically solvent ODGF
firms were held hostage to the interests of Ohio taxpayers and economically insol-

vent members of the ODGF insurance pool. To cope with deposit risk, depositors
may want to diversify their funds across insurers and to demand information from

their bank or savings institution that can let the more sophisticated among them

assess for themselves what constitutes an adequate risk premium on the deposits

they hold. Whenever a government insurer's finances look rocky, it is reasonable to

treat its strongest clients as if sooner or later they are going to have to bear a
portion of the Costs of recapitalizing their insurer.
Figure   L.
                                   TABLE 1
                      STATE-BASED ENTITIES THAT OFFERED
            DEPOSIT INSURANCE TO THRIFT INSTITUTIONS IN LATE 1984

                          Now Technically Insolvent

Fund Name                    Date of Crisis               Rouah Estimate of
                                                             Deficiency
Industrial Bank Savings       September 1987              $35 million
Guaranty Corporation
               -
(Colorado)

Maryland Savings-Share        May 1985                     $350 million
Insurance Corporation

Ohio Deposit Guarantee Fund March 1985                     $150 million

Utah Industrial Loan          July 1986                   $2 million in
Guaranty Corporation                                      reserves covering
                                                          $109 million in
                                                          deposits    in   firms
                                                          whose    net     asset
                                                          values are uncertain.

                     Fully Divested Now of Thrift Clientg
Georgia Credit Union                        All 11 S&L members sought and
Insurance Corporation                       obtained federal insurance
 -
                                            after Ohio and Maryland crises.
                           Ijindine Down Operations
                                                    Nature of Decision
California Thrift                              April 1984 failure of Western
Guaranty Corporation                           Conmiunity Money Center led to a
                                               July 1985 state law requiring
                                               members to obtain federal insu-
                                               rance by June 30, 1989.

Financial Institutions                         FIAC management response to Ohio
Assurance Corporation                          and Maryland crises. The last
(North Carolina)                               remaining    client  expects   to
                                               qualify for federal     insurance
                                               in mid-1988.

Iowa Thrift Guaranty                           1986 state law phased out insu-
Corporation                                    rance as existing CDs mature.
                           Operations Now Limited
                                           Nature of Liettations Introduced
Pennsylvania Savings                       After Ohio and Maryland crises.
Association Insurance                      PSAIC board placed a $5 million
Corporation (created 1979)                 cap on size of firm it would
                                           insure. On Sept. 1987. cap was
                                           raised to $20 million and a 7.
                                           percent net-worth requirement
                                           instituted. On April 1. 1988,
                                           PSAICs 54 members had $129
                                           million in deposits.

Massachusetts Cooperative                  Now limits members deposit
Central Fund                               coverage to balances in
                                           excess of federal coverage
                                           ceiling

Massachusetts Mutual                       Nov limits members deposit
Savings Central Fund                       coverage to balances in excess of
                                           federal coverage ceiling

Source: Adapt.d from Saulsbury (1987) by telephone calls to authorities
        in particular states.
                                      Table 2

  Reported Size of Home State Savings, at Selected Dates during 1979-1985
                                    (in $   million)
Date        Total       Scheduled     Net    Imbedded Losses                 Other
            Assets       Items        Worth on Selected                      Rorrowed
                                                Govt. & Agency               Money
                                                Securities

6-30-79       286                      11.7                                    65.1*
12-31-79      279            5.2       12.5                                    39.8

6-30-80       535.1         17.1       13.0                                   232.4
12-31-80      548.1          7.0       13.7                                   209.5

6-30-81       579.3         11.5       14.2            22.1                   198.5
12-31-81      617.7         10.3       13.1                                   148.3

&-30-82        560.2        12.9       11.9            31.1                    83.8
12-31-82.      562.1        14.1       16.3                                    86.0

6-30-83      1,101.2        19.6       17.0                                   607.3
9-30-83      1,146.2                   16.3            46.5 (some hedging)    614.9
12-31-83 1,146.9                       15.8                                   610.0

3-3i-84      1,148.4                   16.2                                   589.0
6-30-84      1,101.2                   17.2                                   561.2
9-30-84      1,420.2                   20.1                                   755.3
12-31-84 1,438                         19.7                                   713.2

2-28-85      1,424.5                   20.5                                   685.7
4-30-85        626                      6.2

Source: 1979 through 6-30-83 figures and imbedded losses for 9-30-83 taken
        from ODSL examination reports, given in Appendix to OJSC testimony
        of Sylvester Hentschel. Later figures comes from Monthly Reports
        filed with the ODSL.

           *This amount is in excess of allowable "additional borrowing"
           underregulations in effect at this time.

ij: The statutory net worth requirement was 3 percent either of current
       deposits or of the 5-year average of deposits.
                              ADDENDUM TO TABLE 2

             TICKING TIME BOMB MEMO FILED ON HOME STATE SAVINGS
                       BY ODSL EXAMINER IN EARLY 1983

     I have deliberately retained the working copy of this examination
report several days past the mandatory five-day deadline because it is my
understanding that the new Superintendent will not formally assume his
duties in the office until the end of the second week in February.

     I respectfully submit that the new Superintendent should be alerted to
the veritable time-bomb that is ticking away in this association. Briefly
stated, the problems can be summarized in the following two sentences. In
June 1982 the association borrowed $84 million for one year from a small
investment firm called E.S.M. Government Securities, Inc. located in Fort
Lauderdale. Florida. As collateral for this borrowed money, the association
assigned   to E.S.M. 'a control various types of securities which the
association had bought for $209 million.

    As stated in my examination report of July 10, 1982, should E.S.M. be
unable for any reason to redeliver the securities in June 1983, the
association will be confronted with a loss of $l2 million. If that happens.
the association's savings depositors will be required to bear a considerable
portion of the loss. The association's net worth is less than $12 million
and the total assets of the Ohio Deposit Guarantee Fund, of which the
association is a member, are only about $65 million. The association does
not have FSLIC insurance.

     An association's loss exposure in transactions
                                        -       -
                                                    of this type should
never exceed its net worth.

     In   view of former Superintendent Wideman's perfunctory letter
transmitting this.report to the association. I would appreciate receiving a
copy of the board of directors' response when it is received.

February 8, 1983                       Sylvester F. Hentschel
                                  Table 3

     Comparison of Weighted-Average Explicit Deposit Interest Rates at
Home State Savings and FSLIC-Insured Savings Institutions at Selected Dates,
                                  1978-85
                           (in percent per annum)


A. Calendar-Year Figures, 1978-1982
                     Home             FSLIC-Insured
     Year                             Institutions
     1978             7.2                  6.52
     1979             8.1                    7.31
     1980            10.1                   8.69
     1981 HI         11.7                   100S
          H2         13.3                   11.34
     1982            11.4                   11.03

B. Monthly-Average Figures at ODSL Reporting Dates, 1980-1985
                     Home          -
                                      FSLIC-Insured
                                      Institutions
     6-30-80       - 10.5                  9.05
     6-30-81         12.1                 10.74
     6-30-82         13.0                 11.22
     9-30-83         10.4                  9.40
     4-30-85          9.8                  9.22

Sources: ODSL examination reports on Home State Savings given in the
         Appendix to the OJSC testimony of Sylvester Hentschel; figures for
         FSLIC-insured   institutions   are   from   '82 Savines and Loan
         Sourcebook and '85 and '86 Spvins Institution Sourcebook.
                                 TABLE 4
                 CHRONOLOGY OF ODCF CRISIS AND RESOLUTION

1. Loss Generation and Regulatory Forbearance: ESM and Home State Savings
     1975: ESM incorporated; announced strategy is to make sophisticated
          financial plays via repurchase agreements.
     Late 1976: U.S     Comptroller of the Currency finds apparent fraud at
          ESM. Forces a Florida bank to unwind its dealings with it. Report
          by Lou Frank calls ESM deals "sucker transactions." ESM put on a
          federal blacklist.
     1977-1981:   ESM under      investigation by SEC. Investigation is
          eventually dropped as too troublesome because the firm fought the
          agency so tenaciously.
     1979: Outside accountant at Alexander Grant & Co. learns of fictitious
          transactions. Accepts loans from an ESM official.
     July 22. 1980: Examination of Home State uncovers violation in extent
          of nondeposit borrowing underway (including reverse repos)
     Feb. 27. 1981: Federal Home Loan Bank of Chicago orders Unity Savings
          to cease and desist overcollateralized reverse repos with ESM.
     August 24.28, 1981: At a training seminar, ODSL examiners learn ESM has
          poor standing with FHL Bank of Chicago
     June 2. 1982: Home State concentration .of repo business with ESM
          clearly surfaces as an issue at Ohio regulatory agency. Called a
          "time bomb" in draft examination report in O*tober 1982 by
          Sylvester Hentschel. who assigns the firm the ODSL's lowest
           rating. According to the ODSL Manual of Examinations, "This rating
           is reserved for institutions with major and serious problems which
           management appears to be unable or unwilling to correct."
     Oct. .1982-Feb., 1985:    Examiners'    recormsendations  are   regularly
           overridden by the ODSL Superintendent, who sought' guidance through
           channels from higher authorities. Home State managers repeatedly
           promise to reduce their exposure to losses in ESM and find ways to
           renege on these promises. Table 2 shows the kind of information
           state regulators received between 1979 and 1985.
     January 28, 1985: Warner's personal balance-sheet position of $4.85
          million is closed out at ESM.
     March 4, 1985: ESM fails, $300 to $350 million short. Parallel to
          effect of Bevil, Bresler, and Schulman failure on Md. S&Ls.

2. The Failure of Home State Savings
     March 6-8, 1985: Home State has cumulative deposit outflow of more than
          $150 million.
     March 8. 1985: Home State signs borrowing agreement with Cleveland Fed
          and takes out first loan. Announces decision to leave offices
          closed on Saturday, March 9.
     March 9, 1985: An insolvency of roughly $165 mu, found in Home State.
          Governor appoints conservator, claims to assign 000F resources of
          roughly $134 mil. completely to Home State failure. Loss to other
          members of ODGF (who had carried their accumulated contributions
         to ODGF   resarvas     as capital) undermines their solvency This
         clarifies the peril of permitting claims on deposit insurers to
         count as client assets without requiring an offsetting entry for
         contingent liabilities.
    March 10, 1985: Governor rejects embryonic offer for Home State from
         First National Bank of Cincinnati and announces Home State .,il1
         not reopen on Monday.

3. Runs at Other ODGE Members
    March 11, 1985: Fed undertakes outreach program to assist surviving
         ODGF S&Ls to obtain borrowing documents.
    March 13. 1985: Governor and legislature establish new fund with $50
         mil. in state funds and a meaningless $40 mu, from ODCF S&Ls.
          Deposit outflows from four of the surviving ODGF S&Ls become
          heavy.
     March 14. 1985: Major runs occur at 6 ODGF institutions.

4. working Out the Terms of the ODGF Bailout
     Narch 15, 1985: Banking Holiday (Contrasts ironically with image of fun
          and celebration as in film title, Holiday On I.t). Governor pats
           himself on back for providing "strong leadership." Does not
           necessarily entail "cost-minimizing" leadership.
     March 15-17. 1985: State officials attempt to solicit bids for closed
          institutions from in-state and out-of-state bankers.
     March 19. 1985: Game of Chicken with Feds ends. FSLIC promises to speed
          processing of applications from former ODGF-insured S&Ls. However.
          it slowed things by imposing much hisher standards on these
          applicants than it required of its pre-existing clients.
     March 20. 1985 (early All): Legislature passes bill allowing openings
          with possibility of limiting customer withdrawals to $750 per
          month and authorizing indemnification of FSLIC for any loss
          incurred in ODCF S&Ls through July 1, 1987. Availability of Fed
          discount-window assistance to these firms is republicized by the
          Fed -


5. The Process of Reopening Viable ODCF Firms
     March 26, 1985: 18 of the S&Ls are fully open, with only Home State and
          a few others fully closed. Only 2 or 3 experience continuing lines
          of depositors seeking withdrawals.
     April 2, 1985: Out-of-state bid for Home State announced from Chemical.
          Deal said to require state to ante up at least $80 million.
     April 3, 1985: Announced deadline for counterbids from in-state insti-
          tutions. One received, but later withdrawn.
     April 8, 1985: 5 more institutions open fully, for a total of 39; most
          others remain partially open.
     April 11, 1985: Injunction handed down against using ODCF funds to
           assist Chemical Bank purchase of Home State.
      April 16, 1985: Chemical bid for Home State set at roughly $50 mil.
           ($21 mil. takeover premium plus $30 mil. in new capital);
         estimated $90-$129 all. in state funds required to keep depositors
         whole. (Request for state aid set at $125 all, after audit.)
    May 2, 1985: Ohio House passes $91 million appropriation.
    May 9, 1985: Ohio Senate passes $91 million bill. Issue moves to
         Conference Committee. Possibility of in-state bid from Transohio
         introduced in Senate bill.
    May 16, 1985: Conference committee reports out a $125 mu, depositor
         bailout bill.
    May 17. 1985: Senate deadlocks on Conference Committee bill at 16-16.
         (A cynic might interpret this as a way of advertising a vote for
         sale.)
    May 21. 1985: Bill passes Senate 11-16. Chase and Ahmanson takeovers of
         other weak S&Ls is finalized.
    May 29, 1985: P,merican Financial Corporation subsidiary Hunter S&L
         outbids Chemical by $5 all. Permits an in-state and non-cross-
         industry acquisition to occur. To some extent the $21 mu.
         takeover premium is financed by Hunter's piecemeal liquidation of
         acquired values and by FSLIC guarantees of Hunter. Hunter quickly
         sells off 2/3 of acquired branches to Ameritrust and First
         National Cincinnati Corp. for roughly $15 mu.
    June 14, 1985: Home State offices re-open under new names.
    June 30, 1985: Federal court orders liquidation of ESM Bankruptcy
         trustee reports a recovery of only $23 mu, from ESM assets.
    mid-December, 1985: Depositors of one institution (Valleywood Savings
         Association of Cincinnati) still face limitation on monthly
         withdrawals. Two institutions have nol yet reopened at all
         (located in Steubenville and DeGraf).
    Late Decembr, 1985: Closed ODCF institution in Steubenville reopens.
    January 12, 1986: Last of closed ODCF institutions, People Savings of
         DeGraf, opens as Midwest Savings.
    March 24, 1986: Valleyvood offices open under new ownership, ending the
         last instance of depositor inconvenience.

6. Post-Resolution Legal Efforts to Designate Scapegoats and Recover State
          Monies
     November 6, 1986: State of Ohio wins a $34 mil. settlement in federal
          court from ESM's former auditor.
     December 13, 1986: State grand jury indicts five Home State and ESM
          executives on felony charges.
     March 30. 1987: State court sentences Warner to 3-1/2 years in prison
          for unauthorized acts and orders him to pay $22 mu,           in
          restitution to the State. (Appeal is pending.)
    March 31, 1987: Former Home State President, Burton Bongard, is
          sentenced to 10 years in prison and ordered to pay $114 mil. in
          restitution.
    June 19, 1987: Jury in Michigan acquits Warner of Federal charges
          of conspiracy, wire fraud, and interstate movement of fraudulently
          obtained funds. Jury foreman describes Warner as a victim of fraud
          rather than a perpetrator.
     Sept.     3. 1987: State of Ohio settles pending civil suit in state court
             of claims against ESM's former auditor for $65 mu.
    April 15,       1988: State settles damage suit against Home State's
         auditors for $5.6 million, an amount less than the estimated cost
         of bringing the suit.
    July 7, 1988. Jury in Florida awards ESM trustee $22.6 million in civil
         damages from H. Warner on the grounds that he participated in the
         fraudulent purposes of ESM.

Sources: Newspaper and magazine accounts; Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland,
         1985 Annual Report; May-December, 1985 Hearings and Report of Ohio
         Joint Select Committee on Savings and Loans of the 116th Ohio
         Ceneral Assembly.
                                 TABLE 5
                   CHRONOLOGY OF MARYLAND SAVINGS-SHARE
                       INSURANCE CORPORATION CRISIS

I. Loss Generation and Regulatory Forbearance Stage

     November, 1962. Maryland Savings-Share Insurance Corporation (MSSIC)
         begins operations. Members required to have net worth equal to 4%
         of "free share accounts."

    March 24, 1976. MSSIC board adopts by-law providing that MSSIC's
        insurance limit for "each separate account" of any association
        could not exceed the FSLIC limit by more than $10,000. Prior to
        1976, coverage was determined by aggregating accounts with same
         owner   depositor, as FSLIC does.

    May 25. 1978. MSSIC letter to First Progressive states that, as an
        officer of First Progressive, Jeffrey    Levitt had diverted
         association funds to his own   use.
    July, 1981. MSSIC signs an "Insurance Agreement" with Old Court
         restricting its managers' freedom because the association's net
         worth had fallen below MSSIC's 3-percent trigger for such actions.

     Sometime in 1982. Using a MSSIC-approved $2.2 mu, loan from First
        'Progressive, Jeffrey Levitt and Allan Pearistein solidify their
         control of First Progressive, which was operating under a MSSIC
         Insurance Agreement.

     Sometime in 1983. old Court and Progressive embark on aggressive growth
         strategy, fueling rapid asset growth by offering high interest
         rates to depositors.

     May 6, 1983. Md. S&L Division examiners report numerous irregularities
         and violations of Division and MSSIC rules in connection with Old
         Court's program of high-risk lending.

     February,   1984.   MSSIC learns that First Progressive had made
         unauthorized investments with the approval of Levitt.

     April, 1984. Examination of Old Court shows continuing violations of
         MSSIC rules.

     April 23. 1984. Managerial obligations under the Insurance Agreement
         with Old Court are terminated after Old Court prepays           its
         subordinated debenture to MSSIC.

     May, 1984. MSSIC board discusses significant financial deterioration of
         First Progressive of Westminster, Md. and cites Old Court as
        responsib1e at least in part. -     Preliminary examination by the S&L
        Division reveals      very weak operational standards" at both
        institutions.

    August, 1984. MSSIC board notes that Old Court is growing rapidly by
        writing primarily large construction loans funded by jumbo CDs and
        exceeding agency's guidelines on the proportion of assets invested
        in such loans.

    August, 1984. MSSIC staff recommends that Board direct Old Court by
        letter to cease and desist from further construction and land loan
        commitments.

    November 1. 1984. Progressive is merged into old Court.

    December 12, 1984. MSSIC membership committee unanimously recommends
        that the Board issue a cease and desist order to Old Court.

2. Runs Begin and Regulatory Forbearance Continues

    January 20, 1985. 60 Minutes carries segment on insolvency of Nebraska
        guarantyfund. Generates subsequent unease among MSSIC depositors.

    February 27, 1985. NSSIC's Board resolves to subject Old Court to a
         cease and desist order and to require it to enter into an Operating
        Agreement. The cease and desist order is never issued and the
        Operating Agreement is not signed until April 23. 1985.

     March 8, 1985. Home State Savings Bank is closed, rendering the Ohio
         Deposit Guaranty Fund insolvent.

     March 16, 1985. MSSIC officials persuade administration o'fficials to
         force withdrawal of General Assembly House Bill 1609, requiring all
         102 MSSIC institutions to state in their ads that they are not
         backed by the full faith and credit of the state.

     March 22, 1985. MSSIC sends cease-and-desist letter to Merrit Board
         indicating criminal activity. Letter is not shared with Federal
         officials until May 2.

     March 25, 1985. Head of MSSIC circulates a reassuring memo to
         membership about MSSIC's reaction to the Ohio crisis.

     April 8, 1985. Bevill. Bresler & Schulman Asset Management Corp.
         closes, imposing losses on MSSIC's second-largest institution. $839
         mil. Old Court Savings and Loan, and on $370 mil. Merritt
         Commercial Savings and Loan. These institutions           proceed   to
         experience the first consumer runs of MSSIC crisis.
    April Il, 1985. Officials from Nd. Attorney Ceneral's office prepare
        memorandum mentioning difficulty in getting accurate information
        from state S&L division and MSSIC and recomeending Governor to have
        "face-to-face"   meetings to obtain facts. A third MSSIC S&L
        (Chesapeake) joins Chevy Chase S&L and Baltimore Country S&L in
        openly applying for FSLIC insurance.

    April 16, 1985. Federal officials alert Governor's staff to a "silent
        run" on MSSIC institutions of $375 mu, over the previous two
        months. Roughly $7 bil. still in MSSIC institutions.

    April 29. 1985. First of the "major crisis meetings" of Federal Reserve
        and FHLBB officials with Governor Hughes, his staff,          state
        regulators, and top state lawyers. Feds predict a      major run and
        describe some associations as at the "end of their     ropes," giving
        special attention to the sorry state of Old Court.     Officials from
        MSSIC and state S&L Division claim that installing     new CEO at Old
        Court "would take care of it."

    May 2. 1985. Second "crisis meeting." Federal officials are stunned to
        learn of previously withheld March 22 MSSIC letter. Conservatorship
        lawsuits considered for Old Court and Merritt.

    May 2-8, 1985. Old Court continues to solicit deposits via radio
        advertisements, stressing the "Old Court advantage" of high
        interest  rates,   despite Attorney Cenerals behind-the-scenes
        efforts to stop these ads as violations of the state's Consumer
        Protection Act.

    May 8, 1985. Third "crisis meeting," this time without Governor Hughes
        who was in Israel. Old Court management change decided upon and
        press release drafted.

    May 9, 1985. The Baltimore Sun run, story unfavorable to Old Court.
        Runs on Old Court offices accelerate. Criminal investigation into
        Merritt is formally announced.

    May 10, 1985. Merritt loses $3 million in deposits in a Saturday
        morning run.

3. Crisis Stage

     May 13, 1985. Old Court put into state-controlled conservatorship. New
         run begins at Merritt.

     Hay 14, 1985. Governor Hughes proclaims a state of public crisis and
         emergency and imposes a $1,000-per-month limit on depositor
         withdrawals at MSSIC institutions. Discloses to reporters that 20
         MSSIC institutions experienced a $630 mil. withdrawal over last few
        months and are now $370 tell,         in debt to Fed. Merritt put into
        conservatorship. About 350 federal examiners are reported to he
         looking through books of MSSIC members.

4. Preliminary Loss   Distribution
    May 17, 1985. Special Session of General Assembly meets to pass
         legislation (signed by Governor on May 18) holding harmless all
         depositors in MSSIC associations, requiring MSSIC institutions with
         at least $40 mu, in assets to obtain FSLIC coverage by Dec. 31
         (and smaller institutions to do so in two or four years), and
         authorizing the state to put equity into MSSIC institutions if
         necessary to help them qualify for FSLIC coverage. Largest MSSIC
         firm, $2.2 bul. Chevy Chase S&L, is conditionally approved for
         FSLIC   coverage.      Legislature   merges MSSIC into a successor
         corporation, the Maryland Deposit Insurance Fund (MDIF). MSSIC's
         $160 mu.        insurance fund and $80 mu, liquidity fund are
         transferred to MDIF.   which receives authority to issue up to $100
         mu, in general-obligation bonds. MDIF is to maintain depositor
         confidence while MSSIC institutions work out problems in qualifying
         for FSLIC insurance.

5. Reopening MSSIC. Survivors and Unwinding the Affairs of the Mortally
   Wounded.

     May 22, 1985. Governor amends his order to permit exemptions for
         mortgage payments, payroll costs, college tuition bills, medical
         care for the elderly, and settlement costs for home purchases.

         12 large MSSIC institutions have now received conditional approval
         for FSLIC coverage. 16 former MSSIC institutions that can't qualify
         for federal insurance (mostly because they open only a few hours a
         week) reopen under MDIF, with Frederick Dewberry as          acting
         director.

     June 7, 1985. Maryland Court gives permission to roll back interest on
         passbooks and on matured and maturing CDs at Old Coutt to 5.5%.
         Deposits frozen.

     July 28, 1985. President of Nd. Senate complains about FSLIC toughness
         in qualifying former MSSIC thrifts. Only 14 have received FSLIC
         coverage to date. Only these and 60 smaller institutions now
         covered by MDIF have had the $1,000 withdrawal limitation lifted.

     August 14, 1985 (approx). Community Savings and Loan (the 4th-largest
         of the former MSSIC firms) indicates that it must divest itself of
         real-estate syndication subsidiaries (including the spectacularly
         insolvent EPIC) as a precondition for obtaining FSLIC insurance.
    More than $120 intl. of Community's $440 intl.   in   assets prove to be
    funding EPIC losses.

August 19, 1985. Covernor freezes deposits at Community.

August 23. 1985. Melvin Brown appointed director of MDIF, which now
    backs 81 thrifts who have still not qualified for full federal
    insurance. (The other 21 MSSIC institutions have successfully
    switched to FSLIC and 18 more have received conditional approval.)

September 5, 1985. Community (which did not divest subs) is placed into
    conservatorshtp; deposit freeze is extended. EPIC begins filing
    bankruptcy papers.

October 18, 1985. Plan approved to unfreeze Old Court and Community
    deposits selectively for depositors undergoing Thardship.

November 1, 1985. Chase Manhattan Corp. opens 13-branch network in Md.
    acquired by taking over 3 troubled ex-MSSIC S&Ls          (Merritt,
    Friendship, and Chesapeake). This form of out-of-state entry is
    authorized by an October 28 law permitting conversion of crippled
    S&Ls into full-service banks.

November 8, 1985. MDIF obtains court permission to place Old Court into
    receivership, to begin liquidation and to stop accrual of depositor
    interest. $175 mil. loss is now estimated at Old Court, $120 mu.
    at Community.

November 12, 1985. Governor signs executive order tightening rules on
    conflicts of interest In fees and on insider loans at state-
    chartered S&LS and increasing state authority to place a violator
    into state-controlled receivership.

November 20, 1985. First Maryland placed into conservatorship.

December 16, 1985. Ridgeway S&L (Catonsville: $15 mu, in assets) is
    placed into conservatorship. MDIF is overseeing four crippl.ed
    thrifts, including Old Court.

January 9, 1986. I,oss estimates raised to $208 mu, at Old Court, $150
   mil. at Community, and $16 intl. at First Maryland. Governor
   outlines plan to liquidate Old Court and to stretch out period
   repayments of deposits through December, 1989.

late March, 1986. Community conservacorship is transformed into a
   receivership.

May 2, 1986. Federal bankruptcy judge approves EPIC reorganization
   calling for a 5-to-7-year sale of EPIC's 20,000 homes. This clears
        way for a complicated transaction, conveying Community to Mellon
        Bank of Pittsburgh. which converts it into a commercial bank.
        Federal Reserve Board approves this restructuring on May 8, 1986.

    June 26. 1986. First Maryland bacomas third ex-MSSIC institution placed
        into receivership. Liquidation      and   depositor-repayment   pLan
        eventually adopted parallels Old Court's.

    April 6,      1987. Maryland officials discuss a proposal to permit
        depositors of Old Court and First Maryland the option of redeeming
        their deposits (on which interest no longer accrues) at 85 to 90
        cents on the dollar rather than waiting for period payments
         scheduled through December, 1989.

6. Legal Efforts to Identify Scapegoats and Recover State Monies

    January 3, 1986. Levitt of Old Court is indicted on 25 counts of
         embezzlement and misappropriation of $14.6 mil. in connection with
         its failure.

    March 26. 1986. Former owner of Merritt, Gerald Klein, is indicated on
        40 criminal Counts.

     May 27.   1986.   Levitt pleads guilty to criminal charges.

     May 6, 1987. Alan Pearlsteiri is convicted on 4 counts of stealing from
         Old Court.

     May 12, 1987. Law firm that simultapeously advised MSSIC and some of
         its clients settles State's malpractice suit for $27 million.


Sources: Newspaper accounts and Renort on the Maryland Savinzs and Loan
Crisis to the Maryland General Assembly by Wilbur D. Preston, Jr., Special
Counsel, Jan. 8. 1986.
                                       TABLE 6

               THRIFT-INSTITUTION USE OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE
             DISCOUNT WINDOW BY CLASS OF INSTITUTION, 1980-1987


                            Federal          Mutual
                            Savings          Savings   Credit     Industrial
                                                       Unions     flg*
1980            1                                 -       --         --
1981           24              --                 9        2         --
1982           34              --                11        5         --
1983           19              --                 4        2         --

1984           26              --                 7       4          -.
1985           65              --                 7       4              5
1986           28                  8              5        2             4
1987            9                  8             17        9             4


Source: Telephone calls to Gary Cillam of Federal Reserve Board staff.

*Reporting categories added in 1985 and 1986.
                             REFERENCES

1. Barth, James R., R. Dan Brumbraugh, Jr., Daniel Sauerhaft, and
   George H.K. Wang, 1986. "Failure Costs of Government-
   Regulated Financial Firms: The Case of Thrift Institutions."
   Washington: Federal Home Loan Bank Board.
2. Benston, George, Robert Eisenbeis, Paul Horvitz, Edward Kane,
   and George Kaufman, 1986. Perspectives on Safe and Sound
   Banking: Past, Present, and Future, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
   Press.

3. Bowyer, Linda E., A. Frank Thompson, and Venkat Srinivasan,
   1986. "The Ohio Banking Crisis: A Lesson in Consumer Finance,"
   The Journal of Consumer Affairs, 20, pp. 290-299.

4. Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, 1986. "Unfoldings in Ohio."
    Annual Report 1985.

5. Kane, Edward 3., 1985. The Gathering Crisis in Federal Deposit
    Insurance. Cambridge: The MIT Press.

6. ________—, 1987a. "Who Should Learn What from the Failure
    and Delayed Bailout of the ODGF?' A Working Paper circulated
   in the Proceedings of a Conference on Bank Structure and
   Competition, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. p. 306-325.

7. ___________, l987b. "Dangers of Capital Forbearance: The Case
    of the FSLIC and 'Zombie' S&Ls." Contemporary Policy Issues, 5
   (Jan. 1987), pp. 77—83.

8. _____________, 1988. "Changing Incentives Facing Financial-
    Services Regulators," Paper prepared for Perspectives on Bank-
   ing Regulation Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.

9. Kareken, John, and Robert M. 5010w, l%3. "Lags in Monetary
   Policy" in Stabilization Policies. A volume prepared for the
   Commission on Money and Credit, Englewood Cliffs, pp. 14-96.
10.Saulsbury, Victor L., 1985. "The Current Status of Non-Federal
   Deposit Insurance Programs." Issues in Bank Regulation, 8
   (Spring), pp. 3-19.
11. ____________, 1987. "The Current Status of Private Insurance
   Funds and Their Membership." Regulatory Review (Septem-
   ber/October), pp. 21-24.
