NB ER WOREJ NO PA 'ER S

o

I

ES

TAX POLICIES FOR TIlE 19905:
PERSONAL SAVING, BUSINESS INVESTNENT, AND CORPORATE DEBT

Nartin Feldstein

Working Paper No. 2837

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONONIC RESEARCN
1050 Nassachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1989

Any opinions
This paper is part of NBER's research prograe in Taxation.
the National Bureau of
expressed are those of the author not those of
Economic Research.

Working Piper e28:37
Fnbrunry 1989

NB!:R

'lAX POLICIES POR THE 1990S:
PERSONAL SAy NC, BUS I NESS INVESTMENT, AN!) CORPORATE DEBT
ABSTRACT

Although

the tax reforms of the 1980s substantially lowered

the excess burden caused by high marginal tax rates, there were
also significant adverse effects on incentives to save and to
invest in business plant and equipment.
Effective tax rates

on.

real capital gains and real net

interest income remain very high because the tax rules do not
recognize the difference between real and nominal magnitudes.
These high effective tax rates discourage personal saving. The
paper discusses a number of ways in which the tax law could be
modified to encourage more saving and less borrowing.
Existing tax rules bias corporate decisions in favor of debt
finance relative to equity finance and in favor of investrents in
intangible assets (like advertising, consumer goodwill, and R and
D) relative to investments in plant and equipment. The paper

discusses the use of a cashflow corporate tax (with complete
expensing of investment and no deduction for interest payments)
as a way of remedying both of these biases in our current tax
law.

Martin Feldstein
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

Tax Policy for the 1990s:
Personal Saving. Business Investment, and Corporate Debt
Martin Feldstein*

The tax reforms of the l980s achieved a remarkable reduction
of personal income tax rates.

Cutting the marginal tax rate from

the 70 percent rate at the start of the decade to 28 percent on
the investment income of the highest income taxpayers reduced the
associated deadweight loss to less than one—sixth of its previous
level. Even the smaller reduction of the top marginal tax rate on
personal services income from 50 percent to 28 percent reduced
the associated deadweight loss by nearly three-fourths.
The restructuring of the personal income tax in the l980s is
testimony to the power of economic ideas.

Economists for decades

have emphasized the adverse effects of high marginal tax rates
and have advocated broader tax bases with lower marginal tax
rates. In the end, this key idea came to have widespread
bipartisan support in the Congress and in the Administration.
While it took strong political leaders to persuade the public of
the desirability of tax reform and imaginative staffs in the
Administration and in the Congress to invent the technical
gimmicks that made the final legislation acceptable to a
Congressional majority, the driving force behind the reform was
the basic economic insight that high marginal tax rates have
disproportionately large burdens.
*professor of Economics, Harvard University, and President of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper was prepared for
presentation at the annual meeting of the American Economic
Association, December 1988.

I.

Adverse Effects of the Tax Reform Act of 1986
As a result of political considerations, some provisions of

the Tax Reform Act of 1986 contain serious harmful effects of the
incentives to save and invest. Although the revenue effects of
reducting high marginal tax rates were balanced in part by
the
eliminating the opportunities for tax shelter investments and
left some
deductibility of net nonmortgage interest, that still
Even
high income taxpayers with substantial tax reductions.
could
though the total net revenue loss was relatively small and
all tax rates or
easily have been offset by a small increase in
other modifications of tax rules, there was strong political
pressure to provide middle and lower income taxpayers with even
larger proportional tax reductions than those received by high
income taxpayers.
include

a

The legislation was therefore expanded to

massive increase in personal exemptions, an increase

that cost approximately $25 billion a year in lost revenue with
almost no effect on marginal tax rates. To keep the overall tax
bill revenue neutral, this revenue loss had to be offset by an
tax
equally large increase in corporate taxes. This corporate
increase was achieved by eliminating the investment tax credit
and reducing depreciation allowances, changes that substantially
reduced the incentive to invest in business plant and equipment.
Even with the enlarged personal exemptions, the distribution
of the tax reductions appeared to favor higher income taxpayers.
This appearance was an illusion because the Treasury and the
not take the
Congressional Joint Committee on Taxation did

increased corporate tax into account in calculating the
distributional consequences of the legislation. Doing so would
have shown that the overall effect of the tax reform was to raise
the tax burden on higher income taxpayers (Feldstein,l988). The
tax bill was nevertheless modified to raise the tax burden of
higher income taxpayers by eliminating their IRA deductions,
capping pension contributions, imposing an extra tax on large
pension payouts, and, most importantly, by taxing realized
capital gains at the same tax rates as ordinary income.
Because capital gains realizations are very sensitive to tax
rates (Feldstein, Slenrod and Yitzhaki, 1980; Lindsey, 1987),
this last change may not in the end lead to any increased tax
collections from higher income taxpayers.

It will undoubtedly

have the adverse effects of reducing the incentive to invest in
equities, encouraging the corporate use of debt finance, and
decreasing the overall efficiency of the capital market.
Ironically, ignoring the actual increase in the tax burden on
upper income taxpayers that resulted from the rise in the
corporate tax led to an increase in the capital gains tax rate
that will have serious adverse effects on the economy without
necessarily raising the tax paid by those high income
individuals.
The tax reforms of the 1980s have succeeded in reducing
marginal tax rates and eliminating the personal tax shelters.
The tax reforms of the 1990s are likely to focus on improving the
taxation of capital income to increase saving, to improve the
3

the current
allocation of total capital formation and to reduce
incentive for excess use of corporate debt.

II.

Insufficient Saving
The United States has long had one of the lowest saving

rates in the world and a rate that falls far short of equating
the social rate of return on additional capital and the
to future
intertemporal discount rate that individuals apply
The low rate of saving means that
consumption (Feldstein, 1977).
a
the United States has a lower level of income and possibly
than would otherwise be
substantially lower rate of income growth
possible.
The already low rate of saving fell precipitously in the
1980s. During the decade of the 19705, the total net private
the saving of
saving rate in the United States, including
and state—local governments
households, businesses, pensions
half of 1988, that
averaged 8.9 percent of GNP. By the first
5.7 percent of CNP, lower than any
saving rate had fallen to only
of private saving is a
other major industrial nation. The decline
our chronically high budget
particularly serious problem because
3 percent
deficits still absorb private saving equal to more than
of

GP.

the only
The high effective tax rates on saving are not
the United States.
reason for the low rate of private saving in
rise in personal
Private saving fell in the l980s because of the
and home
wealth (resulting from the increae in stock prices
4

the

increased availability of home equity loans and
other forms of consumer credit, and the reduced number of
values)

,

underfunded private pensions.

But taxes are clearly an important

reason for our chronically low saving rate and one that can be
reversed by changes in policy. While some skeptics express doubts
about the potential effects of tax rules on private saving, the
research of a large number of careful scholars
[including Boskin
(1978), Summers (1981), and Venti and Wise (1987)] confirms that
personal saving does respond to changes in effective tax rates
and after—tax rates of return.
Despite the sharp reductions in statutory tax rates, the
effective tax rates on the return to saving remain very
high
because existing tax rules fail to distinguish real and nominal
rates of return. Consider a taxpayer who earns a 9
percent
nominal return on a bond and expects inflation to
average 5
percent during the life of the bond.
return is thus 4 percent.

His expected pretax real

If the taxpayer has a 28 percent

marginal federal income tax rate and a 5 percent state income tax
rate, he faces a combined marginal tax rate that takes one third
of his nominal 9 percent return. His after tax nominal rate of
return is therefore only 6 percent.

With

a

5 percent expected

inflation, the real after tax return is only 1 percent.
Thus taxes reduce the real return to 1 percent from 4
percent because the tax law does not correctly distinguish
between real interest income and the payments that just offset
the inflationary erosion of the debt.
5

Although the combined

33 percent, the
federal and state statutory rate is only
income is 75 percent.
effective tax rate on real interest
is substantially better than it was
Although the situation today
both
a few years ago when inflation and tax rates were
tax rules leave little incentive to
substantially higher, today's

save.
who invest their
The situation is no better for individuals
who bought a diversified
savings in common stock. Someone
Standard and Poor's 500 back in 1978
portfolio of stocks like the
An
has enjoyed one of the great bull markets of the century.
if sold today. Even
investment of $10,000 would bring $28,000
in consumer prices since 1978
allowing for the fact that the rise
what $10,000 would buy
means that it takes $18,250 to buy today
4.4 percent a year. Adding
in 1978, the real gain was $9,750 or
an S
this to the current 3.6 percent dividend yield implies
to compensate for risk and
percent pretax real return, enough
provide an incentive to save.
effect of taxes.
But that 8 percent return ignores the
between real and nominal
Since the tax law does not distinguish
who sold that portfolio in 1988 would
capital gains, the investor
33 percent combined
have to pay tax on an $18,000 gain. With a
would be $6,000 or 62
federal-state tax rate, the tax bill
The net-of—tax real rate of gain would
percent of the real gain.
with a current net—of—tax
be only 1.9 percent. Even when combined
return of 4.3 percent is
dividend yield of 2.4 percent, the total
for the risks of equity market
hardly enough to compensate
6

fluctuations, let alone to provide an incentive to save.

It is

not surprising that individuals have been net sellers of
corporate equities.
The failure to distinguish real and nominal interest also
reduces the net cost of mortgage borrowing and other consumer
debt. An individual who borrows at 12 percent faces a 7 percent
real cost of funds before tax but only a 3 percent net—of-tax
cost of funds.

The most obvious remedy for these defects in the tax
treatment of capital income is to adjust the measurement of
capital gains and of interest, including interest on consumer
borrowing and mortgage debt, to reflect the difference between
nominal and real interest rates. Administrative complexity and
the inability to adjust for inflation with complete precision do
not result in as much economic loss as a tax system that grossly
mismeasures real taxable income and dramatically reduces the net
incentive to save.

Moreover, if fully implemented, these

adjustments for inflation would actually increase total tax
revenue.
The current taxation of capital income would of course still
reduce the incentive to save even if real capital income and
expenses were measured perfectly.

A

consumption tax or consumed—

income tax that excluded all savings from the tax base would
eliminate this distortion. Although such a consumed—income tax
might be chosen over an ordinary income tax in the initial design

of a new national tax system, there are formidable problems of
7

tax.
transition from the existing system to a consumption based
tax
There are also substantial problems in a consumed—income
associated with the purchase of homes and major consumer
durables.
a
These difficulties may not be worth confronting since
the reduction in the tax
piecemeal approach can achieve much of
Retirement
distortion against saving. Because of the Individual

Accounts and private pension rules, most American taxpayers
tax rules for
already face the equivalent of consumed-income
itemize their
retirement saving. Moreover, most taxpayers do not
deductions and therefore cannot deduct any interest expenses.
tax
Further piecemeal progress toward a consumed—income
could include
framework and therefore a greater incentive to save
six changes from current tax law: (1) increasing the income
to keep up
limits for IRA eligibility and indexing those limits
with income growth in the future;

(2)

providing IRA-type tax

before
treatment for long—term deposits that are withdrawn
retirement age, thus appealing to younger households (3)
like
introducing IRA—type accounts for other special purposes
the
home purchase or educational finance; (4) phasing out
interest financed by
remaining interest deductions for consumer
home equity loans; (5) indexing the cost basis in calculating
a fraction of taxable
taxable capital gains; and (6) excluding
of the inflation
interest income and expenses based on the ratio
rate to the interest rate on government bonds.

III.

Misallocated Investment and Excessive Debt
The current system of taxing corporate income leads to a

misallocation of total investment and potentially destabilizing
levels of corporate debt.

Although the 1986 elimination of the

investment tax credit and decrease in depreciation allowances
were advocated as ways of "levelling the playing field" among
different types of business investments, the net effect of these
changes was to increase the tax bias against investments in
business plant and equipment in favor of investments in owner
occupied housing and in corporate intangible assets like
advertising, customer cjLdwill, manpower training, and research
and development that can be expensed at the time of investment.
This tax distortion leads to

a

misallocation of capital that

reduces the level of real income and the rate of economic growth.

Tax rules distort the composition of corporate finance
well as the composition of business investment.

a

For many years

economists were puzzled by the failure of corporations to respond
to the strong tax incentives to use debt and to substitute share
repurchases for dividend payments. Debt is a lower cost source of
finance because interest payments are deductible in calculating
taxable profits. Share repurchases involve a lower tax burden on
shareholders because the cost of the stock is subtracted in
calculating the taxable gain and, until recently, that gain was
taxed at lower rates than dividend income. In recent years,
practice has caught up with theory, helped in part by the new

financial technology of junk bonds and the favorable initial
experience of large leveraged buyout funds.
Now there is increasing concern that the tax distortion in
favor of debt is creating an excessive volume of LBOs and an
undesirably high level of debt. The Federal Reserve and others
have indicated concern that high debt levels that may be
privately optimal could cause substantial economy—wide problems
if high interest rates or a severe recession caused widespread
defaults.

While it is difficult to assess these risks, there is

no doubt that the current tax rules provide a strong bias in
favor of debt finance.
The concern about excessive debt has recently led to
proposals to limit the deduction of interest by highly leveraged
corporations or on debt assumed in LBO transactions. There are
clear practical difficulties in distinguishing LBO5 from the
ordinary acquisitions that are a constant part of corporate
growth. Attempts to restrict interest deductibility is likely to
transfer borrowing to companies that currently have low debt—
equity ratios or to foreign companies. In the end, such
restrictions are unlikely to limit the substitution of share
repurchases for dividends and will do little or nothing to reduce
overall debt finance.
One way to reduce the existing tax bias in favor of debt and
the incentive for LBO share repurchases would be to replace the
current corporate income tax with a cash—flow corporate income
tax. The cash—flow corporate tax would also eliminate the tax
10

bias that currently exists against investment in plant and
equipment relative to outlays on advertising and other forms of
"intangible capital" and to investments in owner—occupied
housing.
The cash—flow corporate income tax can be implemented by two
changes from the current corporate income tax: eliminating the
deductibility of interest expenses (thus treating them like
dividends) and permitting an immediate write-off of all
investments in plant and equipment (thus treating such
investments like all other business costs). As King (1988) notes,
eliminating the deductibility of interest expenses is equivalent
to continuing the interest deduction but including net borrowing
as a taxable receipt. This establishes that the cash-flow
corporate income tax is equivalent to taxing the difference
between all cash receipts (other than from the sale of new
equity) and all cash payments (other than the payment of
dividends).
Because outlays on plant and equipment are expensed under a
cash flow corporate tax in the same way as outlays for
advertising, training and other current costs, the bias against
investments in fixed capital is eliminated. The cash-flow
corporate income tax simultaneously solves the problems of
misallocated corporate investment and excess corporate debt. The
revenue loss from periniting all investment to be expenses would
be balanced by eliminating the deductibility of interest; any
remaining revenue difference could be made up by a small change
11

inthe corporate tax rate.
:IV

Conclusion
The new administration has the opportunity to focus on tax

reform aimed at strengthening capital formation.

If they are

siccessful, the United States will have a higher level of saving,
more investment in plant and equipment, and less reliance on
corporate debt.

12

References
Boskia, Michael, "Taxation, Saving and the Rate of Interest,'
Journal of Political Economy, 1978.
Feldstein, Martin, "Does the U.S. Save Too Little?," American
Economic Review, February 1977,

Feldstein,

.

Martin, "Imputing Corporate Tax Liabilities to

Individual Taxpayers," National Tax Journal, March 1988
Feldstein, Martin, (with Joel Siemrod and Shlomo Yitzhaki),
"The Effects of Taxation on the Selling of Corporate Stock
and the Realization of Capital Gains," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 1980.
King, Mervyn, "The Cash Flow Corporate Income Tax," The Effects
of Taxation on Capital Accumulation, NBER, University of
Chicago Press, 1987.
Lindsey, Lawrence B., "Capital Gains Rages, Realizations, and
Revenues," The Effects of Taxation on Capital Accumu'ation,
NBER, University of Chicago Press, 1987.
Summers, Lawrence, "Capital Taxation and Accumulation in a Life
Cycle Growth Model," American Economic Review, 1981.
Venti, Stephen and David Wise, "IRAs and Savings," The Effects of
Taxation on Capital Accumulation, NBER, University of
Chicago Press, 1987.

13

