NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CASE AGAINST TRYING TO STABILIZE THE DOLLAR

Martin Feldatein

Working Paper No. 2838

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1989

This paper is part of NBER's research program in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER Working paper #2838
February 1989
THE CASE AGAINST TRYING TO STABILIZE THE DOLLAR
ABSTRACT

Better domestic economic policies in the 15 years since the collapse
of the Bretton Woods system would have prevented the extreme fluctuations
of the dollar's exchange value during those years.

The pursuit of policies

here and abroad that are appropriate for dbmestic growth in the future
should reduce the likelihood of such substantial exchange rate swings in
the years ahead.

But elevating exchange rate stability to a separate

goal of economic policy could have serious adverse consequences.

Trying

to achieve that goal would mesn diverting monetary and fiscal policies from
their customary roles and thereby, risking excessive inflation and unemploy-

ment and inadequate cspital formation.

Succeeding

in the efforts to achieve

dollar stability would mean harmful distortions in the balance of trade and
in the international

flow of capital.

Martin Feldstein
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

The Case Against Trying to Stabilize the Dollar
Martin Feldstein

It is easy to understand why dollar stability has widespread
political appeal.

To businessmen, a fluctuating dollar means an

uncertain competitive environment.

Relatively small exchange

rate fluctuations can eliminate previously profitable markets at
home and abroad.

To consumers, a declining dollar can mean

inflation and a lower standard of living.

And looking beyond

economic self—interest, there is an atavistic nationalism that
confuses the dollar and the flag,

incorrectly regarding

a

strong

dollar as a measure of national virtue and a declining dollar as
an indication of national weakness.
Despite the popular support for the notion of a stable
dollar, the analysis summarized in this short paper implies that
a stable dollar, if it could be achieved, would prevent desirable
adjustments and induce unwarranted ones.

The process of trying

to stabilize the dollar would require diverting monetary and
fiscal policies from their customary goals and thereby create

more inflation, more unemployment, or an inferior rate of capital
formation than would otherwise be possible.
*Professor of Economics, Harvard University, and President of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper was prepared for
presentation at the annual meetings of the American Economic
Association, December 1988.

2

There is, of course, nothing wrong with dollar stability if
it happens to come about as a by—product of otherwise appropriate
economic policies. That is not the issue that economists have in
mind when they argue against trying to stabilize the dollar. The
real issue is whether a stable exchange value of the dollar
should be a separate target of economic policy and, to the extent
in order to
necessary, other policy goals should be sacrificed
achieve dollar stability.
The appropriate exchange rate policy depends on the country
and its economic circumstances. A small country within Europe
that tiades a major share of its GNP with its neighbors may find
it appropriate to fix its exchange rate relative to its major
trading partners even though that requires sacrificing the
independence of its monetary policy and accepting German economic
a
hegemony. Alternatively, even without important trade links,
country may choose to tie its currency to that of a low inflation
country in order to achieve a monetary discipline and credibility
that would not otherwise be possible. In considering the
appropriate policy toward the dollar, it is important to
that
recognize that U.S. trade is only 10 to 15 percent of GNP,
we can control our inflation rate through our own domestic
monetary policy without an exchange rate anchor, and that the
United States will not permit our monetary policy to be made in
Frankfurt or Tokyo.
One final word of introduction is appropriate. Economists
who oppose pursuing policies to stabilize the dollar are

sometimes accused of favoring inflation or other destabilizing
domestic policies. It is easy to understand the source of this
misunderstanding. The major swings of the dollar during the 15
years since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system can be
traced primarily to the pursuit and subsequent corrections of
the
inappropriate monetary and budget policies: the inflation of
1970s followed by the anti-inflationary monetary policy at the
beginning of the 1980s; the surge in actual and projected budget
deficits in the early 1980s followed by a gradual decline in
actual and projected budget deficits after 1985 (see Feldstein,
l988a). But the case against making dollar stability a separate
goal of national economic policy should not be confused with
condoning bad economic policies. Am economist can be a firm
advocate of sound domestic policies while still rejecting the
notion of dollar stability as a separate goal of economic policy.

I.

Capital Markets, Goods Markets and Exchange Rates
Before looking at the consequences of trying to stabilize

the dollar by explicit policy manipulation, consider how exchange
rates naturally vary over time in response to supply and demand
conditions in financial markets and in the international markets
for goods and services.
Consider first the role of international capital markets.

At any time there exist in each country desired levels of saving
and investment corresponding to prevailing interest rates.
there were no opportunity to invest or borrow abroad, each

If

4
country's domestic interest rate would adjust to bring saving and
investment into balance.

With completely integrated world

capital markets, there would be a single world real interest rate
that balanced world—wide saving and investment while the
individual domestic saving and investment rates would in general

be unequal. In practice, capital markets are less than perfectly
integrated and real interest rates differ anong countries. It
nevertheless remains true that the saving rate in each country
will not in general be equal to the desired level of investment
at the interest rate prevailing in that country. If the desired
level of domestic saving exceeds domestic investment, there will
be a capital outflow; if desired saving is less than desired
investment, capital will flow into the country.1
Since the capital flow is by definition equal to the current
account balance which in turn is equal to the sum of the trade
balance plus net international investment income, changing the
capital flow in or out of the country requires a change in the
trade balance.

And since the trade balance is a function of the

exchange rate, the only way in which a sustained change in the
capital flow can be brought about is by

a

change in the exchange

rate.
Of course, conditions in the markets for goods and services
also affect the exchange rate.

Any shift in the supply or demand

for exports or imports (at given exchange rates) will alter the
exchange rate.

For example, if American consumers increase their

demand for foreign products at the existing dollar exchange rate

5

(because of a shift in tastes or an improvement in the relative
quality of foreign products or a reduction in their foreign
currency prices), the value of the dollar will fall in order to
maintain the initial level of the trade surplus or deficit and
therefore the initial level of the international capital flow.
Thus shifts in forces that influence the demand and supply of
goods and services alter the exchange rate in a way that is
directly linked to the equilibrium capital flow.
Since exchange rate changes play such a central role in
balancing the supply and demand in capital markets and in the
markets for goods and services, how can anyone believe that
exchange rates could remain constant? The textbook answer is that
exchange rate changes are not needed to achieve a capital flow
between two countries if the products of the two countries are
"perfect substitutes" (in the sense that the cross—price
elasticity of demand is infinite).

For example, an increased

desire to invest in one country would put Upward pressure oon its
local prices, thereby inducing an increase in net imports
sufficient to maintain the initial level of demand.

This

increase in imports automatically entails a capital inflow equal

to the desired increase in investment.
This "purchasing power parity" theory of fixed exchange
rates is good textbook economics but only holds if the traded
goods are perfect substitutes.

Experience shows repeatedly that

the demand elasticities of similar products produced in different
countries are far from infinite even over rather long periods of

6

time.

As the experience of the l980s confirms, imports end

exports are slow to respond to changes in relative prices and
therefore large departures of exchange rates from purchasing
power parity are required to achieve significant shifts in trade
balances, current account balances and capital flows.

With all of this as background,

I can now consider the

effects of trying to stabilize the dollar.

I will begin by

examining the effects of a stable dollar, if it could somehow be
achieved, on trade and capital flows.

I will then turn to the

effects of trying to stabilize the exchange rate.

II.

Adverse Effects of Artificial Dollar Stability
Although shifts in saving and investment and in the supply

and demand for internationally traded products night just happen
to keep the dollar stable, such a singular coincidence can be
ruled out as extremely unlikely.

In general, the dollar will

have to shift to achieve or maintain the desired net
international capital flow described in the previous section.
It is important in this context to distinguish real and
nominal exchange rates.

Changes in nominal exchange rates are

simply the changes in exchange rates quoted in the market, while
changes in real exchange rates are those changes adjusted for
differences in inflation rates between the home and foreign
countries.

Although it is of course the real exchange rates that

influence patterns of trade and therefore the associated capital
flows, popular discussions and official pronouncements do not

7

make the distinction and therefore implicitly discuss the
stabilization of nominal exchange rates.

(See Feldstein, l988b)

Whenever domestic inflation rates differ among countries the
nominal exchange rates must change just to maintain the initial
real exchange rates. The prices of tradable products in the
United States are currently increasing at about six percent a
is not
year while the corresponding price index in Japan
increasing at all.

Maintaining the real yen—dollar exchange rate

therefore requires the nominal dollar—yen exchange rate to
decline at a six percent annual rate. Failure of the nominal
dollar exchange rate to decline in this way would, all other
and a more
things equal, lead to an increasing U.S. trade deficit
rapid accumulation of debt to the rest of the world.
Shifts in the nominal exchange rate that maintain a constant
real exchange rate may provide nothing more than a first
approximation to the required shift in the dollar's value.

For

in 1988 that
example, the sharp increase in the world oil supply
caused a fall in the dollar price of oil during the past year was
of greatest help to those countries that are most dependent on
oil and for
imported oil. Thus Japan, which imports all of its
which oil imports are a large part of total imports, was
had to rise relative
particularly benefited. The yen therefore
to the dollar to prevent an increase in the Japanese trade
from
surplus and a resulting unwanted additional capital outflow
Japan.
In addition to the. shifts of the exchange rate that are

8

needed to balance differences in inflation rates and to offset
shifts in supply and demand in world product markets, the dollar
has to shift to permit changes in desired levels of domestic
saving and investment to be financed efficiently.

The most

obvious example of this in the 1980s was the dramatic decline in
the U.S. saving rate caused by the surge in the budget deficit.
Without an increased net capital inflow from the rest of the
world, the U.S. net investment in plant and equipment, housing
and inventories would have had to decline by approximately one
third.

In fact, the higher real U.S. interest rates attracted

capital from abroad, inducing a rise in the real value of the
dollar that caused an increased trade deficit that permitted the
increased net capital inflow,

Without the capital inflow, the

decline of U.S. saving would have caused a substantial
misallocation of worldwide investment with the productivity of
capital significantly higher in the U.S. than abroad. Although

the associated trade deficit had painful effects on some sectors
of the American economy,

the overall U.S. unemployment rate

declined and total GNP rose throughout the period of the
increasing trade deficit.

III.

Dangers of Trying to Stabilize the Dollar
Trying to stabilize the dollar requires diverting monetary

and fiscal policies from their traditional roles.

The result of

such policy distortion can be a substantial sacrifice of the
traditional goals of price stability, high employment and an

9
appropriate level of national capital accumulation.
Although currency market intervention is the most obvious
tool of exchange rate manipulation, it is also the least
effective.

Experience continues to confirm that "sterilized

intervention" (i.e., the buying and selling of foreign currencies
with offsetting changes in government debt to keep the total
money supply unchanged) has little or no effect on exchange rates
(Obstfeld, 1988) and that any such effect is likely to last for
only a few days or at most a few weeks.

Some research suggests

that even the modest impact of sterilized intervention exists
only because financial markets interpret exchange market
intervention as a "signal" that the government is prepared to
shift monetary or fiscal policy to achieve the desired currency
shift.
In contrast to the ineffectiveness of exchange market
intervention, changes in monetary policy can alter nominal
exchange rates in the long run and real exchange rates in the
nearer term.

Consider first the long term effects of monetary

policy on nominal exchange rates.

An increase in the U.S. money

supply eventually causes a corresponding rise in the U.S. price
level.

If the U.S. price level rises, a stable real exchange

rate requires a proportionate fall of the nominal value of the
dollar. This mechanism shows also how an expansionary monetary
policy that raises the U.S. domestic price level can stabilize

the nominal exchange rate when the real value of the dollar is

10
rising.
It is important to emphasize, however, that the effect of an
rate is only
expansionary monetary policy on the real exchange
transitory. An expansionary monetary policy can temporarily
lower the real interest rate, causing the value of the dollar to
decline.

Since the prices of goods and services increase only

with a lag, the initial nominal decline of the dollar is
temporarily a real decline as well.

Over time, however, the rise

in domestic prices matches the fall in the dollar.

There is a

nominal dollar decline but no change in the real value of the
In the long run, a shift in monetary policy can have
values.
only a monetary or nominal effect and cannot alter real
The experience in 1983 and 1984 illustrates the consequences

dollar.

of trying to use monetary policy to stabilize the nominal value
of the dollar when its real value is being increased by
fundamental real factors. At that time, increases in the current
and projected budget deficits were raising the dollar's real
value. The rising dollar induced substantial pressure on the U.S.
take steps
government from foreign as well as domestic sources to
to reverse the dollar's sharp rise. Although a contractionary
fiscal policy was widely advocated on the basis of domestic
the
policy consideration at the time and would also have reduced
dollar's value, no fiscal action was taken.

If the pressure had

succeeded in inducing the U.S. administration to stabilize the
dollar, the responsibility would have fallen to the Federal
a
Reserve. An expansion of the money supply would have produced

11
temporary reduction in the real exchange rate and a sustained
reduction of the nominal exchange rate. The
important point is
that after a temporary period the real
exchange rate that
influences trade would have been unaffected while the
progress of
the early l9BOs in reducing inflation would have been
reversed.
The futility and the danger of using
monetary policy to
stabilize the dollar is not just
hypothetical. In the spring of
1987 the Federal Reserve began a
policy of restricting the money
and
supply
raising interest rates in order to support the value
of the dollar.

The two percentage point rise in interest rates
was one of the factors that precipitated the October stock
market
crash. Had the Fed not then
abandoned
the
explicitly
goal of
supporting the dollar and allowed interest rates to decline, the
luuerican economy might well have slid into recession in 1988.
Although neither exchange market intervention nor monetary
policy can have a sustained effect on the real value of the
dollar, budget and tax policies could in principle be used to
stabilize the real value of the dollar over a sustained
period of
time. As the experience in the early l980s
demonstrated, fiscal
policies that reduce national saving raise real interest rates,
thereby increasing the attractiveness of dollar securities and
causing the dollar to rise.

The opposite is true when fiscal

policies increase the national saving rate.

But it is difficult to imagine circumstances in which the
gain from using fiscal policy to stabilize the dollar would
outweigh the losses from an otherwise inappropriate fiscal

12
policy.
of the

At the present time, for example, the continued decline
dollar could be delayed by fiscal actions that increase

the real interest rate on dollar securities.

But there are no

deficit or a
economists who advocate an increase in the budget
to stabilize
tax change that penalizes private saving in order
the dollar.
to
One final word about the harmful effects of trying
real exchange
stabilize the dollar. Although economists focus on
decisions within the
rates, official pronouncements and policy
in tens of nominal
group of 0—7 finance ministers are always
nominal interest rates
exchange rates. In a world in which
the promise of
differ because of differences in inflation rates,
In 1988
nominal exchange rate stability is itself destabilizing.
rates by
U.S. interest rates exceeded corresponding Japanese
in
about four percentage points, approximately the difference
the G-7
thflation rates, Portfolio investors who believed
would
assertions that the nominal dollar—yen exchange rate
nevertheless remain stable were induced to buy the higher
yielding dollar securities.

The result was a dollar increase of

and October
nearly 15 percent relative to the yen between January
trade deficit and the Japanese
despite the evidence that the U.S.
fell
trade surplus would remain very large unless the dollar
in
further. When the credibility of the G—7 forecast evaporated
level. The
November, the dollar fell back to its January
rates does not
counterproductive emphasis on nominal exchange
of the key 0-7
reflect a lack of understanding on the part

13
finance ministers, central bankers, and advisors but appears to
be dictated by the political character of official efforts at
exchange rate stabilization.

IV.

Conclusion
Better domestic economic policies in the 15 years since the

collapse of the Bretton Woods system would have prevented the
extreme fluctuations of the dollar's exchange value during those
years. The pursuit of good policies here and abroad in the future
should reduce the likelihood of such substantial exchange rate
swings in the years ahead.

But elevating exchange rate stability

to a separate goal of economic policy would have serious adverse
consequences.

Trying to achieve that goal would mean diverting

monetary and fiscal policies from their customary roles and
thereby risking excessive inflation and unemployment and
inadequate capital formation.

And succeeding in the effort to

achieve dollar stability would mean harmful distortions in the
balance of trade and in the international flow of capital.

14

FOOTNOTES
1. The degree of capital market integration appears to be

See
increasing over time but is still far from complete.
Feldstein and Bacchetta (1988).

2. The price indices used to convert nominal exchange rates to

real exchange rates provide only a very imperfect measure of the
changes in actual price competitiveness because of the
impossibility of adequately reflecting changes in quality and the
introduction of new products. These measurement problems raise
serious doubts about any attempt to calculate purchasing power
parity exchange rates.

15
REFERENCES

Feldstein, Martin (1988a), "Feldstein on the Dollar: Let

the

Market Decide," The Economist, December 5, 1988.

_________

(l988b),

"Redefining Dollar Stability," Wall Street

Journal, September 19, 1988.
Feldstein, Martin and Bachetta, Phillipe, "National Savings and
International Investment," in John Shoven and Douglas
Bernheim, eds., The Economics of Savings, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, (forthcoming).
Obstfeld, Maurice, "The Effectiveness of Foreign—Exchange
Intervention: Recent Experience," National Bureau of
Economic Research Conference on International Policy
Coordination and Exchange Rate Fluctuations, Kiawah Island,
South Carolina, October 27—29, 1988.

