                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      AUCTIONING U.S. IMPORT QUOTAS,
                FOREIGN RESPONSE, AND ALTERNATIVE POLICIES




                            Robert C. Feenstra




                          Working Paper No. 2839




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                February 1989




Many people have asaisted in obtaining the estimates for this study, and I
thank especially Cohn Carter, Irene Trela and Alan Webb. Financial aupport
from the National Science Foundation and U.S. Department of Labor is grate-
                                                                   in
fully acknowledged. This paper is part of NBER's research program
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #2839
                                             February 1989


                       AUCTIONING U.S. IMPORT
                                               QUOTAS,
                  FOREIGN RESPONSE, AND
                                        ALTERNATIVE POLICIES


                                      CT
        In   this paper we quantify the potentiairevenue availableto the U.S. from

auctioning import quotas, and the resultingdrop in foreign producer
                                                                   surplus
relativeto free trade. Previousestimates of auctionrevenueare in the
                                                                     range
of $3 7-5.15 billion for 1986or 1987. Using simulationresults from
                                                                   computable
 partialor general equilibrium models, we find that this revenue gain weuld be at
the expenseofa large drop in foreign producer
                                                    surplus. Ignoringtextiles and
apparel,the potentialauction revenueis $1 3-2.15 billion, and the
                                                                      foreign loss
Is $0.5-O.7 biflionrelative to free trade. One
                                               alternative to auction quotas is
a system oftariff-ratequotas, which are
                                          designed to keep supplier countries
welfareequal to that in free trade. We calculatethat the tariff-rate
                                                                    quotas
could raise $067-i.55 billion in revenue for the U.S. Whilethis
                                                                 amount is less
than availablethrough auction quotas,it could still fund a
                                                           significant program
of worker adjustment,and would mitigatethe
                                               foreign response.




                                          Robert Feeristra
                                          Department of Economics
                                          University of California
                                          Davis,   CA   95616
                Auctioning U.S. Import Quotas and Foreign Response

1.        Introduction

         The increased use of "voluntary" export restraints (yEAs) on international
trade, rather than tariffs, has allowed supplying nations to capture the quota

rents through higherprices       for their exports.   Recent policy proposals in the U.S.

have called for the auction of U.S. importquotas, or their conversion to tariffs,

allowing the U.S. government to obtain the auction or tariff revenues.1 Bergsten
et al (1987) estimate potential auction revenues from U.S. quotas on textiles

and apparel, steel, machine tools, sugar and dairy as $5.15 billion, while lower

estimates of $3.7-4.7 billion are provided by the Congressional Budget Office

(1987)    for 1987-89.    At a time of high budget deficits in the U.S., this potential

source    of revenue     has attracted Congressional and media attention.2 The

auction or conversion of U.S. import quotas is usually thought of as part of a

broader plan, whereby the revenue obtained could be used to encourage
relocation of workers out of protected industries, with the goal       of reducing and
eventually eliminating the protection (Hufbauer and Rosen, 1986; Lawrence
and Litan, 1986).3

          Advocates    of the auction   quotas recognize that there could be some

foreign response. For example, the Congressional Budget Office (1987, p. 2)
states:

          The revenue estimates assume that foreign governments do not
          alter their behavior in response to the change in the system of
          allocating quota rights. Foreign governments often are willing to
          enter into VERs with the United States because VERs allow them
          to allocate the higher profits on imports created by the quota to
          their own producers. Taxing these rents--by auctioning the quota
          rights--causes foreign suppliers to lose their profits. ...Unilateral
          import quotas [by the U.S.) could induce foreign retaliation in the
          form of restrictions to U.S. exports in other sectors, which would
           lower U.S. government revenues obtainable in those sectors.
                                                                                       2




Bergsten et al (1987, p. 145) argue that:
         the unilateral imposition of auction quotas could provoke GATT
      disputes and foster demands that the United States compensate
      the affected exporting countries or face the threat of retaliation
      against U.S. exports. In the most important cases, steel and If
      textiles and apparel, bilateral agreements would be violated.
      those agreements were subsequently abrogated by either party,
      new U.S. legislation would be necessary to impose the auction
      import quotas. Unless such action was coupled with firm
      commitments by the United States to liberalize its long standing
      quotas, the unilateral imposition of auction quotas in these cases
      could seriously compromise the ability of the United States to
      conclude new multilateral trade agreements.

Despite these concerns, neither    of the above   studies consider any methods to
                                                                    to liberalize
mitigate the reaction of trading partners, beyond a U.S. commitment
trade. Lawrence and Litan (1986, chapter 5) appear to be alone in proposing
actual compensation   to exporting   countries, using one-half      of auction   revenues

in the first three years and one-third of tariff revenues subsequently as
compensation.
       Whether or not the U.S. should be concerned about the position of its

trading partners undera system of auction quotas is open to debate. The
international order established after World War II, including the General
                                                                   of policies
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). generally precluded the use
which would harm trading partners except underspecificcircumstances. While

some believe that this international orderis now breaking down (see the
contributions   to Fneden and   Lake, 1987), it is still prudent   for the U.S. to
considerthe foreign response to auctions quota For goods which are imported
from Europe, the European response could involve retaliation.4 For other
countries, actions taken by the U.S. can affect their willingness to bargain in the
current Uruguay    Round of GAIT negotiations. Withthis perspective in mind, our

 paper makes two contributions. First, we shall quantify the loss in foreign
                                                                                           3



producer surplus due to auction quotas, relative to a free trade situation.
Second. we shall consider alternative policies that are designed to raise

revenue for the U.S. and reduce protection over time, but without harming

trading partners.
       In section   2 we present   a simple theoretical model of import quotas,

contrasting the cases where the U.S. is a "small" or "large" importer. Estimates
of the amount of auction revenues are reported in section 3, and the foreign

producer surplus losses are given in section 4. These figures are obtained from

computable partial or general equilibrium models. We find that possible foreign
losses due   to U.S.   quotas are surprisingly high: in textiles and sugar the drop in

foreign producer surplus due to quotas may equal or exceed the quota rents,
while in several other industries the producer surplus loss      is a large fraction of
the quota rents. These results indicate that auction quotas can impose a
substantial loss on U.S. trading partners relative to free trade. This leads us to
consider alternative policies in section 5: allowing above-quota imports at a
tariff which would diminish over time; or a system of tariff-rate quotas which
would implicitly compensate exporters for the trade restriction. We calculate

that tariff-quotas could raise $0.67-i.55 billion in revenue for the U.S., while

keeping imports     at their current   level and foreign welfare equal   to that in free
trade. Conclusions are given in section 6.


2.     Effects of lmoort Quotas

       The effects     of a U.S. import quota are shown in Figure     1. Consider first

the case where the U.S. is a "small" country, facing an infinitely elastic world
excess supply curve at P0 (ignore S for now). U.S. importdemand is D, and
imports of this good underfree trade are        M0. An import quota   of T raises the
U.S. price to P1, and the resulting quota rents are area A. If the quota is
                                                                                        4



voluntarily applied by the exporting countries then they earn the quota rents,
which is a windfall gain over tree trade. If instead the U.S. auctions the quota,

or applies a tariff of P1-P0, then it could obtain A as revenue.   In this case   the

exporters are not signiticantly better or worse oft than with free trade, since it is
assumed that they can divert the forgone U.S. sates elsewhere with a negligible

effect on the world price.

       Thus, while exporters lose the quota rents underthe auction scheme,

they are not substantially harmed relative to free trade. In this case it may welt
be that trading partners could be appeased by a U.S. commitment to lower

protection in the future, as suggested by Bergsten et al (1987). However, the
results are very different when the U.S. is treated as a iarge importer.

       Suppose now that the U.S. faces the world excess supplyS, where P0
and Mo still denote the free trade equilibrium. With a quota   ofvoluntanly
applied by exporters, the U.S. price risesto P1 while the supplyprice (marginal

cost) falls to P2. Supplying countries obtain quota rents of A+B but suffer a fall
in producersurplus of B+C. On net, the exporters are better off due to the

voluntary trade restraint if and only if area A exceeds the tilangle C, which
need not occur if the quota is sufficiently low. A switch to auction quotas means

that the U.S. obtains the revenue A+B, with the trading partners losing surplus

B+C relative to free trade. The outcome is the same as with a tariff     of (P1-P2)

applied by the U.S., which would be a beggar thy neighbor policy.

       Empirical studies     of trade policy commonly assume that the U.S. is a
"small" importer, facing fixed world prices. However, this may be simply an

assumption of convenience, since available evidence is thin. For example, the
annotated bibliography of price elasticities in intemational trade by Stern et al

(1976) devotes over 300 pages to demand, but only eight pages to supply.5
Estimates of export supply and import demand in a simultaneous equations
                                                                                           5


frameworkhave found upward sloping rather than horizontal supply curves.6
We shall rely on simulation results from computable general equilibrium (CGE)

and partial equilibrium (PE) models to determine the effect of U.S. trade policies

on foreign prices and welfare.
        In CGE models, a quota         M can   lead to lower marginal costs (moving

                                                                         In PE models, an
down    S) due to changing factor prices in exporting countnes.
estimate    of the elasticity   of S is used. In both cases, the effects of trade policy

can be calculated with multiple exporting and importing countries, and market

clearing in many goods. The studies we cite in section 4 show that U.S. trade

policy can have a significant effect on the supply price of its imports (i.e. on its
terms   of trade).   We should note, however, two limitations of the studies. First,

many    of the studies rely on the Armington        assumption, under which domestic
and imported varieties      of a good are treated as imperfect      substitutes in U.S.

demand. Several authors have argued that this assumption may exaggerate

the effects of trade policyon the terms of trade, and therefore overstate the
potential drop in foreign producer surplus due to a quota.7 Second. the studies
we use assume perfect competition. Recent literature has argued that the
effects of trade policy are sensitive to the market structure (see the contributions

to Krugman, 1986), while Krishna (1988) has analysed how potential auction

revenuesdependon the type of competition. Extending the topic of this paper
to imperfectcompetition         is an important   area for further research.



3        Revenue from U.S. Auction Quotas

         In Table 1 we show estimates of the revenue available from auctioning

existing U.S. import quotas. The estimates are obtained from two sources: the
Institute   for lntemational    Economics (lIE), reported by Bergsten     et al (1987,
Table 4.1); and the Congressional Budget Office (1987, Table 1). These studies
                                                                                              6



report auction revenue for the steel, textile and apparel, machine tools, sugar
and dairy industries, for the years 1986 or 1987. The figures in column         1   of

Table   1   are lower than those reported earlier by the lIE (see Bergsten et al,

1987, Table 3.3), because the earlier estimates of potential auction revenues

reflected quota rents going to covered           uncovered foreign suppliers.8 That

is, with an importquota or VER restricting sales from somecountries, the higher

U.S. price which results can be obtained by all supplying countries. We believe

this phenomenon is itself evidence that the U.S. should be treated as a large'

importer, since exporters not covered by a quota who obtain higher U.S. prices
must be moving up their supply (marginal cost) curves.9

         Remaining differences between the lIE and OBO estimates in Table                1   are

smali, and can be attributed to differing treatment of exchange rates and
estimatesof the tariff equivalent to quotas (see Bergsten et al, 1987, pp. 49-50).
The potential revenue of $3.7-5.15 billion represents the U.S. gain and foreign
loss from an auction, as compared to the current system whereby exporting

countries obtain the quota rents.10 However, we feel this monetary transfer is

not a good indication of the true foreign loss from an auction, since the quota
rents now earned abroad are         a windfall gain to foreign exporters. In the next

section we estimate the foreign loss relative to free trade, and in section 5

discuss policies to minimize this loss. (The remainder of Table 1 is discussed in

section 5).



4.       Foreign Producer. Surolus

         In Table 2 we report the loss in foreign producer surplus, relative to free

trade, from the auction of import quotas by the U.S. In the first column we show
the ratio Loss/Rent, which equals (B+C)/(A+B) in Figure        1. Note that   a value of

flj     for this ratio   means that exporting countries would gain as much from
                                                                                    7


quota rents due to a VER as they lose in producer surplus, and would therefore
be indifferent between the VER and free trade. However, a quota at the same

level which was auctioned would lead to a foreign loss relative to tree trade. In

column 2 of Table 2 we compute the $Loss by multiplying the Loss/Rent ratio

with the estimates of auction revenue from Table 1. This approach assumes

that auction quotas would only be applied against suppliers which are presently

covered by quotas.11 We also list in Table 2 the source study for calculating

Loss/Rent. Below we provide details on the studies       for each   industry, which use

either a computable general equilibrium (CGE) or a partial equilibrium (PE)
model.



Steel
        Tan' (1987) constructs a three-region PE model with exportsof steel from

Korea and other suppliercountries to the United States and European
Economic Community (EEC), calibrated to 1984. Using the "best estimates" of

parameters, the U.S. and EEC import quotas transfer$41.9 million in rents to
Korea, which obtains a net gain of $32.4 million relative to free trade.

Auctioning the U.S. and EEC quotas would therefore lead to a $41 .9-32.4

$9.5 million drop in Korean welfare compared with free trade, so Loss/Rent =
9.5/41.9   = 0.2. We assume that these estimates of the Loss/Rent ratio apply to
all count,ios constrained by the U.S. importquotas (i.e. to all the potential
auction revenue in Table 1) when calculating the range       of $Loss in Table 2.
Notethat Tan- also examines whetherthere are elasticity parameters which
would give Korea a net loss from the existing quotas (meaning that Loss/Rent>

1), but finds that these elasticities are implausible.
                                                                                      8



Textiles and Acoarel
       Trela and WhaUey (1988) construct a CGE model covering bilateral
                                                                       to the
quotas on exports of textiles and apparel from 34 developing countries
U.S., Canada and the EEC, calibrated to the mid-1980s. They find that the vast

majority   of supplying   countries would gain from the elimination of quotas,

despite the resulting loss in their quota rents. With their central parameters,

they find that the elimination   of import quotas into the U.S.,   Canada and the

EEC would give a gain of $4.8 billion to all supplying countries. While the same

experiment    is not performed for jjj1 the U.S., they report that eliminating quotas
    tariffs in the U.S. raises supplying countries welfare about one-half as much
as eliminating quotas and tariffs in the U.S., Canada and EEC. We conclude
that the U.S. import quotas yield a net loss for supplying countries of abo.t $2.4
billion, despite the quota rents they receive which are $2.9 billion in the study.
Auctioning the U.S. quotas would therefore lead to a $2.4 + 2.9 = $5.3 billion
                                                                        =
drop in supplier welfare compared with no import quotas, so Loss/Rent 5.3/2.9
= 1.8. The $Loss in Table 2 is calculated using the range of potential auction

revenuesin Table 2, resulting in a $4.3-$5.4 billion loss for developing
countries. These figures are large due to the restrictiveness of recent quotas:

previous estimates by Trela and Whalley using quotas from early 1980 showed
that only some of the supplyingcountries would gain from elimination of quotas.


Sugar
        Leu, Schmitz and Knutson (1987) construct       aPE model     of U.S. sugar

imports, allowing   for an upward sloping world excess     supply with elasticity 2.37.

Calibrating the model to 1983-84, they consider alternative estimates of the

quota price premium, reflecting shifting world supply. With quota premiums of
7 and 100 per raw pound they report quota rentsof $619 and $885 million,
                                                                                      9



respectively.12 For the data provided, the drop in foreign producer surplus in
these two cases is calculated as $681 and $702 million, so that Loss/Rent =

681/619 = 1.1 and 702/885 = 0.8, respectively. These figures show that the loss

in foreign producer surplus roughly equals the quota rents, so that supplying

countries are not gaining from existing quotas. As the authors note (p. 597):

interestingly, while countries holding sugar quotas once favored a restrictive
U.S. sugar policy which generated high quota rents, in lobbying activities

related   to the 1985 farm bill, they joined with sugar user and consumer groups
in support   of lower sugar price support as a means of maintaining a market for
sugar in the United States.




       Webb et al (1987) describe the effects of trade liberalization in a PE

world trade model with 8 regions and 13 agricultural commodities. A special

run of this model was performed to calculate the effects    of eliminating   U.S. price
supports and import quotas in dairy, for 1986.13 The simulations show an
increase in world prices   for cheese, butter and milk powder of   14%, 13% and

10%, respectively, with a reduction in U.S. domestic prices of 16.8%, 33% and
5.5%. Of these three products, imports   of cheese accountfor over 95% of total
import quantity. The simulations indicate a quota premium (diflerence between
initial U.S. and world prices) of 14 + 16.8   30.8% for cheese, and so the

change in world prices relative to the quota premium is 14/30.8 = 0.45. This is
an estimate   of (Po-P2)/(P1-P2) = B/(A+B) in Figure   1, and is therefore an

underestimate of the Loss/Rent = (B+C)/(A+B) ratio.

      Considering the overall results in Table 2, the Loss/Rent ratios show a
wide variation across industries. These ratios depend on the extent to which
U.S. imports affect world prices, and on the restrictiveness of existing quotas.
                                                                                       10



                                                                        relative
Summing across industries, we obtain a foreign loss of $4.8-6.1 billion
to free trade due to the auction of U.S. import quotas.14 This range exceeds the

potential auction revenues available, illustrating that the revenue gain to the
U.S. is at the expense of foreign producer surplus. The magnitudes are,

however, dominated by the textile and apparel industry. Omitting that industry,
the potential auction revenue from Table      1   is $1 .3-2.15 billion, and the foreign

loss is $O.5-0.7 billion relative to free trade. In this case the gain to the U.S. is

about three times higher than the foreign loss, but the auction quotas would still

be acting as a beggar thy neighbor' policy. In the next section we shall
consider alternative policies to raise revenue for the U.S. and reduce

protection, but without harming trading partners.


5.     Alternative Policies
       One policy option for the U.S. would be to allow above-quota imports at

specified tariff rates. The tariffs could initially be set approximately equal to the

existing quota premium    or higher,   resulting in little or no additional imports.
Over time the tariff could be reduced, together with possible growth in the quota,

moving the markettowardsfree trade. This type of policy has been advocated

by Cline (1987) and Sampson and Takacs (1988) for world trade in textiles and
apparel.
       From the foreign perspective, this policy is much preferable to auction

quotas. The possibility   of above-quota    imports subject to a tariff could be seen
as betler than strict quota limits, even though the additional imports would lower
U.S. prices and erode quota rents. From the U.S. perspective the main

drawback is that revenue obtained would be much lower than with auction

quotas. However, as imports grow above the quota then tariff revenue would

rise, and it could still be targetted for worker relocation and assistance.
                                                                                       11




       The above policy amounts to the use of tariff-rate quotas, or tariff-quotas,

which specify a quota and a tariff for above-quota imports.15 Supplying

countries earn rents on sales up to the quota, while the U.S. would collect

revenue on sales under the tariff. Varying the quota limit allows different

allocations   of the revenuelrents   across countries. Feenstra and Lewis (1987)

propose that the quota should be set so that the supplying countries receive
rents exacttv eQual to their producer surplus loss, leaving them in the
welfare position as free trade. In Figure 1, the quota M and tariff (P1-P2) would

be set such that (P1-P2) M = area (B+C). This means that Loss/Rent =

(B+C)/(A+B) = (Pj-P2) M/(P1-P2)M=M'/FA, which is the traction of total trade not

subject to the tariff.'6 In addition to the neutral effect of this policyon foreigners,
Feenstra and Lewis argue that it has beneficial incentive effects at home: under

this policythe domestic government has no incentive to overstate or understate
the political pressure for import protection, since it now must "pay for protection
with a portion   of the revenue/rents.
      We can illustrate the tariff-quota poflcy for the industries included in this

study. In order for supplying countries to be left in the same welfare position as
free trade, they should receive compensation (B+C) in Figure 1. Expressed as a
fraction of total revenue/rents, the compensation is (B+C)/(A+B) = Loss/Rent as

shown in Table 2. This leaves [1 - (LosslRent)J available to the U.S.      as tariff
revenue on above-quota imports. To illustrate, in Figure     1   the tariff revenue    is

(P,-P2)(M-M).and dividing by total revenue/rents of (P1-P2)Ewe obtain [1-
(M/)J = 11 - (Loss/Rent)]. These fractions are shown in the third column of
Table 1, and indicate the portion of total revenue/rents which the U.S. could
retain underthe tariff-quotaplan. In the case of textiles and apparel we have

that [1 - (Loss/Rent)] is negative, meaning that the U.S. would have to transfer
       than the total revenue/rents to supplying countries to offset their producer
                                                                                               12

surplus loss.         Since such an action would not be politically feasible, we

impose a lower bound of zero on [1 - (Loss/Rent)J.

        Multiplying the third column in Table          1   by the first or second gives the
estimate    of   revenue available to the U.S. through the tariff-quota plan, in

column four.          Summing       aoss   industries we find that $(167-1 .55 billion   in

tariff revenue on above-quota imports could be obtained, while keeping foreign

welfare equal         to   free trade (except in textiles and apparel).17 While this

estimate of U.S. revenue under the tariff-quota is much less than potential

auction revenues, the neutral effect on foreigners would mitigate their

response.        En   addition, the revenue available could still be sufficient to fund

a significant program of worker adjustment and assistance.                For example,

Lawrence and Utan (1986, Table 5-1) use outlays of $0.8-i.6 billion per year

for worker compensation. The               U.S. Trade Bill of 1988 proposes a 0.15% import

duty   to   finance benefits under the Trade Adjustment Assistance program, and

this duty is intended          to   raise $0.8 billion in revenue.18 Our calculations

show that this amount or more could be available by the conversion of existing

U.S. import quotas to tariff-rate quotas, designed to keep foreign welfare

equal to that in free trade.            The tariff-rate quotas could also be applied to

industries in which new protection is called for.             In either case the policy

should be viewed as temporary, with a declining tariff over time moving the

market towards liberalized trade.



6.     Conclusions

        As the members of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GAll) enter
into the Uruguay Round of trade negotiations, methods are being sought to

restrict the use of bilateral agreements such as VERs.                Proposals to auction

U.S. import quotas, or more generally substitute tariffs for quotas, seem                 to
move in that direction by being more transparent than VER5 and not
                                                                                     13

                                             From the U.S. perspective, these
discriminating against supplier countries.

policies have the advantage of raising substantial revenue.    However, from the
                                                          trade and lower
foreign perspective these actions can affect the terms of
welfare.  Under Artide XIX of GAiT, tariffs and quotas would be subject to

foreign retaliation.   As argued by Bergsten et al (1987). the auction of import

quotas could compromise the ability of the U.S.     to conclude   new multilateral

trade agreements.
       In this paper we have quantified the potential auction revenues available

to the U.S., and resulting drop in foreign producer surplus relative to free

trade.    Estimates of auction revenue are in the range of $3.7-5.15 billion for

1986 or 1987.     Using simulation results from computable partial or general

equilibrium   models, we have found that this revenue gain would be at the
                                                                         and
expense of a larger drop in foreign producer surplus. Ignoring textiles
                                                                      the
apparel, the potential auction revenue becomes $1.3-2.15 billion, and

foreign loss is $O.5-0.7 billion relative to free trade.
                                                         In this case the gain

to the U.S. is about three times higher than the foreign loss, but the cost to

supplier countries relative to free trade is still substantial.
       One attemative to auction quotas is a system of tariff-rate quotas, or
                                                                            to
 tariff-quotas, which are designed to keep supplier countries welfare equal
 that in tree trade. The tariff-quotas allow an allocation of the revenue/rents

 between the exporters and importer, avoiding the extremes of VERs (all rents        to

 the exporters) or tariffs (all revenue to the importer). We calculate that for
 the industries now subject to import quotas, $0.67-i .55 billion in tariff

 revenue could be raised by the U.S.. while keeping imports at their current
                                                                           and
 level and foreign welfare equal to that in free trade (except in textiles
                                                               auction quotas, but
 apparel). This revenue is much less than available through
 could still fund a significant program of worker adjustment and assistance.
                                                                                 14



The preference of trading partners for tariff-quotas over auction quotas would

make it easier to conclude multilateral trade agreements, allowing trade
liberalization to proceed.
                                    Footnotes


       1The idea of auctioning import quotas has previously been analyzed for

some developing countries (see Kafka, 1956, and Bhagwati, 1962), and has

been used in Australia and New Zealand (Bergsten et af, 1987, chap. 7).

       2Media examples are Newsweek, January 12, 1987, p. 40; The Wail

Sireet Journal, February 6, 1987, p. 40; and Business Week, March 9, 1987, p.

27. Congressional discussion    of auction   quotas is summarized in Bergsten et
al (1987, chap. 1).
       3A theoretical model in which tariff revenues are used to reduce lobbying

pressure for import protection is analyzed in Feenstra and Bhagwati (1982).
       4The European Community is usually quickto respond to U.S. trade

actions affecting them, and have threatened to initiate a GATT challenge to a
U.S. import quota on machine tools (see Bergsten et al, 1987, p. 134). In

contrast, Japan often does not respond to U.S. restrictions given the existing
trade surplus with the United States.
       5This observation is due to Haynes et al (1986, note 2).

       6For example, Goldstein and Kahn (1978) and Haynes and Stone

(1983). Since studies   of this type often consider   aggregate imports for a

country, the results cannot be used   to analyze trade policy   in specific

commodities.

       7See Deardorff and Stern (1986, p. 61), Melo (1986) and Brown (1987).

       8Eartier estimates of potential auction revenues also included the

automobile industry, but-the recent appreciation of the yen and loosening of the

export restraint with Japan means the quota rents are now small.
       9Under imperfect competition, uncovered suppliers could be raising their

prices strategically. Evidence for the automobile industry is presented in
Dinopoulos and Kreinin (1988), who estimate that the U.S. prices of European
cars rose by one-third due to the VER with Japan.
                                                                                       2



         lODairy imports are an exception since the quota rights are now given        to
u.S. importers (Bergsten et al, 1987, P. 40). An auction quota would therefore

transfer the rents from U.S. firms to the government.
         liThis assumption    is also made by Bergsten et al (1987).

         l2They also use a quota premium of     15 per raw pound when         world

supply is very high (so the quota is more restrictive relative to free trade), but

they consider this an extreme case.

         13Actually, the simulation involved the liberalization of all U.S.

agricultural imports, but we do not expect the feedback from other sectors to

dairy   to be   large.
         14Th   be precise, the foreign producer losses are relative to a situation of
no import quotas, but due to existing MFN tariffs, that situation is not free trade.
         15As analyzed by Sampson and Takacs (1988), below-quota imports

could be subject to existing MFN tariffs. They also consider now the quota
licenses could be reallocated over time to promote efficient supply.

       l8Figure 1 illustrates the case where the foreign compensation (P1-P2)
M' = (B+C) is less than the total revenue/rents (A+B), so that M' < T and a tariff-

quota can be used to keep foreign welfare equal to free trade. For very
restricted trade however, the required foreign compensation (B÷C) can exceed

the tariff revenue (A+B), as discussed below for textiles and apparel.
         17The qualification in footnote 14 still applies.

         18Summary of the Conference Agreement on H.R. 3,         The Omnibus
Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988, April 19, 1988, Government Printing

Office: Washington, D.C.
                                     References


Bergsten, C. Fred, Kimberly Ann Elliot, Jeffrey J. Schott and Wendy E. Takacs,
      Auction Quotas and United States Trade Policy, Washington: Institute for

      International Economics, 1987.

Bhagwati, Jagdish N., "Indian Balance of Payments Policy and Exchange

      Auctions," Oxford Economic Papers, vol. 14, 1962, PP. 51-68. Reprinted
      in J.N. Bhagwati,   Eays in Development Economics, edited by Gene
      Grossman, Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1985, vol. 2, chap. 9.

Brown, Drusilla K., "Tariffs, the Terms of Trade, and National Product

      Differentiation," Joumal of Policy Modelling, vol. 9, 1987, pp. 5O3526.

Cline, William R., The Future of World Trade in Textiles and Apoarel,

      Washington: Institute for Intemational Economics, 1988.

Congressional Budget Office, "Revenue Estimate      for Auctioning   Existing Import
      Quotas," Memorandum         to Chairman William   Gray, House Budget

       Committee, Washington, February 27, 1987.

Deardorff, Alan and Robert Stern, The Michigan Model of World Production and

               Cambridge: MIT Press, 1986.

Dinopoulos, Elias and Mordechai E. Kreinin, "Effects of the U.S.-Japan Auto
      VER on European Prices and on U.S. Welfare," The Review of

      Economics and Statistics, vol. 70, August 1988, pp. 484-491.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Jagdish N. Bhagwati, "Tariff Seeking and the Efficient

      Tariff," in J.N. Bhagwati, ed., Import Competition and Response, Chicago:

       University   of Chicago   and NBER, 1982, chap. 9.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Tracy A. Lewis, "Negotiated Trade Restrictions with
       Private Political Pressure," NBER Working Paper no. 2374, September

       1987.
                                                                                 2


Frieden, Jeffrey A. and David Lake, International Political Economy, New York:
      St. Martins, 1987.

Goldstein, Moms and Mohsin S. Khan, "The Supply and Demand for Exports: A
      Simultaneous Approach," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 60,

      May 1978, pp. 275-286.

Haynes, Stephen E. and Joe A. Stone, "Specification of Supply Behaviour in
      International Trade," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 65,

      November, 1983, pp. 626-632.

Hufbauer, Gary Clyde, Diane T. Berliner and Kimberly Ann Elliot,
      Protection in the United States: 31 Case Studies, Washington: Institute

      for International Economics, 1986.
Hufbauer, Gary Clyde and Howard F. Rosen, Trade Policy     for Troubled
      Industries, Washington: Institute for International Economics, 1986.

Kafka, A., "The Brazilian Exchange Auction System," Review of Economics and
      Statistics, vol. 48, August 1956.

Krishna, Kala, "The Case of Vanishing Revenues: Auction Quotas with

      Oligopoly," NBER Working Paper no. 2723, September 1988.

Krugman, Paul R., Strategic Trade Policy and the New International Economics,

      Cambridge: MIT Press, 1986.
Lawrence, Robert Z. and Robert E. Titan, Saving Free Trade: A Pragmatic

      Aooroach,Washington: The Brookings Institution, 1986.
Leu, Gwo-JiunM., Andrew Schmitz and Ronald D. Knutson, "Gains and Losses
      of Sugar Program     Policy Options, American Journal of Agricultural

       Economics, vol. 69, August 1987, pp. 591-602.

MeIo, Jaime do, "Comment," in T.N. Srinivasan and John Whalley, eds.,

       General Equilibrium Trade Policy Modelling, Cambridge: MIT Press,

       1986.
                                                                                    3



Sampson, Gary and Wendy Takacs, Return Textile Trade to the Normal

      Worlings of GATT: A Proposal for Reform, Institute for International
      Economic Studies, Stockholm, Seminar Paper no. 404, January 1988.

Tarr, David C., Eflects of Restraining Steel Exports from the Republic   of Korea
      and Other Countries to the United States and the European Economic

      Community,The World Bank Economic Review, vol.        1, May 1987, pp.

      397-418.

Trela, Irene and John Whalley, "Do Developing Countries Lose from the      MFA'
      NBER Working Paper no. 2618, June 1988.

Webb, Alan J., Vernon Oley Roningen and Praveen Dixit, Analyzing

      Agricultural Trade Liberalization for the Pacific Basin," 1987, Economic
      Research Service, U.S. Departnient of Agriculture, mimeo.
                                          Table      1


                        Revenue Available from U.S. Auction Quota
                             or Tariff-Quota (million dollars)


                                              Auction                      C   Tatiff-Quota
                             Auction
                                                            1
                                                                -   Rent        Revenued
Industry                     Revenue         Revenue
                               (llE)          (CBO)'


Steel                         1,330             700                  0.8        560-1,060

Textiles and Apparel          3,000            2,400                  0             0


Machine Toolse                 320              100                  n.a.         0-320

                               300              300                 0-0.2          0-60
Sugar
                               200              200                  0.55          110
Dairy


Total                          5,150           3,700                            670-1,550


nJa. =     not available.



a.       From Bergsten et al (1987, Table 4.1), estimates   for 1986 or 1987.

b.       From Congressional Budget Office (1987, Table 1), estimates for 1987.

c.       From column 1, Table 2, and imposing a lower bound of zero.

d.       Equals columns     I or 2 times column 3.
e.       A range of 0-1 is used in column   3 when calculating column 4.
                                            Table    2

                                Foreign Producer Surplus Loss
                                  due to U.S. Auction Quota



                      LQ
                      Rent
                                         $Lossb                     Method and Source
Industry                                 (million)


Steel                  0.2               140-270                        Tarr (1987)

Textiles and
 Apparel               1.8             4,320-5,400               Trela and Whalley (1988)

Sugar                 0.8-1.1            240-330                      Leu eta! (1987)

DairyC                 0.45                 90                       Webb     et al (1987)

Total                                  4,790-6,090




a.       (Loss/Rent) = (B÷C)/(A..-B)in Figure 1.

b.       Equalscolumn      1, Table   2 times columns    1   or 2, Table 1.

c.       For dairy, the figures shown are the foreign loss due to U.S. auction
         quotas or under the present system, since the quota rents now go to U.S.
         importers.
     VJATO
ci
             Zd
             d
