NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FROM DEFICIT DELUSION TO THE FISCAL BALANCE RULE:
LOOKING FOR AN ECONOMICALLY MEANINGFUL WAY TO ASSESS FISCAL POLICY

Laurence J. Kotlikoff

Working Paper No. 2841

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1989

I thank Alan Auerbach, Doug Bernheim, Christophe Chamley, Michael Darby,
Jacob Frenkel, Jagadeesh Gokhale, Fumio Hayashi, Elhanan Helpmsn, Michael
Manove, Robert Rosenthal, Assaf Razin, Bernd Spahn, and Andrew Weiss for very
helpful comments. Section II of this paper draws on my August 1987 article
in Science. This paper was written, in part, while Kotlikoff was a visiting
scholar at the International Monetary Fund. I am very grateful to the International Monetary Fund for research support. This paper is part of NBER's
research program in Taxation. The views expressed here are solely my own;
they are not necessarily the views of the International Monetary Fund,
Boston University, or The National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2 841
February 1989

FROM DEFICIT DELUSION TO THE FISCAL BALANCE RULE:
LOOKING FOR AN ECONOMICALLY MEANINGFUL WAY TO ASSESS FISCAL POLICY

ABSTRACT

Notwithstanding its widespread use as a measure of fiscal policy, the
government deficit is not a well—defined concept from the perspective of
neoclassical macro economics. From the neoclassical perspective the deficit
is an arbitrary accounting construct whose value depends on how the government
chooses to label its receipts and payments. This paper demonstrates the
arbitrary nature of government deficits. The argument that the deficit is not
well—defined is first framed in a simple certainty model with nondistortionary
policies, and then in settings with uncertain policy, distortionary policy,
and liquidity constraints. As an alternstive to economically arbitrary
deficits, the paper indicates that the "Fiscal Balance Rule" is one norm for
measuring whether current policy will place a larger or smaller burden on
future generations than it does on current generations. The Fiscal Balance
Rule is based on the economy's intertemporal budget constraint and appears to
underlie actual attemps to run tight fiscal policy. It says take in net
present value from each new young generation an amount equal to the flow of
government consumption less interest on the difference between a) the value of
the economy's capital stock and b) the present value difference between the
future consumption and future labor earnings of existing older generations.
While the rule is a mouth—full, one can use existing data to check whether it
is being obeyed and, therefore, whether future generations are likely to be
treated better or worse than current generations.

Laurence Kotlikoff

NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138

—1—•

Recent years have witnessed a growing unease about using government

deficits to measure fiscal policy. Martin Feldstein (1974) pointed out that
vast amounts of unfunded Social Security retirement liabilities are not picked

up in official debt figures. The 12 Economic Reoort of the President and
Leonard (1987) stressed the same is true of unfunded civil service and
military pensions and a range of other programs such as FSLIC commitments,

etc. Eisner and Pieper (1984, 1985), Zoskin (1987), and goskin, Robinson, and
Huber (1987) fault the official U.S. deficit for ignoring government assets.
These and a host of related complaints about conventional deficit accounting
coincided with demonstrations by Kotlikoff (1979), Summers (1981), Chamley
(1981), Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1983) and others that 1) major

intergenerationally—redistributive fiscal policies can be conducted under the
quise of a "balanced budget" and 2) identical fiscal policies can be conducted
concomitant with dramatically different time paths of reported deficits.

While some economists, including Eisner and Pieper (1983, 1985) and
Leonard (1987) suggest that the deficit can be fixed, the arbitrary nature of
such corrections raises the question of whether the deficit is a well—defined

economic concept. Unfortunately, it is not. In a series of articles
(Kotlikoff 1984, 1986, 1988) I have pointed out that from a neoclassical

perspective the deficit is an arbitrary accounting construct with no necessary

relationship to the fundamental stance of fiscal policy. The equations of
neoclassical models do not uniquely define the size or sign of government

deficits, and "the deficit" in such models is purely a reflection of how the
government chooses to label its receipts and payments.

Since rational households and firms see through accounting labels, the

predictions of neoclassical models are free of fiscal illusion. Not only does

—2—

the choice of accounting labels have no implications for actual fiscal policy
in neoclassical models, but the reverse is also true: in neoclassical macro
models the government can conduct any sustainable fiscal policy while
simultaneously choosing its accounting so as to report any size surplus or

deficit it desires. In neoclassical macro models fiscal policies have real
effects, not because of their labels, but because they either (I) alter
economic incentives, (2) redistribute from different generations to the
government, (3) redistribute within generations, or (4) redistribute across

generations. It is this fourth policy, intergenerational redistribution and
its implications for saving and investment, that appears to underlie recent

concern about loose U.S. fiscal policy. Intergenerational redistribution
occurs whenever a government policy expands the consumption opportunities of
one generation at the expense of another.

This paper describes a new rule for assessing whether the government's
intergenerational policy is in balance in the sense that future generations

are not being made worse off as compared to current generations. The rule is
denoted the "Fiscal Balance Rule." In constrast to the "balanced budget
rule," the Fiscal Balance Rule is economically well—defined. The Fiscal
Balance Rule is based on the economy's intertemporal budget constraint and
appears to underlie actual attemps to run tight fiscal policy. It says take
in net present value from each new young generation an emount equal to the

flow of government consumption less interest on the difference between a) the
value of the economy's capital stock and b) the present value difference
between the future consumption and labor earnings of existing older
generations. While the rule is a mouth—full, one can use existing data to

—3—

check whether it is being obeyed and, therefore, whether future generations
are likely to be treated better or worse than current generations.

This paper proceeds in the next section, Section II, by demonstrating the
arbitrary nature of "deficit" accounting with a simple two period life cycle

model with no uncertainty. Section III shows that the economically arbitrary
nature of "deficit" accounting arises equally in models in which government
policy is uncertain and distortionary and in which agents face liquidity

constraints. Section IV describes the Fiscal Balance Rule and its use as a
norm for considering whether fiscal policy is intergenerationally loose or
tight. Section V discusses how this rule might be implemented empirically.
Section VI summarizes and concludes the paper.

II. A Two Period Life Cycle Model
A simple two period, one good Life Cycle model with zero population or
productivity growth is convenient to show both the concern with loose fiscal

policy that redistributes toward earlier generations and the fact that the

governments reported deficit bears no necessary relation to the stance of
fiscal policy. At the beginning of each period a new generation of constant
size is born, and members of each generation live for two periods, their youth

and old age. When individuals are young they work full time, and when they
are old they are retired. Each individual born at time t chooses how much to
consume when young at time t, Cyt. and how much to consume when old at time

t+l, C01, subject to the budget constraint given in Equation (1).

C ÷ C ÷i/(l÷r+i) — W

(1)

-4-

In Equation (1) rt÷l is the interest rate at time t+l. The equation states
that the present value of consumption expenditure (the price of consumption is
numeraired to 1) over the life cycle equals the present value of lifetime

resources which, in this model, is simply earnings when young, W. The
maximization of utility given in (2) subject to (1) gives the demands for
consumption when young and old written in Eq. 3.

$lOSCy + (l—fl)logC01

(3)

Cyt_ t
—

(2)

(l_fl)W(l+r+1)

At the beginning of any time period the young have no assets. Hence, the
capital stock in the economy at time t+l corresponds to the asset holdings of
the elderly at time t÷l. The assets of the elderly at time t+l equal the

savings they accumulated when they were young at time t. This savings per

elderly equals W — Cy1y which is simply saving out of first period labor
earnings. This fact and (3) permit one to write capital per young worker at
time t+l, t+l' as:

—

(i_fl)W

(4)

To close the model assume that the economy's single good is produced
according to the production function in (5) that relates output per worker at
time t,

to

capital per worker, K:

Yt_K

(5)

—5.—

Given the production function, profit maximization by representative firms
implies the following expressions relating factor demands to factor returns:

W — (l—o)K

(6)

a—i

r — aK

Substitution of the first equation in (6) into (4) yields a nonlinear
difference equation determining the time path of the economy's capital stock:

Kt+l —

If a and

(7)

(l—fl)(l—a)K

are less than one, this model has a locally stable, nonzero

stationary state capital stock denoted by K, where:

K —

(l—fl)(l—a)11"1°

(8)

Adding Loose Fiscal Policy to the Model
Consider now an ongoing government policy commencing at time t that takes

an amount H from each young person and gives an amount H to each contemporary

old person. For young individuals born at time t their lifetime budget
constraint is now:

Ct +

C

i/(l+r+1) —

—H

+

H/(l+r1)

(9)

Holding the time path of the wage rate, W, and the interest rate, rt,
constant, this fiscal policy leaves generation t as well as all subsequent

—6—

generations worse off; each generation from t onward gives up H when young and

must wait until old age to receive H bsck. Hence, each generation from t
onward looses, in present value, interest on the amount H. The first
generation of elderly alive at time t, in contrast, benefits from this policy

since they receive H, but don't have to pay it back. Their second period
budget constraint is now:

—

(l.P)W1(l+r)

+ H

(10)

With (9), rather than (1), holding, Cyt —

fl[Wt

— Hrt+i/(l+rt+l)]

and the

capital stock at time t+l is given by (11) since the saving of the young at
time t now equals Wt — H —

Kt+l —

(l_fl)W

—

Cyt

H(l

—

r+1/(l+r+i))

(11)

The new capital stock transition equation is:

Kt+l —

(l—$)(l—a)K

—

H(l — flaK+t/(1+aK+]7)

The new stationary state capital stock, K' ,

is

(12)

found by setting Kt_Kt_1K' in

(12). Denoting by r the initial stationary state value of the interest rate,
the derivative of the stationary state capital stock with respect to H
evaluated at H equals zero is given by:

(13)

6K'/SH = —[1 —

pr/(l+r)]/(l—a)

C 0

Equation (13) indicates that this intergenerational transfer policy crowds out

the economy's long run capital stock. Of course, the crowding out process

—7—

takes some time, and (12) determines the transition path from K to K'
associated with an increase in H.
The intuitive explanation for this crowding out of capital formation is
that the redistribution to the initial elderly generation of H at time t leads
to an increase in their consumption by the amount H (see equation (10)), while
the young at time t reduce their consumption by an amount pHrt+t/(l+rt+i),

which is less than H. Hence, aggregate consumption is larger at time t, and
since output at time t is given, aggregate saving and investment at tine t

declines. This explains why the capital stock is smaller at time t+1 as a
consequence of the policy, but why does the economy end up in a stationary

state with a permanently reduced capital stock? The answer is that although
each successive generation will consume less because of this policy, their
reduced consumption will, at any point in time, not yet have fully offset the
initial increase in consumption of the time t elderly; i.e., at any point in
time there will always be generations yet to come whose consumption has yet to

be reduced by the policy. In addition, the reduction in capital at tine t+l
means a lower level of wages at time t+1 (see equation (6)), which feeds back
into lower savings by the young at time t+l, and an even lower capital stock
at time t+2, with the process converging to the permanently lower capital
stock of the new stationary state.

Deficit Delusion and the Arbitrary Nature of Fiscal Labels
In presenting this simple example of loose fiscal policy care was taken

not to use any fiscal language to label the payment of H by each young
generation to the government and the receipt of H from the government by each

—8—

old generation. It now remains to show that this policy can be conducted with
the government reporting a balanced budget, a debt, or a surplus. In each
case the real effects of the policy are identical, and the reported size of
the debt has no relationship whatsoever to the stance of fiscsl policy.

First, take the case that the government labels the receipt of H from the
young each period as "taxes" and the payment to the old each period as

"spending on transfer payments." In this case the government would report a
balanced budget each period, since "taxes" equals "spending" each period,
despite the fact that the government is running a loose fiscal policy.
Furthermore, the budget would remain in balance the looser the fiscal policy,
i.e., the larger is the value of H.

Next let the government 1) label its payment of H to the elderly at time
t as "spending on transfer payments", 2) label its receipt of H from each

young generation as "borrowing", and 3) label its net payment of H to each
elderly generation at time s for all s>t as "repayment of principal plus

interest in the amount of H(l+r5)" less a "tax in the amount of Hr5". While
each generation of elderly starting at time t still receives H, and each
generation of young starting at t still pays H, with this new labeling the
government's deficit at time t is H, and its stock of debt remains at H

forever. To see this note that at time t the government "spending" is H, and
its reported "taxes" are zero. Hence, the time t deficit ("spending" less

"taxes") is H. At time s, for s>t, the government's "spending on transfer

payments" is zero, but its "spending on interest payments" is Hr. Since its
"taxes" are also Hr5, its deficit (change in the debt) after time t is zero,
and its debt remains permanently equal to H.

—9—

As a third case, let the government 1) label its payment of H to the
elderly at time t as "spending on transfer payments", 2) label its net receipt
of H from each young person at time t and thereafter as "receipt of taxes in
the amount of 2H" less a "loan in the amount of H," and 3) label its net
payment of H to each elderly person at time s for s>t as "spending on
transfers payments in the amount of 2H +

Hr5" less "receipt of principal plus

intereat in the amount of H(l+r5)." At time t the government will now report
a negative deficit ("taxes" less "spending") of —H. And at time s>t the
government will report a balanced budget, since "taxes" of 2H plus "interest
received" of Hr5 will equal "spending on transfer payments of 2H + Hr5."
Hence, the government will report a positive stock of assets, a surplus, of H
at time t and, since its budget will be balance in each period after t, the
government's surplus (negative debt) will remain at H.
These three labelling cases show that a fundamentally loose fiscal policy
can be conducted with the government reporting zero debt, positive debt, or

negative debt. Furthermore, there is nothing to preclude the government from
changing its labelling through time with the consequence that the same real
policy could first be reported as generating a deficit, then be reported as
generating a surplus, and finally be reported as being conducted on a balanced

budget basis. Finally, there is no requirement that the labeling produce
either a zero debt, a debt of H, or a surplus of H. To see this, consider
again the labeling leading to the reporting of a surplus. If the government
labels its net receipt of H from the young as "taxes in the amount of SH" less
"a loan of 4H", and labels the net payment of H to the elderly at s>t as
"spending on transfer payments of 5H + 4Hr5" less "receipt of principal plus

—1O-

interest in the amount of 4H(l+r5)", the reported surplus will be 4H rather

than simply H. Hence, the government can report any size surplus or debt
while engaging in exactly the same economic policy. And individuals, since
they care only about their budget constraints, not the government's choice of
labels, will behave exactly the same regardless of the announced, aa opposed
to actual, stance of fiscal policy.

III. Demonstrating the Arbitrary Nature of Fiscal Labels when Fiscal Policy
is Uncertain, When Fiscal Policy is Distortionary, and when there are
Liquidity Constraints
Uncertain Fiscal Policy
One possible objection to the above demonstration that fiscal labels are
economically arbitrary is that it assumes that government policy is certain.

Surely, the objection goes, "future 'transfer payments' and 'taxes' are less
certain than the future payment of interest on government bonds, which, in the

absence of inflation, is very safe. Hence, this demonstration that rests on
the equivalence of receipts and payments in s world of certainty does not go

through in a world of uncertainty." Fortunately or unfortunately, this
objection is not valid, and the risk properties of government payments and
receipts do not provide a basis for fiscal labeling; i.e., the definition of
"the deficit" is just as arbitrary in models with uncertainty as it is in

certainty models. The reason is that any uncertain payment (receipt)
(where. refers to a variable that is uncertain) made by (received by)
individuals to (from) the government in the future can be relabeled as the

combination of s certain payment (receipt) X plus an uncertain payment
(receipt) X—X. Since current payments (receipts) are certain and future

-•11—

payments (receipts) can be described as a combination of certain and uncertain
payments (receipts), the labeling of the current and future certain payments
and receipts remains economically arbitrary.

To see more precisely why the "deficit" is no less arbitrary in
uncertainty models consider again the two period life cycle model in which the
the

government transfers from the young and to the old. But now denote by

amount taken by the government from the young and given to the old at time t.

The young at time t know the value of L (hence the is dropped below for

To add to the

this variable) but are uncertain about the value of

realism of this example let us assume that output in the future is also

uncertain due to a random productivity shock. The young now maximize expected
utility given by:

EtUt —

flloBC

+

(14)

subject to:

+ t+l.

ot+1 —

In (15)

(15)

and t+1 are respectively the risky and safe rates of return at

time t+l. At time +l is uncertain. The term

is the proportion of the

saving of the young at time t that is invested in the risky asset.
Equations (16) and (17) are the respective first order conditions for the

optimal choices of Cyt and

—I—
yt

— (l_)Et+lttflt+I
C01

(16)

—12—

E

t

t÷C t÷l

— o

(17)

cot+l

Insertion of (15) into (16) and (17) yields two

equations

in the period t

choice variables Cyt and O.
To close the model assume that the production function at time t is given
by:

—

where A

is

AtK

(18)

uncertain at time t. The wage at time t and the risky rate of

return at time t+1 are determined according to (19):

—

A(1a)K

—

—

(19)

a—i

r+1 A1aIC+1
Since the net supply of safe assets to the economy is zero, G will equal 1 in
equilibrium, and (16) and (17) can be solved, given (19), for Cyt and rt.
The economy's capital stock evolves according to equation (20):

—

Al—fl)(l—a)K

—

Ht_ ÔytCt)t

(20)

where Ôyt is chosen to satisfy (16). Note that the optimal choice of Cyt yt
can be written as a function of

the function Cyt incoorates information

about the distributions of A1 and 1t÷l since these variables are integrated
out in equation (16).

—13—

The

Arbitrary Nature of Fiscal Labels •
As

in

Once Again

the case of the certainty model. I have described the uncertainty

model without labeling either Ut or t+l• Suppose now that the amount
received by the government from the young at time t is labeled "taxes" and the

payment of Ut to the elderly at time t is called "spending". In this case the
government will report a "balanced budget." If it proceeds in this fashion
the government will announce a "balanced budget" and a "zero stock of debt"
forever.

Next let the government a) label its payment of Ut to the elderly at time
t as "spending," b) label its receipt of Ut from the young as "borrowing." and

c) label its payment of fl1 as "a certain repayment of principal plus
interest in the amount of Ut(l+rt)" less an uncertain "tax" on the elderly at
time t+l equal to H(l+rt)—flt+1. In words, the random second period payment
is described as a combination of a certain payment equal to "principal plus
interest on Ut" plus an uncertain "tax" equal to the difference between the

certain amount U(l+rt) and the random amount t+1• In this case the
government will report a "deficit" of Ut at time t. At time t+l the "deficit"
(the change in the debt) will equal zero assuming the government labels the

that it gets from the young at time t+l as "borrowing" in the amount of

Ut plus "transfers" to the young at time equal to Ut—Ht+i. The sum of time
t+l "transfers" to the young, Ut—flt+i, plus the government's time t+l
"interest payments,"

equals the time t+l "taxes" on the old, U(l+r)—

and the time t÷l deficit is zero. If the government proceeds in this
manner through time it will report a stock of debt equal to Ut forever.

—14—

If the government prefers to announce a debt of say 2OHt forever rather
than a debt of only Ht it need only label its period t receipt from the young

of

as "borrowing of 2QHt" less a "transfer payment" to the young at time t

of l9Ht. If the government continues to label the payment of Ht to the old at
time t as a "transfer payment" ita deficit at time t and debt at the beginning

of time t+l will equal 2OHt. At time t÷l the government now labels its
payment of Mt+l to the old at time t as a certain "repayment of principal

plus interest" of 2OHt(l+rt) plus a "tax" equal to 2OH(l+r)—fl+l. If the
government labels the Mtf 1 it takes from the young at time t+l as "borrowing"
of 2OHt less a "transfer" of 2OHt—fit+l, its reported deficit at time t+l will
equal zero; time t+l "transfers" of 2011t—flt+i plus "interest payments" of

2OHt will equal time t+l "taxes" of 2OHt(l+t)_ilt+l. If the government
proceeds in this fashion through time it will report a stock of debt equal to
2OHt forever.

I leave it to the reader to convince himself that despite the uncertainty
of government policy, the government can equally well label its receipts and
payments so as to report forever any size surplus it desires.

Distortionary Fiscal Policy

So far the discussion has ignored distortionary fiscal policies. The
presence of distortionary policies does not alter the conclusion that the
"deficit" is not well—defined. I demonstrate this point again using the
simple life cycle model. In the context of the simple life cycle model with
no uncertainty distortionary policy can be exhibited through the introduction
of a wedge between the marginal rate of substitution between consumption when

—15—

young at time t, Cyt and consumption when old at time t+l, C01, and the
marginal rate of transformation between consumption at time t and consumption

at time t+l. Suppose this distortion is effected through a proportional
"capital income tax." In this case the lifetime budget constraint of
generation t is given by:

Cyt +

CO÷l/(l+r+l(l—vk))

(21).

—

In (21) rk stands for the rate of "capital income taxation" and represents a
distortionary policy since the marginal rate of substitution now equals

l/(l+rt+l(l—rk)) while the marginal rate of transformation equals l/(l+r÷1),
where rt+l equals the marginal product of capital at time t+l (see equation
(6)).

If the receipts from "capital income taxation" are used each period to
pay for government consumption and there are no other sources of government
receipts and no other government payments, the government will be reporting a
"balanced budget." Now suppose the government wishes to run the same real

policy, but report a "surplus." One method it can use is to levy a
nondistortionary "tax" on the young at time st of say H, lend this to the
young at time s, and at time s+l use the return of "principal plus interest"

on this "loan" to finance a transfer payment to the old. This policy will
leave each generation facing exactly the same lifetime budget conatraint
including the same distortion with respect to current and future consumption,

but permit the government to report a surplus of

at st. The new policy

also leaves unchanged the net flow of payments from each generation to the

—16—

government in each period; the only thing that has changed is the words used
to describe the policy.

The reader may prefer an example in which the government maintains its
identical policy but uses distortionary "taxes" in "running its surplus."

Here's one such example. Let the government announce at time t that it is
eliminating the "capital income tax" from time t+l onward, but is imposing a

"tax" at rate m5 on the purchase of assets at time sat. To illustrate this
policy let us write the lifetime budget constraint of individuals born at time
sat in two parts:

C + (l+m a)As+l
ys
C

—wa

(22)

(l+rs+l )
os+l —A s+l

In (22) A5+1 stands for the assets the young at time t accumulate and bring

into period s+l. If m5 is set equal to rs+lrk/[l+rs+l(l—rk)] for sat the
lifetime budget constraints of each generation born at time t and thereafter
will be unaffected by the "new" policy and the distortion between consumption

when young and consumption when old will remain unchanged. The only thing
that will change is the government's reported "debt." Rather than report a
"debt" of zero, the government will now report a "surplus" of mA+1 at time t

since "taxes" will exceed "spending" by this amount. At time t+l the
government's "spending" will be covered precisely by this time t "surplus"
including interest earned by the government on this surplus; i.e. ,

the value

at time t+l of the time t surplus is mtAt+1(l+rt+l) which, given the
definition of

equals rt+1rk(Wt_Cyt) the "tax revenue" under the "capital

income tax." However, since the government will collect another m+i in

—17—

"taxes" at time t+l, its reported "surplus" (stock of government assets) at

time t+l will equal m÷lAt+2. At time sat the government's reported "surplus"

will equal m5A51.
Note that in this exsmple if the government lends its surplus each period
to that period's young, the net payments from each generation to the

government will again remain unchanged. Hence, to a Martian observer the only
thing that will make this policy different from the previous policy is the
government's choice of words.

If the government prefers to report a "debt" from time t

onward it can do

so with no change in policy by "borrowing" say D5 for sat and making transfer

payments to the young at time sat equal to D5. At time sat+l it "taxes" the
old an amount equal to D5 plus interest and uses these receipts to finance its

payment of "principal plus interest" on its borrowing of D5 at time s. This
policy will leave the government reporting a "debt" of D5 for sat.
Another way the government can do nothing real while reporting a "debt"

is to announce a subsidy on the acquisition of assets for sat. In terms of
equation (22) m5 is set equal to a negative number. If the government also
announces an increase in the rate of capital income taxation for sat+l equal

to 'ks such that (l+m5)/[l+rs+l(l—c'ks÷l)] —

l/[l+r5÷l(l—ck)],

the

intertemporal distortion will remain unchanged, but the government will
announce a "debt" of m5A5+i for sat.

While hardly exhaustive, these examples illustrate that the distortionary
nature of the government's policy does not restrict its ability to announce
any size deficit or surplus while running the same underlying fiscal policy.

—18—

Liquidity Constraints
Another response to the sbove demonstrations that "deficit" policies are
not well—defined is that the demonstrations ignore the possibility that at

least some agents are liquidity constrained. If some young agents can't
borrow against future income will they be indifferent between policy a) in
which the government takes H from each young person and returns H to them when
old and policy b) in which the government "borrows" H per young person from
those young who volunteer to make loans, repays these "loans" with interest
when the lenders are old, and "taxes" each old person Hr5 at time a?
An affirmative answer is given in a very insightful article by Hayashi
(1987) (see Yotauzuka (1986) for an expanded treatment of Hayaahi's argument).

Hayashi points out that the riskiness of future government payments is

different from the riakineas of an individual's earnings. Hence, even though
an individual may not be able to borrow more than a specific sum against
future earnings, he may still be able to borrow against future government

payments. As an illustration of this point I present one of Hayaahi'a
examples although with different notation. The example relies again on the
two period life cycle model, but incorporates the assumption that there are

two type of young agents each period, denoted type A and type B. Both the A
and B agents earn

when young (assuming they are born at time s). The A

type agents earn AAW5+l when old, while the B types earn ABW5+l when old,

where A8 > AA. The problem for banks in lending money to the A and B typea is
that the banks don't know who is who. If they lend more than
where ra is the safe rate, to the A types, the A types will default on a part
of the loan since their second period earnings is only AAW5+l.

—19—

While Hayashi's argument also goes through in the case of a pooling

equilibrium, I focus here on the separating equilibrium. I first examine the
equilibrium with no government policy and then introduce the government

policy. If one assumes a configuration of preferences such that a separating
rather a pooling equilibrium arises, the banks will separate the two types by
offering a maximum loan, N, (which exceeds AAWS+l/(l+r5+l)) such that a) the A
types are indifferent between borrowing this maximum and defaulting and
borrowing and repaying a smaller amount, and b) the B types borrow the maximum
amount and repay. The indifference relationship for the A types is given by:

$log[fiR5] +

(l—fl)log[(l—)R5(l+r5)1

—

fllog(W5+M)

+ (l—fl)logC

(23)

In (23) the left hand side gives the indirect utility of the A types is they

borrow less than N and repay their loan. The term RA5 equals W5 +

AAWS÷l/(l+rS÷l),

the present value of the lifetime resources of the A types

valued at the safe interest rate. The right hand side gives the utility of
the A types if they borrow the maximum N and then default when old. The term
C stands for the subsistence level of consumption provided by society to

people who have defaulted. EquaLion (23) is used to solve for N. Given 14 the
consumption of the B types when young will equal W5 + N, i.e., their first

period wages plus the maximum they can borrow. Their second period
consumption will equal AgW5+1 —

M(l+r5+1).

The B types are, therefore,

liquidity constrained in this separating equilibrium; they would like to
borrow more than N but cannot.

The question posed above amounts to asking whether type A or type B
agents will change their consumption when young if the government takes away H

—20—

from eadh of them when young and returns H(l+r5÷i) to each of them when old.
This policy leaves the left hand side of (23) unchanged since the present

value of resources valued at the riskless rate r5+j is unchanged. The right
hand side of (23) will also remained unchanged if the maximum loan smount

increases to H+H. In this case the consumption when young of those borrowing
from the bank equals W5 — H plus the maximum loan M + H, i.e., it equals W5+M,
the same amount that is consumed prior to this present value neutral

government policy. The banks are willing to increase their loan amount to the
type B agents because they understand that the A types will, on net, be no
better off if they select into the group borrowing the now larger maximum
because they will need the larger maximum just to remain indifferent between

borrowing the maximum and borrowing less than the maximum. Hence, at the
margin the type B agents are not liquidity constrained with respect to
government—determined changes in the timing of their income flows, and the
"liquidity constrained" B type agents will consume the same when young despite
the government's taking H from them when young.

For the U.S. there is conflicting evidence on whether even a minority of
households are liquidity constrained (e.g., Hsyashi (1987) and Altonji and

Siow (1986)). While as many as 20 percent of households may be liquidity
constrained, such households probably account for less than 10 percent of

total U.S. consumption. Hence, even if Hayashi's logic (which appears to hold
for a wide class of credit market models) is ignored and one argues that the

relabeling of government receipts and payments cannot be accomplished without
some change in U.S. policy, the change in policy would at most be quite minor.

In other words, even admitting the possibility of liquidity constraints that

—21—

bind with respect co government policy, it appears that, at least for the
U.S., one can run essentially equivalent policies while reporting any size
surplus or deficit.

IV. Can We Discuss Fiscal Policy Without Using the Words "Taxes," "Spending,"

and

"Deficits"?

After some reflection on the labeling illustrations of the previous
Sections, one might offer the following defense of the use of the terms

"taxes," "spending," and "deficits:" "Well, I sgree that the quantities we
measure as "taxes," "spending," and "deficits" are not meaningful measures of
fiscal policy in and of themselves, but the important thing is not what the
government labels its receipts and payments, rather the important thing is

thinking comprehensively about the government's receipts and payments. As
long as I keep track of all of the government's lump sum and distortionary
receipts and payments extracted from and made to particular individuals, I can

use any words I want to describe particular receipts and payments." True!
But thinking comprehensively about the distortionary and nondistortionary net
payments extracted from particular individuals is equivalent to specifying

their lifetime budget constraints. Once one realizes this point, there is no
reason to use potentially misleading language when one can describe precisely
how government policy affects individuals' lifetime budget constraints.
Indeed, the policy description in Section II is an example of how one can
discuss fiscal policy without ever using the words "taxes," "spending," and
"deficits" and without classifying assets as "private" assets or "government"
assets.

—22—

This Section offers some new terminology, centered around lifetime budget

constraints, to describe fiscal policies. The Sectiom first discusses
nondistortionary policies and then considers distortionary policies. The new
fiscal vocabulary succinctly summarizes the government's fundamental policy

instruments. One can think about policy in terms of changes in these
instruments. In addition to describing these instruments, this Section
discusses the choice of these instruments through time. In this regard this
Section examines a rule to which the government must ultimately adhere (if the
economy reaches a steady state) in setting policy through time so as to obey

the economy's intertemporal budget constraint. This rule, which I denote the
Fiscal Balance Rule, has no relationship to conventional "budget balance,"
i.e., the government can obey "budget balance" while violating the fiscal
balance rule.

Describing Nondistortionery Policy
If policy is not distortionary and there is no uncertainty, the

government's treatment of each individual over his lifetime can be fully
summaflzed by the present value of the individual's lifetime net payment (LNP)

to the government. The LNP is a sufficient statistic for the government's
treatment of individuals; any intertemporal equilibrium will be unaffected by
changes in the timing of lifetime net payments to the government that leave

individual LNPs unchanged. Equation (24) shows how the LNP (denoted Nt)
enters the lifetime budget constraint of individuals born at time t in the

simple two period OLO modelJ

Cyt + C0+1/(l+r+1) —

— Nt

(24)

—23—

Let us now consider a stationary state of a two period Cobb—Douglas

economy in which government consumption equals C and NtN. In the stationary
state income equals consumption; hence, the capital stock is defined by:

— [fl-4-(l—fl)(l+r)1(W—N) + C

(25)

where r—ok° and W—(l—a)k°. In (25) fl(tJ—N) is the consumption of the young
and (l-fl)(l+r)(W--N) is the consumption of the old. There is no need for N to

equal C. Different combinations of N and C are consistent with different
stationary states. In the stationary state N may be negative, and C may be
zero or positive. Larger values of C and smaller values of N will be
asaociated with larger values of stationary state capital. This may seem
surprising. How can larger values of government consumption and a smaller LPN
be consistent with more long run capital accumulation? The answer is that
equation (25) only tells us about the stationary state; it says nothing about

the transition leading up to the stationary state. To see how the transition
matters, start in a stationary state with a given N and C and consider a

policy in which the government p'rmanently raises C. According to (25) there
is a new atationary state with the original N, but larger values of C and k

that is feasible. But will the economy ever get there? The economy can get
there, but only if the government raises the LNPs on some generations during
the transition. In other words, a new stationary state with a higher C, a
higher k, and the same N is only feasible if the government makes generations
alive in the transition to the new stationary state pay the bill.

Starting at time t from an initial stationary state what is the
transition equation determining the evolution of the economy's capital stock?

—24—

Equations (26) and (27) answer this question.

k÷1 1c +

—

$(W_N)

k+ — fl(W—N)

—
—

C0—

G

(l—fl)(l+r

(26)

)

(W

1—N l —

st

(27)

Equation (26) states that capital at time t+l equals income at time t less
total private plus government consumption at time t. The consumption of the
young at time t, $(Wt—Nt) incorporates the new (if

the generation born at time t. The term

choice of an LNP for

is the consumption of the old at

time t. If the policy does not involve any change in consumption of the
initial elderly C0 will equal (l—fl)(l+r)(W—N), otherwise it will equal this

amount less an additional net payment extracted from the elderly. Equation
(26) holds for periods after time t. At time st consumption of the elderly
can be written as
To -summarize, the government's choice of policy can be fully described as

a) a decision whether to extract an additional net payment from the initial
elderly, -b) the choice of a time path of LNPs (the time path of N5 for sat),

and c) the choice of a time path of government consumption (C5 for sat). The
government need only announce these three elements of its policy and need
never use the three ill—defined words "taxes," "spending," and "deficits."

The Fiscal Balance Rule

The next question that this new vocabulary raises is if the government
abandons the rule of "balancing the budget," what rule should it use to guide
it in choosing the time paths of the N and the C5, i.e., what rule can the

—25--

government use to make sure it is obeying the economy's intertemporal budget

constraint? To consider this question let us first look at the economy's
intertemporal budget. Equation (25) turns out to be simply the flow version
of the stationary economy's intertemporal budget constraint. Since km_rk+W,
equation (25) can be rewritten in the standard form for the intertemporal
budget constraint, viz.:

k(l+r) +

W(l+r)

(W —

N)(l+r)

+ (l—)(l+r)(W—N) +

G(l+r)

(25')

or, after subtracting W(l+r)/r from both sides:

k(l+r) — (l—fl)(l+r)(W—t4) +

N(l+r)

—

C(l+r)

(25')

Equation (25') states that the present value of the economy's resources (the

sum

of

its nonhuman

and

human

wealth)

equals the present value of the

consumption of young and future generations (the first term on the right hind
side of the equation) plus the consumption of the current old plus the present

value of government consumption. Equation (25'') states that the present
value of what the government consumes must be financed by the difference
between the economy's nonhuman wealth and the consumption of the current old

plus the present value of the LNPs from future generations. Intuitively
equation (25'') says that the government's resources for financing the present

value of its consumption are the economy's capital left over after the elderly
have consumed plus the amount

that

will be taken from young and future

generations.

Equation (25'') also represents the stationary state rule for setting

fiscal policy. Let the stationary state level of government consumption be

—26—

C. Then in the stationary state N5 must be set each period to satisfy:
r
—
5
N—G——---—-—[k(l+r)—C
os]
s
s
(l+r) s

(25

)

5

The rule says: set the net lifetime payment of each successive generation
equal to the flow of government consumption less the interest on the economy's

capital stock left over after the current elderly consume. A more intuitive
statement of the fiscal balance rule is: "extract enough from each successive
generation such that if you were in the stationary state you would stay there
and not impose a larger or smaller burden (NLP) on subsequent generations."

In a more realistic model where each period refers to a single year and
in which adulthood begins at say age 20, the fiscal balance rule would be to
set the net lifetime payment of each new cohort of 20 year olds equal to
annual government consumption less the product of the interest rate times the
sum of the economy's current (in the year the cohort hits age 20) capital
stock and human wealth (the present value of labor earnings of existing

adults) less the present value of consumption of existing adults. If there is
population and or productivity growth the rule needs to be adjusted slightly;

in the case of the two period model the rule with growth is given by
where l+n stands for the product of one

plus the rate of population growth and one plus the rate of productivity
growth.

Now consider a policy transition starting at time t from a stationary
state that involves keeping C constant at

but altering the time path of N5

st. While the time path of the N5s can be chosen arbitrarily for a period of
time, if the economy is to converge to a stationary state the government must

—27—

ultimately choose a rule for setting N5 that leads to stationary state

convergence. Any policy rule can be described as a function
since the three arguments of thia function fully
circumscribe the government's choice of Na; i.e., the government needs to
finance a constant time path of G, it needs to honor (if it is time
consistent) the consumption of the elderly, C05_1, and it needs to think about
the resource base of the current and future economy which is fully described

by Ic5. Since the rule N5—N(G,k5,C051), where the function N( ,

, ) is given

by the right hand side of (25'''), must be satisfied in the stationary state,
any policy rule R(C,k5,C05_1) which leads the economy to converge to a

stationary state must, itself, converge to N(G,k5,C051). I denote the rule
N5—N(C,k5,C05_1) the underlying "fiscal balance rule."

While there is no guarantee that any particular rule R(&ka,Cos_i) will
lead the economy to converge to a stationary state, the simulations of
Auerbach and Kotlikoff, 1987 in their 55 period life cycle model use the
"fiscal policy rule" itself (i.e., they set R(G,k5,C05_1)—N(G,k5,C05_1)) and
found no problems with convergence to a unique stationary state for a range of
reasonable parameter values (see Laitner, 1988 for an analysis of uniqueness
in the Auerbach—Kotlikoff model).

Table 1 gives an example of a loose fiscal policy using the simple two

period model and the fiscal balance rule. The economy, whose parameters are
given in the Table, is initially at a stationary state with a value of k—.138,

C—. 1104, and N—.1104. The new policy involves reducing by 10 percent the NLP

of the generation born at time t. At time s>t the value of N (the NLP of
generation a) is set by the fiscal balance rule. Note that this policy raises

•

z0
0

Z
Z
-4

Z
0
I-'
O

0
0

'-4

t
Z
0

'.11

4*)

I

.0

NI

I

4

-0U( .0E
'-4 4

U)

0

r-)

C)

0
Z

0

0'

-

4 .-4 00'. U) U) U) U) U) U) U)

0 0000
4
0 0 0 40 00 0 0 0
4 04

.-4 1
.-4 -4 —
U U) '0 *0
U) U) '.0 0' '0 4 C' NJ — .-4 NJ
NJ NJ NJ NJ NJ
NJ NJ NJ NJ NJ NJ NJ
U) NJ N.-4 '-4 0
0
-4 4
-4 .-4 ,-4
.-4 .—4 ,-4 .—4 —4
.-4 -4 4 .-4 .-4 .-4 .-4

*0*000*0—

-4

SO O U) '.00 50
U) — N 4r4
NI NI ,-4 -4 .-4 -4 ,-4

4

,-4
.-4

NJ NJ

occo

4

4

4 .-1 4 .-I ,-4 ,-4 ,-4
4.4 4' 4*) 4*) 4*) 4*)
.-1 4
.-4 .-4

.-i 4 .-4 .-I

r

00
.-1 NJ N 4 NJ ,-4 — — .-4 00000000
0' U) U) U) U) U) U) U) U) U) U) U) U) U) U)
004'l NJ
4P1

-

0000000000
0
U)
4*1

.-1
4

.—4

l

,-1

-4 ,-4 ,-4
.-4
,-4

.-4

,-4
.-4

,-4 .-4 ,-4
.-1
,-4

.-4
.-4

,-4

0 0 0 00 0 0 0 000 0 0 0 0 00 00 0
4444444444444444444
004
000-4 ,4000 .40 00.4-4 00.-I,4 04
0
00000
,-l
4 ,4 .4
.4
.4
,4
00000000000000000000
.4

NJ

NJ

NJ

NJ

NJ

U)

NJ NJ NJ

U) U) U)
U) U) U)
NJ 0'. c* ui '0 N- N- N U)
'.0 50 50 '.050 50*0
0'. 4 U) U) 50 '.050 '.0 '.050 5050 NJ
04-10
NJ NJ NJ
NJ NJ
NJ
NJ
1
0'. NI
NI

.-4
'-4

44

0

0

4

00000000 0 00000000000

U)

4

—

.4 ,4

41)

..4

41)

4

4) (4) 4')

4*)

C) 4*'. (4) 4*)

0000000
f)
*1)

414

.-4
.-4 .-4
Lfl U)
C') 4". NJ sO U)
.-4 — NJ NJ NI NJ NJ
4$) '.0 4*) N- 0'
U) 50 N- N- N- U) U) U) U) U) U) U) U) U)

.4

4*1

..4

4*1

00 '0 U)N0040
00
40

4 .-I .4 ,4 r4 ,4 .4 ,4 ,4 ,4 —

4*) 4*) 4*)
U) 4$) 4')
4*) 4*) 4')

4

.-4
4*)
11
(4)

44
*0*0*
'0 '0

N- U) '0 U) U) '0 0' U) 4*1 NJ
C') 4*) 4*) 4*)
U) 4 N- 41)
41) 1) 41) U) U) 41) 1)
U) U) U)
4') 4*) 4') 4') C') 4') C') C') 4*) C')

4*) 4*)

44)

,—l

.—4

NJ

NJ

—J

NJ

4

,..4

('.1

4*4

NJ

0 0 000 0 0 0 0 00 0 0 0 00 0 0 0 0
.4 ,4 ,4
4 NJ NI *
0 0 U) '0 U) U)50 C'.'.0NJNJ
NJC'INJ
U)U) NI NO 504 4')
0 0NJNJ
00
,-4 .-1
4 ,-I 1')4 —-1 ,-4,-4 0 0.-4 .-40 0 0-4 .-40 -10 0 .-40 ,-40 .-40 ,-I

4*)

44)

50 N- U)

0'

0

NJ (4)

4 44)50 N- U) 0' 0

00000000000000000000
—

—28—

the consumption of generation a, but lowers that of subsequent generations.
Associated with this intergenerational redistribution is a 30 percent crowding
out of capital.

Before turning to the issue of distortionary policy, it is useful to
consider the nonrelationship between the fiscal balance rule and conventional

"budget balance." An easy illustration of the point that "budget balance"
does not necessarily imply fiscal balance is given by the case of a "pay as

you go" social security system. Suppose the economy is initially (at time t)
in a stationary state with no government policy whatsoever (1l—0 and G-0). At
time t the government announces that starting at time t it will "tax" each

young generation s for st an amount

and "transfer" the proceeds to the

contemporaneous old. Since at each point in time "taxes" equals "spending,"
this policy satisfies "budget balance" forever. For the old at time t the new
policy means an increase of

in their consumption. For generation a, where

a>t, the policy involves setting N5_X5+X5÷1i(l+r5÷l). Suppose the government
chooses its initial

and then sets X+1(l+r+1)X5 thereafter for a>t. In

this case N5—0 for all st, and this "balanced budget" policy never obeys the
fiscal balance rule and, since it violates the economy's intertemporal budget
constraint, leads the capital stock to implode.

If the fiscal balance rule rather than the "balanced budget" rule were
obeyed starting at t÷l, the government would set N5__(r5/(l+r5)]X for sat,
leading the economy to converge to a stationary state with a lower, but

positive capital stock. Depending on the policy's lebeling, obeying the
fiscal policy rule in this case might be described as "keeping the level of
old age benefits (transfers) conatant and adjusting taxes to meet the fixed

—29—

level of benefits plus pay for government consumption" or it might be

described as "keeping debt per young worker constant."2 Again, announcement
-

of "social security trust fund balance" or "federal budget balance" may be

associated

with policies obeying fiscal balance, but they also may not.

Describing Distortionary Policy
As in the case of nondiatortionary policy, fiscal policy can be
characterized with reference to individual lifetime budget constraints. Take,

as an example, the case of a distortionary capital income tax. In this case
the lifetime budget constraint equation (24) still holds, but the lifetime net
payment, Nt. now includes the net present value of distortionary payments to

the government plus the present value of nondistortionary payments.3 With
this budget constraint the share of net lifetime resources (valued at the
pretax interest rate) spent on consumption when young, fi,

depends, on the

interest rate and the rate of capital income taxation. Hence, equation (28),
defining stationary state capital, expresses $

as a function of r and

In

(28) N should be understood to include the net present value of lifetime
distortionary payments to the government.

icC —

[$(rrk)

+

(l_$(r,rk))(l+r)](W_N)

+

G

(28)

The transition equations are:

k+1= k +

k — $(r+l,rk÷l)(W_N) —

a
k÷1— k+ k _$(r+lrk+l)) (W5_NS)_(l_$(r+l,rk+l) )

Gt

(29)

(30)

(l+r)) (Ws1_Ns1)_Ca

—30—

The form of the fiscal balance rule is not changed. However, in determining
N5 in (25''') the government needs to consider the net present value of its
receipts from each new generation arising from its distortionary as well as
nondistortionary policies; i.e., in setting its capital income tax rates the
government must consider how this policy will influence its time path of N5s.

V.

Can We Implement the Fiscal Balance Rule Empirically?
The fiscal balance rule represents a means (but not a unique means) for

judging the stance of current policy. The use of this rule does not require
describing how policy changes will affect the economy. Hence, the use of this
rule does not require a fully articulated model that would determine, for

example, how factor prices respond to changes in policy. Use of the fiscal
balance rule does, however, require one to specify what one believes current
policy to be. This, in turn, requires specifying current future policy, i.e.,

the time path of policy in the future currently expected to prevail. For
example, in forming the value for N5 in (25''') based on an economy with a
social aecurity system one would need to consider what generation s will pay

to the government when young and what it will receive when old. It is this
receipt when old that constitutes an aspect of current future policy.

In addition to specifying current future policy, determining whether the
government is obeying the fiscal balance rule requires projecting future
factor prices. The prevailing term structure of interest rates can be used to
value future earnings and consumption streams, but the levels of future

earnings will have to be projected. Projecting future earnings of those
currently alive requires specifying the growth rates of population and

—31—

productivity. It remains to be seen how sensitive will be the evaluation of
the fiscal balance rule to these assumptions.

Another issue that needs to be examined is how to deal with lifespan
uncertainty in forming the present value of the future earnings and

consumption of existing adult generations. Treatment of this kind of
uncertainty as well as the uncertainty of future earnings and government
policy need to be considered prior to actually implementing the fiscal balance

rule. Still, even at this stage the empirical implementation of the fiscal
balance rule seems eminently feasible.

An advantage of the fiscal balance rule is that its implementation would

take into account non—governmental intergenerational redistribution. For
example, a reduction in the stock market, like the crash of October 1987, will

redistribute from older to younger generations. In terms of the fiscal
balance rule, the change in stock values spells a lower present value of
consumption of older generations and makes it easier to satisfy the fiscal
balance rule.

VI. Conclusion
Deficit delusion is far from a hypothetical possibility. As Feldstein
(1974) has ahown, under the guise of "balanced budgets" the U.S. engaged in an
enormous program of intergenerational redistribution through Social Security

in the 1960a and l97Oa. In 1983 the government dramatically reduced the
future generosity of Social Security without the new legislation having any

impact on the 1983 "deficit." Other programs such as the 1981 Accelerated
Cost Recovery System and the 1986 Tax Reform Act have had important

—32—

generational implications that, again, were not reflected in the "deficit."
By ignoring or placing little emphasis on these and other intergenerational
policies and focusing on the "deficit," we have generally come to believe that

fiscal policy was tight in the l960s and 1970s and loose in the 1980s. In
contrast, it appears that an analysis based on the fiscal balance rule would
lead to the exact opposite conclusion.

The concern with deficit delusion is heighten by the "social security

surpluses" projected for the l990s and beyond. These impending "surpluses"
are already leading many commentators to suggest that fiscal policy will be

tight in the 1990s. In contrast, the fiscal balance rule perspective suggests
there will be no particular tightening of policy in the 1990s. In focusing on
the "surpluses" of the 1990s we could well end up with a much looser fiscal
policy than will likely be justified by the fiscal balance rule.

The use of the fiscal balance rule or closely related rules will not be

easy. Given the kinds of projections and assumptions required for its
implementation we may well end up with a quite rough measure of fiscal policy.

Still, even a rough measure of actual fiscal policy would appear to more

accurate than the precise measu of accounting whims that constitutes current
description of fiscal policy.

—33—

Notes

1. Note that in the policy of Section II Nt—.H+H/(l+rt+l).

2. If the amount X taken from the young at time t is labeled "borrowing," the
amount given to the old at time t is labeled a "transfer payment," and
subsequent receipts from each new young generation are taken when young and
labeled "taxes," then for s>t the quantity —(K5(l+r5)—C05] in the fiscal
balance rule will correspond to "debt per young person," and the fiscal
balance rule would be read "tax each new generation an amount N5 equal to
government consumption plus interest on government debt; i.e., keep debt per
taken from the young at time t is
young person constant." If the amount
labeled "taxes," rather than borrowing, the amount given to the old at time t
is labeled a "transfer payment," and receipts taken from generation s>t when
young are labeled "taxes" and payments made to generation s>t when old are
labeled "transfers" and there is no "debt," then the amount —[K5(l+r5)--C05] in
the fiscal balance rule will correspond to "transfers to the elderly" and the
fiscal balance would be read "set taxes high enough to cover government
consumption and keep transfers to the elderly at the current level of
—(K5(l+r5)—C051; i.e., keep transfers to the elderly constant through time."
In addition to paying "taxes" to cover 0 at time s, the young at time s pay
"taxes" sufficient to cover "transfers" to the elderly at time s, —[K5(l+r5)—
C05]; but when they are old the generation born at time s will receive
"transfers" of —[K5(l+r5)—C05] , hence the present value of their lifetime
payment, N5, is G+[K5(l+r5)—C05]—[K5(l+r5)—C05]/(l+r5+l) which is the fiscal
balance rule except for the difference between r5 and r5+1.
3. One can always express a budget constraint with distorted prices as a
budget constraint with nondistorted prices, but with the present value of
lifetime resources now reduced by an amount equal to the present value of
distortionary payments to the government. Thus equation (21) can be written
as: Cyt + C0+i/(l+r+1) — W—N, where N_rt+lrkCOt+l/(l+rt+l).

—34—

References

Altonji,

J. C. and A. Siow, "Testing the Response of Consumption to Income
Changes with (Noisy) Panel Data," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1986.
Ando, Albert and Franco Modigliani, "The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving:
Aggregate Implications and Tests," American Economic Review, March 1963, vol.
53, Part 1, pp. 55—84.
Auerbach, Alan J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, "National Savings, Economic
Welfare, and the Structure of Taxation," in Martin Feldstein ed., Behavioral
Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis, Chicago: Univeraity of Chicago
Press, 1983.
Auerbach, Alan J. arid Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Dynamic
University Press, 1987.

Fiscal

Policy, Cambridge

Boskin, Michael 3. , The Real Federal Budeet, Harvard University Press,

forthcoming, manuscript 1987.
Boskin, Michael J., Marc S. Robinson, and Alan M. Huber, "Government Saving,
Capital Formation and Wealth in the United States, 1947—1985," NBER working
paper no. 2352, August 1987.

Chamley, Christophe, "The Welfare Costs of Capital Income Taxation in a
Growing Economy," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 89, no. 3, June 1981.
Eisner, Robert and Paul J. Pieper, "A New View of the Federal Debt and Budget
Deficits," American Economic Review, March 1984.
Eisner, Robert and Paul 3. Pieper, "How to Make Sense of the Deficit," flg
Public Interest, no. 78, Winter 1985.

Social Security, Induced Retirement, and Aggregate
Capital Accumulation," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 82, 1974.
Feldstein, Martin S. ,

Hayashi, Fumio, "Tests for Liquidity Constraints: A Critical Survey and Some
New Observations," in Vol.2 of Advances in Econometrics. Fifth World Congress,
ed. by Truman F. Bewley, Cambridge University Press, 1987.
Kotlikoff, Laurence 3., "Social Security and Equilibrium Capital Intensity,"
Ouarterlv Journal of Economics, May 1979.
Kotlikoff, Laurence 3., "The Deficit is Not a Well—Defined Measure of Fiscal
Policy," Science, August 1988.
Kotlikoff, Laurence 3., "Deficit Delusion," The Public Interest, Summer 1986.
Kotlikoff, Laurence 3., "Taxation and Savings: A Neoclassical Perspective,"
The Journal of Economic Literature, December 1984.

—35—.

Laitner, John, "Tax Changes and Phase Diagrams for an Overlapping Generations
Model," mimeo June 1988.
Leonard, Herman B., Checks Unbalanced, Basic Books, 1986.

Modiliani, Franco, and Richard Bnzmberg, "Utility Analysis and the Consumption
Function: An Interpretation of Cross—Section Data," in Post—Keynesian
Economics, ed. by Kenneth K. Kurihara, New Brunswick, N.J., Rutgers University
Press, 1954.
Sargent, Thomas and Neal Wallace, "Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic,"
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Ouarterly Review, vol. 5, 1981.
Yotsuzuka, T., "Ricardian Equivalence in the Presence of Capital Market
Imperfections," MIT mimeo, 1986.

