NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ADEQUACY OF INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS AND POSITION DATA
FOR POLICY COORDINATION

Lois Stekler

Working Paper No. 2844

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1989

Lois Stekler is an Economist at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
This paper is part of NBER's research program in International
System.
Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2844
February 1989
ADEQUACY OF INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS AND POSITION DATA
FOR POLICY COORDINAT1ON

ABSTRACT
This paper examines the adequacy of data on current accounts and
international indebtedness as measures of the need for policy adjustments
and coordination.

Doubts about the adequacy of these data have been

raised by the growth of the global current account discrepancy and the
statistical discrepancy in the U.S. international transactions accounts.
The paper includes a brief review of the conclusions of the IMF working
party on the world current account discrepancy and a detailed examination
of the data on U.S. international transactions and net investment
position.

Both investigations support the conclusion that large shifts

in reported data on current accounts end investment positions are likely
to reflect real changes.
However, even if data were completely accurate, a given current
account or investment position may not clearly indicate the magnitude of
necessary policy changes because of lags in the adjustment process or
underlying trends.

This point is illustrated by the tendency of U.S. net

investment income to grow as a result of the continued expansion of both
claims and liabilities combined with a higher average rate of return on
claims.

This underlying tendency is likely to counteract, in part, the

negative impact on future net investment income of growing U.S. net
indebtedness to foreigners.
Lois Stekler
Board of Covernors of
The Federal Reserve System
20th & C Streets, Northwest
Stop 42
Washington, DC 20551

Lois Stekler
ADEQUACY OF 1NTNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS AND POSITION DATA POE
POLICY COORDINATION
by Lois Stekler

A. INTRODUCTION

The use of international policy coordination to limit exchange
rate fluctuations assumes that there are generally agreed upon measures
of disequUibrium.

Frequently mentioned in this context are current

accounts and international indebtedness. The focus of this paper is on
the adequacy of data on current accounts and international investment
positions as measures of the need for policy adjustments and
coordination.

Since I am most familiar with U.S. data, much of the

discussion will focus on the U.S. current account and position.
There are several reasons for questioning the adequacy of
current account and position data for use as measures of disequilibrium
requiring international policy adjustments and coordination.

High on

this list has been the growth during the past decade in two
discrepancies: the global current account discrepancy and the statistical
discrepancy in the U.S. international transactions accounts.

B. GLOBAL CURRENT ACCOUNT DISCREPANCY

If data collection were completely accurate, each export
recorded by one country would be matched by an equal import recorded by
another country; the sum of all trade and services transactions for the
whole world would equal zero.

In practice, they do not sum to zero;

reported imports of goods and services exceed reported exports.
Moreover, as shown on table 1, this discrepancy has been very large in
the l980s and, although down substantially from the peak of $106 billion

-2-

reached in 1982, it shows little sign of disappearing.
problems appear to be in the services accounts.

The largest

When account is taken of

the fact that shipping goods takes time and that exports at the end of
one year may be recorded as imports in the next year,

the residual

asymmetry in the trade balance is positive and relatively small.

The

large negative discrepancy appears to be mainly the result of services
transactions.
In response to the growing global discrepancy, the IMF set up a
working party to investigate the reasons for its growth and to assess its
implications for the usefulness of countries' current account positions
as indicators of the need for policy adjustments.

The working party

concentrated on five areas: direct investment income, portfolio
investment income,

offshore financial centers and financial innovations,

shipping and transportation, and unrequited transfer.
The working party concluded that the most important source of
the global discrepancy was portfolio investment income and that the
overriding factor was the emergence of a large body of cross-border
assets recognized by the debtor countries but not by the creditors,
coupled with a higher level of interest rates after 1979 (IMF 1987,

12).

They reached this conclusion by comparing reported credits an&debits
with estimates based upon independent information on outstanding stocks
of cross-border assets and liabilities and estimates of appropriate
yields.

In particular, heavy reliance was place on the banking data

reported to the Bank for International Settlements (BIS).
The resulting adjustments to portfolio investment income were
widespread; the working party added net credits to the current accounts
of most world areas.

Table 2 reproduces the working party's allocation

-3-

of the services and transfer discrepancy, by country groups, for 1983.
For more detailed analysis, the interested reader is referred to the
report of the working party (IMF 1987).

In conclusion,

they judged that

the additions to countries' net current account receipts were not so
concentrated in any single country or group of countries as to invalidate
the basic thrust of analyses drawn from the uncorrected figures.

C. U.S. STATISTICAL DISCREPANCY

In contrast to the global discrepancy investigated by the IMF,
the U.S. statistical discrepancy need not reflect errors and omissions in
the reporting of current sccount transactions.

In principle, the sum of

all transactions in the U.S. balance of payments accounts, a double-entry
bookkeeping system, should equal zero;
be two equal entries of opposite sign.

for each transaction there should
In practice, the recorded

accounts never sum exactly to zero because the data that would reflect
the debit and credit counterparts of each single transaction generally
are obtained from different sources.

A positive statistical discrepancy

represents some combination of net unrecorded exports of goods and
services to foreigners and net unreported capital inflows from abroad.
The growth of the statistical discrepancy in the U.S.
international transactions accounts is a relatively recent developnent.
In both the 1950's and the 1960's the statistical discrepancy was close
to zero.

(See chart 1.)

In contrast, during the early 1970's there were

substantial net unrecorded outflows or payments.

Since 1974 a positive

statistical discrepancy indicating net unrecorded receipts or inflows has
developed.

This increase in magnitude is not just the result of the

inflation of nominal values.

Consider, for exanple, the ratio of the

-4-

statistical discrepancy to the value of trade (the average of recorded
exports and imports of goods and services).

The mean absolute value of

this ration was .02 in the 1950's and the l96O's, but .05 in the 1970's
and .06 in the 1980's.

The peak values for this ratio in the postwar

period were .14 in 1971 and .10 in 1982.
Possible Explanations
a. Early focus on capital flows

In the early 1980's, it was assumed that the sudden increase in
the positive discrepancy was largely accounted for by unrecorded capital

flows.

The wide quarterly swings in the size of the statistical

discrepancy also supported that conclusion.

It was recognized that

errors and omissions occurred in the reporting of trade transactions, but
there seemed little reason to assume that these errors would suddenly
increase or that they would vary widely from quarter to quarter.
Previous periods of relatively large positive statistical
discrepancies had coincided with unsettled political and economic
conditions abroad.

The ratio of the value of the statistical discrepancy

to trade was about as high as or higher than the 1979-1980 levels (.08)

in certain Depression years (1934, 1935,
World War II (1939-41), and 1948.

and 1937), the early years of

It seemed reasonable to assume that

these earlier episodes were associated with the flight of capital to a
safe haven in the United States in forms that were not fully reported,
either because these investors wanted to remain anonymous or because the
reporting system failed to catch many small investors.

The only other

year since World War II when the statistical discrepancy was relatively
large, although negative, was 1971.

It seemed plausible to assume that

expectations of dollar depreciation plus certain capital export

-5-

restraints hsd led to unrecorded capital outflows in that year.

The

revolution in Iran in 1978 and the second oil crisis, combined with rapid
accumulation of wealth in OPEC hands and the U.S. freeze of Iranian
assets, were all considered potential contributing factors to the
unrecorded inflows in 1979 and 1980.
b. Evidence of unreported canital flows

In general, it is not possible to check the data on U.S. capital
flows used in the international transactions accounts against data on the
same transactions from other sources. Most countries do not collect
detailed information on capital flows, by country.

Moreover, even where

they do, there is little basis for deciding which data are correct.

In

addition, analysis is complicated by the central role of financial
centers like London, which do not collect data on transactions by
foreigners in foreign securities.

For example, in the U.S. data, new

issues of Eurobonds by U.S. corporations show up as sales of securities
to underwriters in the United Kingdom, but the U.K. data would not
include these transactions.
Data comparisons are possible with the few countries that
collect detailed data on capital flows broken down by country and for
certain bank transactions.

In both cases, theae data comparisons suggesc

that there may be substantial errors and omissions in the data on U.S.
international capital flows included in the U.S. international
transactions accounts.
Much has been made in the press in recent years about apparent
discrepancies between U.S. and Japanese data on Japanese purchases of
U.S. Treasury securities.

Unfortunately, precise comparisons are not

possible on the basis of published data because it is aggregated in

-6-

somewhat different

waysJ

The U.S. data indicate that residents of

Japan (both official and private) purchased net virtually no U.S.
Treasury securities in 1986 or 1987 and that, with purchases of other
bonds and stocks, Japanese investments in U.S. securities amounted to
approximately $13 billion in 1986 and $14 billion in 1987.

Japanese data

indicate private Japanese residents alone purchased net $49 billion in
U.S. securities in 1986 and $37 billion in 1987.

Anecdotal evidence

would seem to support the Japanese data, but this impression is largely
based upon the participation of the U.S. offices of Japanese-owned
securities firms in the U.S. Treasury auctions.

These offices did not

report significant net sales of Treasury securities to Japan in these
years.
It is likely that the discrepancy between U.S. and Japanese data
on securities purchases reflects inadequacies in both reporting systems.
Confusion about reporting responsibility is likely to occur in the U.S.
system when the U.S. offices of Japanese
securities for their head offices.

fins

place orders for

The seller of the securities may not

know that the purchaser is the foreign office, while the U.S. office of
the Japanese firm may not report the sale because, technically, they
never owned the securicies.

However, confusion is also possible in the

Japanese reports of transactions by country.

Transactions may be

reported according to the nationality of the debtor, where the security
is listed, or according to the residence of the transactor.

Only if the

data is reported on the last basis would it be consistent with the U.S.
data and, therefore, a check on U.S. data accuracy.

In the U.S. data,

Japanese purchases of Treasury securities in the London market or

-7-

purchases of Eurobonds issued by U.S. corporations would not be recorded
as sales to Japan.
In addition to comparisons of U.S. data with data collected by
other countries for balance of payments purposes, it is also possible to
compare U.S. data with data collected by bank regulatory authorities.
The

MS

receives reports from a large number of countries on banks'

claims on and liabilities to bank and nonbank residents of many
countries. (These data on cross-border bank transactions are also
published in modified form by the International Monetary Fund.)

In

theory, the claims of banks in a foreign country on U.S. banks should
match the liabilities of U.S. banks to banks in that country.

In

practice, precise comparisons are difficult because of differences in
definitions.

Many foreign countries include in their reports holdings by

banks of securities issued by U.S. banks; U.S. banks exclude securities
from their reported liabilities.

(Changing the U.S. reports to include

these would be difficult because the banks have little information on who
holds their securities.)

U.S. banks include in their reports custody

holdings of negotiable instruments such as bankers acceptances and
commercial paper, which need not be the liabilities of banks in the
United States.

In addition, they report as custody liabilities, loans to

U.S. nonbanks that are booked at their offices outside the United States.
In foreign reports, these would be included in claims on U.S. nonbanks.
The

MS

and the IMF are currently working on comparisons of countries'

data and attempting to explain the reasons for discrepancies.
Finally, some comparisons are possible between the U.S.
international transactions data and data collected by the Federal Reserve
Board on U.S. nonbanks' borrowing from and deposits at banks outside the

-8-

United States.

A

special survey covering the end of 1982,

done by the

Federal Reserve with the cooperation of foreign governments, indicated
that the U.S. international transactions data understated dollar deposits
abroad of U.S. nonbank residents by about $75 billion and claims of banks
abroad on U.S. nonbanks by about $25 billion.

A

clarification by the

U.S. Treasury of reporting responsibility in mid-1986 led to a
significant improvement in coverage of bank loans to U.S. nonbanks in the
U.S. data,

although the question of when these capital inflows occurred

was left unanswered and some inflows still appear to be omitted.
However, the large omission of deposits outside the United States has not
been dealt with.

The Federal Reserve now regularly collects data on such

deposits for inclusion in M3, but these data are not used in the U.S.
international transactions accounts because of unresolved problems of
double-counting and the lack of geographic information.

Comparison of

Federal Reserve data with the U.S. international transactions data
indicates that substantial capital flows continue to be omitted.

MS

data on banks' liabilities to U.S. nonbanks are roughly comparable to the
Federal Reserve data.
There are substantial reasons to believe that inadequacies in
the reporting of U.S. capital flows are likely to increase in coming
years.

Growing securitization of international capital flows has shifted

transactions off the balance sheets of banks, who tend to be relatively
accurate reporters.

In addition, the growing sophistication of U.S.

corporations and individuals has increased the volume of transactions
directly with intermediaries located outside the United States (and
beyond the reach of U.S. reporting requirements).

In either case,

it is

much easier to monitor reporting by a few large banks then to gather

-9-

accurate information from thousands of corporations and wealthy
investors.

Moreover, technological changes and innovations require

constant monitoring and efforts to clear up questions of reporting
responsibilities that were not foreseen when report forms were designed.
b. Inadequactes of data on investment income
If the data on U.S. capital flows are inadequate, then certain
components of investment income will be inadequate as well.

There are no

direct reports of income on private portfolio claims and liabilities and
only partial reports on U.S. government interest payments to foreigners.
These income flows are estimated by the Department of Commerce from
information on the level of assets and estimated rates of return.
Estimates of the level of assets depend,

in turn, on periodic benchmark

surveys combined with subsequent recorded capital flows and rough
valuation adjustments.

Benchmark surveys of foreign portfolio

investments in the United States are conducted regularly, but the last
survey of U.S. portfolio assets abroad dates from World War II.

Errors

in valuation adjustments made since that date could potentially cumulate
to a substantial sum.

In addition, omission of capital flows from the

reporting system, such as the increase in U.S. nonbanks' Eurodollar
deposits discussed above, would lead to the understatement of portfolio
investment income.

Based on alternative (higher) estimates of U.S.

nonbanks deposits at banks abroad and liabilities to banks abroad, the
IMF working party estimated that U.S. net investment income was
underestimated by about $4 billion in 1983.

Since 1983, TIC reporting of

liabilities to banks abroad has been improved,

but reporting of claims

has not, so current U.S. net investment income is probably underestimated
by several billions more.

-10-

Errors will also be introduced into the estimates of portfolio
investment income if the Commerce Departments' estimates of rates of
return are inaccurate.

Commerce does periodically review the rates they

use with major banks and other financial institutions, attempting to keep
up with the evolution of financial markets.

However, there are

inevitable problems; to illustrate, the role of the prime rate in bank
lending has diminished dramatically in recent years and the spread over
Libor paid by particular countries may vary.

In addition, the capital

flows data frequently aggregate a mixture of instruments that pay
differing rates of return; little information is available on how they
should be weighted.

For example, data on debt securities with maturities

of more than one year are sggregated.

However, the interest on 30-year

bonds can differ substantially from the rate on 2-year notes that are due
in 30 days.

Moreover, fees on off-balance sheet transactions are

becoming increasingly important to banks;

efforts are currently underway

to improve estimates of income associated with these transactions.

In

conclusion, despite the best efforts of the Department of Commerce, there
are, undoubtedly, inaccuracies in the rates of return they use to
estimate portfolio investment income.

However, it is not clear that

there would be any systematic bias in these errors, leading to a
consistent over or underestimation of receipts or payments.
In contrast to private portfolio receipts and payments, direct
investment receipts and payments are directly reported by businesses.
The reporting system is extensive and missing reporters are likely to be
small investors, not accounting for large amounts.

However, the very low

rate of return on assets reported by foreign direct investors in the
United States does raise questions. Much foreign investment in the

-11-

United States (as well as U.S. direct investment abroad) is in the form
of wholi.y owned subsidiaries; companies try to minimize their tax burdens
by using intercompany transactions to shift profits from high to low tax
jurisdictions.

The IRS recently reached an agreement to collect

substantial back taxes from Toyota and Nissan on the grounds that they
understated their U.S. profits by overcharging their affiliates for
imported cars.

If they had declared the same inflated value for the cars

when they were imported, this would just shift payments from services to
merchandise trade and not contribute to the statistical discrepancy.
However, apparently it was common practice to declare a lower value for
customs purposes than was used in calculating profits (contributing a
negative value to the statistical discrepancy); the IRS has issued a rule
in 1987 ending this practice by foreign investors in the United States.
U.S. direct investors abroad have similar incentives to shift profits to
lower tax jurisdictions, overstating direct investment receipts.
However, this would have little impact on the statistical discrepancy
unless they declared one price for exports to their affiliates in U.S.
export documents and used another in calculating the profits of their
(The failure of multinational companies to adequately charge

affiliates.

their foreign affiliates for R & D expenditures, central administration
costs, etc.

,

would just

shift receipts from services to direct

investment, and not affect the net current account.)
c. Inadequacy of data on other services and unilateral transfers

The growing importance of services in the U.S. economy has led
to efforts over the last decade to improve the coverage of services in
the U.S. international transactions accounts.
remain.

However many inadequacies

The Department of Commerce has just conducted a special survey

-12-

of a wide variety of service transactions with foreigners that are
currently not covered, including sales of information, computer and data
processing services, legal and accounting services, etc.

Depending on

the results, regular surveys may be instituted to cover the most
important types.

In addition, the coverage of medical services provided

to foreigners was added in 1987 and estimates are now included for fees
earned by brokers and dealers on stock and bond transactions. Many gaps
remain; the Commerce Department is currently working on ways to estimste
education expenditures of foreign students in the United States and U.S.
students abroad.
In addition to inadequacies in the coverage of many service
transactions, the current estimates of immigrants transfers (which
include only information on immigrants from Canada) undoubtedly
underestimate the total.

For a country like the United States, with a

tradition of welcoming large numbers of immigrants, the omission of
immigrants transfers from the international transactions accounts could
contribute significantly to the positive statistical discrepancy (see
Frankel and Long 1985).
e. Inadeouacv of data on trade

It is generally assumed that the U.S. data on trade are
reasonably accurate and that errors and omissions in these data could not
explain wide swings in the statistical discrepancy from quarter to
quarter.

However, because imports are frequently subject to duties or

quotas, they are likely to be more carefully tracked than exports.

This

point is illustrated by the results of the regular reconciliation
meetings of U.S. and Canadian statisticians.

Comparison of Canadian with

U.S. customs data has led the Department of Commerce to increase U.S.

-13-

exports in the published accounts by between $6 and $10 billion (or
between 2.5 and 4.7 percent of the compiled total) in the years 1985 to
1987.

However, the underreporting of exports to other countries is

probably not as significant because, unlike the case with Canada, the
compiled data does not depend on compliance with requirements that
truckers place export documents in unmanned drop-boxes at large numbers
of border crossings.
Another potential cause for concern is that fact that a
significant part of U.S. trade is accounted for by transactions between
multinational firms and their affiliates.

Transactions between U.S.

corporations and their majority-owned foreign affiliates accounted for
approximately 25 percent of U.S. merchandise exports and 15 percent of
U.S. merchandise imports in 1986.

Transactions between foreign companies

and their U.S. affiliates accounted approximately for an additional 10
percent of U.S. exports and 25 percent of U.S. imports in 1986.

No

information is available on what part of this trade is with wholely-owned
affiliates, but in cases where transactions are between parts of the same
firm, prices charged affiliates or declared for customs purposes may not
accurately reflect market values.

Presumably, the declared values of

imports subject to customs duties are carefully monitored, but the values
declared on other transactions are probably not scrutinized as carefully,
and may deviate substantially from market value.
e. Conclusions on the adequacy of reportine systems

In conclusion, detailed examination of the U.S. international
transactions accounts reveals many components that are inadequately
covered or where the data appear to be inaccurate.

Efforts are underway

to improve the data, but results in many cases would require significant

-14expenditures of money and increasea in reporting burdens.

Moreover, many

improvements would not necessarily reduce the large positive statistical
discrepancies observed in recent years.
Statistical Analysis
In addition to examining the adequacy of data on components of
the U.S. international transactions accounts, it is possible to explore
the sources of the statistical discrepancy in the accounts by examining
correlations with other data.
In order to explore whether the statistical discrepancy behaves
like unrecorded net capital inflows, I have looked at the correlation
with recorded net capital inflows, components of recorded inflows, and
variables that are conventionally used to explain capital flows such as
imterest rate differentials, expected exchange rate changes, and LDC
capital flight.
It should be recognized that the insights obtained from
correlations between the statistical discrepancy and recorded net capital
inflows or components of recorded inflows are limited.

Lack of

correlation between the statistical discrepancy and a particular
component of the balance of payments accounts does not prove that there
are not substantial errors and omissions in reporting of that component.
The correlation would be highonly if a stable fraction of the balance of
payments component were unreported.

Moreover, since the balance of

payments accounts are a double entry system, any correlation between the
statistical discrepancy and a particular component of the accounts could
be interpreted in two ways: either reporting of that component is
inadequate or reporting of the other side of the transaction is
inadequate.

Sign does not necessarily indicate which interpretation is

-15-

for example, a negative correlation of the statistical

correct;

discrepancy with foreign purchases of corporate securities could indicate
either that sales of securities were being missed or that the reporting
of the assets that investors were switching out of in order to pay for
the securities was inadequate.

In addition, the correlation results must

be treated with caution because the estimates have been unstable; the
addition or elimination of a few observations can change the results,
With these caveats in mind, table 3 shows the results of
regression with various components of the international transactions
accounts.

All components were net to avoid spurious correlation because

both the statistical discrepancy and almost everything else has gotten
larger since 1970.

Multiple regressions were not tried because the

statistical discrepancy is, by definition, equal to the sum of the other
components in the U.S. international transactions accounts with the
reverse sign.

The statistical discrepancy appears to be positively

correlated with net direct investment inflows (equation 6), but
negatively related to other capital inflows (equation 7), particularly
bank reported inflows (equation 8).

One hypothesis that would be

consistent with these results is that capital flows involving banks are
more accurately reported than other flows, and when flows shift to other
channels, errors and omissions rise.
Table 3 also shows the results of a regression relating the
statistical discrepancy to variables that might be used to explain net
capital flows (equation 12): the differential between U.S. and weighted
average foreign long term interest rates and expected exchange rate
changes (where it is assumed that actual exchange rate changes were
correctly expected).

These variables do not explain much of the

-16variation in the statistical discrepancy, but it does appear that the
statistical discrepancy rises when U.S. interest rates rise relative to
foreign.
The next regression (equation 13) on table 3 relates the
statistical discrepancy to one measure of capital flight from Latin
America and the Philippines.

Capital flight is crudely measured as

equal.

to the gross external debt of these countries plus the inflow of net
foreign direct investment minus the current account deficit minus the
change in external assets of the central bank and the commercial banks.
The

in this equation is not comparable to those in the other

regressions because the data are annual rather than quarterly.

However,

the correlation appears strong and the coefficient appears high, implying
that about half of every dollar of capital flight from these countries
ended up in unrecorded U.S. capital inflows.
In conclusion, although these regression results must be viewed
only as suggestive because of the dangers of spurious correlations, they
do seem to support the view that at least part of the statistical
discrepancy in the U.S. international transactions accounts is the result
of errors and omissions in the reporting of capital flows.
Table 3 also reports the results of regressions relating the
statistical discrepancy to components of the current account.

There

appears to be a negative relationship between the trade balance and the
discrepancy (equation 1).

One possible explanation is that a fraction of

the capital inflow necessary to finance the trade deficit is unreported.
There is a positive, but not statistically significant relationship with
the services balances (equation 2).

This positive relationship is

supported by a regression relating the statistical discrepancy to the

-17-

level of U.S. interest rates (equation 14);

if interest income were

being underreported, the amounts involved would tend to increase as
interest rates rose.
Conclusions on the U.S. Statistical Discreyancy
There are strong reasons to suspect errors and omissions in the
reporting of both current and capital account transactions in the U.S.
data.

Inspection of the reporting systems and correlations between the

statistical discrepancy and various variables confirm these suspicions.
However, it is very difficult to quantify the contribution of current
account vs. capital account transactions to the statistical discrepancy.
It would seem safe to assume, however, that the shift of the U.S. current
account from near balance in the first 3 years of the l980s to deficits
of around $150 billion in recent years cannot be accounted for by errors
and omissions; the direction of change is clear, although the exact
magnitude of the deficit could be significantly below $150 billion.

D. INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT POSITION DATA:

GLOBAL

Net debtor positions as well as current accounts are frequently
mentioned as indicators of sustainability and the need for policy
adjustments.

Unlike the current account data, which are readily

available for a large number of countries on a consistent basis from IMF
sources, data on international investment positions must be collected
from national sources.

The difficulties of measuring a country' net

investment position will become apparent in the next section of the
paper, where the U.S. net investment position is examined in detail.
Moreover, since there are no commonly agreed guidelines on how assets and
liabilities should be valued, it is unlikely, even if data were available

-18-

from all countries, that the sum

of

all countries' positions would equal

zero.

With this caveat in mind, table 4 shows net external assets
(excluding gold) for the 7 major industrial countries and IMF projections
for 1987 through 1989 (IMF 1988, 89).

Over the next few years, these

countries as a group are expected to move into a large negative position.
According to the IMF, "Given that the recorded debt stock of the capital
importing countries, which smounted to $1200 billion at the end of 1987,
is unlikely to be fully matched by the assets of the smaller industrial
countries and the capital exporting countries in the Middle East, the
data presented here would seem to confirm the existence of a very large
smount of cross-border assets recognized by debtor countries but which do
not seem to be reflected in the statistics of creditor countries" (IMF
1988,

90).

This theme ia examined in more detail in the Report on the World
Current Account Discrepancy (IMF 1987).

The IMF working party concluded

that the underreporting of assets was widespread across countries; in
particular, estimates of the international claims and liabilities of
nonbanks appear to be deficient.

Some idea of magnitudes can be inferred

from the other side of transactions: bank records of claims on and
liabilities to nonbank foreigners.

The reasons for the inadequacy of

data on nonbanks assets and liabilities vary but include evasion of taxes
and exchange controls and ignorance of reporting requirements.

This

problem has been exacerbated in recent years by the securitization of
international lending;

information on issuers of securities in

international bond markets is readily available, but little information
is available on the purchasers of these securities.

-19-

In conclusion, it appears that there is significant
underreporting of claims in many countries' net investment position data.
However, forecasts of current accounts are likely to provide a reasonable
indication of directions of change and, in many cases, of future trends
in investment income payments.

Moreover, in the case of highly indebted

countries that have experienced significant capital flight, the fact that
some residents of the country have assets hidden abroad and are earning
income on these assets may be of little use if these assets are beyond
government control.

E. U.S. NET INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT POSITION

According to the Department of Commerce, foreign assets in the
United States exceeded U.S. assets abroad by approximately $368 billion
at the end of 1987 (see table 5).

This net debtor position is a recent

development; from World War I through 1984,

the United States was a net

creditor to the rest of the world, with the net asset position reaching a
peak of $141 billion in 1981.

The sharp reversal in recent years is a

result of the large net capital inflows associated with growing U.S.
current account deficits.

Valuation changes estimated by the Department

of Commerce play some role in explaining changes in position from year to
year,

but, in recent years, these valuation changes have been small

relative to recorded capital flows.
As acknowledged by the Department of Commerce, these data are a
rough indicator and not a precise statistical measure of U.S. net
indebtedness to foreigners because of errors and omissions in the U.S.
international transactions data and because of valuation problems.
Errors and Omissions

-20As discussed earlier, the statistical discrepancy in the U.S.
international transactions accounts hss been large snd positive for the
past decade, indicating some combination of omitted net exports of goods
and services and omitted net capital inflows.

In fact,

cumulative net

unrecorded transactions between 1959 and 1987 amounted to over $190
billion.

Since the published net investment data rely only on recorded

capital flows, the real net investment position could be more negative.

On the other hand, alternative sources of data indicate that
U.S. nonbanks' deposits at banks outside the United States are seriously
underestimated in the position data.

As of the end of 1987,

Federal

Reserve data indicate that these deposits are at least $70 billion larger
than the amount included in the position data.
Valuation Problems
Apart from stocks and bonds, the Department of Commerce does not
attempt to revalue assets according to market prices.

And even in the

case of stocks and bonds, the valuation methods may be subject to
substantial errors.
a. Securities

The Treasury Department conducts periodic benchmark surveys of
the value of foreign holdings of U.S. stocks and bonds (lines 16 through
19),

In between these surveys, reliance must be placed on data collected

on new transactions and estimates of the change in value of previous
holdings (based on movements in stock market price indices and interest
rate movements).

In estimating the investment position, BEA is currently

using data from the 1978 benchmark survey; however 1984 data will be
available soon.

Estimates of changes in value are necessarily crude

since foreigners' holdings of stocks may differ in composition from the

-21-

information
stocks included in various market averages and since little
of bonds.
is available on the term structure of foreigners' holdings
For U.S. holdings of foreign stocks and bonds (lines 8 and 9),
War II; no survey
the latest benchmark survey was conducted during World
and
has been conducted since then because of the tremendous difficulty
expense of obtaining accurate data.

As a result, the current estimate of

since World War II and
holdings is based upon data on transactions
valuation adjustments based on foreign stock market indices, interest
of
rate and exchange rate movements. The task of valuing U.S. holdings
the fact that purchases
foreign securities is made even more difficult by
of the
and sales data are collected on the basis of the nationality
centers
transactor, and not the issuer; transactions through financial
like London need not reflect purchases or sales of U.K. securities.

As a

estimated
result, it certainly is possible that the errors in the
valuation adjustments to U.S. holdings of foreign securities could have
cumulated to a substantial sum since World War II.
b. Gold

U.S. official reserve holdings of gold (included in line 3) are
valued at the official price ($42.22 per ounce), while the market price
is about 10 times higher.

U.S. assets would be about $100 billion larger

if gold were valued at current market prices.
c

.

Direct

investment

In addition, direct investment claims (line 6) and liabilities
(line 15) are at book value.

It seems likely that this valuation

understates the market value of U.S. direct investment abroad by more
than it understates the value of foreign direct investment in the United
States because foreign direct investment in the United States is, on

-22-

average, more recent than U.S. direct investment abroad.

One way of

crudely estimating market value would be to assume that the market value
of investments (measured in dollars) increases proportionately with
inflation and exchange rate changes.
direct investment assets in 1964,

Starting with the book value of

inflating each year by a weighted

average foreign price index adjusted for exchange rate changes, and
adding the new capital outflow yields an estimat&df the value of U.S.
direct investment assets of about $700 billion at the end of 1987.

Using

the same methodology, estimated foreign direct investment in the United
States would be $350 billion, and the net position would be $350 billion,
$300 billion larger than the net included by the Department of Commerce.
Comparison of the size of direct investment receipts and
payments suggests that the market value of U.S. assets abroad may exceed
the market value of foreign assets here by even more.

The ratio of

reported receipts to payments in recent yesrs has been about 3 to
contrast to the 2 to 1 ratio estimated above.

1,

in

However, this ratio

calculated using receipts and payments may be distorted by temporary
factors which inflate or depress earnings;

if generally perceived as

temporary, they would have a limited effect on the market value of
assets.

In addition, many affiliates of foreign companies in the United

States and foreign affiliates of U.S. companies are
wholly-owned
subsidiaries; the parent companies enjoy considerable latitude in
determining charges for transactions with their subsidiaries, and tax
considerations may play a significant role in determining where
profits
are reported.
d.Bank claims and liabilities

-23-

Bank reported claims on and liabilities to foreigners (lines 11
and 21) are also at book value.

No adjustment is made, for example, for

the market value of loans to countries experiencing debt servicing
problems (as long as the banks continue to carry the loans on their books
at full value).
Conclusions
The net international investment position of the United States,
as published by the Department of Commerce, is subject to a substantial
margin of error because of the errors and omissions in the U.S.
international transactions accounts and because of valuation problems.
However, given the magnitude of recent U.S. current account deficits,
there is little doubt that the published data correctly indicate the
direction and rough magnitude of change.

F. USEFULNESS OF CURRENT ACCOUNT AND POSITION DATA AS INDICATORS OF

DISEQUILIBRIUM
Even if data were completely accurate, a given current account
and investment position may not clearly indicate the need for policy
changes because of lags in the adjustment process or underlying long run
trends.

Lan
The problem
indicator
illustrated

with

using

of disequilibrium

by considering

observed

requiring

current

policy

account

adjustments

the current U.S. situation.

positions

as an

can be
Estimates of

whether substantial further depreciation of the dollar is necessary to
correct the U.S. current account deficit depend crucially on whether all
or only part of the impact of the depreciation of the dollar from its

-24-

high of February 1985 has been realized.

Given current techniques

for

estimating the length and shape of lagged adjustments, it is possible for
different econometricians
the seme data.

to arrive at very different conclusions using

This problem has been discussed extensively elsewhere,

for example at the January 1987 Brookings workshop on the U.S. external
deficit,
Hooper,

and I do not intend to repeat it.

(See Bryant, Holtham, and

eds. 1988, 101-139.)

Underlying Lona Run Trends
Another problem with using current account or investment
position data as an indicator of required policy adjustments is the need
to take into account underlying trends.

For example,

it may be

appropriate for a country with a rapidly aging population to run current
account surpluses and accumulate assets in preparation for future years
when a large retired population must be supported.

There are many

additional factors which might mean that it would be unwise to identify
current account balance with equilibrium and current account surpluses or
deficits with disequilibrium.

I plan to focus on only one of these:

the

implications for future U.S. net investment income of the growing U.S.
net international indebtedness.
Many observers have concluded that the United States will have
to run substantial trade surpluses in the future to cover large net
payments of investment income on the U.S. net debtor position.

Crude

estimates are arrived at by assuming that the U.S. net debt will
accumulate to $1 trillion and by assuming an interest rate, for example
percent, producing an estimate of around $70 billion per year in net
interest payments.

These back-of-the-envelopcalculations probably

7

-25-

substantially overstate the net interest payments that are likely to be
associated with a recorded U.S. net investment position of that size.
The reasons for this are twofold: first, the rate of return on
U.S. assets abroad tends to be higher than the rate of return on foreign
assets in the United States, and, second, while U.S. liabilities are
growing more rapidly than U.S. assets, both are likely to continue to
trend upwards.

The combined effect of these factors is illustrated by

the fact that net investment income was positive in 1987 despite a
sizable net debtor position.

U.S. net investment income would tend to

increase if our net debtor position were not growing.
a. Relative rates of return

Two questions are apparent: is this differential in rates of
return likely to persist in the future and does it represent a real
difference or just a recorded difference in rates of return?

Turning

first to direct investment, table 6 shows the rate of return on direct
investment as published by the Department of Commerce.

Because the

direct investment position used in these calculations is measured at boo1
value, and since direct investment in the United States is, on average,
more recent than U.S. direct investment abroad, the value of U.S. direct
investment abroad is more seriously understated because of inflation than
the value of foreign direct investment in the United States.

If the

rates of return are recalculated using Department of Commerce capital
flows data, adjusted for inflation and exchange rate changes (also shown
on the table),

the differences are reduced substantially, but some margin

remains.
Some differential might be expected on the grounds that some
U.S. direct investment abroad is located in countries where political and

-26-

economic risks are significant.

However, a major part of the

differential is probably the result of tax incentives which lead
multinational firms to use transfer prices to shift reported profits to
lower tax jurisdictions abroad.

Although U.S. corporate tax rates were

lowered recently relative to other industrial countries, they still
remain above rates in various tax havens.

The incentive to report

profits abroad will probably persist, inflating reported receipts on U.S.
direct investment abroad and depressing payments on foreign direct
investment in the United States.

Balancing this distortion of the direct

investment accounts is the underreporting of exports of goods and
services by U.S. corporations to their affiliates abroad and the
overstatement of the imports of goods and services by the U.S. affiliates
of foreign companies.

These understatements of net credits on other

current account items are likely to grow as direct investment in and out
of the United States continues to expand, so errors in the returns on
direct investment are likely to be matched by equal and opposite errors
in other current account items.
Turning now to portfolio investment income, table 7 shows the
average rates of return implicit in the data published by the Department
of Commerce on income and position.
payments

The implicit rate for private

has been consistently below the rate for government payments and

private receipts. There are several explanations for this. First, at
the end of 1987, foreign holdings of U.S. equities amounted to $173
billion, somewhat less than 20 percent of the U.S. private sector's
portfolio liabilities to foreigners while U.S. holdings of foreign
equities amounted to only $56 billion, less than 10 percent of U.S.
private portfolio claims on foreigners.

Since dividends generally

-27-

and since capital
provide only a part of the expected return on equities,
of payments accounts, the
gains on stocks are excluded from the balance
liabilities is
average rate of return on both portfolio claims and
side.
brought down, but the impact is larger on the payments
Second, the bulk of U.S. portfolio claims and liabilities are
reported by banks: about three-quarters of private claims and threefifths of private liabilities.

As intermediaries, banks make profits by

earning more on their assets than they pay on their liabilities.2

In

addition, the Department of Commerce includes in receipts of income on
U.S. assets abroad estimates of fees earned by banks in the United States
for various services provided to foreigners.

In response to pressures to

the growth of
improve capital adequacy, major U.S. banks have slowed
their balance sheets and have focused increased attention on profitable
off-balance sheet transactions.

Fees from these off-balance sheet

services to foreigners are likely to continue to grow in the future.
Finslly, U.S. nonbanks are likely to be paid a higher rate of
return on their dollar deposits abroad than foreigners are paid on their
bank deposits in the United States because of the absence of reserve
requirements and deposit insurance charges in the Eurodollar market.
b. Growth of gross claims and liabilities
Despite the shift to a net debtor position, U.S. assets abroad
have continued to grow, illustrating the continuing internationalization
of financial markets and the use of U.S. financial institutions as
intermediaries by foreigners.

As can be seen on chart 2, the rate of

in recent years,
growth of U.S. portfolio claims on foreigners has slowed
as the U.S. current account deficit has grown.

However the deceleration

is exaggerated by the rapid growth of bank claims in 1981 and 1982;

in

-28-

these years banks shifted business from the books of their affiliates
outside the United States to their newly established International
Banking Facilities (IBF5).

The slower growth of bank claims in recent

years also has been associated with the debt crisis and efforts to
improve capital adequacy as well as a slowdown in inflation.

As a

result, one might expect the rate of growth of U.S. private portfolio
claims on foreigners to remain somewhat below the average for the 1970s
and early 1980s, but to remain significant.
U.S. direct investment assets abroad have also continued to grow
In recent years, although the year to year changes are sensitive to
fluctuations in economic activity (and currency translation effects)
U.S. based firms are likely to continue to invest in growing economies
abroad and the pressures of international competition are likely to
continue the trend toward global sourcing and expansion of production
facilities in countries with lower costs.
c. Implications for U.S. net investment income

The simulations done with the Multicountry Model of the Federal
Reserve Board for the Brookings Conference on the U.S. Current Account
(January 1987) illustrate the implications of continuing growth of U.S.
gross claims on foreigners for future net investment income.

Between

1986 and 1991 the U.S. net investment position declines by $746 billion,
from -$280 billion to -$1026 billion.

However, U.S. net investment

income declines only by $23 billion, from $22 billion to -$1 billion.
These numbers are just illustrative; they should not be interpreted as a
forecast because the underlying assumptions are somewhat arbitrary and
have, in many cases, been overtaken by more recent developments.

But

they do illustrate the point that underlying trends must be taken into

-29-

account, along with current account positions, in analyzing necessary
policy adjustments.
E. CONCLUSIONS

The data on U.S. and other countries' current accounts and
international investment positions appear to be subject to a considerable
margin of error.
be illusory.

However, large shifts in recorded data are unlikely to

There is little doubt that the United States has been

and that the
running massive current account deficits in recent years
rest of the world has accumulated large claims on the United States as a
result.

While the data may be accurate enought to discern broad trends,

current account and net investment positions do not always yield
unambiguous signals of the need for policy adjustments.

This is

illustrated by the current debate over the appropriate exchange rates for

the U.S.

dollar.

-30-

Lois Stekier
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bryant, Ralph, Holtham, Gerald, and Hooper, Peter, editors, External
Deficits and the Dollar, Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C., 1988.

Frankel, Allen and Long, Alice, The Treatment of Immigrants' Transfers in
U.S. International Transactions Data, Unpublished memo, Federal Reserve
Board, Washington D.C., January 3, 1985.

Helkie, William and Stekier, Lois, Modeling Investment Income and Other
Services in the U.S. International Transactions Accounts, International
Finance Discussion Paper Number 319, Washington, D.C., December 1987.

IMF, Report on the World Current Account Discrepancy, IMF, Washington
D.C. September 1987.

IMF, World Economic Outlook. April 1988, IMF, Washington D.C., 1988.

Krueger, Russell C .,"U.S.

Intenational Transactions, First Quarter

1988, in U.S. Department of Commerce, Survey of Current Business, June
1988.

Scholl, Russell, "The International Investment Position of the United
States in 1987", in U.S. Department of Commerce, Survey of Current
Business, June 1988.

31
Lois Stekler

END NOTES
1. The published U.S. data aggregate official and private purchases of

U.S. Treasury or other securities by Japan, while the Japanese data
exclude central bank purchases of securities and do not distinguish
between U.S. Treasuries and other long

ten bonds.

in world current
2. The IMF Working Party on the statistical discrepancy
account balances used a spread of 250 basis points between the rate
earned on bank claims on nonbanks and the rate paid on liabilities to
nonbanks; the spread on interbank transactions is much smaller.

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

Statistical Discrepancy

Statistical Discrepancy in U.S. International Transactions Accounts

Chl

1982

1987

14

+
0

14

21

28

35

42

Billions of Dollars

U.S. Ifltema,,a, flvesjme, Posftj0
Po,Uoio Claims and Uablgltj86

8OflS

Ofj
1200

1000

800

U.S. PortfoIo Claims on Foraig,

600

400

200

Direct Investment Claims and

flhions of Dollars

Uabjft,j

moo

800

600

400

U.S.

Dlr lnveClaims on Foreig



200

u.S.

DfreI,

Uat,Jeo

Fog
0

1983

1964

1985

1988

1987

Total /

Industrial countries
Developing countries
Other countries 21

on Current Account J/:

-3.0

2.1

3.0

5.1
1.7

0.8

0.4

18.1
-3.5
21.6

-1.5
-9.4
7.9

3.3

1.0
2.3

9.6
-1.0
10.6
-3.6

9.3
12.9

5.9
8.5
-2.5

35.6
20.0
15.6

-43.6 -74.5 -89.7 -72.8 -86.2 -72.4 -51.3 -64.0
-5.8
-6.1
-8.8
-9.3 -10.5
-8.7 -10.5
-5.8
-6.2
1.4
4.1
2.2
-1.6
0.2
-0.1
-14.5 -12.5 -12.9 -10.1 -11.7 -11.7 -16.0 -22.3

30.9
11.0
19.9

-27.3 -68.6 -105.7 -79.5 -86.1 -73.5 -57.3 -44.6

0.8

-58.8 -17.0 -20.9 -18.5 -57.7 -50.8 -19.3 -49.4
4.4
33.5 -24.3 -38.9
30.6 -48.6 -86.9 -64.0

.0.3

-8.4

39.3
16.0
23.3

-6.7
6.4

-20.7 -21.9

-6.6
5.7

-77.4 -83.6

34.8
18.0
16.8

-57.5 -59.8

7.9
0.2

-49.8 -51.1

12.J. 12Z 12I 14 19I 191k J,2l l988' J.2&"

Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook, April 1988, page 143.

/ IMF projections.

3,1 Including official transfers.
2/ Covers estimated balances on current transactions only in convertible currencies of the U.S.S.R. and nonmember
countries of Eastern Europe.
/ Reflects errors, omissions, and asymmetries in reported balance of payments statistics on current account, plus
balances with countries not included.
J Staff estimates of the difference between the beginning-of-year and end-of-year "float," that is, the value of those
exports that have not yet been recorded as imports (usually because the goods are in transet of because of delays in the
processing of the documentation). The estimates should be viewed only as rough orders of magnitude.

Balance on services
(in percent of service payments)
Private transfers, net
Official transfers, net

Trade balance
Timing
Residual asymmetry

Total by Selected Categories:

Balances

12.Q

Table 1
Global Current Account Discrepancy
(billions of dollars)

Source:

-2.9

+3.1

+12.6

+58.1

+3.4

--

+7.0

--

+8.4

--

--

--

-7.0

--

-7.0

+7.6

+2.5

+10.4

+0.8

--

+6.7

+29.0

+13.0

+5.9

+0.4

+3.0

-3.7

+3.1

+5.9

+27.7

+13.9

+2.0

+6.0

+5.5

-3.7

+3.1

+5.9

32.8

+4.4

+4.0

-3.7

+0.6

--

--

--

+5.3

-5.3

-0.1

-1.9

-3.1

---

--

-10.4

countries Industrial

exporters oil East Middle

centers banking Offshore

countries developing Other

countries European Eastern

C., D. Washington, Discrepancy, Account Current World the on Report IMF,

+16.8

--

+1.0

109. page 1987,

+2.9
-2.0

---

Total

+11.5

--

organizations International

Unallocated

+14.0

Total

income
income
earnings
investment
investment Reinvested
Non-direct direct Other
Investments on Income

Services
Other

Transport
and
Shipment

fers
Trans-

Merchandise
Excluding
Account,
Current Total

dollars) of (billions
1983 Groups, Country by Discrepancy, Transfer and Services of Allocation
2 Table

Table 3
Statistical Discrepancy Regressions
A.

Components of U.S. International Transactions (1970Q-1987Q4)
Coefficient

Exlanatorv Variable
Trade balance
Services balance
net investment income
3.
other service income
4.
5.
Current account balance
6. Net direct investment capital inflow
7.
Net other private capital inflows
bank reported
8.
9.
nonbarik reported
10. Net official capital inflow
11.
foreign official inflow

-0.13
0.32
0.43
0.53
-0.10
0.37

1.

2.

B.

-0.16

-0.18
-0.04
-0.09
-0.12

Coefficient

Variable

D.

-2.51
1.54
1.60
0.90
-2.02
2.23
-2.94
-2.66
-0.36
-1.13
-1.28

.11
.06
.06
.05
.09
.10
.12
.12
.04
.05
.06

T

Stat.
6.01
2.66
1.03

Capital Flight (1978-1987)

Coefficient

Ex1anatorv Variable

13.

Stat.

3.9
1.1
16.7

Constant
U.S. -foreign interest differential 2/
Exchange rate change

J

C.

T

Variables Used to Explain Capital Flows (l974Ql-1987Q4)
ExDlanatorv

12.

),J

Constant
Capital flight

15.0

/

.57

T

Stat.
6.27 '
3.30

3

U.S. Interest Rate Level (1970Q].-l987Q4)

Exlanatorv Variable
14. Constant

U.S. treasury bill rate

Coefficient
-1.4

J

.6

T Stat.
-

.78

2.63

All regressions were OLS with Cochrane-Orcutt correction. Data were
J
in billions of dollars. Annual data was used in
capital flight
the

regressions, quarterly data in all others (not including the seasonal
discrepancy adjustment).
2/ Interest rate on 10 year U.S. Treasury bonds minus the trade weighted
average of rates on 10 year government bonds for the C-b countries.
Change in the Federal Reserve trade weighted index of the value of the
dollar igainat G-b0 currencies (I f/ Capital flight from 10 Latin Lserican countries and the Philippines.
Equal to the gross external debt plus the inflow of net foreign direct
investment minus the current account deficit, minus the change in external
assets of the central banks and the commercial banks.
U.S. Treasury bill rate - 3 month, secondary market.

't1)/'t.1

/

232.6

-36.9

143.0

-133.7

-6.3

191.9

-35.0

152.2

-89.9

266.0

-3.4

150.5

-34.0

159.5

-274.7

179.3

1.0

106.3

-34.0

162.3

-1.9

-123.0

128.9

-11.4

58.6

-32.1

105.4

4.3

-7.5

73.5

-22.2

34.1

-18.2

84.5

29.9

78.5

36.4

-20.7

27.4

-18.1

69.2

60.1

125.9

23.7

-11.8

27.2

-20.9

56.0

93.6

129.9

9.9

--

20.1

-14.7

47.6

81.3

95.1

10.5

--

26.1

-1.1

27.2

69.4

States United

Japan

of Rep. Fed. Germany,

Italy

Kingdom United

89. page C., D. Washington, 1988, April Outlook, Economic World IMF,
Source:
rates. interest and rates exchange real constant of assumptions baseline
Outlook Economic World on based and effects valuation excluding projections, and estimates Staff IMF j/

-9.6
343.8
-435.4

Canada

France

above countries
major Seven

419.2
-576.5

-46.1

-710.3

-88.4

1980

-111.5

1981

-106.5

1982

-112.6

1983

-114.3

1984

-122.1

1985

-142.1

1986

-149.3

l987"

-160.0

198811

-171.7

l989"

dollars) of billions period, of (End
1980-89 Gold, Excluding Assets, External Net Countries: Industrial Major
4 Table

Table 5

Source: Survey of Current Business, June 1988 page 78.

12. Foreign assets in the United States
Foreign official assets in the U.S.
13.
Other foreign assets in the United States
14.
Direct investment in the United States
15.
16.
U.S. Treasury securities
U.S. securities other than U.S. Treasury securities
17.
Corporate and other bonds'
18.
19.
Corporate stocks
20.
U.S. liabilities to unaffiliated foreigners
reported by U.S. nonbanking concerns
21.
U.S. liabilities reported by U.S. banks, not
included elsewhere

3.

U.S. assets abroad
U.S. official reserve assets
US. Goverzent assets, other than official
4.
5.
U.S. private assets
Direct investment abroad
6.
7.
Foreign securities
Bonds
8.
9.
Corporate stocks
U.S. claims on unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S.
10.
nonbanking concerns
U.S. claims reported by U.S. banks
11.

2.

investent position of the United States

1. Net

international

Type of investent

Line

82

51
33
507

40
29
447

43
19
35
204

18
60

260
133

30
548

56

309
147
91

29

539

309
142
167
27

452

84
206
82

124
29

354

74
10
65

30

121

46
10
36
14
42

185
16

4

220
91

171
173

262
78
344

283

858 1,099 1,253
325
83

134
28

242
203

176

221
87

501 1,061 1,341 1,536

63

517
215

1,168
46
88

933 1,034

49
90

43
88
819
230
113
73

27

16
42
237
124
35
25
10

64

950 1,071

607

295

-368

-269

-111

1987

1986

1985

106

1980

74

1975

International Investent Position of the United States at Yearend
(Nillions of dollars)

Table 6
Implicit Rates of Return on U.S. Direct Investments
U.S. Direct Investment Claims
Dent. of Commerce
Adjusted

1980
1981
1982
1983
1984

18.4
14.4

1985
1986
1987

14.8
15.7

9.9
9.5

10.2

18.4

U.S. Direct Investment Liabilities
Adlusted
DeDt, of Commerce

9.06

15.4

7.11

6.92
5.24
5.87
6.65

9.8
2.6
4.3

5.13

6.1

1.88
2.66
4.32

6.28
5.46
5.95

3.5
2.7

2.99
2.66

4.4

3.24

Table

7

Implicit Rates of Return on U.S. Portfolio Investments
U.S. Portfolio Claims
Govt.
Private
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984

12.20
15.00
12.79
10.63

1985
1986
1987

8.76
7.30
6.74

9.71

U.S. Portfolio Liabilities
Private
Govt.

4.96

8.49
10.20
9.30
6.89
7.82

9.18
10.99
11.33
9.95
10.11

4.87
5.20
4.24

6.41
5.40
5.43

9.40
8.40
8.11

3.55
4.31
4.48

4.84

