                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             PRECAUTIONARY SAVING IN THE SMALL AND IN THE LARGE




                              Miles S. Kimball




                           Working Paper No. 2848




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                               February 1989




I would like to thank Creg Mankiw, Leslie Young, Lars Hansen, Stephen Zeldes,
                                                                       in
Phillipe Weil and Ted Bergstrom for helpful discussions, participants
various seminars for insightful comments, and the editor and two anonyaous
referees for excellent suggestions.   This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Financial  Markets and Monetary Economics.  Any opinions expressed
are those of the author not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                           NBER Working Paper #2848
                                           February 1989


              PRECAUTIONARY SAVING IN THE SMALL AND IN THE LARGE


                                     ABSTRACT


     The theory of precautionary saving is shown in this paper to be

isomorphic to the Arrow-Pratt theory of risk aversion, making possible

the application of a large body of knowledge about risk aversion to

precautionary saving, and more generally, to the theory of optimal choice

under risk.   In particular,   a measure of the strength of precautionary

saving motive analogous to the Arrow-Pratt measure of risk aversion is

used to establish a number of new propositions about precautionary

saving, and to give a new interpretation    of the Oreze-Modigliani sub-

stitution effect.


                                           Miles S. Kimball
                                           Department of Economics
                                           University of Michigan
                                           Ann Arbor, MI 48109
I. Introduction
     It has been recognized since Bernoulli (1738) that risk aversion can be associated with concav-
ity of utility functions. But it was not until Pratt (1964) and Arrow (1965) that it was recognized
that the function z4iLl_or the related index                was an excellent measure of risk aversion.

Subsequently,    the Arrow-Pratt  measures of  absolute and  relative risk aversion have often demon-
strated their usefulness in a wide range of both theoretical and empirical studies of behavior under
uncertainty.5 In addition, the example of the Arrow-Pratt measures of risk aversion has spurred
a considerable amount of research on other ways to characterize aspects of risk aversion, such as
Ross' (1981) work on a notion of "strongly more risk averse" or Pratt and Zeckhauser's (1987) work
on "proper risk aversion."
      In the study of precautionary saving, it has been known since Leland (1968) and Sandmo
(1970) that precautionary saving in response to risk is associated with convexity of the marginal
utility function, or a positive third derivative of a von Neumann-Morgensternutility function. More
generally, Rothschild and Stiglitz (1971) note that if an individual's utility is a function of a control
variable 8 and an exogenous random variable 9, so that he or she solves

                                             maxEV(9,8),
using the first-order condition
                                               E         = 0,
then if       convex in 9, increases in the variability of 9 will result in increases in the optimal
                 is

choice of 8. This is analogous to the fact that a concave utility function indicates risk aversion.

However, unlike the theory of risk aversion, which lays out in considerable detail the determinants
of the magnitude of the effects of risk on ezpected utility, the theory of the optimal response of
decision variables to risk (which includes precautionary saving as a subcase) has not hitherto said
much about the magnitude of these responses. Fortunately, as will be shown, this is an easily
remedied deficiency, since a straightforward reinterpretation of the mathematical theory yields an
equally powerful theory of the optimal response of decision variables to risk—and in particular,a
theory of precautionary saving closely analogous to the Arrow-Pratt theory of risk aversion.
     Mathematically,the Acrow-Pratt index —v"(x)/v'(z) = a(x) is a good measure of risk aversion
because given two utility functions vs(x) and v2(z), ifai(x) > a2(x) for all z, then vs(z) = g(v2(z))
where g() is a monotonically increasing, concave function.2 If v5    is   thus   a concave or   "risk averse"


       The References    many papers in this category.
                   include
   2   See   Pratt (lse4) for a proof.

                                                    1
transformation of v2, then it can readily he shown          that v1   implies more risk averse behavior     than
V2

     Analogously, as long as the cross-partial 82v(9,6) is uniformly positive or uniformly nega-
                   a
tive, the index — V2(9s)     5)     = q(O, 6) is a good measure of the sensitivity of the optimal
choice of 6 to risk because (by the same mathematical result used above) given two indirect util-

ity functions   V1(9, 6) and 1/3(9,6) and a fixed      initial value of 6, if sji(9, 6) >    s(9, 6)   for all 9,
then            = h (av;o)) where      h)is monotonically increasing and concave if Ot9,6) > 0 but
convexif            < 0. If 8v,(&61 is thus a concave or convex transformation of dV,61 then in
certain important senses detailed below, the indirect utility function V5 implies a different degree
of sensitivity of the optimal choice of 6 to risk than the indirect utility function V2
     If we give the name "prudence" to the sensitivity of the optimal choice of a decision variable
to risk, then      6) is a measure of "absolute prudence," and 9 i(9, 6) is a measure of "relative
prudence," just as a(x) is a measure of absolute risk aversion and x a(x) is a measure of relative
risk aversion. The term "prudeuce" is meant to suggest the propensity to prepare and forearm
oneself in the lace of uncertainty, in contrast to "risk aversion," which is how much one dislikes
uncertainty and would turn away from uncertainty if one could.3
    Though the analogy between the theory of risk aversion and the theory of the optimal response
of decision variables to risk is quite general, concreteness is especially importantin illustrating a
technique of reinterpretation. The determination of precautionary saving is an example of the effect
of risk on a decision variable that is not only simple, but also one that has considerable importance
in its own right. Therefore, after a few remarks on a general plane in Section II, establishing the
usefulness of "prudence" as a measure of the sensitivity of choices to risk, we will turn to a deeper
investigation of precautionary saving.4 Section III establishes the formal similarity between the
theory of precautionary saving in particular and the theory of risk aversion. Section IV applies the
most basic results about risk aversion to precautionary saving. Section V explores the consequences
of decreasing, increasing or constant absolute prudence in the context of precautionary saving,
including the effects of uncertainty on the marginal propensity to consume out of wealth. Section
VI briefly considers the consequences of facing more than one risk at a time. Section VII uses the
concept of "prudence" to provide a novel interpretation of the Drkze-Modigliani (1972) substitution
effect as the consequence of the precautionary saving motive being stronger than risk aversion in

     In differentcontexts, "prudence" will have different meanings. In the paradigmaticexample of the consemption-
     saving decision under uncertainty, "prudence"represents the intensity of the precautionarysaving mntive.
     Kimball (1955a) offers another, quite different, example of how the mathematical theory of risk aversion can
     be used to study optimal decisions under risk.

                                                        2
the case of decreasing absolute risk aversion and weaker than risk aversion in the case of increasing
absolute risk aversion. Section VIII concludes the paper.

H. Prudence as a Measureof the Sensitivity of a Decision Variableto Risk
     Four of the basic results in the theory of risk aversion involving risk premia can be applied
readily to any model of choice under uncertainty that falls under Rothschild and Stiglitz' (1971)
general description. In order to state these results we must first define two concepts analogous to
risk premia.
    Let a probability distribution for 9 be analyzed into 9 = 9o + where 9 is a certain quantity
and 6 is a random variable. Then we will call an "equivalent precautionary premium" for 6 if it
satisfies

                                       ___________       —
                                                         —   OV(90—',81)
                                               as                as

for some5. If both sides of (1) equal zero, then 55 satisfies the first order conditions for an optimum
                                                                    r
for two different distributions of 9: for 9 equal to 9o — with certainty, and for 9 equal to the
random variable ee + 6. If these first order conditions are also sufficient for an optimum, then the
equivalent precautionary premium is the certain reduction in 8 from the initial value 8e that has
the same effect on the optimal value of the decision variable as the addition of the random variable
6; in both cases the optimal value of 6 changes from te = arg max5V(8, 5) to 55.
     Similarly, we will call   '" a "compensating precautionary premium"5 for              U   if it satisfies
                                             6
                                    E OV(95 + + st', So)        —
                                                                —   OV(80, 5)
                                                 as                     as

If both sides of (2) equal      zero---as they will be       if 5e is   defined   as at the end of the previous
paragraph—and these first order conditions are sufficient for an optimum, then the compensating
precautionary premium      °
                         is the shift in the distribution of 9 that compensatesfor the effect of the
random variable 8 on the optimal value of 5,6
     The parallel between these precautionary premia and risk premia can be shown more clearly by
Table 1. Pratt's (1964) notation ir      is   used to denote an equivalent risk premium and           7r   to denote

     See Pope and Chavas (1985) for a discusdon of the distinction between equivalent and cnmpensating risk
     premia, which are analogous to equivalent and rompensating variations under certainty. Pratt (1964) refers
     to this distinction in passing, noting that the "asking price" price of a risk (the equivalent risk premium) is
     different from the "bid price" of a risk (the compensatingrisk premium). He refers to the compensating risk
     premium as the "bid price" of a risk.
     Compensation for an effect on a decision variable should not be confused with welfare compensation. The two
     often do not coincide, as can be seen, for example, in Section VII on the Dréze-Modigliani substitution effect.

                                                         3
a compensating risk premium.7 Table 1 shows the definitions of the precautionary premia for both
the special case of precautionary saving, which will be addressed in the succeeding sections, and
for the general case.

                                                        Table   1


                         Comparison of Risk and PrecautionaryPremia


            Equivalent Risk Premium it                          Compensating Risk Premium           r
                 E v(x + .1) = v(       —   ir(2, x))           E ri(z + I + ir(I, it)) = v(z)
Equivalent PrecautionaryPremium if'                             Compensating Precautionary Premium
                (precautionarysaving case)                      (precautionarysoving case)
                Ev'(s + y) = v'(s — ib(,s))                     Ev'(s + + sf'5(ys)) = v'(s)
                   (general case)                               (generalcase)
  EOV(90+9S)= &v(ao—4(O,es,5),s)
          85                       85
                                                                E3v(9o+0+9s5)5)
                                                                       85
                                                                                = OV(9o,S)
                                                                                    85

Note: In the arguments of it,   r, if', and if', the symbols I,          and 9 represent the entire distributions
of I, and 0, not particular realizations.

    The only difference between the definition of a precautionary premium and the definition of the
                                                                                   to the decision
corresponding risk premium is in the substitution of marginal utility with respect
                                                                                    &2V(9,5)is either uniformly
variable for total utility. Furthermore, given our assumption that
                                                                                     or _.JC$ç5, considered as
positive or uniformly negative over the relevant region, either
a function of 9,   is   a monotonically increasing function to which theorems about monotonically
                                                                                      the definition of
increasing utility functions can be applied. Since changing the sign of both sides of
a precautionary premium leaves an equivalent expression, the substitution of or                   —
                                                                                             for v and

the substitutionof if' and lb* for it and ir describes a complete isomorphism between statements
 about risk premia and statements about precautionary premia.
     Two of the most importanttheorems about equivalent risk premia can be found in John Pratt's
 (1964) brilliant article "Risk Aversion in the Small and in the Large." The "risk aversion in the

     Throughout the paper, all formulasinvolvingr, sw and have
     zero means, unless stated otherwise. However, when S or 9
                                                                    r
                                                                    apply even when the risks involved do not have
                                                                        non-zero means, 'r, re     and b must he
     interpreted as minus certainty equivalents or minus certainty compensations, rather than as premia.

                                                           4
small" of Pratt's title refers to the result that for a small mean-zero uncertainty E, the equivalent
risk premium    is
                                       —v"(x) cr2             2            a2         2
(3)                         ir(,x)=  v'(x)
where o(c) denotes a quantitythat approaches zero faster than                    o
                                                                         as cr —s 0. In an even more

striking result, Pratt demonstrates that absolute risk aversion also indicates the intensity
                                                                                              of "risk

aversion in the large" since given two utility functions v1 and v2, if v1 always has a higher measure

of absolute risk aversion—that is, ai(x) =         Z7>        = a2(z) for all z—then the equivalent
risk premium will always be greater for v1 than for 02 (ri(,x) > ,r2(2,z) for all z and i). This
is a result of the fact we noted above that if ai(z) > a2(x) for all z then vj(x) is a concave
transformation of vo(x).
     These two results are readily translatedinto the language of optimal choice under risk. Por a
small mean-zero uncertainty, U, the equivalent precautionary premium is


(4)                    4'(J,Oo,S) =
                                        03V(9, 5)

                                    02V(o,s)
                                      0985
                                                     -    +o(a) =

"In the large," if given two indirect utility functions V1 and V2 and a fixed initial value of 5, if V1
has a globally higher measure of absolute prudence than V2—that is,
                                             81/(9,5)             82 V2(9, 5)

                             qi(9 5)     —    pg2p            —     p9255       = 112(9,5)
                                             OuT/i(9,5)           82V2(9,5)
                                       0905        8905
for all 9—then the equivalent precautionary premium will be greater for                      V1   than for   V2

(5j1(U,90,5) > b2(9,O,5) for all 9o and U).
      Pratt (1964) mentions the concept of a compensating risk premium only in passing,9 but
 the statementsabove apply to compensating risk premia and precautionary premia as well as to
                                                                                  = —
 equivalent risk premia and precautionary premia. Appendix A shows that f(x) x ,r(i, x)
                                                                                         and

 g(x) = r + lr(i, x) are mutual inverses,10 so that for a small zero-mean risk i,
                                         x) = ir(E, x + ir(i, z))
                                            = a(x + ir(z,     —       2

                                                           x))—( + o(c5))
                                              =
                                                  a(x)-- + o(cfl,
      This is true both when the cross partials             are positive and when they are negative. However, it is
      essential that the cross partials have the same sign for both V5 and V2.
      See footnote
      These are ordinary point-valued functions, since as long as the utility function is monotonically increasing,
      there is at most one possible valos for a risk premium.

                                                          5
 as long as absolute risk aversion a(s) is continuous. Furthermore, the fact that       f(s) = a' — r(2, x)
 and g(x) = a' +  r,   x) are mutual inverses implies the following lemma:
 Lemma: Let each utility functionbestrictly increasing and continuous and let
                                                                                      irs(2,a'), ir(2, a'),
 7r2(z,a') and ir(2, x) be the equivalent and compensating risk premia for two different utility func-
 tions, vs(x) and v2(a'). If irs(I,a')  (>)ir2(2,a') for all a' where both ir5(2,a') and ir2(2,a') exist
 and both exist for some value ofa', then irT(i,a')
                                                       (>)ir(2,a') for all a' where both             and
                                                                                               irç(2,a')
7r(z,a') exist. Similarly, for one utility function and two risks 2 and 22, if ir(2s,a') (>)r(ia,a')
for all a' where both exist, and both exist for some value of a', then 1r(ks,a') (>)ir(22, a') for all
a' where both exist. Both statements are also true      if the equivalent and compensating premia are
interchanged.

     A proof is in Appendix A. As a consequence of this lemma, not only only are
                                                                                 equivalent and
compensating risk premia approximately equal "in the small," but almost all significant qualitative
results about equivalent risk premia are interchangeable with
                                                                corresponding results about compen-
sating risk premia, including the result the result about risk premia "in the large" discussed above.
Furthermore, because of the close analogy between risk premia and precautionary premia, we can
be confident that a result about equivalent precautionary premia will imply a
                                                                              corresponding result
about compensating precautionary premia.15

III. The Analogy Between Precautionary Saving and Risk Aversion
     From this point on, our discussion will be much more concrete, as we focus on the
                                                                                   consumption-
savings decision under uncertalnty as a paradigmatic example of choice under risk. Establishing
the formal correspondence between precautionary saving and risk aversion
                                                                           requires us to set out
a simple model representing this consumption-savings decision. The simplest such model is one
that has only two periods, in which a consumer imbued with additively time-separable utility faces
uncertaln labor income in the second period. This is the model taken up here. The extension to
more than two periods is difficult, but important,and is pursued in Kimball
                                                                             (1988b). The extension
to the case of nonseparable utility is relatively stralghtforward, but cumbersome, and is addressed
in Appendix C.
    To further simplify the presentation,    it will be assumed that the risk-free rate and other rates
of return are exogenously fixed and that     when   an agent   faces incomplete markets,   the constralnt
    In the case of precautionary premia, the assumption of strict monotonicity and cnntinnity in the Lemma
    becomes the assumption thst LY& is a rontinuoss and either monotnnically
                                                                                 increasing sr mnnotonirally
    decreasing function ol U.
                                                                                                      -

                                                    6
that    an agent cannot borrow against more   than the minimum value of his or her human wealth
is never binding except at the end of the last period of the agent's existence. Since the interest
rate is exogenously given, it is easiest to calculate everything in present-value terms, so that we
can, without loss of generality, treat the real risk-free rate as if it were zero. Finally, it will be
assumed that labor supply is inelastic, so that labor income can be treated as if it were manna
from heaven.12 With the foregoing simplifications,the consumer's decision problem is:

                                            max   u(c)+Ev(wo—c+y),

where u is the first period utility function, c the first period consumption, E an expectation
conditional on first-period information, v the second-period utility function, w5 the consumer's
initial assets plus his first-period labor income (whichis received before the first-period consumption
decision must be made) and p the second-period labor income.

       It   will be convenient    to write p =             ,,
                                                  dividing second-periodlabor income p into its
                                                       +
expectation and a mean zero risky component and to define so = so0 + adding mean second-    ,
period income to initial assets to get the total of human and non-human wealth (which is what
determines consumption in the case of certainty equivalence). We will also define for later use
  = so — c, the amount of "saving" out of total human and non-human wealth. The consumer's
decision problem can then be rewritten:


                                            maxu(c)+Ev(w-c+y).

       The first-order condition for (7) is


                                              u'(c) = E v'(sv — c +    ).
It is clear from this first-order condition that the risk in second-period income will affect con-
sumption in the first period only insofar as it affects second-period expected marginal utility. The
fact that expected marginal utility is unaffected by the addition of mean-zero risks in the case of
quadratic utility is what yields certainty equivalencein that case. Even when certainty equivalence
does not hold, if there is some quantity 1' that can compensate for the effect of the risk on

second-period expected marginal utility—that is, a compensating precautionary premium satisfy-
ing v'(w — c) = Ev'(w — c + + ), then first-period consumption would be unaltered by the
 12
       Despite the fact that labor supply is inelastic, twill continue to refer to this income as "labor income" in order
       to distinguish it from "capital income," which is determinedendogenously.

                                                            7
addition of the risk  plus the tompensating precautionary premium
                                                                     )
                                                                                     .
                                                                   Similarly, if there is an

equivalent precautionary premium such that v'(w — c — = E u'(w c+ D), then the elimination
                                                                 —


of the rik       at the cust to coitsumer of the certain quantity & would leave optimal first-period
consumption unchanged.
     Interpreting the two precautionary premia in a slightly different way, the compensating pre-
cautionary premium & shows how far the first-period consumption function will shift to the right
at a given level of consumption, since it shows how much more wealth is needed to compensate for
the effect of the risk on consumption. Similarly, the equivalent precautionary premium shows
the leftward shift of the consumption function that would result from elimination of the risk                      .
Appendix B contains a demonstration             of these two propositions.
       To place this model within the Rothschild-Stiglitzframework used in Section II, we could write

                                        V(w + ü, c)   = u(c) + v(w — c + u)

Consumption is the decision variable, so that c takes on the role of 8, while w has the role of 9e,
the role of U and to + the role of 9 itself.'3 In place of we have     = u'(c) — v'(u,— c+ and in         ),
place of         we have —v"(w — c +       ),
                                       which is alwayspositive. Because u'(c) is constant for a fixed

value of the decision variable c, we can ignore this term in the definition of precautionary premia
                                                          )
for this model. Moreover,the term —v'(w — c + is a function of c only through to — c = s, so that
a precautionary premium for one combination of consumption and wealth is also a precautionary
premium for all other combinations of consumption and wealth involving the same level of "saving"
s out of total expected human and nonhuman wealth. In particular, for a given value of s, one can
search out the combination of to and                          condition (8) is satisfied, allowing
                                                c for which the first-order

us to give an economic interpretationto the precautionary premia for any value of a.
     The analogy between the theory of risk aversion and the theory of precautionary saving is
particularly simple. The negative of marginal utility —v' plays substantially the same role for pre-
cautionary saving that the utility function itself plays for risk aversion. For example, concavity of v
indicates risk aversion, while concavityof —v' or v"(.) > 0 indicates a positive precautionary saving
motive. As another example, the index of absolute prudence in this model, where it represents the
 strength of the precautionary saving motive, is
                                                           (—v'(s)" =       v"(s)
 (9)                                 pe,c) = ti(s)         (—v'(s))'        v"(s)
       It is becaese a   has the role of 9 that the precautionary premia show up here as additions and subtractions to
       wealth.

                                                            8
Thus, the analogy between absolute risk aversion and absolute prudence is especially obvious in this
context. In general, virtually every theorem about risk aversion has an application to precautionary
saving by substituting —si' for v and making other appropriate adjustments. We will proceed in
exactly this way: reinterpreting many of the most important theorems about risk aversion as
theorems about precautionary saving.14

IV. Prudence as a Measureof the Intensity of the Precautionary Saving Motive
    Applying the results of Section II to precautionary saving, we find first that the increase in
the wealth needed to induce any given level of first-period consumption—or in other words, the
rightward shift of the consumption function—due to a small risk is approximately q(s) =
(where the total "saving" out of human and nonhuman wealth s is also the mean of second-period
consumption) times half the variance of the risk. Similarly, the leftward shift of the consumption
function due to the elimination of a small risk is approximately q(s) times half the variance of the
risk.
          Second, giventwo second-periodutility functions v1 and v2, if qj(s) =
for all s, then
                                                                                        >            i
                                                                                                  = (s)


                                                  's(Ths) > '2(Y,5)

for all s and     ,   and


                                                  (Ths) > b(ü,s)
for all s and     ü• Therefore,    for points with the same amount of saving out of total human and non-
human wealth s, the risk   in second-period labor income causes a greater rightward shift of the
consumption function for an individual with second-period utility v1 than one with second-period
utility v2.    If the first-period utility functions are such that the consumption functions in the absence
of the income risk are identical (for example, if szj(c) = lvs(Ac) and u2(c) = *v2(Ac) so that the
consumption functions are both linear, with slope j--) then points with the same saving and the
same initial second-periodconsumption also have the same first-period consumption; therefore agent
 1   would react to with a greater rightward shift of the whole curve representing the consumption
function. Similarly, the leftward shift of the consumption function due to eliminating the risk
is greater for agent 1 than for agent 2 at points with the same amount of saving a. If by chance

     14    am grateful to Leslie Young for suggesting this way of proceeding.

                                                             9
the consumption functions in the face of the income risk are identical,'5 points with the same
"saving" and mean second-period consumption s have the same consumption c ss well, so that the
whole graph of the consumption function shifts further left for agent 1 than for agent 2 when the
income risk is eliminated.

     In addition to applying the results of Section II to precautionary saving, the simple structure
of precautionary saving under additively separable utility makes it possible to bring to bear the
result of Arrow (1965) that a globally more risk-averse individual will choose to invest less in a
risky security. Formally, Arrow states that if v is globally more risk averse than v2 (that is,
ai(x) > as(x) for all x) then aj(i,x) .c a2(2,x) for all z, where

(12)                                  oi(i,x) =     argmaxEv1(x + af),

and


(13)                                  a2(f,z)=argmaxEv2(x+ai),

As Arrow (1965)also makes clear, differentiatingtwice with respect to a shows
                                                                            that expected utility
is concave a,
          in  and therefore that expected utility monotonically increases with a up to the point
where the maximum is reached and monotonically decreases thereafter.
       To make the application of the foregoing result to precautionary saving, substitute —v for c1
and    —t4 for v2 to find that if ?)1(s) > m(8) for all x, then $i(, 3) c fl2(D, s), where


(14)                                 /3i(Ths)=   argmaxE[—v(s+l3i)],

and


(15)                                 2(Y,5) = argmaxE[—t4(s+fiz)).

How can this be interpreted? Since


(16)                                       —u'(c)   = E [—v'(s + /11)]

for an individual allowed to freely choose his or her level of consumption and saving, the level
of consumption corresponding to a given level of saving must be greatest for the value of $ that
maximizes the right-hand side. To look at things another way, since total human and non-human

       Note that this is different than the consumptiontwo consumptionfunctions being the same in the absence of
       risk, so the following statement is not just a trivial consequence of the preceding one.

                                                        10
wealth other than the risky asset    is equal to consumption plus saving (to = c + a), we can see
                                          /32

that the wealth corresponding to a given level of saving is maximized by a lower value of /3 for
agent 1 than for agent 2. Graphically, the savings function at a given level of begins
                                                                                  a        to move

leftward (implying an increased average propensity to save out of initial wealth) at lower values of

/3 for agent1     than for agent 2.

V. Decreasing, Increasing, or Constant Absolute Prudence
                              a
      Using the fact that (z) > a2(x) for all z implies greater global risk aversion
                                                                                        for v1 than for

v2, it is easy to show, as Pratt (1964) does, that diminishing absolute risk aversion(a(x) a(x+)
                                                                                              >

for all x and all c > 0) implies that the risk premium tr(i,x) always decreases with x. One need
only substitute into the propositions above v5 (x) v(x) and v2 (x) v(z + c)
                                                    =                =           where is any strictly
                                                                                           and that the
positive number. One also discovers by this exercise that r(2,z) decreasing in x
                                                                      is

optimalamount of the risky security, a(2, z) is increasing in x if absolute risk aversion is decreasing.
                                                                                                      in
By the same kind of reasoning, lr(i,x) and 7r(i,x) are increasing in x and cs(2,x) declining
                                                                                         is

r if absolute risk ,aversion is increasing (a(x) < a(x + €) for all z and all > 0). Finally, r(l, z),
1r(i, x) and a(2, x) are constant in x if absolute risk aversion is constant.16
    The application of these results to precautionary saving follows the same pattern as before. If
absolute prudence is decreasing (q(s) > i(s + €) for all a and all      0) then —v'(x) is a decreasing
absolute risk aversion utility function and both    a) and          '(9,
                                                                   a) are decreasing in a, while /(U, a)
is increasing in a. Similarly, if absolute prudence is increasing (t(a) c i(s + €) for all a and all
c > 0), then     (j,
                 a) and       j,
                              a) are increasing in x, while $(, a) is decreasing in 5; and if absolute
prudence is constant, b(Q,a), b(ü,a) and fl(,s) will be constant.17
     The preceding facts about b*(p,a) allow us to determine the effect of income risk on the
marginal propensity to consume. As shown in Appendix B, the formal statement            of the fact that
 0(  a) is the rightward shift in the consumption function is

                                       w(c,   )=   w(c, o) + A(y, w(c, o)
                                                                            —
                                                                                c),


 where w(c,      )   is the amount of wealth necessary to induce consumption c in the face   of the income
 risk   . If   0* is differentiable,
                                  Ow(e,   )   — Oui(c, 0)
                                              —
                                                  Oc
                                                            +     a(c, 0)) Oa(c, 0)
                                                                 Os               Oc'
        Note that
    17 Note          ,   '
                   r = r if r and r are constant in z.
               that = if th and 0' are constant in a.

                                                            11
where s(c, o) = w(c, o) — c. As a result of the strict concavity and additive separability of utility,
       > 0 (i.e., second-period consumption is a normal good), so that the effect of the income risk
   on the reciprocal of the marginal propensity to consume      is the same as the sign of        It             .
is obvious then that the effect of income risk on the marginal propensity to consume

opposite sign from that of 2.• Therefore, if si(s) is decreasing in s, then
increases the marginal propensity to consume.19
                                                                                          - has the
                                                                                c 0 and income risk
                                                            If n(s) is increasing in s,       >   0   and income risk
reduces the marginal propensity to consume. Finally if y(s) is constant, L' is also constant and
the marginal propensity to consume is unaffected by income risk.
     Further discussion of the effect of income risk on the marginal propensity to consume, along
with a discussion of the plausibility of the assumption of decreasing absolute risk aversion can be
found in Kimball (1988b).
     The facts stated above shoot the equivalent precautionary premium             s) are redundant, in
the sense that looking at the equivalent precautionary premium        s) in the contextof decreasing,
increasing, or constant absolute prudence can only tell us that if income risk is eliminated, the
effect on the marginal propensity to consume is the opposite of what happens when income risk is
introduced. More illuminating is the interpretation of the fact that 13(2, s) is increasing, decreasing
or constant as absolute prudence is respectively decreasing, increasing or constant. It indicates,
for example, that in the case of decreasing absolute prudence, the amount of the risk 2 the agent
can absorb before the reduction in saving due to the positive mean of 2 begins to be dominated by
precautionary saving effects (or more precisely, the value of 13 beyond which increases in 13 reduce
the wealth corresponding to a given amount of saving) is increasing in s. In the case of increasing
absolute prudence, this watershed amount of risk is decreasing in s; and in the case of constant
absolute prudence, it is constant.

VI. The Effect of Income Risk in the Presence of Other Independent Risks
   One possible objection to the original Arrow-Pratt theory of risk aversion is that it tends to
compare risky situations with situations of certainty. Actual economic agents are more likely to
be comparing two situations of uncertainty. Fortunately, Kihlstrom, Romer and Williams (1981),
and Nacbman (1982) show that the Arrow-Pratt theory of risk aversion applies not only to risks
imposed on a world of certainty, but also to risks added to the preexisting uncertainty, as long as (a)
  18 Even   if   l' is not   differentiable, v(c+Ac,s)—w(c,y)   =   o(c+AO)—w(c,o)   + (5,'+'—e(6,')        L   so that
                             as j1—5 and    f5.(c,)fa(c,s)
  15 One
        special case of decreasing absolute prudence is the case of constant relative risk aversion, for which Zeldes
    (1986) found this effect of iocome risk on the marginal propensity to consume using computer simulations.

                                                           12
the added risks have a probability distribution that is independent of the preexisting uncertainty
and (b) the utility functions involved have decreasing absolute risk aversion.25 The implications for
                                                           as the risks involved are independent of
precautionary saving are immediately apparent: as long
the background uncertainty and the utility functions involved have decreasing absolute prudence,
all of the preceeding results about precautionary saving are true even in the presence of background
uncertainty.21
                                                                 to one risk in the presence of another
     Addressing the same general issue of an agent's response
                                                                          under which being forced to
independent risk, Pratt and Zeckhauser (1987) discuss the conditions
face one undesirable risk will make an individual less willing to take on another, independent risk22;
or equivalently, conditions under which the risk premium of two independent risks put together will
be more than the sum of the risk premia of each risk taken separately.23 Pratt and Zeckhauser's
                                                                                                   of
most striking finding is that a broad class of utility functions have this property, including all
those that are infinitely differentiable and have derivatives alternating in sign on some semi-infinite
                                                                                                 result
interval     m) (i.e., v'(x) 0, v"(r) 0, v"(x) 0, v""(x) 0, etc., for all x > rs). This
             (xs,
                                                                            of
isimmediately applicable to precautionary saving since the condition infinite differentiability
and derivatives of alternatingsign is one that if satisfied by v, is also satisfied by —v'. Under this
                                                                                                   on
condition, satisfied by many commonly used utility functions, the effect of independent risks
                                                                     the precautionary premia.
precautionary saving will be more-than-additive, as measured by

 VII. The Drdze-Modigliani Substitution Effect
      Dréze and Modigliani (1972), studying a two-period model similar to the model in this paper,
                                                                              One component is the
 analyze the effect ofincome risk on first-period income into two components.
                                                                                              income
 reduction in consumption une would expect by looking at the reduction in utility caused by
                                                                                            in
 risk and calculating the change in consumption that would result if an equal reduction utillty
                                                                                                  the
 had occurred as the result of a reduction in wealth. This they call the "wealth effect," though
 label is somewhat confusing. The other component is the reduction in first-period consumption
                                              the reduction in utility caused by the income risk.
 beyond what one would expect from looking at
                                                                                                                           if (x)
     25   The basic theorem from which all of the other results uf Kihistrum, Romer and=Williane+stemisis that v1            mure
          is globally more risk arerse than t2(r), then the derived utility function Cs(x) Evs(z 1') globally
          risk averse than in(s) = Ev2(r + I') as long as either es(s) or v2(r) has decreasing absolute risk aversion.
                                                                                                                 risk is a general
                                                                                                                                     -

     21   Ross (2981) shoscu thar one cannot readilyextend previnusresultstn the case in which additional
                                       of preexisting risk rather than being distributed independently  nf that preexisting risk.
          mean-preserving      spread
     22    Pratt and Zeckhauoer look for utility fnnctioaas that gsarastee this property evenRomer   in the presence of a third
                                                                                                            and Williams (1981)
           independentbackgrouod risk; thus their work meshes nicely with that of Kihistrom,
     23    If it is equivalent  risk         as
                                     premia issue,    both  risks must be undesirable, but this is not necessary if it is compen-
           sating risk premia at issue.

                                                                 13
This they term the "substitution effect." They show that this "substitution effect" is positive if
preferences for second-period consumption display decreasing absolute risk aversion, negative in
the case of increasing absolute risk aversion and zero in the case of constant absolute risk aversion.
     In the model presented here, the correspondence between the direction of the substitution
effect and decreasing versus increasing absolute risk aversion is a
                                                                      simple consequence of the fact
that obsolute prudence is greater than or less than absolute risk aversion depending on whether
absolute risk aversion is decreasing or increasing. To see this, one need only take the
                                                                                          logarithmic
derivative of absolute risk aversion:

                         a'(x)      d                 \       v"(x)
(19)                               —I   n   —v"(x)
                                              v'(x)   )
                                                          —
                                                          —
                                                              v"(x)
                                                                           v"(x) —
                                                                            ,fl—a(x)sl(x).
Clearly, as long as we are dealing with risk aversefunctions so that                 a(s) > 0, then

(20)                                         e'(x)0 as
Focusing on the most important case, decreasing absolute risk aversion implies that prudence
exceeds risk aversion.24 To put it another way, decreasing absolute risk aversion
                                                                                  implies that
—v'(x) is more risk averse than v(z).
       If —i,'(x) is more risk averse than v(x), then precautionary saving effects are at least as
                                                                                                   large
as   the effects   of risk aversion. In particular, given decreasing absolute risk aversion,


(21)                                              tb(ü, a) >    ir(, s),

(22)                                            *(,s) > r(,s)
and

(23)                                             /3(I, a) < a(I, a),

where $(i,s) maximizes E{—v'(s + $1)J and cslI,s) maximizes EIv(s +
                                                                                         a2)]. Furthermore, if    is
independent of P,

(24)
 24
       Decreasingabsolute risk aversion is almost universally considered a reasonable, or even
       since it is implied by such behavior as investingmore in risky securities as one becomesobligatory assumption,
                                                                                                wealthier. (See Pratt
       (1964).)

                                                           14
and


(25)                                       b(ü,s+P)> sr(,s+ü).

Thus, decreasing absolute risk aversion impli that whether startingfrom certainty or considering-
additional risks independent of background uncertainty, each precautionary premium is greater
than the correspondingrisk premium, and the amount of a risky security an agent would freely
choose is larger than the amount which, if forced on him or her, would require the most wealth to
induce a given amount of saving.
    We can give a more vivid interpretation of the above facts about precautionary and risk premia.
5* >   smeans that the extra wealth it would take to bring the agent'sconsumption in the presence
of back to what it was in the absence of is greater than the amount it would take to bribe the
individual to accept the risk Q. Therefore, if a monopolist selling the risk plus a certain positive
quantity effectively price-discriminates so that the consumer gets no surplus from buying it (but
the purchase is still voluntary), the consumer's first-period consumption will decline. (However,
if the consumer gets some surplus—that is, a bigger bribe to take than necessary—first-period
                                                 '
consumption may go up.) Conversely, > ir means that the maximum amount a consumer is
wilting to pay for complete insurance, or insurance from a risk independent of other risks, is less
than the amount that would have to be taken from the agent in order to keep his or her consumption
the same despite the reduction in risk. Therefore, any voluntary purchase of complete insurance, or
insurance from a risk independent of other risks, will increase the agent's first-period consumption;
since even if the agent was indifferent about getting the insurance, consumption would increase,
and whatever consumer's surplus the agent gets (i.e., however much less the agent pays than he or
she is willing to pay) also tends  to increase first-period consumption.
     Finally, the fact that /3(i, s) < a(2, a) can be interpreted graphically as in Figures 1 and 2.
Figure 1 shows a graph of expected utility and expected marginal utility as a function of the amount
A of a risky security held. Expected marginal utility is minimized, and therefore the first-period

consumption and wealth corresponding to a given level of saving is maximized, for a smaller value
of A than the one that maximizes utility. Since both E [0(8 + Af)] and E [—v'(s + Ai)] are concave
functions25 of A, this means that at the amount of the risky security the agent will choose and for
a range of lower amounts and aU higher amounts of the risky security, more of that security will
reduce the wealth needed to induce a given amount of saving, or equivalently, more of the risky

  2S   See Arrow (1965), or simply differentiate twice.

                                                          15
security will lead to increased precautionary saving and less first-period consumption at the same
level of wealth.

    Figure 2 shows these facts in a different way. Decreasing absolute risk aversion implies both
that the curve A = o(i, s) will be upward sloping in the A-s plane and that the curve A = /3(2's)
will beto theleft   of A = cs(2, s). (The curve A= /3(2, a) is upward sloping in the case of decreasing
absolute prudence, but otherwise may not be.) There is a region at the left, where the amount of
the risky security is low enough relative to saving that more of the security increases both expected
utility and first-period consumption. At the right, the amount of the risky security is so largethat if
forced to hold even more, both the agent's expected utility and his or her first-period consumption
would decrease. In the middle is a region where more of the risky security increases expected utility
but reduces first-period consumption. On the boundary where increases in the risky security have
no effect on first-period consumption (where A = /3(2,s)), they always increase expected utility.
Finally, at the amount of the risky security that maximizesexpected utility (A = cs(i, s)), more of
the risky security olways increases precautionary saving and decreases first-period consumption.
     In view   of the   facts above, it can
                                         be seen that the opportunity to make risky investments
has two possibly divergent effects on the marginal propensity to consume. On the one hand, free
choice about riaky investments may lead agents to voluntarily face more risk than they otherwise
would—risk which tends to increase the marginal propensity to consume in the case of decreasing
absolute prudence (or decrease it in the case of increasing absolute prudence). On the other hand,
assuming we have decreasing absolute risk aversion, the endogenous increase in risky investment
that comes with an increase in wealth will tend to reduce consumption because of the Drèze-
Modigliani substitution effect, implying a lower overall marginal propensity to consume.26 These
effects are discussed in more detail in Kimball (1988b).

VIII. Conclusion
    Since Leland (1968), it has been recognized that a positive third derivative of the utility
function indicates a precautionary saving motive—that is, that uncertainty about future income
will reduce current consumption and increase current saving. Thus, the sign            of the third derivative
of the utility function governs the presence or absence of a precautionary saving motive just as
the sign of the second derivative governs the presence or absence of risk aversion. We have shown
  26 In the case of increasing absolute risk aversion, the endogenous decressein risky investment that comes with
     an inrrease in wealth will tend to reduce consumption, also tending to lower the overall marginal propensity
     to cnnsume. In the case of constant absolute risk aversion there is no endogenous change in risky investment
     due to a change in wealth and so the marginal propensity to consume is unaffected by the possibility of risky
    investment.

                                                       16
that the analogy between risk aversion and the precaotionary saving motive extends much deeper.
Without taking undue license, it can be saidthat the precautionary saving motive is risk aversion
of the negative of marginal utility.
     More generally,the theory of risk aversion can be used to study any situation of optimal choice
under uncertainty. In particular, the Arrow-Pratt measures of absolute and relative risk aversion
have the counterparts in the theory of choice under uncertainty of absolute and relative prudence,
which measure the sensitivity to risk of the optimal choice of a decision variable.

     Some of the specific results established about the paradigmatic case of precautionary saving



                                                                                 "
are:

(1) For additively separable utility of future consumption v, the quantity    is the appropriate

    measure of absolute prudence, and measures the strength of the precautionary saving motive,
    just as absolute risk aversion     measures the strength of risk aversion.

(2) Ignoring the effects of endogenous choice of the level of risky investment, if absolute prudence,
    9i", is decreasing, then labor income uncertainty will raise the marginal propensity to consume
    at any given level of consumption. Conversely,if absolute prudence is increasing, labor income
    uncertainty will lower the marginal propensity to consume out of wealth at a given initial level
    of consumption.
(3) The Dreze-Modigliani(1972) "substitution effect" can be interpretedvery readily in terms of
       the fact the index of absolute prudence exceeds the Arrow-Pratt index of absolute risk aversion
       whenever absolute risk aversion is decreasing, and is less than   the Arrow-Pratt measure of risk
       aversion when absolute risk aversion is increasing.
(4) Holding constant the initial amount of risk an agent faces, endogenous adjustment of the
    amount of risky security holding will result in a lower marginal propensity to consume.

(5) If the utility of future consumption v is infinitely differentiable with its derivatives alternating
    in sign then the precautionary saving effects of independent income risks (as measured by
    precautionary premia) are more than additive.
(6) The main results can easily be extended to the case of independent background risk and to
      the case of non-additively-separable von Neumann-Morgenstern utility.27
      Since uncertainty is present in almost all aspects of life, the theory of choice under uncertainty
is likely to become an even more important part of economicsin the future than it is now. Although

it will not answer every question about choice under uncertainty, we can hope that the close analogy

  27 That extension is in
                          Appendix C.

                                                    17
between:risk aversion and the sensitivity of optimal choices to risk will continue to be fruitful in
illuminating many other responses to risk as it illuminates precautionary saving.



                                                     Appendix A


The Connection Between Equivalent and Compensating Risk Premia
    To see that the functions 1(z) = x — ir(2,z) and g(z) = x + ir(2,z) are mutual inverses one
must examine closely the the definitions of ir(2, z) and ir(2, z). If


(A.1)                                              z = x — ir(2, z),

then    by the definition of ir(2, z),

(A.2)                                            v(z) = E v(z + 2),
but by the definition of ,r*(i,z*),


(A.3)                                    v(f) = Ev(z* + 2+ ir'(2,z)).
Equations (A.2) and (A.3), plus the strict monotonicityof v, imply that

(A.4)                                            x   =   f   +   f(2,x*).

      The monotonicity aud continuity of v insures that both f(x) and g(z) are also continuous and
monotonically increasing. Portraying 1(z) and g(z) graphically, as in Figure 3, one can see that if
7rs(z,z) > ir2(2,z) for all x so that the curve for v5 is below the curve for v2, then the curve for v5
is to the right of the curve for v2, so that rr(2,x) > 1r(2,z*) for all z, and vice versa. Similarly,
if ir(21, z) > ir(22,x) for z one can show graphically that ir(25, x) > ir(22, x) for all z and vice
                              all


versa.

       The qualificationsof the Lemma in Section II               arise because the equivalent   and compensating
risk   premia may sometimes fail to       exist.


       We   will   prove the Lemma by contradiction. Defining Is, 12,91 and 92            in the obvious   manner,

we know by hypothesis        that there   is   an x5   for which f1(xs)      f2(zo). Now suppose there     were an

z for which gj(x) < g2(x). If so, either z                   f2(xs) or   x    f2(zs).
                                                             18
     If   x f2(xo), then g(x) c g2(x) x0 by the monotonicity of g. With g2(xfl between
              'C

two values of x for which fi exists, the definition of                  f
                                                       insures that 1' (g2(x;)) exists, and by
hypothesis, we know that fj (g(x))      ft(g2(x)) = xt. But then A cannot be monotonically
increasing between g1(xfl and gt(x&).
     If   x   ft(o), then by the monotonicityofgi, ro                       gs(x) c g2(z0). This insures that
12 (gs(x)) exists.Then by hypothesis, f2 (gs(x))                    fi (gi(z)) = x. But in that case, f2 cannot
be monotonically increasing between gs(x) and g2(x).

     Therefore, there cannot exist an          x for which g1(x) < g2(x); whenever both gs(x*) and
g2(z) both exist, gi(x') g2(x').
      It is easy to modify this proof to show that the Lemma is true when stated with strict inequal-
ities and to take care of the case of two different risks instead of two different utility functions.




                                                   Appendix B


The Connection Between Precautionary Premia and Horizontal Shifts of the Con-
sumptionFunction
     Let   the function c(w,     ) be the consumptionfunction                defined   by

(B.1)                               c(w,)=argmacu(c)+Ev(w—c+),
and let w(c,       )   be the inverse consumption function (giving the wealth necessary to induce a given
                                                               -
consumption level) defined by

(B.2)                                             w(c(x, ü)'       )=   x.

Then in the case of the compensating precautionary premium, we want to show that

(B.3)                                 w(c,   )=   w(c, o) +             w(c, o) — c).

      Using the definition      of w(c,   ), we have
(11.4)                            o'(c) = E v'(w(c,    )   —   c+   ) = v'(w(c,o)       —
                                                                                            c).

From Table 1, the definition of               w(c, o) — c) is

 (11.5)                     E v'(w(c, o) — c + +               w(c,o) — c)) = v'(w(c, o) — c).

                                                               19
Together with (B.4) this implies

(B.6)              E v'( w(c, o) — c + + &(ji,w(c,o) — c)) = Ii v'(w(c,                     )    —c   + tl).

Because of the strictly decreasing marginal utility of v, (B.6) implies (B.3).
    Similarly,in the case of the equivalent precautionary premium, we want to show that

(B.?)                                 w(c, o)   = u,(c,   )   —
                                                                      tv(c,   )   —   c).

The definition of   '(u uj(c, )   —
                                      c), combined with (B.4), yields

(B.8)                   v'(w(c,   )   —   c—       w(c,   )   —
                                                                   c)) = E v'(w(c,      )   —   c + u)

                                                                      =   v'(sv(c, o) — c),

which, as   a result of the fact that v' is strictly decreasing, implies (B.?).



                                                   Appendix C


The Case of Non-Additively-Separable von Neumann-Morgenstern Utility
   Inthe case of non-additively-separable utility with all the other simplifications of the text
maintainted, we can write

(C-i)                                           V(w, c) = U(c, w — c),

where U is the direct utility function with consumption in the first and second periods as its
two arguments. In this appendix, we can use subscripts to denote partial derivatives withuut
confusion. Thus, in terms of the indirect utility function V, the consumer's optimization problem
under certainty is just

(C.2)                                               max V(w,c),

which has the first-order condition

(C.3)                                               V(w, c) =        0.


The cross-partial   V will be positive at least for pairs of c and w on the consumption function if
first-period consumption is a normal good, since by the implicit function theorem                              = — ______
                                                              20
                                                                                    function is more
Positivity of the denominator away from values of c and so on the consumption
difficult to guarantee, but seems likely if first-period consumption is a normal good at any interest
rate and in the face of any random distribution of second-period income. The exact conditions
                                                                   are a subject for future research.
(short of U12 0) needed to insure positivity of the denominator
     The results of Section II can be applied straightforwardly to the nonseparable case. A simple
modification of the proof in Appendix B can be used to show that for values of c and so and
                                                                       tbe equivalent precautionary
probability distributions of that make E V(w + &, c) equal to zero,
                                                                  would follow upon removal of the
premium is the leftward shift of the consumption function that
            .
income risk Similarly, for valuesof c and so that make V(w, c) equal to zero, this
                                                                                    is the rightward
                                                                                    .
shift in the consumption function due to the addition of the income risk The appropriate measure
of absolute prudence in the nonseparable case is
                                                                         —               —
                                               = — U522(c, so — c) — U222(c, so—          c)
                                                                —
                               =          c)
(C.4)                q(so c)
                                   V(w, c)          U12(c, so       c)       U22(c, so   c)

     The relation between decreasing or increasing absolute prudence and the marginal propensity
to consume can be extended to the nonseparable case if vi(so, c) is decreasing,increasing or constant
when c and so increase in the sanse proportion as they do at the point on the initial consumption
function with consumption equal to c. Normality of first- and second-periodconsumption could be
                                                                             be viewed naturally as
helpful in yielding such a condition, since the right-hand side of (C.4) can
a function of c and so — c.
                                                                                                   the
      Results about the values of j3 that maximizeE V0(so + flu, c) are difficult to interpret in
                                                                        when these expected values
 nonseparable case, since an optimal consumption choice is involvedonly
                                                                                                 little
 are zero. The results nf Section VI about additional independent risks can be applied with
                                                                conditions are satisfied by V(w, c)
 change to the nonseparable case, as long as the necessary
 thought of as a function of so.
      The analysis of the Drèze-Mudiglianisubstitution effect in the nonseparable case requires some
                                                                                but it is worthwhile
 explanation. Drèze and Modigliani (1972) do address the nonseparable case,
 to draw the connection between their results and the measure of prudence given above.
      In the nonseparable case one must be careful in defining what one means by "decreasing (oi
                                                              =       shows the extent of risk aversior
 increasing) absolute risk aversion." The expression 4'-"- 422
 for small risks, since the uncertainty directly affectssecond-periodconsumption, and by the envelope
 theorem,   the adjustments in consumption due to risk will have only second-order effects on utility
 for small risks. For large risks the effect on utility of these adjustments in consumption must be
 taken into account. The kind of "decreasing absolute risk aversion" needed to imply that prudence

                                                     21
exceeds risk aversion is that

(C.5)

which Drèze and Modigliani term "endogenously decreasing absolute risk aversion." By using the
fact that the logarithmic derivative is also greater than zero, it is easy to show that this insplies
that

(CM)

and assuming that   V, > 0, that
                                          —              —
                                              cww            low
                                                             w

or in words, that prudence is greater than risk aversion. Similarly, if we have "endogenously in-
creasing risk aversion," prudence will be smaller than risk aversion. The consequences of these facts
for the relative sizes of risk and precautionary premia are virtually identical to the consequences
of decreasing or increasing absolute risk aversion in the additively separable case, as can be seen
from Drèze and Modigliani's results. Furthermore, just as in the additively-separable case, at the
amount of a risky security that maximizes expected utility, an increase in the amount held will
tend to reduce first-period consumption if absolute risk aversion is (endogenously) decreasing and
will tend to increase first-period consumption if absolute risk aversion is (endogenously) increasing,

making endogenous adjustment of investment in a risky security reduce the marginal propensity to
consume in the nonseparable case as well.




                                                    22
                                            References

Arrow, Kenneth J. (1965): "Aspects of a Theory of Risk Bearing," Yrjo Jahnsson Lectures, Helsinki.
                                                                                              Co.
    Reprinted in Essays in the Theory of Risk Bearing (1971), Chicago: Markham Publishing
Bernoulli, Daniel (1738): "Specimen theoriae novae de mensura sortis," Comentarii AcaderniaeSci-
   entiarum Irnperiales Petropolitanae, Vol. 5, 175—192. Translated by L. Sommer as "Exposition
   of a New Theory on the Measurement of Risk," Econornetrica (1954), 12, 23—36.
Diamond, Peter A. and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1974): "Increases in Risk and Risk Aversion," Journal
    of Economic Theory, 8,     337—360.

Drèze, Jacques H., and Franco Modigliani (1972): "Consumption Decisions under Uncertainty,"
     Journal of Economic Theory, 5, 308—335.
Feller William (1971): An Introduction to Probability Theory and its Applications, Vol. II, 2nd
      ,
    Edition, John Wiley Sons, Inc., New York, 439—442.
Kihistrom, Richard E., David Romer, and Steve Williams (1981): "Risk Aversion with Random
    Initial Wealth," Econometrica, 49,    911—920.

Kimball, Miles S. (1987): Essays on Intertemporal Household Choice, unpublished Ph. D. disser-
   tation (Harvard University, Cambridge, MA), 100-195.
Kimball, Miles S. (1988a): "The Effect of Demand Uncertainty on a Precommitted Monopoly
     Price," mimeo, 1988a.
                                                                             to Consume,"
Kimball, Miles S. (1988b): "Precautionary Saving and the Marginal Propensity
     mimeo, 1988b.
Kimball,Miles   S.   and N. Gregory Mankiw (1987): "Precautionary Savingand the Timing of Taxes,"
     mimeo, 1987.
Leland, Hayne E. (1968): "Saving and Uncertainty: The Precautionary Demand for Saving,"
    Quarterly Journal of Economics,82, 465—473.
Merton, R. (1971): 'Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a Continuous Time Model,"
    Journal of Economic Theory, 373—413.
                                                                                Journal of
Nachman, D. C. (1982): "Preservation of 'More Risk Averse' Under Expectations,"
     Economic Theory 28, 361—368.
                                                                                    Journal of
 Pope, Rulon D. and Jean-Paul Chavas (1985): "Producer Surplus and Risk," Quarterly
     Economics, 100,     853—870.

 Pratt, John W. (1964): "Risk Aversionin the Small and in the Large," Econometrica, 32, 122—136.
 Pratt, John W. and Zeckhauser,Richard J. (1987): "ProperRisk Aversion," Econornetrica,January
                                                     23
    55, 143—154.
Ross, Stephen A. (1981): "Some Stronger Measures of Risk Aversion in the Small and the Large
    with Applications," Econometrica, 49, 621—638.
Rothschild, Michael and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1970): "Increasing Risk I: A Definition," Journal of
    Economic Theory, 2, 225—243.
Rothschild, Michael and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1971): "Increasing Risk II: Its Economic Conse-
    quences," Journal of Economic Theory,3, 66—84.
Sandmo, Agnar (1970): "The Effect of Uncertainty on Saving Decisions," Review of Economic
    Studies, 37, 353—360.
Zeldes, Stephen P. (1986): "Optimal Consumption with Stochastic Income: Deviations from Cer-
    tainty Equivalence," mimeo, University of Pennsylvania, 1986.




                                             24
