                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             A MODEST PROPOSAL FOR
                     INTERNATIONAL   NOMINAL TARGETING   (INT)




                                Jeffrey Frankel




                            Working Paper No. 2849




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                February 1989




This paper was written for the NBER conference on international
                                                                 policy
coordination and exchange rate fluctuations, Kiawah Island, South Carolina,
October 27, 1938.   It is forthcoming in a book edited by William
                                                                   Branson,
Jacob Frenkel, and Morris Goldstein (Chicago: University of
                                                              Chicago Press)
Ihe author would like to thank Julia Lowell for efficient research assistance
and Ralph Bryant, Geoff Carliner, Doug Purvis, end John Williamson for
comments and suggestions. This paper is part of NBER's research
                                                                 program in
International Studies. It should be noted that, under the
                                                           procedures of the
National Bureau of Economic Research, papers do not take
                                                          policy positions or
aake recommendations.
                                     NBER Working Paper #2849
                                     February 1989

      A MODEST PROPOSAL FOR INTERNATIONAL NOMINAL TARGETING (INT)


                               ABSTRACT




    The paper reviews the obstacles to successful international
macroeconomic policy coordination, and then offers a proposal for
coordination that is designed to have the best chance of
overcoming these obstacles: an international version of nominal
GNP targeting. There are three sorts of obstacles to
coordination: uncertainty, enforcement, and inflation-fighting
credibility. Enforcement is always a problem for coordination,
but the problem is particularly great in the presence of
uncertainty. This is partly because it is difficult to verify
compliance if the "performance criteria" are not directly enough
under the control of the authorities, and partly because a
country may end up regretting cx Post the criterion that it
agreed to cx ante if the criterion is not directly enough related
to the target variables about which it ultimately cares.   For
example, a country that commits to a narrow range for the money
supply may regret the commitment if a shift in velocity occurs.
     The time-inconsistency of inflation-fighting has been
offered as a third reason why policy-makers would be better off
renouncing period-by-period coordination of discretionary policy-
making. But the way to establish inflation-fighting credibility
is to precommit to some nominal anchor.  The paper argues that
International Nominal Targeting (INT) is the best choice for
nominal anchor, as well as the best choice for the
                                                    performance
criterion by which compliance with international agreements can
be monitored. Nominal GNP (or, better yet, nominal demand) is
superior to other candidates such as Ml as a candidate for the
nominal variable on which policy-makers should focus, because it
is far more robust to velocity shifts and other uncertainties,




                                   Jeffrey A. Frankel
                                   Kennedy School of Government
                                   Harvard University
                                   79 JFK Street
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                     2
I. INnwCrIcv:           PLANS    F LD ?U'Th                         REFae(   S}J1D    LTrILy
PRACIL


       signir      prcposals for        sr1d         ixretaxy reform was in the 1960s         a
pcxflar "parlor gaze" aiir            ecaiists.            We   have perhaps seen a   revival of
this sport in the 1980s.
       The   inpetus    bejth      such proposals         is    a    seriis
                                                                    Exchaxe rate
                                                                              one.
volatility thrnei       .it   to be higher than was anticipat1 before the xxve to
floath exr±are rates in 1973,   the swiis have been partinlarly laxe
                                              arxl
in the 1980s, prceptir proposals for gcveznt action to stabilize
echarqe rates.    Axxn the (alledly) prnise1 fruits of floatir
exhare rates that have               fail
                               to materialize is insulation of each
ccuntry' s   ecory frcin        disturbances         originatir        an its parthers.    This
insulation property was supposel to                  all
                                            ntries to set their policies
iixeperxently. Meanwhile, the need to correct the large macroecononic
imbalances that arose in the 1980s, withait settirq off a r1d recession,
has reiriforcel support for the idea that interdeperxerice may be inevitable,
ai that      cntries shild set their                     policies cooperatively rather than
irxeperently.             for coordination draw support frcmt a birgeoniri
                       Proposals
academic literature that, until recently, was a1ixst unanis in claiinir
that   each x*zxtzy' S    rnic welfare was necessarily higher unier a regine
of ccozination than urer a ui-oocperative (Nash) regime in which
c*mtries set their policies iix1epenently.1
    Flans for full-flelgel coordination, in the sense of cooperative
maximization of scse joint welfare function, are likely to be too calex to

       Fischer (l988b) surveys       nu.ich   of the coatdimtiai literature.
                                            3

be   ilnted as literally proposed.           Hei the ntivation for sinçler nre
practical
                      2   for exaiiple fossfr on a few key "ecaictnic
iricators.'        3it the ultimate reason for skepticien that cooxination
proposals will in fact be       ilnted
                                   is that they require nations to give
up    sa  degree of sovereignty over policy—makiri for the sake of
cxçeration.   Lookir foard frun 1989, it is unlikely for many years to
     that intries will be ready for such a ccxanitnnt. In the first
place, enfornt is a prlen even when everya benefits relative to the
Nash equilthri [because each 1ntry              ld
                                           do still better by deviatir

unilaterally fron the agreetnt]. In the secor. place, given nertainties
about   policies   ai     about future   disturbares, a coor±.nation   regima   that
guarantees higher welfare for each country
prthably entail        losses for         s
                                    countries in
great tentation for them to break the agrenent.
                                                           sn   will nevertheless
                                                                years, creatir a
                                                              marican goverrint,
for exançle, sould be unlikely to maintain policies saorificir U.S.
ecczunic welfare for the sake of an international agrent, for fear of
 losir political support.

        If a cooperative regime is to      be sucxssful,   it nn.st be boilt    on an

 accuialatiofl of trust.  If countries are in every year to resist the short-
 ri    advantages of deviatir fron the agrerrt for the sake of the lorer-
 zi.ui gains of maintainin the cooperative reghe, it is necessary that
                                                                        there
 be either   elicit sartions for violations, or ilicit effects             on   their
 lor-term repitations.        The   rep.ztations route requires the passage of tiite

     2 Levine, Currie ar5. GaineS (1989) present a general mathology for
 analysir the sustainability of coordination agreenents that take the form
 of single rules.
during whidi
jxid.
                   u*.ries can
                   sarctia      rite
                                              4

                                    establish track      rrds
                                        reqii.res a ccsmiibnent
                                                                    '
                                                     to give up national
                                                                        whidi they can be


sovereignty, for whidi, again, intries will riot be politically ready for
sax tine. This is          major prthli with a prcposad rethrn to ficad
ecthamge rates, a gold staMard, ar others of the airitis plans for vrld

                                             rld
itionstaxy refore. They presue a
there is rio evident pathway leadir there frcin
                    fr
                                                               r
                                          of surrerxier sovereignty, ar
                                                                    current   rld.   "you
can't get there


scale
       The   mst
        in the
                    here."
                    0 can

                    1990s,
                             anticipate is that coordination will begin on a
                              with cc*ntries givir up just a             all amt of
                                                                                     ll
sovereignty in return        for nall   expectad gains.       Sudi coordination   .ild be
pror.irio     successful      if anr.u      international      ecic agreents re
riot upletely devoid of subetare,                 if   the   agrents      actually causad
camtries to n.ify
their policies      — even     if only a little — fron what they otherwise ild
have been, ard      if the results can be seen to have raisad rnic welfare—
 again, even   if only a little.
       If rdiriation on a         email scale     is   successfulin the 1990s, then it
will    establish the prerequisites         of     txst      aM confidence rt1ei for
coordination on a n.erate scale          in the 21st century: national track records
of onpliance with the international agreemants, or perhaps sufficient
consensus as to the benefits to al1 the establishiEnt of sanctions for
future rion-cliax.         The point is that, at each stage, a record of

successful coordination will politically al1, an increase in the degree of
camnitnent to coordination in the next stage. What is needad, then, is

really a prcposal for a seauence of coordination regires, an overall plan in
                                             5

whith the     dree   of coordination can         bin at       a enall "nailcrk"    ai
                                                                                   be

gradually raisad     fr
                      there [in theory,          w'y         readfl the level of full
coordination of policies].
     This paper itains, in additicti to a review of the             tacles to futire
progress     tard    coordthatiori,   a    preliminary mInation of two nøiest
prcsals    for the form that    sxfu].          coordination might take. is an
internationa]- version of targetir ncininal           P
                                                (or aregate               dr).
prcçosal might be cal].ad mr, for 1nternatiaa]. Naninal Targetirq.3
                                                                        The

other is a supranationa]. bank, sanetimas callad a Hoscini Fur, whith ccold
intervene in the foreign earqe irarkets, witiit national central banks
surrerxerirq their     n rights to cçerate in the markets. In eath case—
International Naninal Tazgetin ar a Hosani               ix
                                                    — a key elnent of the

                                                                trust ar
prtçosal is that it ccold begin on a very seall scale, baild up
 fideie    in the institution slily, ax           ts
                                            progress to higher degrees of
 coordination.


      The    esserce of the arguxnei* for the need for coordination         is that there
 are international externalities or spillover effents.             If these
 externalities did rct exist, i.e., if eath ccixtry was tmaffected by d-ianes
 in other ntries, then the decentralized rxmocçerative solution wa.ld be
 cptimal; there      ld be little role for international asetings or a
                                                                    wld be
 supranatiai institution to coordinate policies [just as there
 little role for goverirtt intervention in the dcttic ecany                   if danestic
 markets furctioned petitively ar withci.xt externalities].


       3                                  in brief    form   in Frankel (l988c).    Frankel
  (1988d)
            The flIT proposal appearS
             offers a versit of the   zrjl       of            ].ersth as the jxesent
                                        6
          caiwt    )a        or what kird of ooordi.nation is desirable
                        whether
without first krxiwirg the nathre of the externalities.       Is the Nash
rKnxocçerative equilibrian too tractionaxy, biiae of a proclivity
t.ard lVbear..+thy_rmigborH policies? Then joint expansion is called for.
This, of irse, was the      lic
                              of the "locative theory" that gave rise to
the 1978 8onn Suisnit. Or, on the other hard, is the existir equilibrium
overly inflationary? In that case joint discipline       1d be called for.
This is the apparent tivation urerlyii the Eurcpean Monetary Systn.
Perhaps the prchlen is that each     try  seeks by its policy mix to raise
real interest rates, attract capital inflows aid appreciate its .1rrery,
thereby reducin the Constmr Price Irdex for any given level of c*.ttprt aid
employsent. This description      se   to characterize sai major cmtries in
the early 1980s.        Or perhaps   the prthln, rather than "ccspetitive
appreciation,"    is "caipetitive depreciation," as was feared at Bretton Woois
in   1944 on    the basis of the experiei of the 1930s. Each kird of
externality     ild inply a different ]drd of apprcpriate coordination to
acthess   it.
     In Part II of this paper, wa     ress prchlem corcernhx the overall
degree of expansion of macroecanic policies, whether nxretaxy aid fiscal
policies are too    titor too loose, rather than the pzer mix of the two.
In Part III of the paper, iicre briefly, wa aress the problem of exctharqe
rate variability.4 It is left as a          ticfor futore work to consider

      '' If the problem with the Nash rirccperative equilibrium is tha4it to
be caipetititve appreciation or depreciation, then an agreement to nvve to a
regine of greater exchange rate stability will solve the problem. If, on
the other hard, the problen is tha.ht to be overly catractionary or overly
expansionary imznetazy policy, then such a switch in regimes may exacerbate
the problem by irxeesirz the degree of intanetiamJ. traiesiseiai of disti.rtmr.
                                          7

prthl of        the degree of       aneion sisi.iltaz-zslv with   prthl of    the
itazy/fisca.l policy mix, real interest rates ard the exthar rate.



II.   OV          o'rAcr.s W DDUD             NSI1i      OIACIcV



      II.A istic Policv-Makii

       Macroeconanicpolicy-makir is always a tradeoff beten the
advantages of discretion on the
past, writers coxrned with either one of the                  t
                                     hard ard rules on the other. In the
                                                           pxthl often
siaplistically assumed away the other. If the aim is to maximize           eic
lfare (a funotion of .itpt aid inflation) only for a given pericd,
ignorir lorg-z.ui inplicatia for expected inflation, discretion can be
 shtn to    be unairigus1y         serior to   rules;    after all,   hi   can one

 possib].y gain by      agreeir to limit one's abilities beforehard to respcrd to
 develcpints in the ecxmuny? If        ignores the possibility of short-run
 disthzbais, on the other hard, rules can be            sln
                                                        to be tma±igusly
 serior to discretion in a lor-rm espilibrium; macroic policy
                                   la
 cait atfct c*itp.xt in the z'.r anyway, aid precamnittir to a ncmdnal
 aiior can reduce expected inflation ard therehy reduce actual inflation.
        There   are a excellent surveys of the literature concerning tima
                         few

 inoonsistenoy, pre-tini1nt ard         ritati,
                                              aM its izplicatiais for the

 older dehate over rules versus discretion. See, for exazple, Barro (1986),
                                       8

Fisder   (1988a), arxl   goff (1987). It s1d be clear by xu that neither
extr in the date represents the cxxçlete ocrrect axr.             On   the
                                                         afl
hax, if the political systan' s po1icy—makir pros is          to cptimize
on a pirely shozt-n.ui basis, the 'xito will be over-expansion. Thus

degree of 1er—term nithent to resist inflationary teinptat.icns is
                                                                         s
imlicatad, even if it is a decision to insulate the Central Bank frczn the
political pros rather than formal czmdthent to a rninaJ. arthor or
rule.5   Onthe other hard, in a world where  rs
is important that the goverrsent retain at least
                                                 disturbarces      alcz, it
                                                       ability to respor to
stabilize the  eny.         solution is      degree of  iithnt,     xit less
than 100 per cent, to said rxiiinal axxor6


    In the context of     dstic
                          policy—xna]cir, this paper makes rc       jtrxt

                                                            l
on the desirable degree of pre-cnitunt to a zxinal target.

       Whiie Milton Frian has justifiably had ncre influerce on this
issue than one hinian being is usually able to have, there have      been two
aspects of his campaign against the Faderal Reserve Board that are p.xzzlirx.
First, his arg.mnt against discretion in xxcnetaxy policy-making is largely
the Depression of the 1930s nxch worse than it otherwise  ld
basad on the analysis in Friadman az Schwartz that the FeSeral Reserve made
                                                                 have been by
"aflcMir' the Ml ncney supply to fall. Yet in recent decades he has
canpaigned for the Fad to do precisely what he aises then of dOing in the
1930s: set a firm target for the ilxrietaxy base rather than for Ml. The
secord, even ucre pozzling, aspect is that Frinan ard his fell,
ncnetarists claim to believe that U.S. xxey grth wfld be slower ard
sore stable if netary policy were plaoad sore urder the xtrol of the
deratic political process, via the Treasury or the U.S. Onrress, than
under the itrol of elitist central bankers like Paul Volcker.           It is
partioilarly ironic that, when a menber of the xetarist Shadow Open Market
Caxunittee fimally becama Treasury tinder-Secretary for )bnetary Affairs in
the early 198Os, his view that the ncney gzwth rate was danger.isly high
was overruleS by a Treasury Secretary and White Hc*zse whosht     to
the Fed for faster xxcney growth leadix to the 1984 election. pressure
     6 lboff (l985b) shows that   s
target is optimal for zcnetary policy.
                                       intermediate degree of camnkbnent to a
                                       9
                                                                       as given
na1ogis1y, when we thrn to international coordination, we take
by the political process the degree of eitsent to coordination.]
     alt   it can be azued that,          the degree of prexmwitmant to a
                                   whatever

xuithial target, rmiinal    P
                            (or rma1nal dssar) makes a mare suitable target
than the fair other iuninal variables that have been prcosed: the         ey
                                                                rate. Ihe
supply, the price level, the price of gold, or the exctarige
                                                                     in the
argument has been made well by others.7 In the event of distuxbares
                                                                   or other
banking systes, disturbaxS in the piblic's dauard for lr'iey,
distuzbaieS affectix the denard for goods, a policy of holding rninal        P
                                                      rr
 steady insulates the euw; neither real
 be affected. In the event of disthzteS to supply,         s
                                                       the price level neel
                                                           as the oil price
increases of the 19700, the change is divided equi-proxtionately between
an iiease in the price level ard a fall in c*itpit. For sana or*intries,
this is    rhly the split that a discretionary policy wcEld choose anyway.8
 In general, unless the chjective ftion pits precisely equal weights on
 inflation ard real gr.ith, fixing xinal      P
                                            will net give precisely the
 right answer. alt if the ice is         the available rinal arxthors
 runinal (P gives an ontc characterized br greater stability of a.rtit
 ard the price level.       n Açeodix to this paper   shis that a runinal     P
           Gordon (1985), Hall (1985), Taylor (1985)         ardallum       (1987,
            foreunle, argue    in favor of  targetix   ncininal QP  in the closed-
 1988ab),
 econany context. The idea also has prcpocents       in the United Kirqk*: Bean
                             ittaii
 (1983), I'de (1984) ard demard (1987).
                                     as
                                              Miller
                                              of their
                                                      ard Williamaco (1987, 7—10)
                                                         "blueprint" for exchange
 prcpose  targeting  iuninal            part
 rate target  zones.
      8 In 1974, Switzerlard can be given as an example of a        mtzy      that
 chose to take the adverse su1y shock almast entirely in the Swoden   fore of lost
 inecxe ard esployment, in order to restore aJmastprice stability,in the formas an
                                     to                                         of
 example  of  a     rxtrythat dune      take it           entirely
                                                             ard the United States
 inflation, in order   to preserve .itpit  ard aTployment,
 as an example in between.
target strictly daninates a   ney sup1y target,        in the   swe of ininfriizirq
a quadratic loss       ftnti,   regardless      hi   iiortant inf1atia—fjghtJ.
credibility is.
     To take an exan1e fros recant history, the Federal            erve, citir
large velocity shifts, decided begirmii in late 1982 to          all   Ml   to break
firmly    itside their pre-anrs        target   za.            per cent per
                                                       Ml grew 10.3

year fros 1982:11 to 1986:11. Scs sexvers have suggested that the Fed
was fo11ir a general policy of targetir rina1 (IP.           For        fr
                                                                      years
the nnetarists decried the betrayal of the ney grc*th rule, aix warnel
that a major return of inflatiai was inininent. Nctxxty can dcubt, in
retrospect that the Fed dose the right    rse.  Even with the reccvery that
began in 1983 ax continued through the        fr
                                              years ai beycr, nominal           P
grew nore slily than the ncney suply: 8.0 per cent per year.           Thus
velocity  declined at 2.3 per cent per year, in cutmst to its past
historical pattern of increasiru at roughly 3 per cent a year. If the Fed
had folled the explicit netarist prescripti of rigidly pre—snittirq
to a noney grth rate     1r   than that of the       prirperi, sudr as 3
per cent, ard velocity had folled the same path, then nominal QIP             ld
have grn at       ly 0.7 per cent a year. This nurker is an uer brx1,
because with even      ler   inflati    than occurred, velocity wculd aJ.ncst
certainly have fallen even    nre   than it did. The i1icatiom         se
                                                                       clear
that the 1981-82 recessic    ild have lasted arther five years
                                            11

  11.8   ctstacles to internatiaJ. Policy oorinatice

  After the in.iti.al e uasln for the gains frce cuordinaticz, especially
at the thecretical level, a nuirer of            aists
                                                have in recent years been

pointin cut    sa  of its diffinltieS [binnixq, at the piblic level, with
Fe].dsteirl (1983,   1988)).




       The   stacles    to     implntfl a        suessfUl        regi      of   macrofliC
         ordinatii are of three sorts:           uncertainty,      enforcrxt, ar tire-
policy
,sistent inflation—fighth          crelibility. Difficulties of              enfornt ar
credibility have received the       st atteriticri frce          econceists.     Even when   a
                                                     be better off than it
cuozdination package guarantees that eath mtzy will
ld    be in the non—oocperative equilibrium, the zxtry will
                                                            be able to do
                                                                        it
                                                          will be able to
better still if it "cheats" on the agrent. That is,
do better  in the short-run, assuming that the other cntries leave their
policies as agreed; in fubire periods, the other intries
                                                           will presumably

retaliate by also abar3onir the agreeflt. Bit econ3nists have prthably
over-aSiZed the difficulties of enforcEt1t (Ke.nen, 1987, 31—36, thinks
so 9), ar uner-emithaSized the difficulties of uncertainty.
                                                                         If
policymakers cculd be certain as to hi variss policy
                                                       changes w.ild affect
                                                                to enforce
 their eunic chjectives, it might nct be very difficult
 cooperative agrenerxts. Bit uncertainty is in fact ermaic to international
 macroriC policy-making.
                                                                                           have
                             Hhes Hallett                                    "Ecorzd.StS
         Holthaln aix3.
  perhaps focused on         ixral hazard   prletheir
                                                 (1987,   130)    agree:
                                                  because of their interesting
                                                      Lpirical iiçortance. It
  1ical   character rather than because of
  semis likely that uncertainty ar el disagreaTent
                                                   are greater chetacles
  to   internatiorIaJ cxxperatiOn."
                                              12

      As we       will see,   urrtainty is
                                      of three kinds: wmartainty regaxdin
the current and future position of the              eny,
                                                  uncertainty reardin the
desirable cçt.tma for the target variables, and urtainty reardixTj the
effects on the target variables of thares in those policy                irtxts
                                                                       that
the policy-makers directly           trol.
                                        Each of these areas of urrtainty
makes it difficult for policy-makers in        ntxy to                   ki
                                                                what policy

charges to ask of its tradir partners, and to }o what policy charxes it
itself shculd be wi.llir to make in return. Even assumirg that there are nc
prchl of enforoemant,   a cooperative package of policy charqes that each
ocuntry thinks will benefit            it
                                cxild, ex most, easily turn cut to make
thugs worse rather than better. This        be the .ild            cut
                                                          if the baseline
level of cutpit, for exanpie, turns cut to be different than expected, or if
the          level (e.g., potential cutpit) turns cut to be different than
      cptiim.im

expected, or if a foreign expansion of xnetary policy, for exanple, turns
cut to have a different effect on dastic cutpt than expected.
     Urrtainty greatly catplicates the enforcemant prthlee as well. In
the first place, policy-makers do nct have direct itrol over the variables
that we refer to as their "policies." Central banks cannct determine the
ny    supply precisely, because of disthrbai within the ban)th systen or
in the wider ecauny' s desarxl for ney. Nor can a specific policy-maker
who is engaged in international notiatiais determine his ca.ntry's fiscal

policies precisely.           For   this reason,   it   can be   difficult to hold policy-
makers     amtable   for deviations of the policy variables fron the
cooperative bargain that they agree to.
     In the second place, ex ante uncertainty seans that there will be sai
states of the world in which the temptation to cheat is especially great
                                       13

because   te oc*intzy thrr oit ex tost to lose a lot fr abidin           by   the
agresmant  (relative to unilaterally violatirg the agreamant, ax perbaps
also relative to nsver havirg made the agreent to bein with). In sud
cirtazs,        the short-run gains fros abrtqatirg may itweigh the     1er-
term gains fran          tix
                           cxxçeration.
     A third kir of thstacle has been pointad xt by Ioff (1985). A
cooperative agreamant that      oe   in raisirg ecuiic welfare in             a
period will, if     it
                  takes the form of joint reflatia, raise expectationsof
future inflation ax may thus raduca    enic welfare in the 1aer run. In
suth   a ciratare, rencwirq oocperation may be a way that mtries              can

pre-mit to less inflationary policies.
     This part of the paper examines these different              to
sucreseful international coordination, ax then argues that INT, an
international version of targetiog nc*ninal GP (or nanina]. aggreate
daxzxI),    is   re likely than other types of coori1nation to   surnxxuxt   these
cbstacles.


 11.8.1 Prless of uirtaJ.ntv


       Thereare three things that a    ntry  ideally neads to kni before it
 even can enter nagotiations with other mtries on coordinatod policy
 cbajes.     ( at  is the initial position of the daistic euny, relative
 to the cptiimm values of the target variables? (2) %flat are the correct
                                                                irc].i.es the
 weights to pit on the varicos possible target variables? [This
                                                                  sideration
 question of whith variables shculd be excltod frau
 altogether, ar whith 1zltL] (3) ?at effect does eath unit dange in
                                                14
the dstic croecxxnic policy variables (ard the foreign) have ai the
target variables; that is, what is the rrect ne1 of the rld eccey?

     These three eierits fo1l siçly frzn the a1graic eqressii for
the eunic thj active futicn. We specify here a ftzticr of three target
variables,      althh we 1d as easily have re or fer.
(1)    W   =(]12)     (y2+wx2+sp)
(1*) W       (1/2)    (y*2 + ***2 + W*p*P* ),
                                                                        -



where W   is the quadratic ices to be m1nimiz, y is cutpit    (e3çressed in ic,
form   ard relative to its timan), x is the orrent     art      (express1 as a
                                   its tinwi),
percentage of QIP ard again relative to                     p is the inflaticn
rate, is the relative weiit plao the irrent
        WA                                                 ant jective,      Up
is the relative weit pia ai the inflatir jective,           ard an asterisk

to    t policy nstrunEnts: the ney suply, in (in
expezxitureg (as a percentage of (4P).
                                                       l
 (*) dertes the analcxjc*is variables for the foreign cmtry. We will refer

                                                       form), ard goverveent


      The marginal welfare effects of dwes in these policy variables are
then given by:


(2)    dW/din       (Y)Ym +     wx(x)X. + Wp(P)P
                =           +
(3)                 (Y)Yg       Wx(x)Xg + Wp(P)
(4)    q/dm*        (Y)Ym* +    wx(x)x1* +   p(P)Pm*
(5)    dW/* =       (Y)Yg* + Wx(x)Xg* + Up(P)Pg*
(2*) dW*/11 = (Y*)Y*m + W*x*(X*)X*m + W*p*(P*)P*m

(3*) dW*/dg (y*) Y*g + w**(X*) X*g + w*p* (p*) P*g
                                          15

(4*) */de* (y*)y* + w*x*(x*)x*m* +
(5*) */dg* =(Y*)Y*g* + W*x*(X*)X*g* + W*p*(P*)P*g*
                                            ey
effect of   y
where the policy niiltiplier effect of


for the cçtizun,
                on the     ait
                          ld set
                                           on itp1t is
                                amt by x, etc. If
                                                              given by
                                                               wished
                                                                         y,   the
                                                                        to solve
                                    these derivatives equal to zero (with the

target variables (y), (x), etc., first expressed as linear furctias
                                                                     of the

policy variables m, g, etc.). In the Nash imxxçerative equilibrium (in
whith eadi coirTtry takes the other's policies as given),       ldneed ally
                                                       Eath cxxntry igrres
equaticns (2), (3), (4*) &1 (5*) for the BolutiQl.
the effect that its policies have on the other ztzy, so equaticxs (4),
 (5), (2*) an (3*) do rxt enter. Ireied this is precisely
                                                              the starxard
 reason why the nrcocperative equilibrium is sub—optimal. These oes—
mtry effects enter ally In the determination of the cooperative soluti.
        Before they decide on a policy diarqe, policy-aakers im.st at least )c'i
                                                            or any other of the
 the   sign of the correspa3.irq derivative. Equation (2),
 eit derivatives above, neatly illustrates the three kings of uncertainty.
                                                                 x ard
 First is uncertainty abc*it the initial pceiticn, the variables, y,     p.
 Pceitial uncertainty in turn breaks down into three parts: (a) uncertainty
 about the current value of the target variable in question10; (b)
 uncertainty over how the target variables are likely to ive during
 forthnlng year or
 forecast"
                          e     in the   abee of policy
                                                                        the
                                                          dianges, the "baseline
                  this information is relevant on the as&mption that any policy
 cbares     agreed upon   will have their major inpact beginning in a year or


         10 Forexanle, Mankiw ard     Shapiro (1986) fird that the staniard
  deviation of the  revision fran the  preliminary estimate of the real growth
  rate to the final  nuer  is 2.2 percentage points.
                                      16

e, rather      than 1irl1 tely11); ard (c) tzrtainty as to the locatiai of
the cptiim.nn value of the target variable.12
     The point is clear. The policy—maker's estisates of the current values
of y, x or p in his    ctry   mild easily be off by several percentage points
in either directia, which cild flip the signs of the correspc1in three
teras — any   e     of which .ild chaxe the sign of the derivative of the
cjective furtiai — in each of equaticz (2)- (5). Thus it is entirely
pcssfl,le that the cntxy   ld      ask its partners in nagotiatians to eçiard,


these thares
     To take
              ld      in fact e
or that it cild agree to a partner's request that it itself expard, when
                                     ey
                                   the              wr
                                               in the       directicm
                    historical exaiçle, in the late 1970s the U.S. policy-
makers, looking at the available eoc*anic data, coixthxled that insufficient
gr,th in the world ecorny was the prthles of the tima. This as&mpti
was the basis of the 1978 Bonn Si..it agreint for coordinated expansico
with Japan ard Eure, Germany in particular. By the erd of the decade, the
consensus had  bee       that fightir inflatico was the top priority, not
acoeleratin real growth. A natural way of interpretir the vi.i — widely
held in Germany at least — that the results of the Bonn-coordinated

     11 Kenen ard Schwartz
                            (1986) have studied the a.racy of current—year
forecasts by the IMF World Econonic CXtlook for the last fifteen
They flid that the root maan squared error  an    the
is 0.773 percentage points for real growth ard 0.743 &nmait
                                                                      years.
                                                             Seven .]ntries
                                                       percentage points for
inflation.   These prediction errors, relatively nall, are in themaelves
large eruh to reverse the signs of the derivatives of the welfare ftrtion
equations (2)- (5). Errors
of two years or itre
                           ild
                    that are prthably  st
                                 presnably be nuth larger for the horizons
                                          relevant for policymaking. Many
major  international ecorttric nodels show the effects of inetary ard
fiscal policy peaking in the secorxi year in the case of .xtpit,   ard not
reaching a peak within six years in the case of the price level or current
accaint. See Bryant et al (1988).
     12 Econanists
                   disagree as to the correct estimate of the natural rate
of untploymant or the level of potential itpit, for exanpie.
                                       17

expansicr   thrx  cut in retrospect to have been detrintal, is that
unanticipated develrents, particularly the large izease in oil prices
associated with the s'.ñien Iranian crisis of 1979, u,ved the world e1rj'
to a highly inflationary position where               was no lcrer called

for13

    The   seI sort of urcertainty present in the equations is urrtairxty
regarding the proper weights w,  arWp
                                      to pit on the target variables in the
          furctiori.-4 This issue is even    resubjective than the issue of
the cptinal values of the target variables. In a society where the weights
that irdividual actors place on inflation (or the cueixt aint) vary frau
zero to infinity, the likelinood 1aist be jtged very high that any given
gcvernt is Using weights that differ fran the "correct" - that wculd
follow fran any given criterion. One can see fran the equations that
pitting insufficient weight on fighting Inflation, for exauple, can have the
sane effect as unierestimating the baseline inflation rate: the policy-
auker in coordination exercises may ask his trading partners to adopt

     13 Another unexpected deve1c.unt in the late l970s was the dnward
shift in the demar for ney In the United States.    This disturbai, like
the oil shock, maarit that the planned growth rate of uney turned cut ex
post to be nre inflationary than expected.
     14 One way to thtain estimates for the weights is to follow (Xiiz        ar
Sadie (1986), who  ass.in
                            that as of 1984 policy-makers were cptinizing their
                              Nash equilibrian, ard infer the welfare weights
jective    furctiie        a
                                                                    cutcas for
that they isist have had in order to produceThethe

             as
cutpit, inflation    ani. the current aaint.
very sensitive to suth things
 ers    are
                                   as theie].    of the trj
                                                        estimates thrn cut to be
                                                                 that the policy-
                       to have. [To equate the inferred weights with
                                            of .irse            not       that
                                                                                the
                                                                                the
correct rates,   as  Ouiiz  ard  Sadie  do,            requires     only
                              seeking to optimize In a Nash equilibrian in that
policy-makers were indeed
particularardyear,
              the
                    b.xt also that they know the correct
                   correct             of   xeiy
                                          the
                                                             iel,
                                                      relative to the
                                                                      the correct
                                                                       cptinnsi.]
weights,                    position
                                                 18

 eansionazy policies             when   tractionaxy policies    are   in fact called for.
 This    is
         precisely the mistake that by 1980 scan ccrchded had been made by
the tinited States. Fron the viewpoint of the Rep.iblicans who were
to the presidercy in that year, or the Social Deiorath who
Germany       abcut the   s      tim,
                                                                         c
                                                                    elected
                                                                to power in
                                        the po].icy-akers who had agreed to coordinated
reflation at the Bonn S.m!nit of              1978 had   pit insufficient weight on   the
cbjective of prios stability.


        The    thiz
              sort of urcertainty pertains to the policy iiltipliers, the
derivatives y, Ygi etc., in equations (2)- (5*), tel1ir the effect of
cthares       in    the nney sup1y         ar   governnsnt   experiiture on the target
variables.  ny given governmEnt is likely to be usir policy sultipliers
that differ substantially fron the "tni&' ones, ar that
                                                             may even be
incorrect in sign. One way of seeirg this is to note the                      trzTJ
variation in sultipliers          arir
                                 to different schools of thc*.ht, or even
accordin       to different estimates in ncdels of         9mainstream" macroeccrzijst.
They canrct         all   be   correct, ax   it se       highly prthable that no sir1e
icdel is in fact exactly right.15
     It is possible to illustrate the potential rare of sultiplier
estimates in sate detail. In a recent exercise corxucted at the
                                                                Brookirs

which,
        15 The German
          in retrospect,
                           view that the
                          inarriate
                                was
                                             1978 Bonn   Sit entailed
                                                           joint reflation
                                        has been used above to illustrate,
alternatively, urcertainty alxiit the baseline forecast (the unanticipated
oil shack of 1979) or uncertainty abit the thjective function (the prer
weight to be pla on inflation versus growth).           A third possible
interpretation is zcdel uncertainty: the Germans believe that the slcpe of
their Aregate Supply cirve turned out to be steer than they, or at least
the Amaricans, th4it
               if                 it
                             wild at the tine. This interpretation is
             one believes that the German labor market is characterized
plausible                                                                 a
high degree of real wage rigidity, as was pointed out by Bransonby      ard
Rotanberg (1980).
                                      19

institution, 12   1eir eutric e1s           of the international macroeny
sitailated the effects of specific policy diares in the United States ar
                                                                            in

the rest of the        16 The  e1s     participath were the Federal Reserve
Board's i1ti-CnitrY )del, the Eurcpean         Eic       Ozsix&nttty's Ozzxçact

tel, the Japanese Eccaic Plansir Agency ircdel, Project Link,thePatrick
Minford'S Liverpool )de1, the McKithon-Sadis Gla1 nel,
                                                                  Sl-
Littennan     el, the O' s Interlink  e1, Jdn Taylor's nde1, the
arton Eitrios ual, ar the Data PeS1rCeS, Inc., el. The
           VAR



variation in the estimates is large, not just in magnitie bit also in sign.
The effect of fiscal or ixretary expansion on dmstic itpit
                                                              ax inflation
is usually at least of the positive sign that one would expect. [Even here
there are exceptions as regards inflation: the VAR, Wharton ar Link xcdels
                                                                     due to
sanetimes shi expansion causin a reduction in the CPI, prthably


 ttcre   n
 effects via mar1wp pricir.] ait disagreeflt
             when we turn to
                                                 an a1s
                                                    the
                            the international effects.
                                               ai   the eDetric
                                                               becces twh

                                                                        rels
      The areas of greatest disagreement
 rea.rdirq international transmission are not the same as     a
                                                             might expect

 fran the theoretical literature. A U.S. fiscal expansion is transmitted
 positively to the rest of the  O   in 10 out of 11   els,ar an expansion
                                                                     in 9
 in the other ntries is transmitted positively to the United States
 out of 10 ircels, whereas in theory fiscal transmission can easily be
  neative.17 The greatest ajicunt of disagreement      trs,rather, on the
  effect of a ticnetary expansion on the datstic current          aamt, ar
         16 Seethe voltm edited by Bryant et al (1988).
       17 For exaxple, if capital       tiity   is sufficiently la ai a
  depreciation of the datic   curreD! is xritrectiaaxy    the reign cainty.
                                                20

      a the foreign rrent a.uit aid c.itpit level. There are twe
therefore
flictii effects. the or hard, the itary expansi raises
                              On

ard therefore uiports. On the other hard, it depreciates the rrency,
                                                                                  ir
which terxs to inçrove the trade balare. [In the !4dell—Flnir e3. the
net effect on the current          ant
                                  nust be positive. 18j it ta-na cut that a
     iinetary eansion srsens the current               aint in cut of 11 ndels,
                                                  0
U.S.                                                               8

ard a nnetary expansion in the other                   itries rsena their current
amts          in 5   cut of   10   ie1s.    (In   it   ncdels the rest of the 4irdell-
Flenir tranission             mecbanism    isreversed as well: the foreign current
amt ard foreign iine                rise rather than fall.]

       at     happens   if U.S.,
coorithation efforts despite disagreemartts            s
                                    European aid Japanese policy-makersproceed with
                                                           as these?
Pcckett (1986, 1988) ard Frankel (1988), I used the 3rookirxs sirulations
                                                                          In Frankel ard


[ard the welfare weits frau adiz aid Sas] to consider the possibilities

when governments        coordinate    usir ocnflictir imDdels.         Ccuntries will in
general be able to fird a package of ocordinated policy chamges that each
believes will leave it better off, even thcuh each has a different view of
the effects aid thus may not urderstard why the other is wilhir to go along
with the package. The actual effects deperd on what the true ndel is. If
we consider ten possible iels, there are 1,000 binations of             that iels
can be used to represent the beliefs of the U.S. policy-makers, the beliefs
of non-U. S. policy—makers, aid reality. We fird that nnetary coordination
results in gains for the United States in 546 cases, losses in 321 cases aid

       18 A   reduction in interest rates causes
urzr a fltirg athare rate, inplies an             ie      in U     rt xit belarx.
                                                         a net capital cutfli    which,
                                            21

no effect on the objective f.uctia (to                fr
                                                significant digits) in 133
cases. Coordisatiat results in gains for the rest of the                O
                                                               cntries in
539 cases, as against losses in 327 ax no effect in 134.


     A ni.mber of authors have taken ection to this fin±1r, ax its
iiiçlication that unoertainty constitites a seriis obstacle to sucoessfuJ.
internationa]. policy coordination. Hoitham ar Hughes Hallett (1987),
Frerikel, Goldstein are. Masson (1988, 31—32), Gosh      ar            ar Masson   (1988ab)

argue that, in a world in which different de1s abo.z,                   it is not sensible
to asstm that each policy-maker acts as if he kr'zs with certainty the
correct iadel. Such critici mild be a1ied to the original paper,
Frankel ar Rockett (1986). Bit extensials in the p.b1ished
                                                           Frankel                      ai
Pcickett    (1988,    337—338)    ar   Frankel       (1988,   19—21)    papers relax the
 assi.mption    that each   policy-maker   acts as    if he or she is certain as to the
 correct ndel. Policy—makers are assumad to assign probability weights to
 each of the possible isels, ai then to maxinize their expected we1fare.-9
  Coordination then turns out to raise U. S. welfare in only 20 per cent of
 the cases, ar to raise non-U.S. welfare in 60 per cent of the cases.
       iosh (1987) ar tceh ar Masscat (1988a) claim that the presenoe of
 ircdel uncertainty — far frau renerirY rdination unattractive as in my
 results    actually furnishesan argueentin favor of coordination, provided
            —

 policy-makE's rrLize that they
                                    do not               1o
                                                  the tnme imdeJ.. Their

       19    the case where the weights are      uniform, each policy—maker is
                                      nel.    One possible way of interpretir
 playir  by the  sama
 such a canprauise on the
                   the correct
                                 iel
                       "ccmiprctnis&'
                                   is as a type of coeration
                                view  of the world rather than
                                                               that consists of
                                                               rotiatir over
 negotiatir over
             See  Frankel  (1988).    Kenen (1987, 8—9) ar Bryant (1987, 8)
 policies.
 stress that excharge of information is a useful function of international
  cocperatiort broadly defined.
                                      22

arg.mnt is essentially that if the policy-in&cer has rations]. eectatics,
then the prabiity weights he assigns to the possible nels (1/10 to
each of 10 in     ir    e,erint) will oorrespcx1 to the best weights
available. This argumant is oorrect (1) assumiog that govexrsnts do in


                                       s
fact assign the best weights to alternative els     (which ai     other thiogs
                                                                     rt
iplies that all goverxnts share the         perti,         which does     seen
to be the case), ar (2) as a statnt abc*.it ex ante welfare only. If



the original implicatians of disaqreient as to the correct     e].
                                                                   s
governments do rct agree on the correct set of weights to assign the itcdels,
the iiiplications even for correct ex ante welfare are precisely the        as
                                                                      are for
true ex post welfare: coordination uld make the mtxy worse off in
expected value.     Furthernre, even if the ntries do kixM the best
weights, it is still quite possible that the true nel    will thrn cxit to lie
far frcin the weighted—average ndel ax coordination will reduce ex post
welfare. It is ex post welfare that shld be the ultimate iterion; to
argue otherwise   ld  be essentially to argue that what matters is that the
President blithely perceives that he has made the best decision, even if the
cnsences     for the ecorxrj may in fact be calamitous.
     Holtham ar Hthes Hallett (1987) axxl Kenen (1987) argue that we should
rule out coordination (i.e., that it will not take place) in cases where the
bargain is not "sustainable," defined as cases where one party expects that
the other — even though happy to go alorg with the bargain — will in fact
lose fron it. The susition is that the first party will expect the other
policy-maker to abrogate the agretnt next period, when the error becones
evident. To this, one can make two possible responses. First, one can
point out that thrrhc*.it the exercise (that considered by Holtham am
                                     23

Th4es   Haflett, as uth as by Frankel ar ckett), it is assumed that
policy-makers do nct revise their nailtiplier estisates just because the
target variables turn cat in the next peried to take different values eros
the ones they expected. (D1icitly, they assign the error to a transitory
distuibance. This is the alternative to assumir that they gradually upate
their nLatiplier estimates in a Bayesian way until they converge on the true
ei20        It wld certainly be foolish to represent anyone as plete1y
revisir his imfltiplier estimates eath period so that his       nel     fits
perfectly the latest data point.) It folls that it wld not be rational
 to expect the other policy-maker to abroate the agrenint next period,
 because the other policy-maker is )ain to believe in a    nel     that will
 continue to make the agresiEnt appear advantagec*is. It is not as if the
 other policy-maker will be able to a.ise the first of bad faith. If the
 first keeps his prosise to set his policy instzinnents in the way agreed
u, it     is not his fault if the ecorny respQs in an unexpected way.
      The secor possible response to the point is to admit that policy-
 makers in international rotiations are less likely to reath agreement on a
  coordination package if they have prof.irly different vis     of therld
ard thus have diffinfity cosrLlnicatirq at   all.
                                              This argument does not
charge the clusion that uncertainty constitutes a       seris
                                                         obstacle to
sussful policy coordination. It sisply reclassifies sos of the 1,000
 canbinatior. as cases where coordination does not even get past the talkirg
 stage. rd there is nothir to guarantee that those "sustainable" cases
 where   the coordination does take place will have a higher incidence of

        20      ard Masson (1988b) examine the iitplications of havirg the
             iosh
 policy-makers upate their isels in a Bayesian way, an interesting
 extension of the original problen.
                                      24

 welfare gains than that   reflecta in the statistica that     cxxnt   all   1,000
 cases 21
                              st   further, we can isider the subset of 100

                                                                             .
      carrjiri this loic one
 cases where the two cntries agree on a sir1e model. again, this does not
 necessarily improve the diaz that the chosen      iel    is the correct
 In Frankel ar ckett (1988, 330), for the subset where the .mtries
 agree, coordination turns  it  to result in tJ.S. gains in 65 percent of the
 cases, ar rest-of-world gains in 59 per cent of the cases. Holtham arxl
 Hughes Hallett (1987, 25) reach a similar cor1usion: ji.ãed by the correct

 model, only slightly over half the cases result in gains.


                                                        sa
      Frenkel, Goldstein arv3. Masson (1988, 30—3 1) offer further defenses
 of coordination, these in response to the point made by Cxñiz az Sachs
 (1984) ani others that the gains frce coordination are  irically        to
 be small, even unier the normal certainty assi.mtion (which   is the best case
 in that the gains are necessarily positive). First, they cite a firirq of
 Hoitham ani Hughes Hallett (1987) that the gains frce coordination turn      it
 larger when other target variables such as the excharge rate are inoli.x. in
      21 In any case it wld not hurt to try the count on the
subset of cases where the mtries believe that both will gain.
I have not yet done this for all 10 models (100 cathinations).
at nt
the
     the tables in Frankel ani Rockett (1988) can be
           for fourels.                              us    to do
                             Out of the 16 canbinations, 8 cases
are eliminat&3. if it is assun that coordination does not take
place when one partner thinks that the other would lose by the
propose:1 package.   Out of the 8 renainir "sustainable" cases,
ard the corresporkirg 32 possible axtcais, the U.S. turns aft to
gain in 24 cases ani the rest of the OE in 22 cases. These are
only slightly better odds in favor of coordination than result
when all canbinations are ccnsider admissible.
                                        25

the cbjective function. Pqainst this     fIrirm1st be balaix, the           pr1e
that uncertainty poses for dicosing the exchange rate as one of the target
variables; the    matric   record shows even greater uncertainty as to the
effects of      iaonic      policies on exchange rates than on              tpt,
 inflation ar the trade balance.
      Frenkel, Goldstein aM Nasson point
                                         xxt two further limitations of the

 Cudiz-Sachs aroath: that it does not provide an elicit staniard of
                   it pron.zces the gains frcin coordination "enall," aM that
ccsparison when
it   asss that the "crxterfacthal"        (what   ld   happen   in the absence of

coordination)     is   optimization by policy-makers in the Nash ncrcperative
equilibriun, which is not ns-arily realistic. These two points are
siimiltanecsly aressed by an experimant reportad in Frarikel aM Rockett
(1988, 332, table 7) aM Franks]. (1988, tables 13 aM 14). There the gains
 fron   coordination,    uMer   the best-case asm.mption that the policy-maker

        tie troe irel, are x*ipared to the gains to    sirqle policy—maker,
                                                          a

 who may previisly have believad an incorrect irel, of discoverir the
                                                                       tnie
 tcdel aM unilaterally adjusting his policies aordingly [while staying
 within the Nash noncooperative equilibrium]. In a majority of cases, the
 gains fran coordination are mnall cceipar&1 to the gains
                                                                  fr
                                                               a unilateral

 switch to the correct ite1 [9 to 6 for the U.S. aM 12 to 4 for the rest of
 the OECD, in each case assuning that the partner     knows the   correct   el all
 along].
        Thus   it renains tre that the distacles to   successful coordination are
                 even   in a sieplifiad. one-peri     frazework with enforanient
 formidable,
 assw to be autanatic.
                                           26




II. B. 2   Prl   of enforcrnt ar the G—7 irdicators


      Canirq fran
corditions   wild
                    r    sideration of the prcbleee of urertainty,
                      seen   to be essei*.ial for
                                                                          several
                                                    any cooperative  agreent to
"stick."     First,   each rtxini   of coordination a.ist   spify clearly what is
expected of each party. It is hard enca.h to enfot a clear-cut agrent,
because each party has an incentive to cheat: enforxnt is
                                                             hopeless if
 the parties have not even spelled xt what is required of        th.  [en OPEC
ministers ccate ,.zt of a Vienna       nets   withit havir agreed upon oil
pruction quotas for their xntries, it is prcbably a safe bet that the
members will not be withhoidirg c*itpit in the caxun interest; enfornent
is hard encii)1 even when the agretnt is explicit.]
      Secor, for the parties to be held accntable, the variables that they
mnit to itn.st, to the mnaxim.un extent possible, be both cImservable ard urder
the control of the goverrmEnt authorities, ard in particular urder the
control of those authorities involved in the international rotiations. It
is for this reason that when the International. netary Fwi neotiates a
"letter of intent" with the Finance Minister of a borrowing ccuntry, the
"perfonnance criteria" that are agreed upon tenl to be variables directly
under the control of the authorities, such as the growth rate of the
Itonetaxy base, rather than variables that are harder to control like the
broad noney supply, let alone the ultinte target variables like inflation.
Otherwise, the national authorities cculd always clam that a subseg.ment
failure to satisfy a performance criterion was beyond their control.
                                       27

     It is rt   essential that the variables be uer the precise short-run
control of the atrthorities, especially if   pliar      with the agre1Ent is
                                         once a year at annual reviews by the
only to be cked on a basis of, say,
                                            Simunit Neetirgs of the Heads of
fl    ("article IV Consultations") or at
                                          the Finance Ministers. It is only
State, or twice a year at maetirgs of
 essential that there be an una±igUS        si to the relationship between the
                               under direct control ar the variable to which
 policy instr'mnt5 that
                                                                nct be too lor.
 the parties imiit, ar that the lags in the relationship
 hen the variable begins to deviate seris1y frce the agreed-Upon rare,
                                                              accoxdirYly. Then
  the policy—makers begin to adjust the policy instr.mEts
                                                  be held amtable for any
  the policy-maker at the er of the year can
  large deviations frcin the agreement.
       The third necessazy corition p.ills
                                              the o?o6ite direction frce the
   secor. The variables that the parties     tit     to ituist be closely eixh
                                                        function that if
 tied to the target variables in their ultite cbjectiVe
                                                       in one of the ecornic
 there turns cit to be an unexpected disturbanCe
 relationshiPS [or if one of the tfltiplierS
                                                  belorifl to an agreed policy
  c1arge turns  it  to be different than expected], the cantry will not
                                                                          be too
                                                  to a specific riuner for the
  drastically harmed. If the cntry ccatunits
  rrnetary base or the itcney suply, ar
                                                there are shifts in the xtrney
                                              number into a severe ar needless
  xs.ltiplier or velocity that translate that
  recession, it is cviS that the       ntrf   will break its ccamnitment. There
                                        the variables that each party conTrnits to
   utust also be a sisilar link between
                                                     A ntrY will not be as
   ard the other cnty'5 target variables.
                                                            target if this turns
   iressed when its partner sticks to its meney grth                     ives   it
   out to be disadvantage to     it   (for example because a disturbance
                                            28
 to the overly inflationary side of full esployeent, or because the
                                                                    partner's
 ltcney grth turns      it
                        to be transmitted negatively rather than positively).

       Atthe Tbkyo Stm!nit of May           1986,     it   was   decided that the   G—5

 c.mtries, or thexforth the G—7,         ild focus in their meetirqs on a set of
 10 "cjective irLicators": the grth rate of QP, Interest rate, Inflation
 rate, unenplcznnt, ratio of the fiscal deficit to QW, current acccunt and


excharie rate. No pretense was        e
trade ba1ars, xiney grth rate, international reserve
                                                             holdirxs, and
                                      that the ners wci1d rigidly cnit
to specific n.nrbers for these iricators, in the sense that sanctions           ild
be iiosai on a ccuntzy if it deviated far fron the values
                                                          agreed upon. Rit
the plan did incli.e the U erstandir that apprriate resedial nasures
v1d    be taken whenever there develcped significant deviations fron the
"interded cairse." The indicators are viewed as prototypes of the variables
that representatives      bargain over if coordination ware to becae tre
seris.       The current G—7 system   ld
                                      be viewed as an attenipted case of the
"epeilon-sinall" degree of coordination       intior
                                                 at the beginning of this
paper,      a necessary stage for b.1ilding   confidenee before     nving on to nre
birthrg forns of coordination.
      The   list has been further   discussed, arid   trintn dn, at suequent        G—

7   neetirs.   the tine of the Venice St.mnit in June 1987, the list had
                   By
been reduced to six indicators: grith, inflation, trade
                                                               balances,
government bñgets,       nnetary conditions,     arid exchange     rates.22 Treasury

      22    This   list did not appear in the tuuunique, bit rather in connts
to the press   by the U.S. Treasury's ssistant Secretary        ilford.vid
Finabashi (1988, esp. p.130 ff.) offers a fascinating    acccunt of the
nachinations of the G—7 nechanien fron 1985 to 1987.
                                          29

Secretary James Baker, hcMeVer, in Cctck'er 1987
                                                 told the             D' Annual iieetir
that "the tinited States is prepared to consider utilizir,
                                                           as an

jiicator in the coordination process, the relationship anEq currencies    r   itional

                                                                At the Toronto Sununit of
ai a basket of omities, ixxl.ing gold. .."             .

June 1988, "the      G—7   cintrie5   weloctQd   the    aition of a cxadity price
iricator       ai the   progress made    tjaxd refining the analytical            use of

iniicators."23
         The French Finance Minister        ard
                                              Balladur singled        five     it
                                                 1987 (a "L.zvre greement
jxxicators after the G—7 neeting of December 23,
                                                                bñlding on
II"). He writes of "a system based on international cooperation
 the spirit of the  I.s*Nre  1greenentS. Their enforcement requires close
                                                 the basis of such econonic
 surveillance of each of the major econonies on
                                                      of payments, interest
  indicators as grcMth rates, fiscal balance, balance
 rates    ar ecange rates.        This surveillance        is   already being established

 gradually."24
         It is sonewbat difficult to rrile these optimistic statennts that
                                                                with the
 sate aimmt of substantive coordination is already takirg place
 fact that G-7 meetings do nct publicly artxe the targets agreed
                                                                  to for
                                                to bear on ntrieS that
                                                   br4t
 the indicators.        H
                      can any pressure be

 stray fron the agreed-Upon targets (wbether
                                                  it is ix,ral suasion,
 enaIrasItt, the effect on long-term ritatiOflS, or itright sanctions)


          23   ISY,        September 26, 1988,   p.292.
                                                              Wall         Street Jcurnal,
          24   "Rebuilding an International Monetary System,"
  Feb. 23, 1988, p.28.
                                         30

if the targets thelves are not made poblic?25
       Ireed, the   G-7 guards    with   trncus secrj     the values of the
injicators, even nore so than the central banks guard the secrecy of their
foreign exchare market interventions. Theory says that the        sus    of a
target za, for exdare rates for exauçle, is enhairI when speculators
are made aware of the zrarjes26 1y does the G-7 ke, thee secret? One
possible answer — drawn fran central bankers' view of the finaxial
markets, not fran econanists' — is that the G—7 believe that short-term
foreign exdiare speculation is destabilizlrg, ar that creation of short-
term urxrta.inty as to what the authorities will do is a way of   disragi
such speculation.27 limther possible answer is that they do not want to
lose face when the exchange rate subsequently breaks axtside the band.
This answer fits in well with one's suspicion that the 0-7 meetings niay is
fact reach no substantive agreents, bit find it politically useful to
issue crimiiiniques nevertheless; the caimuniques are sufficiently vague that
each mether can interpret thee to his an advantage. 28

     25 To take a recent exanple, in the Baker-Miyazawa
                                                        greement reached in
San Franoisco in Septeeber 1986 [and subsequently broadened to         inolt
Germany and the others at the Lcuvre in February 1987], the Japanese
apearently agreed to a fiscal eansion is exchange for a pranise fran the
U.S. Treasury Secretary that he
the  usual U.S. pranise      to
                                    uld
                                    stop "talking down" the dollar (plus
                            cut the biciget deficit). In the months that
followed, each side viewed the other as not living up to the agrent. (The
episode  isdescribed in P\.mabashi (1988)). Bit it was difficult for
                                                                   anyone
to verify the extent of capliance, because the precise terms of the
original agreeint had not been p.iblic.
     26 See Krugman (1988) for the alication of the latest "snooth
pasting" technology to this prublexn.
     27            and FrarJJ (1988, section 111.6).
      28 It is clear fran Funabashi
                                      (1988) that the varic*is members held
differing views as to which indicators were nost iitortant, what responses
were   called for   if   indicators strayed fran the agreed-upon path, and   l,
                                        31


    The G-7      list   of   iricators is    not especially well-'suit. to the
desirable cor.itions for workable ooord.thation         stat
                                                     ahove.             It is
                                                                        of its
difficlt to inagine a G-7 meeting alying meral censure to
ibers for having ecperierd a higher rate of real growth during the year
                                                       a lower rate of
than had been agreed upon in the preceding meeting, or
inflation.
     The   uin prchlem with the list is that it is too long to be practical.
chen each     ntxy       has ten irdicators     b.t
                                              only two or three policy

instxnts,        it
                  is virthally certain that the irdicators will give
                                               authorities will feel no
oonflicting signals axxi that the national
           on their setting of policy instruments. Frenkel, Goldstein
                                                                      ard
constraint
Nasson (1988, 22) note   that ons azgimnt in favor of choosing a single
 inlicator is the point that when ailtiple irdicators serd conflicting
 signals, authorities can hide behinI the confusion. They also serve that
                                                                      a single
 imltiple iixicators can er1rage "ovezoniination:" setting
  itxlicator  all   each cntry to retain sane degree of freedan in setting
  its nnetazy ard fiscal policies. In this light, a serious coordination
  scheme might   j3   in the l990s by setting only one irdicator, ard then only
                                                      when axx if sufficient
  progress to ccztnninents to uvltiple variables
                                                                             of
 political   consensus ard confidence has develcçed to justify that degree
 sacrifice of sovereignty.
      Perba the true list has been, or will be, winnowed down
                                                              to a       1ler
 nuzrber of irdicators? No item on the list is a good can±date
                                                                 to be the
                                                                        to
                         should be. It is also clear that each was ablehis
  biring thetheagreement
                 Plaza ard Lazvre Agreeeents afteards so as to reflect
  interpret
  own   views.
                                       32

sir1e   variable on which negotiation ur.er a futhre cooiination reiae
ild    focus. Each wild seen to be dninated by nziinal QP (or ninal
dnarxi). We consider each in turn. Peal             ploynnt, inflation ar
the trade balance are less directly affected by policy instxiinents than is
naninal C2P, aside fran the fact that focussi elusively on any one wld
destabilize the others. The nney     ly     is nre unier the control of the
authorities (at least on an annual basis), bit is ntich less directly 1frked
to target variables: it is one unai±igus step further away frcsi the two
fuixainenta1 target variables of real outpit ani the      pri  level than is
ninal     P    (that step, of   rse,    beir the existence of shifts in
velocity, as discussed in section II .A ani dstrated in the eriix).
Ptherscre we saw in the preceiir section that the effects of rey on all
three target variables [x.xt,    pri  level, ard trade balance] in the other
ntxy are tpletely anbigucils in sign. Thus it is a less suitable choice
of focus for international coordination, even, than for       dtic   policy-
m&drq.
     Fiscal policy   is nre easily linked to the   foreign target variables (or
wld be, if the high-loynnt deficit were used as the iricator). 3it
it is less directly unier the control of the policy-aakers than is the nney
supply. itng G-7 ccuntries, the inability to control the bxget deficit
has been nest   strikir   in the case of the United States in the 1980s.
Feldstein (1987, p. 23-24) offers a reason why the United States will
be able to participate in sericus international bargainir over fiscal
policy:
"A primary reason why such macroeconanic policy coor1thation cannot work as
envisioned is that the United States is constitutionally incapable of
                                           33

participating in such a negotiation. The separation of pers in
                                                                           the
Arican form of governt nans that the Secretary of the easury cannot
pratise to reduce or exparxl the b.xIget deficit or to change tax riiles. This
pr     does not rest with the President or the administration bit depends on
a legislative agrent between the President ai the Corress."
       xchange rate pe].icy is of cc.irse a very large tcic in itself, to be
considered briefly in the      last part   of this paper.   alt we    can note   sa
difficulties with the exchange rate befrg the single irdicator that G-7
ccunt.ries cmiit to in licy-ordination agreenents. If the dollar/rk
rate begins to stray .itside the anncrc target zone, which of the
goverxnts shculd suffer sanctions or a lose in rextation? The "n-i"
                                                                                 t
prthl nans that one cc*.intry wc.ild have to sit      it,
                                                   presabiy the Unit
States, which is not what is warrte:L29 Cntries cculd mnit to certain
targets for their foreign exchange intervention, or nre generally to
 ixrietary   ar fiscal licies, which in theory wc&ld determine the exchange
 rate. alt — as already rict& — the link fran inacroecori-ic 1icies to
 the exchange rate is frait with even greater uncertainty than the link to
 outpit an inflation, even if one          re
                                           to assun that the exchange rate
                                                       function as the other
 might have as great a claim to being in the cbjective
 target variables.
       In the secord part of the pperdix to this paper, the exchange rate is
  added in to the chjective function along with itpit ard the price level.
  It is shin that the penalty that goes with stabilizing the exchange rate is
  foil/ing a mnetary licy that destabilizes the overall price level,
  relative to a regime of stabilizing ncininal C2P. Within this fraxnerk, to
       29    Miller aixJ. Willianon (1987) address the n—l prthlen.
                                     34

opt for a fixed exchare rate   rein,      one has   to   it trrcxs weight   on
the exchare rate cbjective. (One has to be prepared to argue that a ten
percent fluctuation in the extharqe rate causes greater trr.le than a ten
per cent fluctuation in the price level.) The only other way xit w.ild be
to ass'. that n51ch of the disturbai in the exthare rate uation will
disappear when the regima charges, rather than havir to be aooaxmated by
the ncney supply.30 If we were to make the xre practical caDparison of
exchange rate target zones versus nc*ninaJ.   P   target zones, rather than
literally fixed exchange rates versus fixed noninal       P,
                                                           the advantages of
DT wild be further boosted by the aoontabiity point: if a .1ntry 's
exchange rate strays itside the target zone to which it has ivnitted
itself, it can always claim that the ncvennt is beyorKt its x,ntrol. Such
claims wld be opletely credthle, in light of the large disturbances in
the exchange rate equation.
     As for the remainin three iixlicators on the G-7 list, the interest

rate, international reserves, arxl the price of gold, the last is the only
one that has been proposed as a canlidate for the sole variable arxu which
ntries shild coordinate. Proponents of a central role for gold do not
seen to appreciate the analytical point that shifts in the demai fwtion
for gold, ar in the other econceic relationships that link it to the
target variables that we ultimately care abc*it, are even nre unstable than
shifts in the denarx for zoney or the denar for foreign exchange, ar1 are
likely to remain so in the future.
     30 Miller ar Willianson (1987, 54—55; 1988) do precisely this: ass.m
that there is a large "fad"   carponent to exchange rate fluctuations urder
the cirrent floating regime, ard that it wild disappear ur.er their target
zone proposal. CThe idea is not absurd. &zt it certainly "stacks the deck"
in an empirical caiparison of the two regis.]
                                            35

       This does   rt   mean   that the price of gold ar other      idities is rt
a gcxxl iricator in the      sense of an early warning signal as to the likely
future crse        of a true target variable, namely the overall price level.31
In this sense      it belcngs with the nzy suly, the interest              rate ar the
yield curve,                 leading irdicators, on the list of variables
                 ar many other
that policy-makers may want to        nitor
                                       on a short-term basis in attapting

to hit their targets, whether under a regime of coordination (e.g.,
International Nui.rial     P Targeting), dscentralized national            policy-making
with    sa  ccsunint to a ixmiinal               azr.hor   (e.g., regular rxsiinal QP
targeting), or catlete discretion.

     In short, if coordination is to begin — on a scale that is          ttit all,
goes k,eyorxl the stage of mere rhetoric — by sate degree of mnithent to a
single variable, then ninal (2P (or nmninal denar)                ild
                                                            seen to dcmth-iate
each of the eleven irxlicators that the G-7 has aarently been discussing as
the natural cardidate for that variable.


 II.B.3 Prthlet of inflation-ficthtircribility


        The   third of the existing      itiques       of international coordination,
 after    prlis       of uncertainty are.   prl            of   enforcnt   arpolitical
                                                                   if goverints set up
 practicality, the point made by Ken Rngoff (1985a):
 the machinery for joint welfare maximization peri-by-perii,                         the


         31             is sate evidence that the prices of gold arz other
              indeed there
 tncdities   react thstantaneasly to dwges in expectations regarding
 whether imnetarj policy will be tight or loose is the future. (Frankel arid
 Hardive1iS, 1985.)
                                             36

oocperative ecpi1ibriti in each period is likely to entail a greater degree
of e ansion, ar thereby in the lorg rtm to urziexine the goverrmnts'

inflation—fightirg     cribility ar to result in a higher inflation rate for
a given     level of axtpit.      In the   off view, re      incirig   the aathlnexy of
ooordination    is   or of the ways that goveiints can crthly pre-it to
less inflationary paths.
     It is important to realize that the introduction of Iorer-ters issues
of credibility, ti-iinsistexy ard pre-ccisiitnt can just as easily zm
in favor of coordination as against it. 32 If the perceived externality or
shortcanirg of the Nash noxxocperative equilibrit is that it is overly
expansionary, then the coordination equilibrit, even when arrived at on a
period-by-period basis, will entail       expansion, not        re.
                                                                This is often
argued to be the basis urerlyixq the Eurcpean 'bnetary Systesi.           The
thetoric that Schmidt ard Giscard originally used in proposing the         in
the late 1970s stqgested that they were doir so because the United States
was nlecting its duty to sucply to the              rld
                                                 the public good of a stable,
non-inflatir, crrery. Ten years later, many cbservers of the fl. have
decided that its success lies precisely in givirg inflation-prone intries
like Italy ard Frare a crIible naninal anchor for their uuetazy

policies.33 Ccxinuittir to an e,sthange rate parity or bard vis-a-vis a hard-
currency co.intry like Germany constitutes precisely the sort of                  tli-
consistent l-inflation policy sc*.ight by those who               rry
                                                                 that central

       32   noti'er of   Frenkel-Goldstein-Masson'     s                      the claim
that   the gains fron coordination are            nall isarg.mrrts against
                                                          to cite results of
                                                                      Currie,
levine ard Vidalis (1987) to the effect that a ccsiparison of the cooperative
equilibri allcm             sae
                           for qavexents to establish reptations with the
analogcus noncocperative uilibritzn shows large gains to coordination.
             For example,   Giavazzi ard Pagano (1988).
                           ,
                                      37

bankers left to their  n
                       discretion will be overly expansionary.
    In the case of the      there is an asymmetry. It is acoepted that
Gernany is simply 1on to place very large weight on price stability,           e
to its history or for whatever other reasons. The weaker-currency intries
can   then peg to the "greater mark area",    if they wish to ixrt inflation-
fightir    credibility. [There is a close analc,y with the idea in          off
                                                               — is )cn to
(l95b) that if a particular Jnividual — say Paul Voicker
have   extr   aversion to inflation, then the ca.intry can gain by appointing
him as Central Banker, even if the cntry' S                function pits less

weight on fighti inflation; his tight-imney credibility will reduce the
pblic'S etations of inflation, axx1 in long-run egt2ilibriun will pruce
a  lr     level of actual inflation for any given level of cutp.it.] In the
case of prcposals for rldwide coordination, there is no pres1.mticn that
the United States (the natural "Stackleberg" leader) in fact has as much
 inflation-fighting credibility as Germany arx3. Japan. Thus there is no
 automatic presmtion that year-by-year coordimation         sld lerthe average
 werld inflation rate rather than raise it.


       The implication of   the credibility issue is that a schema for
 coordination is nore likely in the long-run to preduce gains if the plan has
 the national goverrmEnts ma)dr, not just camnitments to each other on a
 pericd—by—perio basis,    it  also sme degree of camailment to a naninal
 anchor on a longer tenn basis. Hence the arguments for ooordinatirg arrx!
 the price of gold (Baker,
  (cKinnon's proposal).    trell,    et al) or arm the glal nney supply
                              then all the argtmants fron the closed-econarj
 context [discussed in part II.A) as to      why ncmtinal   P as a   ncaninaJ. anchor
                                        38

daniriates
equally to the world    y.
              t1 iey sly,        price of gold, or overall price level,   aly


II. C   H, International Naninal G1P Taxetir (INT)   Wa1ld Work




The
        The    frawork laid     t   in Franks]. (1988c,d) is a very simple one.
        G—7 wld xit a.side their list of 10 ixicators, ard wld instead foa.s


on naninal demard [defiriad as runina].  QP minus the balax on goods ard
services]. At each meeting the national authorities          ild  (a) mnit
theJ.ves, withit any essively great degree of firmness, to target
rates of grcith, or rares, for their natries' levels of rinal deinard
for five years into the future, ard (b) camait thmae1ves, with sczmawhat
greater firmness, to targets for the canix year. In the first stage, i.e.,
the early l990s, there wfld be no elicit enforcement naniszn. Bt the
targets wild be p±licly annaino&I, ard if a cc*.mtry's rate of grwth of
rianinal demard     turiait to err significantly in one direction or the
other, the fact wa.ild be noted disarovirly at the next G-7 neeting.


suooessful, a future stage might      another variahle or   t
This does not happen urder the current system. If the first stage vere
                                    a                         to the list, or
might even ccmnmit intries firmly to specific policy responses in the event
 that their level of naninal demard begins to stray fran the year's target.
      A plan that called for targeting rxmninal (P rather than naninal deinard

 might be itcre readily arxi mnre widely urderstcod, ard thus might stard a
 better chance of succeeding politically.         advantage of focussing on
 nczninal denard is the assnption that when the ceoperative equi1inri.nn
                                           39

entails expansion, tntries     need   to   be dis<xraged   fran the   ttation to
aooaplish the epansion of cutp.xt      thrh
                                          net foreign de!nar, for exaitle
thrcih protectionist trade asures, as cosed to datic denarxl. In
se   years the coerative equilibri may entail contraction rather than
expansion, ar then a nczninal    Ptarget might be preferable to a naninal
denar target. 3.zt it is usually th4it that the political pressure for
protectionist trade  ries is greater in recessions than in             expansions,34
which points to ncaninal   dai as the sterior choice.35
      Cntries    ccAfld   attain their naninal GP or riidraJ.       targets
                                                                      denar1

thrcgh any of several rtes. one possibility, for example, is the
Willianon-Miller (1987) "blueprint", which assigns fiscal policy in each
cnt3y the responsibility for attainir a naninal dnar target (are
assigns nonetaxy policy in each       ntay responsibility for the exchange
rate36). 3.it at least one seris prleu arises if fiscal policy is
explicitly specified as the policy instrnent with which aitries are
 expected to attain the ncininal demand targets that they agreed to. When
 their econanies stray away fran the target the authorities will claflu that
 it is not politically possible to adjust fiscal policy quickly. Such clams
           Cornbsch ani. Frarikel (1987) note sane qualifications, relevant for
 the U.S. political process, to this staniaxd view of protectionist plres.
       3 Besides subtracting fran total (P that part goirg to the foreign
 sector (the trade balanoe), it might also be a good idea to subtract that
 part going to inventories as suggested by Gordon (1985).
        36 The Miller-Williaxion blueprint also specifies that the G-7 shculd
 set the average level of theirGPs. interest rates so as to attain a target for
 the areate level of their               This part of their plan is similar to

  each country's naninal
 nnetary policy, thatrate
                            dt
  Part (a) of my proposal. It is my part (b), cooperative yearly setting of
                                     target, to be attained primarily thrigh
                           differs the cost fran their plan Laside frau my
  treatsient of exchange       stability as a separable issue].
                                        40
will be cxx1etely crelthle, because they will generally be true.37
     An agrent is scre likely to stick if ntaxy policy is specifi&I as



policy.    Even                                       e
the policy instr.ment that cntries are expect to use, rather than fiscal
             if fiscal policy is assi. to be no        subject to lags ax
political erxthrar than is nKretary policy, there is another reasen for
assignir nxretary policy to the nxiJ.nal danarx target. If .intries also
pirsue trade balanoe targets (are it seese that they do, whether or not
they shld), then the classic "assignsont prublen" is relevant. The
general rule is to assign responsiblity for the trade balarce target to that
policy instrunsnt that has a relatively greater effect en it (4zdell,
1962).     I
           agree with 8cuhton (1989) that urder           arn
                                                       oitions of
floatirg exoharge rates, whith work to decrease the effectiveness of
nnetary policy with respect to the trade balarce ard increase the
effectiveness of fiscal policy, this     nsassignir fiscal policy to the
trade balar target ard nrretary policy to the daistic target.
   what   is the precise   instrument of xetaxy policy that   shild be adjustad
when   rnina denard drifts away frcsi the target?  nrretary base or level
                                                    The
of unborrsi reserves s.i1d be better than the broader iazetary aggregates
because the central bank controls then nre directly.      (The short-term
interest rate is another possible instrument.) ?alltnn (1988, 15) has

         For attenpts to evaluate             the stabilIzing properties of
the blueprint plan, see Miller ardenpirically
                                   Willianeen (1988) ard Flenkel, Goldstein
ard Masscri (1988, 33—49). Frerikel ar1 Goldstein (1986) survey target
proposals. Miller ard Willianon also consider a floatirq rate regise arxl
                                                                          za
the Kinrcn (1984) proposals to use netazy policy to target the aggregate
ncney suly — or In a later version the aggregate price level —
G—3 ccxintries.  Kithen ard Sacths (1988) also      are                 the
                                                         these regimes. As
yet, I am not aware of eipirical work evaluatirg the likely c*ite if
ntries    cooperatively set rianinal
attain them].
                                       Ptargets [ard use netary policy to
                                           41

suested a      specific   feack rule in the caxtext of clos-ecany policy—
                                                                           per cent
making that might do well     here.    His proea]. is that for each

that rninal        P
                 deviates      fr
                             its target in a given quarter, the      tary
base be e anied an aitiona1 .25 per cent aver the subeegient quarter. He
snggests setting a trer. grth rate in the target of per
                                                    3     cent per year,

ani subtraCting frcin this the average         grth rate of base velocity aver the
preceding    fr
              years.        n altaative possibility wuld be to replace the        3


per cent target with "a      n.ber to be negotiat1 for each mter of the G—7
each year,    with   a plar long-nm tendency of 3 per cent."
       The   central bankld      be   better able to   hit its annual uninal dexnarx

target   if it was     all to respcr to         other available   fonnation, besides
                                                                Ben Frien
just the most recent icnthly figure for naninaJ. denan. itself.
 (1984, 183—84), for exaile, shs that such iricators as the nney suly
 a   the stock of creiit can be usef to prict iinre     accuratelydeviations

 fr
 aed tothe list. The cenolusion            s
      a niral incc*ne target. Many other "leading iricators" cculd be
                                           to be that it          ld
                                                                be better in

 practice to leave the maans of attaining the rinal denai target up
                                                                      to the
 national authorities, rather than requiring that they folli a particnlar
 rule like allum's.


        It   might be   ject that this entire discussion of ccorthation via
 fl has rlect important questions of the mix between crtarj       an fiscal
 policy,     the   real interest rate,   amf   the exchange rate.38 These questions

        38 Arelat cjection is that a plan for using itnetaxythe      policy to
                        P
                        ild     have   dora  little  to
 target ncaninaJ.that arose in the early 1980s, the U.S.
 disñlthri I
                                                         prevent
                                                                    get armajor
                                                                          trade
                                          (1983) that this disequiliJDri1m
                                                                            was
 deficits. 3.it agree with Feldstein  the       ninistration   did  not to
 not a  "coordination failure,"  that      U.S.                              any
                                      42
are considerad next.




III. rorcy   IND   DF u                    FraBIuTy

     One  nasure of the degree of    maonic        policy vergere       ax
.mtries is the magnitixle aid variability of the real interest
differential.  off    (1985c) for exaiple shows that real interest rates are
not perfectly rrelated aoss European ca.intries, aid argues that this
shows that European ccntries retain        se   policy irdeperxlence.     One

apestion, posed by cIservers of the Eurcpean )kinetary Systas in particular,
is whether such irdeperderce is attribotable to capita]. ntrols aid other
remainirg barriers to the free nov nt of capital across national
bcurdaries, or whether it is attrihitable to exchange rate flexibility.39

extent pursue the policies it did as a result of insufficient eansion by
tradirg partners. Irdeed the At±ninistration did not even want aircpe ax
Japan to exan1, until after 1985. No International bargain
brht      abc.it a U.S. fiscal crrection.
                                                                  ild
                                                Only a rnition by the
                                                                         have
Pdiniriistration ard Corqress of the link betwaen their fiscal policies ar
the trade deficit (tcether with the political will nssaxy to make
difficult k*xlget choices) wild have done so. By the same token, neither
INT nor any other proposals for onord.thation sha.ild          bealld      to
distract attention from the point that the nost ieçortant policy ctharmes to
be made in 1989 can be made unilaterally by the United States. Sud
thom.ghts are suçorted by the flrdirs in Frankel ard Rockett (1988) ar
the gains fromn the United States discovering the true
adjustir its policies aaordirmly.
                                                      el
Frankel (1988) that the gains from ordination are usually aaller than
                                                             aid unilaterally

         A nusber of authors, irclidii     off      (l985c) aid Giavazzi arr
Giovannini (1988), have pointed cut that European plans to decrease both th
ranaining degree of exchange rate flexibility aid the ranaining level o
barriers to finarial integration may run Into txble, if the irdividua2
                                          43



III .A Finanoial irrteiration. bretaiV intration, ax Iriepeix1er

    Frarikel     ar NacrtbUr (1988) stiie real interest differentials for 24
czrtries,   fran 1982 up to early 1987,        ar deoaoeed then into a caiczent
attrft*itable to iserfect finarial integration (the "ccntzy preni') ax
a cc*iiponerit attrit*itable to exchare rate variability (the ".irrency
                                        differentials for 25 cantries, vis-
prenium"). Table 1 sbs real interest
a-via the Eurllar, upat&I thrcu3h the b nriin of 1988. [It is taken
fran Frankel (1989).] Both the maan of the differential ai the seasures of
variability sbi subataritia-l iixeper]eiXe for each of the ctries. Table
 2 uses forward exchare rate data for each currenoy to separate
                                                                    cit the
 cover interest differential, which represents the cciiçonent due to
                                                                     is very
 inçerfect finanoial integration. The covered interest differential
 small for the G-lO intries (ixltir Switzer1ar) except for Fraz
                                                                         ai
  Italy, ar is also very small for Austria, Sirapore ai Hcr Kor. Even
  for the other cc*.intries, which often have significant barriers to
  international finanoial integration, the camtry preni is in arst cases
  smaller than the currency preniurn. This says that for the major ntries,
  ar many others as well, excthare rate variability is a greater sarce of
 policy iix1epenerx than is imperfect financial integration.
      Different views are possible on whether or not policy ix1eperienoe
 makes   for a   ire sxm,cthly-nmnir world uny.            Corden (1983) argues   that
  dentralized       decision-ma1drY   aimrg    mtries is    re efficient,    because

  each   cntry knis better its        n situation.   His   is an argumant in favor of

  ca.intries are not ready to give up their renainir policy irieperence.
                                                            n
                     .'Urn-:       Vt  !;ri1a LVs Ral)nL                 Infit:cn   Diffrerci:ia1
                                   :.eotC,ijttr. 112       tic




                                                     1                    2          3        4
                                                                   Series Root Near
                              4*of                       Standard Standard Squared
                              Jhc.            N1aaj-       Error  Deviation Error 95% Band
Coon       4tlanttc   JLs
     Caneda                             62     i.o'          0.33        2.09    2.09       3.96
     Germany                             o3 —1.29            0.65        2.77    3.06       5.95
     Mctherlanda                        62    —0.71          0.86        3.91    3.97       7.63
     Switzerland                         62   —2.72          0.81        3.39    4.36       8.43
     United Kingdom                     63     0.46          0.79        3.45    3.48       5.69
     Sr cup                             313   —0.83          0.66        3.16    3.46

Ltberalizing Pacific LDCs
     Hong Kong                          42    —2.89          0.94        4.80    5.62      11.61
     Ma 1 avs i a                       62     0.83           1.00       4.61    4.68       8.19
     Singapore                           61    0.08          0.68        3.33    3.34       6.71
     Sr o up                            135   —0.67          0.82        4.23    4.62

Closed LDCs
     Ba hr a in                         60     2.19          1 .46       7.10   7.44       12.93
     Greece                             56 —9.22              1.91       9.36   13.19      21.77
     Mexico                             62 —20 .28           9.43       21.19   29.45      52.13
     Portugal                                 —3.90          2.97       11.28   11.95      23.62
     South Africa                    61       —4.84          1.17       4.85    6.88       11.16
     Sr cup                         300       —7.25          1 .30      12.16   16.06
Closed European         DCs
 -
     Austria                            44    —2.20          0.83       3.84    4.43       7.32
     Lie 1 g i urn                      63     0.53          0.63       2.90    2.95       4.99
     Denmark                            61    —3.42              .90    4.34    5.54       9.64
     France                             64    —0.42          0.72       2.94    2.98       5.54
     I re land                          61     1.53          1.03       3.95    4.24       7.13
     Italy                              61     1 .01         0.86        3.62    3.76      5.83
     Noreay                             SC:   —0.64          0.84       3.23    3.29       6.83
     Spat n                             63     0.53          1.44       5.92    5.95       11 .90
     Sweden                                        .21       1 .   07   4.52    4.53       8.28
     Sr   Cc   U                    550       —0.37          0. 8 1     4.00    4.29
Liberalizing Pacific               DC
     Australia                          0)     1   .16       0.90       3.69    3.97       7.43
     Japan                              63    —0.58          0.62       3.41    3.46       6.03
     new :ealand                        6C)    1   .04       1 .83      7.15    7.23       11.36
     Group                          J '33      v.52          0.73       5.00    5.09

     All Countries                 1531       —1.74                     6.47    8.0
                                           Table 2:
               llter'25t Differential Less Forward Discount
                     September, li82 to April, 1988

                                      1                            2            3
                                                                Series
                                                                    Root Mean
                    1*   of                        Standard Standard Squared
                    Ohs.           Mean             Error Deviation Error             951 Band
Open Atlantic DOs
   Canada                  68      —0.10              0.03         0.21       0.24        0.44
   Germany                 68      0.35               0.03         0.24       0.42        0.75
   Netherlands             68      0.21               0.02         0.13       0.25        0.45
   Switzerland             63       0.42              0.03         0.23       0.48        0.79
   United Kingdom          68      —0.14              0.02         0.20       0.25        0.41
   Group                 340        0.14              0.01         0.21       0.34

Liberalizinq Pacific LDCs
   Hong Kong           48           0.13              0.03         0.28       0.31        0.60
   Malaysia            63          —1.46              0.16         1.28   .    1.95       3.73
   Singapore           61+         —0.30              0.04         0.31       0.43        0.73
   Group              195          —0.52              0.05         0.76        1.14

Closed LOGs
   Bahrain                 64 —2.15                   0.13         1.06        2.41        4.17
   Greece                  58 —9.39                   0.80         6.08       11.26       20.39
   Mexico                  43 —14.47                   1.83       12.01       20.54       28.86
   Portugal                   61   —7.93               1.23        9.59       12.49       27,83
   South Africa            67 —1.07                    1.17        9.55        9.61        2.68
   Group                  293 -6.64                    0.48        8.23       11.82

Closed European DOs
   Austria                    65    0.13              0.05         0.39        0.41       .0.39
   Belgium                    63
                               0.12                   0.03         0.26        0.29        0.59
   Denmark                 46 —3.53                   0.19         1.57        3.89        6.63
   France                  43 —1.74                    0.32.       2.68        3.20        7.18
   Iceland                 66 —0.79                   0.51         4.17        4.24        7.80
   Italy                   63 —0.40                   0.23         1.92        1.96        4.11
   Norway                  50 —1.03                   0.11         0.76       1.29         2.10
   Spain                   67 —2.40                   0.45         3.66       4.39         7.95
   Sweden                  68 —0.23        .          0.06         0.45        0.51        0.81
   Group                  583 —1.10                    0.09        2,25        2.77

Liberalizing Pacific DCs
   Australia           68          —0.75               0.23        1.94        2.08        2.59
   Japan                68          0.09               0.03        0.21        0.23        0.43
   New Zealand         68          —1.63       -
                                                       0.29        2.42        2.92   -
                                                                                           5.24
   Grcup              204          —0 76               0   12      1 78        2 06


   All Countries         1620      —1.73               0.09        3.81        5.36
                                         44

the current floatirg—rate system. Kinrri (1988), on the other haril, takes
it for granted that r1d econcmnic efficiery riires that real interest
rates be alized across ntriea [presumably so that the marginal pr.1ct
of capital is ualized across .intries]. His is an argumant in favor of
refora of the system so as to reduce excharge rate variability.


III.B   A    Prcosal for Bethnfl to Stabilize        are         Rates: The "Hosani



       Wculd-be    reforitrs of the world ixnetary system have a choice. If they
wish    to   all    each cx.intry enhanced policy irdeperIence, they can seek to
decrease the degree of finanoial market integration.            Alternatively, like
McKinnon     (1983,   1988) an   Williaon     (1983), they   can opt for irreased

policy      nvergere    and   exchare rate stability.        [Frenkel, Goldstein and
Masson (1988)                  beten decreasir the demand for policy
                   refer to a choice
ordination and irwreasir the suly.] Frankel (1988b) nsiders one of
the ncst-mantioned proposals for deasing the degree of financial

intration, the "Tchiri tax" on foreign exchange transactions. Here I
discuss another particular proposal that others have made for stabilizing
exchange rates.4°



    40 rnbsch and Frankel (1988) discuss ten proposals for world
netary reform. F.ir entail     decentralized policy rules: new classical
fatalin, a gold standard, national zretarin,   and national naninal incczne
                                            foresee enhai coordination:
targeting as discussed in section hA. Fair
the G-7 indicators as discussed in section Part IIB, Willianon's target
zones, McKinnon' s "world inonetariem," and the Hosani Ftixxl. Two propose
enhanced independence: the Tcbin tax on transactions and the Drnlsch
proposal for a dual exchange rate.
                                         45

     several years ago, Takashi Hosati (1985) proposed the creation of a new
supranational fuz that      ld intervene in foreign ex±ange markets. The
Japanese Vice-Minister of Fthare for International Affairs, Toyoo Gyoten,
has recently floated precisely this sort of proposal•41  sax recent talk
of a European Central Bank, heard both in official            ar
                                                        acadenic circles,
strikes a sinilar rte42

        The   prcsal envisions a   furs. that   ld    uniertake operations in the
open international markets,     it ild rtreplace the irividual cantries'
central banks. A plausisle ntivation for this approach is precisely the
one presented in the intruction to this paper: the need for proposals for
nnetary reform that are politically practical in that they            ld
                                                               begin on a
very    allscale, gradually biild up nfidere axaeg the players, arx:1 then
isrease the scale of crdination accordi1y. In this case, the size of
the     fur   constitutes the variable that     ild begin with a all "epsilon"
ar. subseqently        increase to reflect      bever    itn.ich   political   consensus
exists.
        isions cld   be made by an "Open Market Ccmxnittee" consistir
primarily of representatives of the individual central banks, with votes
presmbly awarded in prrtion to the size of their ecoaies or the size
    41 "A New Collar for Cuzrery Markets," The                International Econry,
May/June 1988, pp.36—38. (See also Wall Street          Jrnal,      Septenter 25, 1987,
 p.22.)
         in the case of Europe, it see that a unified currency is the
        42
 ultiate goal (ar    a strerxthened role for the ecu is nsidered the first
 step). In ugust 1988,       a European Castiunity stnind.t maetir agreed to
 establish a cattmittee that    ildstudy creation of a xicnetary union an to
 examine the issue at a Madrid maetir scheduled for June 1989. See Casella
 arxl   Feiristein (1988) for a theoretical analysis.
                                           46

of their   itribition of international reserves to the fur, as is the case
with the International !bnetaly Furx,             cperati decidi by a
                                                bit   with
inalian voter nile. [The Bank for International Settlnts i1d also serve
as a e1; ire it is eivable that an parxa BIS caild serve, In
place of   f.irir yet ancther irrternat.ional institution.]           In the event that
France, say, wishes    to                    of the franc against the dollar
                            dazpen depreciation
bit is cutvot       by a majority in favor of dollar porchases, the Bank of
France is still     free to intervene in the cççosite direction on its             n.
intries will at first       be   giviz up very little sovereignty when they agree
to the establisiment of       fwd because it will be on a email scale.
                             such a

Only if all parties are happy with the outcax w.ild the size of the
portfolio — ar therefore the potential loss of national sovereignty — be
reaseI.

III. c conclusion

     This paper has examfl two possinle reforma of the world nnetary
reform. Both are design so as to try to overc the                  seris
                                                         chetacles to
successful coordination that are       itlin in section II.      In particular,
                                                                     B.

both are   design in    such a way     that they can bein on a emall scale, ar
then grov as the degree of political consensus         grs.
     The IN proposal is the aropriate one if the shortcanir of the Nash
noncooperative equilibrium is thight to be either insufficient or excessive
expansion.    The Hosoni proposal     is the aropriate       one   if the shortconirx is
thht to lie with the exchare rate.                           the two
                                                The question arises whether
are caipatible, whether they can be inpleeent siimiltanecusly if the
                                         47

noncooperative    equilibriue is   thht to be characterized by both sorts of
shortccEfrqs.
       If the   Hosaai Fund   is
                             foreseen to affect exchange rates only via
chances in iiey supplies, and nxnetary policy is also foreseen to be the
instrtment whereby irxtries attain their rxiina.l desand targets, it      nit
there is in fact a prclen. There are
ld
                                              s
sees that there is an overdetereinacy in the systes. 3± I am not sure that
                                             chvis policy instz'.nnents that
      intrcx±ice extra degrees of freed into the systes: the Hosoni Fund s
intervention     cld  be non-sterilized, thus changirg the international
supplies of bonds rather than supplies of rey, or the ccntries c,ild use
fiscal policy     alside netaxy        policy to attain their rnina1 denand
targets.
       Even   if noney slies are the only available policy instrnts, there
are n   ney     slies to be detennined and n national opinions as to what
they shcold be. So     it scunds like there is no overdeterxriinacy prcblem.   At

arrygiven tire, the itian voter on the International Open Market Ccrmittee
will siply receive extra wa4it in detenninir what the ney supplies will
be. it is true that if the nian voter wants the fund to        y
                                                             a particular
currency to increase    its               at the sare tire that the ccuntry
                              exchange value,
 in question is cbligated to increase its monetary base in order to correct
 slier-than-targeted grth in its nominal        P,
                                                then the ccurrtzy will be      it
 in an untenable position. It      seunlikely that the Open Market Ccmmittee
 sld    choose to "pick on" a particular inber in this way. 3± this is

 rerely speculation at this stage. It     ldbe desirable for future research
 to study the isplicatioris of such a Hosani Fund with a nian voter rule,
 just as it     ld  be desirable for future research to study a regine of
48

oocperative ex      ante    settir of         nczninaJ.   demar    targets.   This paper has aily

tried to   point the way, with an examination of                    sane advantages of these twe
approaches.




                        *               *             *



                              APPDD


       In this arperxix
exchane rates, with
                             we canpare         fr        possible policy
                     full disetion by national policy-makers (the irrent
                                                                              ri:    (1)   floatiog


regine), (2) a rigid ney suly nile, (3) a rigid naninal 1P rule, ax
(4) a rigid exdare rate rule. [In the case of eath of the three possible
naninal arhors,         prants scmietimas have in mire                     a target zone system;
the assuniption of a rigid nile just makes the analysis siiiler.] The
approach, rporatiog the advantages both to rules and disetion, folls
Rogoff (1985b) and Fischer (1988a), who                     in turn foll Kydland and Presostt
(1977) and Barro and Gordon             (1983).

       Thrigh.1t, we        ass an aggreate su1y                    relationship:

(Al)       y = y*   +   b(p-p5)    +   u,
where y represents itp.it, y* potential                        it.xt, p the price   level, pe the

expected price level (or               they    ld         be   the actual and expected inflation

rates,     respectively),         and   u a       suly distuxbai,             with all variables

expressed as logs.
                                            49

   Xixt       ax the Price Level    in the Cbiective Furtia


        Webein witht the exchare rate.            The   loss furtion is siaply:
(A2)      L=ap2+(y_ky*)2,
where    a is the weight assign. to the           inflati cjtive, ar we assme
that the     laod or expected price level relative to which p is measured can
be normalized to zero.       We    impose   k   > 1, which   ilds in an expansionary
bias to disetionaxy po1icy-ma)dr.
(A3)    L = a p2 + [y*(l-k) + b(pp5) +
L. DisetiOnarV licy
      Urder full disetion, the policy—maker each period chooses ?regate
Demard so as to ininisize that period's L, with pe given.

          (1/2) dWdp = ap + [y*(l-k) + b(p_pe)
                                                  + u]b = 0.
 (A4)

 (A5)     p = [-y*(l-k)b + b2pe
                                -      i]
                                      / +b].
Urder rational expectations,
 (A6)        pe   =   Ep =
                  -y*(l-k)b/a.
So we can solve (A5) for the price level:
(A7)      p= _y*(l-k)[b/a] -ub/[a+b].
Fon (A2), the expected loss function then works out to:
(AS)    = (1 + b2/a) [y*(l-k) ]2 + [a/(a+b2)] var(u).

The first term represents the inflationary bias in the systen, while
                                                                      the
secord represents the effect of the suly disturbance after the authorities
have chosen the optimal split between inflation ard outp.it.
 2. Money     rule
        To   consider alternative               mist be explicit about the uney
                                                 we

 market equilibrimit corxiition.       (In case 1, it was iitplicit that the xaney
                                                50

su1y m was the variable that the authorities were                                 usii    to    itrol
d.)
            m=p+y-v,
(A9)

where v represents        velocity shocks.      (We         as        V    uirre].ated with u.) If
the authorities pre-cc2anit to a fixed              ey
                                          grth rule in order to reduce
expected inflation in lorw-nui euilbritun, then they       give up on             ut
affectir y. The optimal nney grJth rate is the ons that sets Ep at the

target value for p, naily 0. Thus they will set the ney supply m at Ey,
whidi in this case is y*. The Aggregate                 Dear euation tnis becciries
(AlO)      p+y=y*+v.
Cctibinin with       the Aggregate      Suly    relationship (Al), the eqiilibrium is
given by
(All)      y = y*   +   (u + bv)/(l+b),             p   =   (v   -   u)/(l+b).
Substitutir        into   (A2),   the expected loss furtion is
(A12)         = (1-k) 2y*2 + ((l+a)var(tl) + [ab2)var(v) )/ (l+b)2.

The first term          is   aller    than the corresporxLir                 term in the discretion

case,    because the      pre-xsithnt reduces expected inflation; bit the secor
term     is prdably larger,        because the authorities have given up                  the   ability
to     resporxl   to ney     demand shocks.         %iith regima is better              depends onho
big     the shocks are, and hi            big   a    weit            (a)    is placed   on inflation-

fightirq.
3. Noninal G1P rule

     In the case of a naninal (P rule, the authorities vary the ncney
suly in such a way as to acmicdate velocity shocks. (AlO) is replaces
by the corition that p + y is constant. The solution is the sama as in
case 2, bit with the v disturbance drcped.     Thus the expected loss
                                               51

oollaees fran              to:
(A13)    =         (A12)

              (1—k)2y*2      + [(].+a)/(1+b)2]Var(U).

is u abigusly daninates the iey rule case. It is still not sible,
with.xt )      var(u) or (a), to say that the rule dczninates discretion.
            cMing

It is quite likely, especially if the variarxe of u is large, that an

argnt for a target            z
abeolute cxrtibnt to a rule ild be unwisely constraining. Henoe the
                           rather than a single ranther, ar for subjecting
the Central Bank C1airman to a nre loss of rL1tation if he ndsses the
target rather than a firing squad.    3± it seiE clear that, to whatever
extent the mtry chooses to           it to a rxiinal aior, rxiinal                       ?
dcininates the iney su1y as the candidate for ancthor.


            the ciarne Rate to the Oblective Funotion


   We reconsider      here    a likely   objection    to   choosing   rninal   P or iuriinal
denar    as the focis of international               coordination,    that it   rlects   the
 exchange   rate.      alternative of setting iinetazy policy so as to
                        The
 stabilize the exchange rate will riot look attractive unless the exchange
 rate enters the objective function, perhaps indirectly via the corisi.ur
 price index or the trade balance. Here we confront the argument head—on,
 and incli.e the exchange rate directly in the loss function along with

 ciutpit and the price level. Thus we replace               (A2)   with:

 (A14)         L = a p2 + (y-ky*)2 + c
 where   s is the spot         rate measure relative to sai iilibriun or
                             exchange
 target value and c is the weit places on exchange rate stability per Se.
    There is no point in specifying an elaborate ittidel of the exchange rate.
All the   irica1   results say that            t
                                               52

                                          of the variati in the ecthare
rate canrt be exp1ai.n (even ex post: we say r*.hiz of prictia)
seasurable macrounic variables, ar thus can Qily be attrib.itel to ar
error term that we here call e. ait we imst            irle
                                                    the ney suly In ths
jiation; otherwise we do not           all
                                       the authorities the possibility of
affectir the exdaxe rate. Our          uati
                                          is sin1y:
(Al5) s=m-y+e.
(we ase that e is urrelated with the other disthi±arxes.)
Frcn (A9),
(A16)     s=p-v+e.
We   ass that the sane Aggregate sly relatiahip lds as before,
equation (Al).
So we can write   the loss finotion (A14) as:
(A17)     L =   ap2 + [(l-k)y* + b(pp5) + U]2             + c(p—v+e)2.

We   prooeel as before to   nsider possible         regiiaes.


1. Disoretion
       (l/2)dI/dp = ap + [y*(l_k) + b(p_pe) + u]b + c(p—v+e)             0.
(Al8) p = [y* (l-k)b + b2pe - bi + c(v-e)] / [a+b2fc].
The rationally expecta p is given by pe =
(A19) pe = -(1-k) by*/ (a+c).
Substithtir Into (Al9) yields:
(A20)    p -(l—k)y*[b/(a+c)]       + [c(v-e)—bi]/[a+bZ4-c].

'flie loss funotion is
(A21)    1= [(1-k)y*]2      (a+b2-1-c)/(a+c)    +

     {(a+c)var(u) + c(a+b2)Cvar(v)     +var(e)])/(a+b2+c).
                                                        53



2   ev        rule

As when    sidered a ney rule before, so that expected flation is
                 we
zero the autrities set m at y*, ar (AlO) alies. Thus the sane solution
(All)       for   y    ar p   also    aplies.     The    xaxe rate is given by substithtir
the solution for p            frciu (All)    into (Al6):
(A22)        s   = e — [(u+bv)/(l+b))

The       additional s term         is the only   differere frun     (A12)   in the expected loss
fwtion:
             EL=                      +    [(l+a+c)/(l+b2)]Var(U)
                                                                      +
    (A23)              [y*(l—k)]2

[(a+b+d)/(l+b)2)VaZ(V) + [cjvar(e).
                                             on the vari.is magnitixes.
Aqain the ccviparison with discretion depers



    3   jjnal GP rule
                  inetaxy authorities are able to vary          in   so as to keep
Wtien the

    p +     y constant, the velocity shocks v drop cut.              The   expected loss furtion
    becs
    (A24)             = [y*(l—k) ]2    +   [(l+a+c)/(l+b)2] var(u) + c var(e).
    As   before, the naninal          P    rule unambigusly doninates the in'ney rule.
         In practice the e shocks in the exchare rate equation are very large.

    They certainly dwarf the u shocks in the aggregate suçly equation. (The
    exchange rate often nves ten per cent in a year, withcut correspor.ir
    ncvrxts in the itnay suçly or other c1servable nacroeconanic variables;
    try to imagine similar scvnts of real cxtpit.) If the weit c on the s
    target is subetantial, then the last term in the expected loss equation nay
     be   isortant.
                                            54


4   aiue rate nile
?qain, the authorities can't affect y in         la-rwi eqiil1brii.m. 3it   r, it is
the   exxtharxe   rate that they   p in   such a way   that Ep = 0, which fros   (A16)
is s = 0.     The   ex post price level   is then given by
(A25)     p=v-e.
F'rce (Al),
(A26)   y = y* + b(v-e) +     U.

Fros (Al4),
(A27)     L=  (a+b)Var(v-e) + ty*(1_kfl2+var(u).
The ocefficierxt on var(e) is (a+b2), as ccmared to the ceefficient c in the

expected loss (A24) urxer the rniiia1         P
                                            rule. We made the point above
that e   shocksin practice dwarf u shocks. Reasatixq on this basis, even if
v shocks are also enall ard         a
                                    (the cjective furction pits         r
                                                                     greater
weight on a 10 per cent fluctuation of the price level than on a 10 per cent
fluctuation of the exdare rate), which is extrly conservative, the
expected loss fron fixir s is greater than the expected loss frce fixir
nceinal CP. The reason is that wxer an exchare rate rule a shocks are
alled to affect the ney suly ard therefore the overall price level.
Once we   a1l for v shocks (which are prchably in between u ard e shocks in
maiite), the case for rianinal lP tazetixr is avert strorer. One wild
have to pit extraordinarily high weight on the extthare rate jective to
prefer an eathare rate rule.
                                             53

              *           *             *           *


                          Paferes


Barro, Pcbert. 1986.      Rent     develcpnents in the theory of rules versus
discretion.     Eraic JrnaJ. 96, 23-37.
              The

Barro, Rt±ert, ar1 tavid Gordon. 1983. A positive theory of ncnetary policy
in a natural  rate nel.   Jrna1    of Political Ecaw 91, 4, Aiust, 589-
610.


 1iaxe
          Jaas. 1989. "Policy ?.ssigrnt
Bhton, Pates."   In B.Eichengreen,
                                         Strategies with Saiwhat Flexible
                                   MJ4iller ar R.Portes, es.,
Rate Reqimes ar Macroecernic Policy, forthcxnir.
                                                                                 ca
Branson, William    az Julio Rotenerg.            1980.    "International adjusnt with
                                    Review 13, 3, May, 309—337.
wage rigidity." European Eccncaiiic
Britten, Saniel. 1987. The role         ar
                                       units of overrmnt, reviseS eSition.
Loron: Wildwocd     Hc*mse.


Bryant, Ral. 1987. Intragovernimental coordination of eoornic policies:
interim stocktaJcir. In International nionetarv occeration: Essays in honor
 of Henry   C. Wallich, Essaysin international Finare No. 169, Princeton
 University, December.
 Bryant,   Rali, et al.  1988.          iri.l
                                           macroeconcrios
 econc!nies. Washirxton, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
                                                                      for Interdenerdent

 Corden, W. Maxwell. 1983. The logic of                   the international netary non-
 system. In F.Machlup, H..i11er-Groe1in,                es.,   Reflections on a tr*.ibleS
 world econattsr. Lrdon, 59—74
 Casella, Alessardra,         ai
                             Jonathan Feinstein. 1988. Alternative inetaiy
                  two caintries. Paper written for conferenoe an European
 syste between
 iietary integration, Castelgaixiolfo, Italy, June.
                      Levine
 Currie, Devid, Paulfor            ar
                                  Nicholas Vidalis. 1987. Cooperative ard non-
 cooperative rules      ncnetary arô fiscal policy in an empirical two-bloc
 imdel. In R. Bryant     ar
                          R.Portes, eSs.


 perience      a
 Dornmsch, R. ard J. Prankel. NR
                 alternatives.
 eS., International finance      anS
                                    1988. The flexible exchange rate system:

                                      trade in    polycentric
                                                                  In S. Borer,
                                        workix apaper no. 2464.world.   Lordon:
 Ma4il1an, forthconing.
                                               The Ecornist, June 11.
  Feldstein, Martin. 1983. The world ecory,
                                           56



iEIiernationaiDistisu.ish
             • 1988.
                xrnic                 lecthre on   eoios fri
                                               goverramant: Thin)dx
                       coordination. Jirnal of Ecnic Prapectjves
2 (2)   Sprir:
          3—13.

Fiser, Stanley. 1988a. Thles vs. discretion In arrietary policy.
WorkIr Paper No. 2518, February.
                                                                                N
_________•   1988b. International        mecroicpolicy coordination. In
M.Feldstein, ed., International o1icv coordination. Cticago: UrLiversity of
thicago Press.
Frankel, Jeffrey. 1988a.         tacles
                                   to International macrounic polic',r
coordination. International )etaxy Ftud Workin Paper 87/28. Stdies in
International Finar No. 64, Prixton University, Deceiter.
________•
variability.
                 1988b.
                  Qzferez
                            International capital
                                 on International
                                                     iity i±alanees,
                                                           aid
                                                    payments
                                                                     exthange   rate
                                                                            Federal
Reserve Bank     of    Boston, Bald Peak, N.H., 0cter. Forthczzdx.
            1988c. A Proposal for licy ord.thation: International Nosinal
Targetur (INT). Conferenee on International. payments ialanees, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston, Bald Peak, N.H., Octcber. Prthociajng.
            1988d. A         est
                               Proposal for International Nanina]. Taxgetin
(INT). Kennedy Scthool of Goverrment, Harvard University, Deer 1988.

ferenos on SavIr,ant1fyir
__________• 1989.                   international capital nility. NB
                         Maui, Jamlazy.   D. Bernheim aid J.S1en, editors,
forthoosirx.
Frankel, Jeffrey aid Gikas Hardouvelis. 1985. Oxmdity Prioss, 1xney
surprises, aid Fed credibility. Jonrnal of !kaev. Credit aid BanJcIx 17 (4),
Noveriber: 425—438.

Frarikel,
policy coordination when policy-makers disagree on the madel.
Paper 2059, October.
                                                                      N
         Jeffrey aid Katharine Reckett. 1986. International macroeoornic
                                                                 Workirg

_________ 1988.      International macrciiic policy coordination when
policy—makers do net agree on the true scdel. merican Eiosic Review 78
(3)   Jwe:   318—340.

Frenkel,     Ja,aid Norris Goldstein. 1986. A guide to target
Staff Papers, 33, 4, n1,er.
                                                                        zs. fl'
Frerikel,    Ja, Norris Goldstein, aid Paul Masson. 1988. International
coordination of scoiic policies: Scope, meths and effscts. Conferenee
on national    rnic    policies aid their
International Nonetaxy Fund, May.
                                                    lact
                                                  on the world

Ftiedsan, Benjamin. 1984. The value of intermediate targets in         inp1ntir
                                            57

etary    policy. In Price stability ax b1ic licv, Kansas City, )t.:
Faderal sexve Bank of Kansas City. Pp. 169—191.
Funabashi, Yoicbi. 1988. Mnaqir the Dl1ar:            the Plaza      to the Louvre.
Washirqton, ID. C.: Institute of International Eccrxinics.
Ccsh, SWati.
unkncJn. H.   il    Internationa.l o1icr ordination when the no.el is
                   1987.
              Thesis, Oxfoz university.
iosh, Atish ami Paul Masacm. 1988.  International policy ooorthnation in a
rld
J.   with     ielurertainty. ixternationaJ. Wrietary Fw Staff Papers,

Giavazzi, FraresCO,   ar Afterto Giovarinini. 1988. Li]nitix
flexibility: The rcvean !netarv Systen, Cembrice, Ma.: ?T Press.
                                                                      eaie
                                                                    rate

Giavazzi, Fraricesco, ar Marco Pagar. 1988.       advantage of tyrg
harxs:       discipline az central bank crthility. Eurqean Ecornic
Review 32, June: 1055—1082.

Gordon,
policy in
45—81.
              r
          B±ert. 1985.     The   cort of s.
                   times. A.Aro et al,
                                         dstic mmetaxy policy. In netaxy
                                            Cembrie, Ma.: M.I.T. Press. Pp.

         Pert.     1985.     policy         with an elastic price stariard. Price
Hall,
stability ar blic Monetary
                    policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Hoitham, Gerald, ai Arrew Hihes Hallett. 1987.        Iriternaticrial policy
coordination ar zcdel urxertainty. In R. &yant ar R.Portes, eds., G1al
macrconcinics: Policy conflict arx. cc.veration, Lon: Mail1an.
Hosoni, T. 1985.      Tard       a   cre stable   international nnetazy systen.   In
T.Hososi      ar    M.Fu)cao, A secoixi look at foreiqn excare               xnarlçet
 interventions.     Tokyo: Japan Center for International Finaz.

Kenen,  Peter. 1987. Exchare rates axxi policy coordination. Brockirgs
 Discussion Papers No. 61, Octther.     Washirton D.C.: The Brookings
 Institution.
 KrxJman, Paul. 1988.      Target zones aixi ecciarie rate dynamics. NBR workirg
 paper 2481, January.
 Kydlar, F. ar E.Prescott. 1977.       1iles rather than discretion: The
 irxxrsisterxy of optimal plans. Journal of Political Ecorw, 85, June: 473—
 491.
 Levine, Paul,     vidO.irrie, aixi Jessica Gaines. 1989. "Siuple .iles for
 International Policy Agrents." In B. Eidierreen, M.Miller arxl R. Portes,
 eds., charxe Rate 1thnes            ar
                                 Macroeconomic Policy, forthccining.

 !4al1tmi, Bennett. 1987. The case for rules in     the coixixt of irx,etaxy
          A  concrete example,  Faderal  Reserve  Bank of Ridmxi Economic
 policy:
                                           58

Review,   Ster/Cctcer:           10—18.

             1988a.     .isthess prcperties of a rule for metary policy.
________•
                       iferei
Cerrie—Podter
________• 1988b.
loysent.
                   - role of dar nnagant in
                N Workir
                               Series on Public Policy. Revised, Fruary.

                                Paper No. 2520, February
                                                             the    nitenare of full
l'tKon, zwick,      ard Jeffrey Sadie.      Oordination of inxietazy aril
fisl    policies in the iistrial eies.          In Ja Frenkal, ed.,
                                                1988.

Irternational asnects of fiscal policies. thicago:           of  University     thicago
Press,   73—120.

McKinnon,    Ronald. 1984. An international stamiard for naietaxy
stabilization. Washirqton, D.C.: Instithte for International Exiica.
_______ 1988. !netary ard exthane rate policies for international
finarcial stability. Jnal of Eianic Perspectives, Winter: 83l03.
Meade,    Jams.    1984.   A   new Keynesian   etton    Woods.     Three Banks Rev.ew,
June.
Miller, Mars ard Jdin Wilhiazieon. 1987. Targets ard irdicators: A
blurint    for the International onordination of exiic policy. Policy
analyses In International     nica, r.
Instithte for International FAxxxelics.
                                         22, Septarter. Washirton, D.C.:

_______ 1988. The international imietazy systee: An analysis of
alternative regines. Centre for
Paper No. 266,
                                    Eiic   ard Policy Research Disssion
                   July. Euroneanecuanic review, 32, 5,          June: 1031—1048.

4.irdell, Pchert. 1962. The aprcçriate use of zcnetaxy ard fiscal policy
urder fixed exchare rates. Staff Papers 9, International lbnetaxy Furd,
March: 70—77.


an     irdustrial ecminies. BrookIrs Pacers on          Eic
Odiz, Gilles, ard Jeffrey Sacths. 1984. Macrouzic policy ordination
                                                        Activity 1: 1-75.
Rooff, Kenneth. 1985a. Can International nietaxy policy onordination be
interpreductive? Jc*.rnal of International         Eics
                                                      18: 199-217.

                                                   nint
                                                    .
_______ 1985b. The cptimal degree of                   to an irxteriate
mnetazy target. arter1v J.irnal of Ecoricszics 100, Novester: 1169—1189.
_______ 1985c.      Can exchange rate prodictability be achieved without
ix,netaxy convergexxe? — Evidez fron the          Euronean Eunic Review
28, June/July: 93—115.

______    1987. PepxtationaJ. oonstraints on nnetary policy. In K.Brunner
ard A.Meltzer, ads., Carniie-Pothester QnferenoeSeries on Public Policy
26, SprIx (Surplnt to the Journal of Nonetaxy Econanics).
                                   59

                           wcfl.d xina1 1P targettir do to the business
Taylor, Jdu. 1985. S.ftat Ccrfere2   Series   Public Poii 22: 61-84.
cycle? TIe11e—d'eSter
wihiQi,forJthri.    1983. Theeare
                          EiCS.
                                         rate svsten. Wa&dxt, D.C.:
Institute    Iriternaticra1
