NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DETERMINING THE IMPACT OF FEDERAL ANTIDISCRIMINATION POLICY ON THE
ECONOMIC STATUS OF BLACKS: A STUDY OF SOUTH CAROLINA

James J. Hecknian

Brook

S.

Payner

Working Paper No. 2854

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MS 02138
February 1989

This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2854
February 1989
DETERMINING THE IMPACT OF FEDERAL ANTIDISCRIMINATION POLICY ON THE
ECONOMIC STATUS OF BLACKS: A STUDY OF SOUTH CAROLINA

ABSTRACT

This paper assesses the contribution of federal antidiscrimination policy to the dramatic improvement of black economic
status in manufacturing that occurred in South Carolina in the mid
1960's. Using a unique data source on wages and employment by race
and sex in South Carolina we evaluate competing explanations. Human
labor market stories
capital stories, supply shift stories and tight
do not account for the black breakthrough. Our study documents a
significant contribution of federal antidiscrimination programs.

James J. Hecknian
Department of Economics
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06520

Brook S. Payner
Citicorp
New York, NY 10280

DETFIIINING THE IMPACT OF FEDERAL A1TIDISCR1MIN&TION POLICY ON ThE ECONOMIC
STATUS OF BlACKS:
JAMES

This

J.

A

STUDY OF SOUTH CAROLINA

HEcKMAN AND BROOK S. PAYNER.

*

paper assesses the contribution of federal antidiscrimination policy

to the dramatic improvement of black economic status in manufacturing

that

occurred in South Carolina in the znid-1960's. Using a unique data source on
wages and employment by race, sex and industry' for South Carolina we evaluate
competing

explanations.

Human capital stories, supply shift stories and tight

labor market stories do not account for the black breakthrough.

Our study

documents a significant contribution of federal antidiscrimination

programs.

Two decades of research have failed to produce professional consensus on
the contribution of federal government
progress of black Americans.

civil rights activity to the economic

There are several reasons why this is so.

In part

it is due to the lack of convincingmeasures of federal civil rights activity.
In part it is due to the reliance of much of the literature

on notoriously

fragile macro time series in which numerous plausible explanations compete for
scarce degrees of freedom.

Highly aggregated time series or cross section

studies do not isolate well defined labor markets in which supply and demand
factors can be meaningfully separated,

although it is the separation of these

factors that is essential to the resolution of the debate on federal impact.

Much valuable institutional detail may be lost in the process of data
aggregation or in the fitting of "general purpose" wage equations which
constrain equality in coefficient estimates across diverse sectors.
This paper takes a new look at this old question using a unique body of

data on employment and wages by race and sex for the manufacturing sector of
South Carolina.

Some of the data are available at the disaggregated

1

county

level affording useful cross sectional variation,

By focusing attention on well

defined labor markets, it is easier to separate out supply and demand side
impacts on black status.

Unlike most previous studies of the topic that focus

exclusively on black wages, our study analyzes both black wages and employment.

Trends in black economic progress in South Carolina are typical of trends
for the South as a whole,

As noted by Richard Butler, James Smith and Finis

Welch and the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, a

sizeable

component of the post-

1960 U.S. aggregate relative wage and occupational improvement for blacks arises

frcm improvements in the South. Thus a study of black economic progress in the
South is likely to illwsinate the sources of Southern and hence U.S. black
economic progress.

A

study of black progress in Southern manufacturing

is of

particular interest. Butler shows that a substantial portion of the gain in
black economic status in the South (one half) arises from the movement of blacks
from traditional sectors into operative end craftsmen jobs concentrated in
manufacturing.

Three major

-

and not necessarily mutually exclusive

.

explanations have

been advanced to explain the growth in aggregate black male relative (to white
male) earnings found in the post-1964 data.

(1)

Some authors, seizing on the

coincidence in timing between the passage of Title VII and other related federal
antidiscrimination

activity and the relative improvement in black wages, assign

a central role to federal antidiscrimination
(1981), Wayne Vroman and Charles Brown).
g.,,g

Smith and Welch)

.

(2)

activity.

(Richard Freeman (1973),

Other scholars deny this claim (see,

Welch, Smith, and Smith and Welch assign a central,

but not necessarily exclusive, role to human capital formation and the
importance of previous state government discrimination
schooling.

in the provision of

(3) Still others (James Tobin, William Wilson, Milton Friedman)

in tight labor
assign an important role to the rising cost of discrimination
2

markets associated with industrialization,

the emergence of competitive markets

or demand management policies.
Few scholars dispute the importance of schooling in raising black incomes.
Most acknowledge that tight labor markets favor employment of blacks although
there is considerable controversy surrounding the effect of tight labor markets

on racial wage differentials. Most of the disagreement in the literature centers
on the contribution of federal antidiscrimination activity

-

the

focus of this

paper.

We address this question by using empirical proof by elimination.

Using a

variety of data sources and measures of federal activity and eliminating other
plausible explanations, we conclude that federal policy benefited black economic
status in South Carolina.
The strongest evidence of federal impact is

Ours is a tale of two sectors.

found in the traditional manufacturing sectors of the state that were already
thriving when Jim Crow laws formalized racial segregation in employment

in 1915.

Human capital stories cannot explain the timing of black improvement in these
sectors.
There is little evidence of federal impact on black status in the more

modern sectors of the state that emerged after 1945.
also find no evidence of employment discrimination

Somewhat surprisingly, we

in state, local or federal

government hiring after accounting for individual qualifications.

The growth in

black employment and wages in these sectors appears to be market or supply side
driven.

-

Our analysis establishes the value of more disaggregated industrial and
institutional analyses in assessing the contribution of federal activity to
black status. We demonstrate the importance of accounting for the relevant
economic and institutional histories of industries in understanding black

3

economic progress. Our evidence confirms the wisdom of Gavin Wright's emphasis

on the role of institutions in explaining Southern economic history.

Our

analysis also provides evidence against the widely held belief espoused by
Charles Murray and other conservatives that federal government policy has not
contributed to the elevation of black economic status.

We develop our argument in the following way. In section

1,

we present

salient features of the South Carolina labor market experience of blacks.

Five

striking graphs suggest that the federal government may have played an important
role in improving black status. Although we sound cautionary notes against first
impressions, in the remainder of the paper we demonstrate that they are correct.
Section II establishes that trends in South Carolina are like those in the
U.S. South.

Thus our analysis of South Carolina data contains important lessons

for understanding the progress of blacks in the South and hence their progress

in the U.S. as a whole.
Section III states and Section IV evaluates competing arguments using

detailed analyses of the data.

The paper concludes with a summary of the

evidence

I. The Black Breakthrough in South Carolina Manufacturing
Figures one and two plot South Carolina industrial data on employment and
wages by race and sex for the period 1940-1980.

The data are from the

Reports of the South Carolina Department of Labor.
paper

Annual

Below, and in a companion

(the authors and Butler), we establish the validity of this self-reported

data collected from firms.
Black employment

is a stable fraction of total employment between 1940 and

1965. (Fig. 1). Suddenly, in 1965, the proportion of black employment begins to

grow at a time when total manufacturing employment is growing.

4

The relative

wage series for black workers shows an upturn at the same time although it is
less dramatic.

(Fig. 2).

Textiles are the major industry in the state employing 80 percent of all
manufacturing

employment in 1940 and a still sizeable 40 percent in 1980.

Most

of the breakthrough in black employment occurs in this industry and the related
apparel industry. There is much less evidence of any dramatic breakthrough in
the non-textile non-apparel sector of manufacturing although there is visible

growth in the share of black female employment after 1965 (see Fig. 3) but the
rise in relative wages for black females starts long before 1965 (see Fig. 4).
The decline in the black male share in this sector and the rise in the female
share for both races is largely due to the entry on a large scale of the female
intensive electrical machinery

into the state in 1964 and the entry into the

food industry of new firms employing women of both races in equal proportions.
(See the authors and Butler for further evidence on this point).

Figure five presents employment shares by race and sex in textiles between
1910 and 1977.

1

It confirms the impression conveyed by Figure one.

Through

two World Wars, the Creat Depression and the booms of the 50's and 20's the
share of blacks in textile employment remains constant at a low level despite
growth in the quality and quantity of black schooling and despite economic
scarcity resulting

from tight labor markets.

Suddenly in 1965 the black share

in employment begins to improve when Title VII legislation becomes effective and
the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission begins to press textile firms to
employ blacks and when Executive Order 11246 forbids discrimination by
government contractors at the risk of forfeit of government business.
sold a significant proportion of their output to the federal government
1965.2

Textiles

in

The improvement in black employment and wages occurs at a time and in an

industry that suggests a major role for government activity.

5

This evidence supporting

government impact is reinforced by some additional

background information on South Carolina textiles.

That industry may well have

been an ideal example of Kenneth Arrow's model of discrimination.

Initial racial

exclusion ratified by a 1915 Jim Crow law may have been perpetuated by fixed
costs of employment coupled with fellow employee tastes for discrimination. The
costs to marginal experimentation
the geographical

in hiring blacks may well have been raised by

isolation of mills from existing supplies of black labor which

required residental integration to effect industrial integration.

Southern

textiles was one of the few industries found by Bunting to have monopsony power

because of its geographical isolation from other employers.
Title VII and related aritidiscriminatlon activity seems likely to have had
its most visible effect in industries like South Carolina textiles in which
exclusion of blacks was so blatant.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission

on employment discrininatlon
targeted Southern textiles and conducted hearings
in that industry in late 1966 and early 1967.
publicized.

These hearings were widely

(See Richard Rowan). More than 140 charges of wage and employment

discrimination were filed against textile firms in North and South Carolina in
1965. (See Alice Kidder, Sidney Evans, Michael Simmons and Dupont Smith).

Any

rational theory of government bureaucracy would make South Carolina textiles an
inviting target for equal rights intervention.

The Defense Department, which

was in charge of monitoring textile affirmative action programs, was known to be
relatively vigorous in pursuit of equal opportunity. Three large textile
withdrawn
companies in North and South Carolina had government contracts

for a

brief period in 1968 because of noncompliance with the Order.
Before any conclusion about the efficacy of federal policy is embraced,
however, it is important to raise some cautionary questions,
which constitute

the remainder of this paper.

6

the answers to

The first argument against the obvious is that the data are suspect.

Since

one through
textile and apparel firms report the basic data underlying figures

after 1965 to avoid
five they may have lied about the growth in black employment
federal intervention and they may have lied about the level of black employment

before 1965 to avoid state intervention on behalf of Jim Crow laws.
In Table

1,

we compare the South Carolina Department of Labor (SCDOL) data

on demographic employuient in textiles to that reported in the U.S. Census of
Population for 1940, 1950, 1960, and 1970.

The SCDOL data and the Census data

are not expected to be the same in any year since the Census includes all

In addition, the

workers.
employees, whereas the SCDOL includes only production
Census interviews workers and the SCDOL interviews firms.
includes part-time workers.

Finally, the Census

For these reasons we expect the Census figures to

be larger except perhaps in 1970. SCDOL includes chemical industry workers with
the
textile workers. The chemical industry expanded rapidly in the State during

l960s, although it is a much smaller employer than textiles.
numerical discrepancies,

Despite these

the same pattern of dramatic black improvement is found

in both data sources. In a companion paper (the authors and Butler), we
the data so that the faulty data argument
extensively document the accuracy of
can be dismissed.
The second argument against the obvious is harder to refute.
Carolina labor market was unusually tight after 1964.

60s

Tightness

national boom coupled with the growth in real manufacturing

The South
arose from the
output (see

investment. Textile output was
Fig. 6, in 1967 dollars), entry of firms and

black breakthrough. The growth in demand for
expanding during the period of the
sources of
textile labor coupled with a dramatic contraction in the traditional
white labor supply due to

the secular decline in South Carolina agriculture may

have created unusual pressure for integration of the industry as a means of

keeping down labor costs.

Federal antidiscrimination

activity may have simply

facilitated the inevitable by giving employers an excuse for doing what they

wanted to do anyway.

Most economists who have analyzed the desegregation of

Southern textiles claim that the primary source of black improvement was the
tight labor market.

(Rowan and Donald Osborne).3

Other arguments can also be advanced against the obvious explanation.

The

first is a supply shift argument that focuses on the decline in South Carolina
(and Southern) agriculture as a source of growth in black industrial employment.
The second argument is the 'human capital" ergument. One version of this
argument mirrors Smith's explanation of black aggregate relative wage growth in
the 60's and claims that growth in the quality and quantity of black schooling

may have accounted for the black breakthrough in textiles and related
industries.

We address these arguments in the remainder of the paper.

We first

document that trends in the status of blacks in South Carolina are typical of
those in the South.

II. South Carolina in Context

Butler establishes that for the period 1960-1970 two thirds of the growth
in the aggregate occupational index of black males relative to white males is
due to improvement in relative wages or occupational

standing in the South. He

goes on to note that much of this improvement comes in the operative and
craftsman categories that are concentrated in manufacturing.

Scholars at the

U.S. Commission on Civil Rights (Table 8.1) document that the rate of
convergence of black male wages to white male wages in percentage

terms was

almost cwice,as fast in the South as in the non-South over the period 1960-1980
for males age 25-54.

Since roughly half of the black population lives in the

8

South, these estimstes

imply that two thirds of the growth in relative black

status over the period is attributable

to developments

in the South. If it can

be established that trends in black relative status in South Carolina resemble
those in the rest of the South, our study of that state acquires a more general
character.

in black employment in South Carolina textiles

The dramatic breakthrough

was also experienced in other major Southern textile states. Table 2 documents
for these
this claim using U.S. Census data. Annual data are not available
to compare the exact timing of the black
contiguous states so it is not possible
breakthroughs.

But we can be sure that the breakthrough in all states occurred

in the same decade.

It is likely that lessons learned about South Carolina

textiles apply to these states as well.
South Carolina is not a microcosm of the South but the state and the region
1940
share many common trends. The proportionof the population that is black in

is higher in South Carolina (44%) than for the South as a whole (26%). The black
Carolina
proportion declines in both geographic entities until 1970. Both South

and the South experienced a substantial decline in agricultural employment
between 1940 and 1980 and a substantial growth in manufacturing

employment. Due

to the presence of the textile industry in the state, the fraction of the work
as
force employed in manufacturing is higher in South Carolina than in the South
a whole. The breakout of blacks from traditional sectors was similar in the
South and in South Carolina.

Tables 3 and

4 reveal that trends in employment

distribution
by race and sex are also similar. The convergence of the industrial

of black employment to that of white employment is similar in both.

Employment

in domestic service (personal services) and agriculture declines for black women
and employment in manufacturing

and professional services increases in South

is the same in
Carolina and in the South. The pattern of educational improvement

9

the South as in South Carolina. (See the paper by the authors and Butler).

Trends in Southern labor markets are undeniably reflected in the labor
market of South Carolina.

Lessons learned about black progress in South

Carolina seem likely to apply to the South as a whole.
II].

Thauses of The ]troyçeffijnJja]c Econoide

Status

iii

South

QnjjjaNanufacturig
Various

demand side and supply side explanations have been offered as

causes of the black breakthrough

in manufacturing

in South Carolina.

On the

supply side, one explanation relates to the decline of agricultural employment

in the South which was a consequence of technology and government policy and
which led to shifts in the supply of blacks available to manufacturing.

In South

Carolina, black employment in agriculture declined by about 98,000 workers
between 1950 and 1970.

Over the same decades, black employment in manufacturing

increased by about 40,000 workers. The timing of these changes suggests a
possible causal role with the decline of agriculture releasing supplies of black
labor to the manufacturing

A

sector.

second supply side explanation relates to the increasing quantity and

quality of black education during the forties and fifties that made blacks
better qualified to compete with whites in the labor market.

In South Carolina,

there is considerable evidence of black educational gains relative to whites
during the years leading up to 1965. Figure 7 shows the average highest grade
completed by 5 year birth cohorts from 1900 to
convergence over the period.

l954.

The figure shows steady

As documented by Welch one year of schooling for a

black student was not equivalent to one year of schooling for a white student in
the system of segregated schools that existed in the South and in South Carolina
prior to 1960.

Measured convergence understates the true convergence because

10

the quality of black schooling was increasing over time. Elsewhere

(the authors

and Butler) we document that, as in many Southern states, elementary school
school
expenditure per student began to converge in the thirties while high
late forties.
expenditure per student began to converge in the mid to
One demand side argument is that as the demand for labor increased, the
costs of discrimination
was characterized

increased.

Since the period of the mid to late sixties

by strong economic growth and low unemployment, the argument

may be correct for the South Carolina market. Another demand side explanation
action and civil rights
assigns a central role to federal government affirmative
activity.

IV. THE EVIDENCE

A. $upDjy Shifts
In this section, we examine the evidence in support of each of the major
hypotheses beginning with the supply shift hypothesis.
agriculture and manufacturing

1970 by race and sex.

Table 5 shows

employment in South Carolina in 1950, 1960 and

The numbers indicate that although black agricultural

employment declined by 60,000 during the fifties, black manufacturing

no effect
employment increased by only 1200 in the decade suggesting virtually
of the

decline in agriculture during the fifties on manufacturing

employment.

During the sixties, black agricultural employment decreased by about 38.000

black manufacturing employment increased by a similar amount.

in agricultural employment (28,000), but for less than half of the
black manufacturing
manufacturing

employment

(10,000).

the

However,

the
changes by sex demonstrate that black males accounted for most of

decline

increase in

Most of the increase in black

whereas black
employment was accounted for by females (22,000)

female agricultural employment declined by only 10,000. In a companion paper

11

and

(the authors and Butler) we document that only a tiny fraction of black entrants
into industry came from agriculture.

A simple supply shift argument cannot

account for the growth in black manufacturing

employment during the sixties or

the fifties.

B. SchoolinE Quality and Quantity

We next consider the schooling quality and quantity hypothesis.

Table 6

gives the average education, by five year age cohort, of white males and white
females employed in the textile industry in 1960.

These averages are indicative

of the education required for employment in the textile industry in 1960. Since
the quality of black schooling is lower than that of
reports quality corrected or adjusted years of

whites, Table 6 also

education.

The adjusted figures

are formed by adding two years to the white average and rounding to the nearest
complete year or 12, whichever is greater. The purpose of this admittedly ad hoc
is to correct for the difference in schooling quality by race to see

adjustment

if blacks are qualified to work in textiles on the basis of their educational
attainment.

In Table 7 we show the percentage of black males and females in South
Carolina with years of schooling completed greater than or equal to the white
male and female adjusted averages given in Table 6 above. Already by 1960, over
25% of all blacks in South Carolina between the ages of 21 and 30 had sufficient
education to be employed in textiles as measured by skill levels presented

Table

6.

in

In the older cohorts, about 20% of black females and 15% of black

males had sufficient education. Yet less than 1% of employed black females and
less than 5% of employed black males between the ages of 21 and 65 worked in the
textile industry in 1960.

About 25% of all employed whites in the same age

of
range worked in textiles in 1960. Lack of education is not keeping blacks out

12

textiles in 1960.
One implication of a pure form of the educational improvements hypothesis

is that controlling for education and other individual characteristics, blacks
should not be under-represented

in the textile industry in 1960 relative to

1970. Table 8 gives the coefficients on a race dummy variable from a series of
linear probability regression models for males. The sample of all employed
persons is broken down by sex and five year cohorts.5 The left hand side
variable is equal to one if the individual is employed in a given industry and
zero otherwise.

The right hand side variables

include an intercept, years of

one for blacks
schooling, years of schooling squared, and a race dummy equal to

and zero for whites. The regressions are performed for each Census year from
1940 to 1980.6 A full report of these regressions is given in Heckman, Payner
and Butler.

The industry categories, based on SIC codes, are:
forestry, and fisheries

1.

Agriculture,

2.

Mining and construction

3.

Transportation,

4.

Wholesale

5.

Federal government

6.

State government

7.

Local government

8.

Personal services

9.

Professional

communication,

and utilities

and retail trade

services

10. Recreation services
11. Finance and business services
12. Traditional manufacturing
products,

-

paper,

printing, publishing, food

stone, clay, miscellaneous manufactures,

furniture

13

lumber, and

13. Non-traditional

manufacturing

and non-electrical
machine shops

-

transportation

-

equipment,

electrical
and

machinery, metal industries and founderies

industries

that enter the state on a large scale

after 1945
14. Chemicals
15. Apparel
16. Textiles.

non-zero coefficient on the race dummy may be interpreted as arising from

A

dscrim1nat1on on the demand side. Controlling for individual characteristics,
the coefficient on the dummy
likely

than whxes to be employed

plausibly,

tn cofftcient

racial seccoral

tells

variable

oti

the

indicates whether blacks are more or leSs

L

dunmiy

given industry. A1te:ntiveiv. atd. iss
ay be inerpretd as tha outccne 2
in either

preferences on ths supply side.

can, the coef±icient

the relative likeithood of finding a black worker in a given industry,

controlling for individual characteristics.
The race dummy coefficients are reported for these industries
the least squares t-statistics in parentheses.

along with

Prior to 1960, we find that

adjusting for qualifications black males are not under-represented
industry except textiles. In fact, black males are over-represented
as of 1960.
agriculture and professional services

It

is important

in any

in
to note that

in 1960 blacks are under-represented in the non-traditional manufacturing
labor force.
industries in relation to their share in the population and the
8 shows that black
However, controlling for individual characteristics, Table
males are not under-represented

in these industries.

For black females compared to white female the story is quite similar. (See
the authors and Butler)! Besides being under-represented
females are also under-represented

in textiles, black

in the closely allied apparel industry. Also,

14

in 1960 black females are over-represented
traditional manufacturing,

chemicals,

in most industries, including non-

government, services and trade.

The 1970 regressions shows little change from 1960 for black males except

in textiles.

In the younger cohorts of textile workers, blacks are no longer

under-represented

and in the older cohorts, they are much less so than in 1960.

For black females, the 1960 to 1970 comparison yields similar results.
younger cohorts are no longer under-represented
older cohorts are less under-represented.

The

in textiles by 1970, and the

Also, a similar story is true for

apparel workers. (See the authors and Butler).

These improvements

for younger

firm
workers are consistent with theories that stress the incentives of making
lives
specific investments in younger workers with longer expected working

rather than in older workers.
The regressions show that, controlling for education and other individual
characteristics, blacks are significantly under-represented
industry in 1960 and before.

in the textile

In 1970, however, the under-representation

for the older
disappears for the younger cohorts and diminishes considerably
cohorts.

If educational improvement led to the black gains in textile

have shown no underemployment, the regressions controlling for education would
representation

of blacks in 1960, and no change in under-representation

from

1960 to 1970.
In a companion paper (the authors and Butler) we examine the effect of
on our analysis.
accounting for improvements in black schooling quality
regressions using quality corrected education variables
educational expenditure by race.

We run

formed using data on

The qualitative results are the same as those

obtained without adjusting for quality of education.

15

As a final test, we ask the question:

what happens to the

probability of

finding a black employed in the textile industry as the average level of black
education rises from its 1960 to its 1970 level?

The results for black males

are shown in Table 9 for selected industries using the 1970 linear probability
model regression coefficients]
non-traditional

manufacturing,

For black males in most industries, including

chemicals, different levels of government,

financial and business services and wholesale
increasing education

is to increase the probability of employment.

as well as agriculture,
employment. Textiles

and retail trade, the effect of

In textiles,

the effect is to actually decrease the probability of

is a low skill industry.

Increasing education has the

effect of decreasing the probability of employment

in low skill industries.

Although blacks had already made gains in education relative to whites in
the years leading up to 1965, the evidence presented here does not support the
claim that educational improvements led to increased black employment and wages

in the textile industry.

First, the gains in schooling measured by years

completed and expenditure per student per year came gradually.

Second, by 1960,

between one-fifth and one-fourth of the adult blacks in South Carolina had
sufficient education to work in the textile industry.

However, black females

were practically excluded and black males were employed in very small numbers in
textiles.

Third, even controlling for education, blacks were found to be

severely under-represented

in textiles in 1960, but much less so in 1970. Also,

in all other industries with the exception of apparel, blacks were not found to

be under-represented when educational background is taken into account.
Finally, if years of schooling of blacks are increased, the probability of
blacks being employed in textiles actually decreases.
The evidence presented here confirms the powerful role of education in
elevating black employment in other sectors of the economy, especially
government and the emerging new industrial sector of the state that apparently

16

never discriminated
statistically

against blacks (or at least black qualifications)

on a

or numerically significant scale. As black skills improved, so did

their representation

in these sectors.

C. The Titbt Labor Market Hynothesis

With statewide aggregate data, the tight labor market hypothesis is not
testable.

The black breakthrough in textiles is an event that occurs only once.

Many other events that occur contemporaneously with the black breakthrough are
equally plausible

candidates for being the cause.

Without more variation in the

data one cannot discriminate among the possibilities.

Although we do not have

evidence from other comparably tight labor market episodes in South Carolina, we
do have a time series of cross sections on the black breakthrough as it occurs
in different counties of South Carolina.

Even with these att, the labor market

hypothesis is not testable if one believes that South Carolina is a single labor
market or that all counties are identical. In that case, a tight labor market
could cause simultaneous effects across counties just as uniformly applied
government policy could.

iiiñjt&TIbor market,

However, if the counties of South Carolina do not form

the two hypotheses can be differentiated.

A tight labor

market would affect the various counties differently, whereas uniformly applied
government policy would plausibly affect all counties simultaneously.
that the counties of South Carolina

We argue

are different labor markets and that the

simultaneous breakthrough of blacks in textiles across those counties is
evidence against the labor market hypothesis and in favor of the government
eleven South Carolina
activity hypothesis. We begin by examining data from
counties for which we can form a consistent time series on textile employment by
race and sex for the period 1910-197?. Most of the 11 counties are in the
Piedmont region in the northeast portion of the state.

However,

central and central portions of the state are also represented.

17

the south

Table 10 shows population levels and shares respectively by race and sex
for these eleven counties in 1960. The counties vary greatly in racial
composition. They also vary greatly in size of the population.
Table 11 shows total employment and employment

in selected industries in

1960. The county population employed varies from 34 percent to 41 percent. The

proportionof the employed working in manufacturing varies from 55 percent to 20
percent. The counties vary substantially
workforce.

in the size of the manufacturing

To the extent that regional labor markets exist, we expect the effect

of changing labor market conditions to be different across counties.

Anthony

Tang documents sharp differences among contiguous Piedmont counties in South
Carolina in many indicators of economic development.
Figures 8 to 18 show employment shares by race and sex in the textile
industry for these eleven counties from 1910 to 1977.
counties,

Tn seven of the eleven

the textile breakthrough for black females occurs in the fiscal year

1965. The textile industry data are collected on a fiscal year basis.

Therefore

fiscal 1966 covers July 1965 through June 1966. Tn the four remaining counties,
the black female breakthrough

in textiles occurs in fiscal year 1966. Since

these are fiscal years, we cannot rule out the possibility

that the breakthrough

occurs in calendar year 1965 in all counties.
After 55 years of near total exclusion from the industry, black females

became employed in significant
each county.

numbers for the first time in the mid-sixties

Similarly, after constant but low utilization

in

in the industry

prior to the mid-sixties, black malea significently increase their employment in
textiles in fiscal years 1965 or 1966 in each county.

Tf the state of South

Carolina was a single homogeneous labor market with no mobility costs for

of
workers, a tight labor market might produce the simultaneous breakthrough
black employment of the type exhibited here.

However, given significant

across
differences in employment, industrialization, and racial demographics

18

counties, we conclude that South Carolina is not a single labor market.
Therefore, we do not expect changing labor market conditions
same impact on black textile employment simultaneously

The

Evidence supporting

alone to have the

across all counties.

Covernaent Activity Bvothesis

the government activity hypothesis

comes from the time

series on statewide textile employment and wages by demographic group presented
above.

Black textile employment was virtually unaffectedby events that

occurred from 1910 to 1965.
employment.

This is especially true for black female

Under the tight labor market hypothesis we might expect some black

employment changes in the upswings of the numerous business cycles that occur

prior to 1965.

The government

activity hypothesis

predicts that significant

changes in black employment and wages would occur after the 1964 Civil Rights

Acts but has no prediction about black improvement in previous periods. The
simultaneous breakthroughof blacks in counties varying in size, racial
composition and industrial composition is consistent with uniformly applied
government policy.

The fact that white male textile employment begins decreasing at about the
same time as black employment increases is also consistent with the government
activity hypothesis.

See Fig. 19.8

On the demand side, fins complying with

governnent policy would likely employ fewer whites per unit output expansion as
their demand for blacks increased. Evidence documenting that this occurred is

given below.

Examination of the wage data gives a supply side explanation for

the decrease in white male textile employment that occurred after 1965.

After

increasing from 1959 through 1965 white male real wages were practically
unchanged from 1966 to 1971 despite growth in employment
industry. See Fig. 20.

and output in the

Real wages for blacks increased through the end of the

19

If textile fins were discriminating against blacks before 1965, but

sixties.

white wages
not in later years, then under the government activity hypothesis,

would stop rising as a large pool of black labor became available to textiles
would continue to rise over time as blacks
the first time. Black
for

wages

become employed in higher paying occupations.
White male real wages stop growing in textiles after 1966.

As their wages

in textiles declined relative to those in other industries, white males left
The slowing of wage growth for white males does

textiles for other industries.
not occur in all industries.
manufacturing.

Figure 21 shows real wages in non-textile
real wages continue to grow after 1965 at a

For white males,

rate similar to that experienced prior to 1965.

Wages for other demographic

sixties.
groups in these industries also grew throughout most of the

Thus there

the government
are plausible demand and supply side explanations consistent with
activtty hypothesis

that account for the white male departure from textiles.

labor
In an effort to assess the contributions of government and the tight

market to the breakthrough in black employment, we estimate reduced form
the county level data. Wage data
employment by race equations for textiles using

by race and sex are not available at the county level.

For the eleven South

we
Carolina counties for which consistently defined textile data are available,
fit pooled time series-cross section equations for the years 1947 through 1971.
The regressionequations are of the form
Y..
ijt

(1)

where

i

to time.

—

X. a. +
it 3

refers to the county,
The fixed effects

f
j

ii

+ g.
it

+

'7..
lit

refers to the demographic group and t refers
are, respectively, county specific

and

and year specific intercepts for each demographic group.
effects control for a variety of omitted variables
demographic employment.

Absorbed in

jt
20

These estimated fixed

that are likely to affect

are any time varying uniform (across

counties)

statewide race and sex specific factors, like uniform government

policy, human capital improvements or migration that plausibly affect employment

by race and sex.

Absorbed in

f1

are any idiosyncratic time invariant county

factors like the location of the county in relation to product or labor markets
or the percentage of the county that is black.

'XjJ

is a row vector of

explanatoryvariables, not including an intercept, with associated coefficient
vector a..

The term

is a mean zero error term.

The explanatory variables used in our analysis are, with one exception,
taken from the Annual Reports of the South Carolina Department
Textile Output

of Labor:

— Real textile output in millions
of dollars.

New Establishments

— Number of

establishments which entered the

county after 1957.

Old Establishments

— Number of

establishments which entered the

county before 1958.
Non-textile Output

— Real non-textile manufacturing
output in million dollars.

Defense Contracts

— Real cumulative defense contracts
in million dollars.9

Industry demand is proxied by county textile output. Higher levels of

output would be expected to lead to greater employment of workers.

The number

of new establishments and the number of old establishments are introduced as
separate variables to test a version of the industrialization hypothesis

that

to discriminate
suggests that new entrants into South Carolina are less likely
against blacks than are older establishments.
establishments

This might be so because new

are not encumbered by the restrictive racial legislation

regulated old establishments.

Initial discrimination

21

that

in employment might persist

Many new

discrimination.
due to fixed costs of hiring and due to fellow employee
establishments

were Northern owned and it is possible that their owners had

lower tastes for discrimination.

Joan Hoffman reports evidence favoring this

of an old establishment
hypothesis. Even in the absence
differential,

the total number of establishments

-

new establishment

is a plausible regressor which

in the regression) measures the effect of
(since output is being held fixed
establishment

size on demographic employment.

Non-textile manufacturing

output in the county is the best available proxy

for the tightness of the nontextile

labor market. Manufacturing

employed over

one third of all workers in South Carolina between 1960 and 1970.

Textile

workers have more mobility into non-textile manufacturing than out of
10
manufacturing altogether.
a good measure of
County level defense contract expenditure provides
because the Office of Federal
government activity for the textile industry
Contract Compliance and the Defense Department monitored the compliance

of

provisions of

textile firms with the affirmative action and nondiscrimination

evidence that the
Executive Order 11246. Orley Ashenfelter and Beckman present
for a firm to integrate
presence of a government contract makes it more likely
its workforce

and employ more blacks.

Cumulative

rather than current expenditure is used to measure the long term

distributed lag version of this variable
impact of contracts. Estimation with a
does not affect any inference. The effects of uniform government
antidiscrimination

are absorbed into
policies which cannot be directly measured

the estimated year effects.

We also estimate an interactive version of the preceding model which
permits the

a.

1964.
coefficients to assume different values after

22

This

interactive specification

enables us to test for the presence of structural

shift in demographic employment equations which would result from effective
government antidiscrimination

and affirmative action measures.

In order to determine the appropriate transformation of the dependent
variable for the employment

we follow Amemiya and Powell as describec.

equations

in Amemiya and estimate a non-normal Box-Cox model that uses

rather than
linear

data betsr.

as the dependent variable. The main inferences from using
are preserved in the Box-Cot regressions but the latter Lit the
is estimated along with the other coefficients of the model

using nonlinear least squares. Both log and linear versions of X

produce the

same inference. To simplify the presentationof these results, we report only
the linear X version of these estimates in Table 12. The slope coefficients are
for the stated dependent variable. The sign of the estimated effect on
the same as the sign of the coefficient reported in the Table. Durbin-Watson
statistics for each county (reported in a companion paper by the authors and
Butler) indicate few problems with serial correlation in the estimated county
residuals. Corrections for heteroscedasticity

using Halbert White's method do

not overturn any inference obtained using least squares standard errors.

For

the sake of brevity we only report the results of tests based on the
conventional least squares standard errors.
There is evidence of statistically significant positive effects of defense
contracts on black employment and statistically

Increased textile output raises

this variable on white male employment.
employment for all demographic groups.

significant negative effects of

The interacted output variables

23

reveal a

post-1964

coefficient in favor of black workers.

shift in the output-employment

For black females, there is little evidence of any textile output expansion
effect before 1965

-

a

result that should be obvious from inspecting figures 8

to 18. In the noninteractive

specification, higher non-textile output in a

county is associated with less employment in textiles for each demographic
group. The

effect
pattern is preserved in the interactive model but the

strengthens for blacks and weakens for whites in the post-1964 period.

In the model without interactions there is a clear effect of establishment
size on employment by race.
establishment)

Smaller establishments

(measured by output per

tend to hire more blacks. Larger establishments

tend to hire more

white females while the estimated scale effect for white males is ambiguous. The
only pronounced new establishment
females.

-

old

establishment effect is for black

There is evidence that new establishments hire more black women and

fewer whites than do old establishments. The interactive specifications

reveal

that new establishments tend to hire more blacks and fewer white males.
The estimated models show a steady increase in estimated year effects for

black workers in the post-1964 period. (These estimates are reported in our
companion paper with Butler). Further evidence of structural shift in the labor
market is revealed by simulating the best fitting models over the crucial period
1965-1970.

Such simulations allow examination of the change in employment

attributable to changes in each X variable and the change not explained by the
regression. The results of such a simulation are presented in Table 13 which

presents results for both the interactive and the noninteractive models.
The most striking feature of the Table is the failure of each fitted model
to account for most of the observed employment change.

Much of the improvement

in black status is accounted for by unexplained post-1964 year effects. The
the operation of unmeasured
importance of such year effects is consistent with

24

government antidiscrimination
is statistically

policy. Although the estimated defense coefficient

significant, the contribution of defense contracts to black

employment is numerically weak.

ll

If all post-1964 interaction effects are

attributed to government policy, between 70 to 80 percent of the predicted
change in black employment is attributable to this source.

In any case,

unmeasured coulponents account for most of the observed change. Such dramatic
structural shift seems inconsistent with pure forms of the tight labor market or
industrialization

hypotheses.

Government

activity

-

residually defined

-

seems

to be the most plausible source of this change.
V. Summary and Conclusions

This paper examines the sources of black economic progress in South
Lessons from that state are of general interest because trends in

Carolina.

black progress in South Carolina resemble trends in the South

a

a whole and

black improvement in the South accounts for a substantial component of aggregate
U.S. black improvement over the period 1960-1980.
sector.

We focus on the manufacturing

Butler documents that much of the Southern black progress comes through

entry of black workers into craftsmen and operative occupations and improvement

in relative black wages in those occupations.
Using a unique body of time series-cross section data on employment and

wages by race and sex supplemented by a variety of U.S. government sources, we
examine a number of competing explanations for the breakthrough

in black

1964.
employment and wages in the manufacturing sector that occurred after
demonstrate

We

the value of disaggregating the data and establish that different

factors account for black progress in different sectors.

The principal manufacturing employer in the state is the textile industry.
This industry was already a substantial employer by 1915 when Jim Crow laws

25

formalizeda preexisting exclusion of blacks from the main operative and
We document that over the period 1910-

craftsman occupations of that industry.

1964, the share of black employment was low and stable despite a variety of

economic circumstances in the state.

Suddenly, in 1965, blacks of both sexes

become employed on a large scale. That year witnessed the implementation of
Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act which forbade employment discrimination.
Executive Order 11246 was also issued in that year.

The Order forbade

discriminationby government contractors and required the establishment of
affirmative action programs.

The South Carolina textile industry sold 5 percent

of its output to the U.S. Government in 1965. The Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission targeted Southern textiles and held hearings on the industry in 1966.
The improvement in black status after 1964 is uniform across geographically
diverse local labor markets. Regression
structural

analyses of black employment

reveal a

shift in employment equations that cannot be accounted for by

conventional measures of output or the growth in alternative opportunities.
There is some evidence of greater black employment in counties that sold more
goods to the U.S. Government. Both the timing evidence and the regression
evidence suggest that government

activity played an important role in

integrating textiles. As a large new supply of black workers became available to
the industry, the real wages of white workers

-

which had been

consecutive years before 1965-suddenly flattened.

A

rising for six

similar but less well

documented story can be told for black female progress in the closely related
apparel industry.
Alternative explanations of the black breakthrough

much less cogent.

A

in textiles appear to be

to the
supply shift story attributing the black improvement

decline in agriculture cannot account for the timing of the black breakthrouzh

in textiles.

The human capital story of improvement in black skill also cannot

26

account for the timing. Increases in black human capital between 1960 and 1970

should have reduced black employment because textiles is a low skill industry.
By 1960, there were plenty of blacks with skill levels adequate to perform
textile jobs.
The only viable alternative to the story of government as the agent of
change in textiles is the story that assigns a central role to the tightness of
the labor market.

By the mid-1960's, South Carolina had a booming economy. New

industries entered the state and the traditional reservoir of white farm labor

had disappeared. Real wages in textiles increased making competition with low
wage foreign firms more difficult.

The incentives to draw on a new source of

low wage labor were greatJ2
What cannot be dismissed and indeed seems quite plausible is that in 1965
entrepreneurs

seized on the new federal legislation and decrees to do what they

wanted to do anyway. One could argue that the federal antidiscrimination and
affirmative action laws came into existence in 1964 precisely because the U.S.
labor market was tight to an unprecedented degree and discrimination

was

becoming costly. This study cannot reject the hypothesis that it was the
confluence of tight labor markets and new laws that made integration in textiles
occur so rapidly.

Separating these factors requires information from another

episode in which comparable laws are put in place in a slack labor market.

We do not claim that federal activity accounts for black progress in other
sectors of the state.

A

major finding of our analysis is that once skill levels

are accounted for blacks were not excluded from other sectors even in 1960.
Newer industries entering the state long after the institution of Jim Crow laws

tended to be color blind in their employment practices.
state and local governments by 1960.

Surprisingly,

Blacks were underrepresented

sectors only because they lacked skills.

27

so were

in these

As their skill levels expanded, so did

their employment

in those sectors.

28

Data Appendix
We have combined data

front U.S.

the state of South Carolina.

government sources with data published by

Three types of data were combined to form the

South Carolina data base: annual county level data annual state level data and

Census year data. For the period 1910-1935, the data come

Reso1utjonof South Caroling to
Carolina.

front Revorts

and

the General Assembly of the State of South

For the period 1936-1971, the data come from the Annual Report of The

Departmencpf Labor to the State of South Carolina. In addition to the South
Carolina data we collected U.S. Population Census data for the Census South and
selected Southern states.
We obtain the following data, by county for each fiscal year (July 1 to
June 30).
For the textile industry, the variables are:
value of annual product (dollars)
average number of days plants operated
total wages of production workers (dollars) by sex
average employment of productionworkers by race and sex

number of establishments
From a listing of all textile plants by name in each county are formed:
number of establishments started after 1957
number of establishments started before 1958
Establishments

are counted at the plant level, although individual plants may

data on
belong to the same firm. For total manufacturing, we collect annual
timber
value of annual product (dollars). Total manufacturing excludes lumber,

and turpentine. Non-textile output (annual product) by county is formed by
total manufacturing output. The county textile
subtracting textile output from

29

data exclude totals for
1910-1969.

knitting mills and synthetics mills for the period

In 1970 and 1971 the totals include knitting mills and synthetics.

Unlike the county level data, statewide aggregate data for the textile industry
include the knitting and synthetics mills over the entire sample period.

From U.S. Census of Population reports for 1960 for South Carolina, we
obtain population, total employment, manufacturing employment, textile
for selected counties.
employment, and agriculture employment

We obtained defense contract data from Prime Contract Awards Over

$10000

1966 to 1971.
by State. County, Contractor and Place for South Carolina from
formed
Total defense contracts for textile establishments by county by year are

or plant
by matching firm or plant names listed in this data source with firm
names listed in the Annual ReDorts of the

South Carolina Department of Labor.

In addition to the county data, we use aggregate statewide industry data
from the South Carolina Department of Labor reports. These data are for every
manufacturing

industry except lumber, timber and turpentine.

The available data include:
value of annual product (dollars)
average number of days plants operated

and sex
average number of productionworkers by race
total wages by race and sex (dollars)
total wages
Average daily wages by race and sex Ire computed by dividing
(deflated by the CPI) for each race and sex group by the product of the number

of production workers in that group and the number of days plants operated.
Statewide data on employment in manufacturing and agriculture by race and

sex were obtained from the U.S. Bureau of the Census, Census of Population for
race and sex were
1950, 1960 and 1970. Statewide textile industry employment by

30

for 1950, 1960, 1970 and 1980 for the states of North Carolina,

collected

Georgia and Virginia from U.S. Bureau of the Census, Census of Population: Vol
2, for those states.
U.S. Census public use microdata

computer taples are another source of

The 1940, 1950 and 1960 tapes each contain a one percent sample, the 1970

data.

tapes contains a two percent sample, and the 1980 tape contains a five percent
sample.

We use the following variables from each Census tape for South

Carolina.

occupation
industry

race
sex
age
annual wage income (dollars) last year
hours worked last week
weeks worked last year
highest grade completed
labor force status (civilian, employed, unemployed, out of labor force)

From the U.S. Bureau of the Census Public Use Samples we also obtain data for
the Census South.

We use one percent samples for 1940 and 1950, one percent

samples for 1960 and 1970 and a 0.5 percent for 1980.

Data on race, sex and

industry were obtained for each Census year.
For certain analyses, we form the following five categories of
manufacturing

industries: textiles, chemicals, apparel, non-traditional

manufacturing and traditional manufacturing. Chemicals and apparel were isolated
because of their similarity to textiles.

31

The other two categories were formed

on the basis of a ranking of the percentage change in employment from 1960 to
1970 in the remaining manufacturing industries.
growth industries are: transportation

The five non-traditional

equipment, electrical machinery,

high

non-

electrical machinery, metal working and founderies and machine shops. The six
traditional low growth industries are: food products, paper and pulp, stone and
clay, lumber and furniture, printing and publishing and miscellaneous
manufacturing

-

The data from the South Carolina reports are available for the fiscal year
beginning July 1.
the calendar year.

The Census and Department

of Defense data are available for

We chose the following convention for matching data from the

various sources. The fiscal year is defined to correspond to the calendar year
in which the fiscal year ends.

A

copy of the South Carolina data is available from ICPSR at the University

of Michigan.

32

References

Amemiya, Takeshi, Advanced Econometrics, Cambridge: Harvard University Press)
1985.
Arrow, Kenneth J.

"Models of Job Discrimination"

in A.H. Pascal, ed.

Racial Discrimination in Economic Life, Lexington, Massachusetts:
Heath Lexington, 1974, Ch.
Ashenfelter,

1.

Orley, and James Heclcrnan, "Measuring The Effect of An

Antidiscrimination

Program", pp. 46-84, in Orley Ashenfelter and James

Blwii., eds, Evaluptinz

The Labor-Market Effects of Social

ProgL,

Princeton Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University, 1976,
CIt 2.
Brown, Charles, "Black-White Earnings Ratios Since the Civil Rights Act

of 1964: The Importance of Labor Market Dropouts", Quarterly Journal
Economics, May 1984, 99, 31-44.
Bunting, Robert L., Employer Concentration in

University of

Local Labor Markets, Chapel

Hill:

North Carolina Press, 1962.

Butler, Richard J., "Demand

Side

Changes and Relative Black Wage Growth in the

1960's", mimeo, Brigham Young University, 1985.
Directorate for Information, Operations and Reports (DIOR). DOD Prime
Contract Awards over S1O.000 by State. County. Contractor and Place,
Fiscal Years 1966 throuEh lflQ.

Washington, D.C.: The Pentagon, 1980.

Freeman, Richard B., "Changes in The Labor Market for Black Americans",
Brookinfs FaDers on Economic Activity, Spring 1973, 1, 67-120.
"Black Economic Progress after 1964: Who
S. Rosen, ed, Studies

Has Gained and

Why?", in

in Labor Markets, Chicago, 1981, chap
33

8.

of Chicago Press,
Friedman, Milton, CaDitalisu' and Freedom, Chicago: University
1962.
Heclcnian, James, 3rook

of The Economy and
Payner and Richard Butler, "The Impact

the State On The Economic Status of Blacks", mimeo Yale University,
Hoffman, Joan,

1988.

Racial Discrimination and Economic DeveloDment, Lexington, Mass:

D.C. Heath, 1975.
Efforts in The Carolina Textile Industry: A
Kidder, Alice, "Federal Compliance
Summary

Report",

Proceedings of The 25th Annual Meeting Of The Industrial

Relations Research Association, Madison, Wisconsin:

Industrial Relations

Research Association, 353-361.
•

in Minority
Sidney Evans, Michael Sinons and Dupont Smith, 'Changes

of North Carolina and South
Participation in The Textile Industry
North Carolina A&T,
Carolina 1966 to 1969", Department of Economics,
Greensboro, N.C., 1972.
New York: Basic Books, 1984.
Murray, Charles, Losinz Ground,
Osborne, Donald,

of North and South
"Negro Employment in The Textile Industries

Carolina", Research Report, 1966-70, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, Washington, D.C., November 21, 1966.
in The Textile Industry", Part Five of H.
Rowan, Richard L., "The Negro
Northrup, R. Rowan, D. Barnum and

.J.

Howard, eds., Nezro Employment

in

Southern Industry, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1980,
Ch. 5.
American Economic Review, September
Smith, James, "Race and Human CapitalTM,
1984, 685-698.
Years of Economic
Smith, James and Finis Welch, Closing The Gap: Fourty
California: Rand, 1986.
Progress For Blacks, Santa Monica,
34

South Carolina Department of Education. Annual Report of the State Superintendant of Education of the State of South Carolina. Columbia, S.C.:
Printed under the irection of the State budget and Control Board,
1931-1957
South Carolina Department of Labor. Retorts and Resolutions of So.ith Carol&na
to the General Assembly

o

the State of South Carolina, Columbia, S.C.:

Printed under the tirection of the State Budget and Control hoard,
1910-1936.
South Carolina Department of
Report.

Columbia,

Labor.

Louth

Carolina Department

of Labor

S.C.: Printed under the Direction of the State Budget

and Control Board, 1936-1977.
Tang, Anthony N.

Economtc Development th The Southern Piedipnt, University of

North Carolina Press
Tobin, James,

On

Chapel Hill: University North Carolina,

Improving The Economic Status of the Negro,

1958.

a?da1u,

94

Fall, 1965, 878-898.

United States Commission on Civil Rights, The Economic
in America, Washington D.C.

gess

of Black Men

U.S. Governnent Clearinghouse Publication 91,

1986.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Census of Population: 1940, Vol. 2, Characteristics

of the PoDulation, part

6. Washington, D.C.:

U.S. Government Printing

Office, 1943.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Census of Population: 1950, Vol. 2, Characteristics

of the Population, part 40, Washington, t.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office, 1953.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Census of PoDulation; 1960, Vol. 2, Characteristics

of the PopujaUon, part 42, South Carolina. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
35

Goverrunent Printing Office, 1964.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Census of Manufacturers:

1967, Vol. 3,

Ana

Statistics, part 2, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Govenunent Printing Office,
1971.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Census of the Population: 1970, Vol. 1,
Characteristics

of the Pouulption, part

1,

United States Summary -

Section

1. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1973a.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Census of Poyulation: 1970, Vol. 1, Characteristics

of the Population, part

42,

South Carolina. Washington,

D.C.: U.S.

Govenunent Printing Office, 1973b.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Census of Population; 1960, Public Use Microdata
the Census
Sample, [machine-readable data file]/prepared by the Bureau of
Washington, D.C.: The Bureau [producer and distributor],

1973c.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. Census of Population: 1970, Public Use Microdata
Sample, [machine-readable data file]/prepared by the Bureau of the Census.
Washington, D.C.: The Bureau [producer and distributorj,
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Annual Survey of Manufactures:

1973d.

1970 and 1971.

1973e.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1980 Census of Population, Vol. 1, chap.

C.," General

Social and Economic Characteristics," part 1, U.S. Summary. Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1983a.
" General
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1980 Census of Foi,ulatipn, Vol. 1, chap. C,
Social and Economic Characteristics," part 42, South Carolina. Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Govenunent Printing Office, 1983b.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Census of Poyulation and Housint: 1980, Public Use
Microdata Sample (A and B Samples), [machine-readable data file]/prepared

36

by the Bureau of the Census. Washington, D.C.: The Bureau [producer and
distributor], 1983c.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Census of

PoDulatign: 1940, Public Use Z1icrodata

Sample, [machine-readable data
Washington,

D.C.: The

of the Census.

U.S. Bureau
Sample,

fuel/prepared by the Bureau of the Census.
Bureau [producer and distributor], l984a
Census of Pooulation:JQ, Public Use Microdata

[machine-readable data filel/prepared by the Bureau of the Census.

Washington, D.C.: The Bureau [producer and
Vronian,

Wayne, "Changes in Black Worker's

distributor],

Relative

l984b.

Earnings: Evidence For the

1960's", in C. Von Furstenberg, ed., Patterns of RAcial Discrinithptipn,
Vol.

II

Lexington, Mass: Heath Lexington,

Welch, Finis, "Black-White Differences

l974

in the Return to Schooling", American

Economic Review, December, 1973, 893-907.
White, }Ialbert,

'A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent

Covariance Matrix Estimator

and a Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity", Ecpnpmetrica, September, 1980,
817-838.
Wilson, William. The Truly

Public
Wright,

DisadvantaEed:

Inner City. The Under Class

Policy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986.

Gavin,

Old

South. New South, New York: Basic Books, 1986.

37

and

Footnotes

Yale University, New
*Heclcman is the A. Whitney Griswold Professor of Economics,
Haven, Ct. 06520-1972.
York, 10280.

New
Payner is a Vice President of Citicorp, New York,

"The
This paper draws on research reported in a longer paper

The Economic Status of Blacks: A Study of
Impact of The Economy and The State on
was supported
South Carolina" written jointly with Richard Butler. This research

and SES-87by NSF Grants SES-77.11231, SES-81-4225, DAR-792594, SES-84-11246
of Wisconsin,
39151. This research was originated at the University

Fall, 1977

Jon Moen
and has been assisted at various stages by Richard Butler, Chris Flinn,
assistance
and Guilherme Sedlacek. Steve Cameron provided first class research

for the work reported here. Margaret Watson, formerly of the South Carolina
the South Carolina data used
Department of Labor provided valuable advice on
here.

We have benefited from comments received from Orley Ashenfelter, Steve

Toni Mroz, Theodore W. Schultz,
Cameron, V. Joseph Hotz, Rick Levin,

TN.

Srinivasan, Glynn Williams, David Weir, Gavin Wright and participants

in

seminars at Yale, Stanford, The Hoover Institution, Sloan School -MIT,
Princeton and the Economic
University of South Carolina, NBER-Cambridge, Penn,

of Chicago.
History Workshop at the University
1Data on wages were not collected before 1940.

There are no consistent

time

series data on employment in non-textile industries before that date.
2About 5 percent-120 million-1965 dollars.

3An exception is Kidder who assigns a central role to changes in community
mores.

4These figures were calculated using the 1950 Public Use Sample for the cohorts
born between 1900 and 1924 and the 1980 Public Use Sample for the cohorts born
between 1925 and 1954.
5The regressions were also run using civilian labor force and total population
38

as the sample

instead of

employed persons.

The results described in the text

are unaffectedby these changes in the sample.
6Selected regreasions were repeated using a probit specification

to correct for

heteoskedasticity. The results were qualitatively similar to those reported
here.
7This analysis was repeated using the 1960 regressioncoefficients with
qualitatively

similar results.

8This decline occurs in the eleven counties anElyzed in the preceding

section

and for the state as a whole.
9Defense contracts data by establishment were available after 1965. The
Department of Defense gave us data on Prime Contract Awards over $10,000 by

county for South Carolina over the period 1966-1971.

Cumulative contracts were

used because a contract award received in one year wai not necessarily only for
that year alone.
contracts

For instance, some firms had negative values for defense

in years when previous contracts was cancelled. A similar variable,

cumulative EEOC expenditures, was Used by Freeman (1973).

the

10Froni

1970 Public Use Sample, we calculate that of all textile workers in

1965, about 90 percent were employed in a manufacturing

There

industry in 1970.

are conditions under which we underestiniate the contribution of defense

contracts

to the increase in black eployinent. The contract data refer to work

done in the county but firms were required to comply with Executive Order 11246
in all plants, even those not producing goods for sale to the government. There
are many textile firms with plants in different counties and different States.

County textile defense expenditure is thus an error- ridden measure of the
appropriate variable.

In a

siniple demographic model

employment solely on the measured contract variable,

of demand which regresses
the estimated contract

effect is downward biased if the variable indicating whether the

39

has a

contract is independent of the disturbance

term

in the equation. If the

demographic demand equation contains additional explanatory variables which are
corelated with the indicator variable, the si&n of the bias is ambiguous.
12However it should be noted that many employers feared that blacks were more
likely to join unions. (Rovan) In the nonunionized textile labor market this

would be a serious negative consideration.

40

List of Tables

Table 1:

Textile Employment

Table 2:

Employment of Blacks and Whites In Textiles In Other Southern
Textile States

Table 3:

Industrial Distribution of Employed Persons (21-65) In South

Carolina
Table 4:

Industrial Distributionof Employed Persons (21-65) In The Census
South

Table 5:

Manufacturing And Agriculture Employment

Table 6:

Average and Adjusted Years of School Completed in Textiles

In 1960
Table 7:

Percent of Blacks With Average Education Level of Whites In
Textiles In 1960

Table 8:

Race Coefficients From Male Employment Linear Probability Models (TStatistics In Parentheses)

Table 9:

The Effect of Increasing Black Male Education From Its 1960 To
Its 1970 Level On The Probability of Employment

Table 10:

South Carolina Population and Population Shares In Selected Counties
In 1960

Table 11:

South Carolina County Level Employment By Industry In 1960

Table 12:

Box-Cox Demographic Employment Equations Fit Using The Amemiya
Powell Procedure

Table

13:

(t statistics shown in parentheses)

Effects of Changing Variables on Textile Employment

*
1965-1970

TABLE 1
TEXTILE EZ4.PLOYMENT

Year

Total

White

White

Black

Black

Males

Females

Males

Females

(Percentage Share of Demographic Group in Parentheses)

Total Textile Employment from United States Census

1970

1960

1950

1940

143779

132166

131558

100461

9575

68977

48642

16585

(47.8)

(33.8)

(11.5)

(6.5)

78951

44601

6513

401

(59.5)

(35.3)

(5.0)

(0.3)

75613

49326

6113

506

(57.5)

(37.5)

(4.7)

(0.4)

61701

34355

5128

277

(61.4)

(34.2)

(4.1)

(0.3)

Table

continues on next page

Table (Continued)

Production Worker Textile Employment from SCDOL

1970

145108

1960

120665

1950

124379

1940

92725

Sources:

48548

19488

8080

(47.6)

(33.5)

(13.4)

(5.6)

72122

42903

5448

192

(59.8)

(35.6)

(4.5)

(0.2)

71065

42903

5987

311

(57.1)

(37.8)

(4.8)

(0.3)

57517

31484

3555

168

(62.2)

(34.0)

(3.8)

(0.2)

1940 census data from U.S. Bureau of the Census (1943, p. 370) 1950

census data from

US.

68992

US. Bureau of

Bureau of the Census (1964,

the Census (1953, p. 183); 1960 census data from
p. 346); 1970 census

data from U.S. Bureau of

the Census (1973b, p. 680); SCDOL data from the Department

of Labor of the State of South Carolina as described in the appendix.

TAZLE 2
EMPLOYMENT

OF BlACKS

AD

WHITES

IN

North

1950

IN

TEXTILES

OTHER SOUTHERN TEXTILE STATES

Carolina

1970

1960

282,935

1980

267,207

Whites

206,383

213,161

Blacks

8,746

8,565

Whites

95,254

88,659

143,175

Macks

7,029

5,955

27,361

46,778

46,910

76,620

145,015

Virginia

Whites

38,249

34,804

68,702

68,195

Blacks

2,189

1,783

11,969

18,188

1970 and 1980.
Source: U.S. Census, Employment by Industry, 1950, 1960,

TABLE

3

INDUSTRIAL DISTRIBUTION OF EMPLOYED PERSONS (21-65)
BY PERCENTAGE

Industry

1980

IN SOUTH

1970

CAROLINA

1960

1950

1940

Black Females

Agriculture

2.6

8.7

24.2

39.2

39.2

Business Services

3.5

1.0

0.2

0.5

0.0

Government

3.5

0.9

0.2

0.2

0.2

32.5

19.9

4.1

2.4

2.0

0.6

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

Personal Services

13.9

36.9

51.2

43.8

51.4

Professional Services

29.7

22.7

14.5

9.3

5.7

Trade

11.3

8.3

4.6

4.0

1.4

Other

2.3

1.2

0.7

0.6

0.1

Manufacturing
Mining/Construction

Table continues on next page

Table 3 (Continued)

Industry

1980

1970

Black Males

Agriculture

6.4

12.6

27.2

50.6

58.3

Business Services

3.8

2.6

1.7

1.6

1.0

Government

4.5

3.7

1.8

1.3

0.7

Manufacturing

38.2

33.0

24.2

19.7

14.5

Mining/construction

15.6

16.1

14.7

8.6

10.5

Personal Services

1.9

3.7

4.6

2.9

4.1

Professional Services

8.9

8.3

6.3

3.2

2.3

Trade

12.0

11.9

12.2

6.5

4.4

Other

8.8

8.1

7.2

5.6

4.3

Table continues on next page

Table 3 (Continued)

Industry

1980

1970

1960

1950

1940

White Females

Agriculture

1.1

1.0

2.8

7.6

9.6

Business Services

8.9

6.3

5.8

2.7

1.0

Government

3.9

3.6

3.7

2.6

3.3

28.8

39.3

43.3

5L9

48.2

Mining/Construction

1.7

1.3

0.6

0.9

0.9

Personal Services

3.8

4.8

4.7

4.9

7.9

Professional Services

27.8

21.8

17.1

12.9

14.7

Trade

20.3

18.8

18.5

14.4

12.4

Other

3.8

3.2

3.6

2.0

1.9

Manufacturing

Table continues on next page

Table 3 (Continued)

1980

Industry

1970

White Males

Agriculture

3.6

4.5

8.2

20.8

26.4

Business Services

7.9

6.6

6.1

4.6

2.9

Govertment

5.0

6.2

4.8

5.0

4.3

Manufacturing

33.5

36.6

40.5

34.7

30.5

Mining/Construction

12.5

12.4

9.8

8.5

11.6

Personal Services

1.3

1.6

1.7

1.5

2.5

Professional Services

9.8

7.5

4.9

3.0

3.3

Trade

17.1

17.4

17.5

15.9

12.5

Other

9.2

7.1

6.4

5.9

6.0

Sources:

and 1980
Computed from 1940, 1950, 1960, 1970

Public Use Samples, U.S Census of Population

TA3LE

4

INDUSTRIAL DISTRIBUTION OF EMPLOYED PERSONS

IN

Industry

(21-65)

THE CENSUS SOUTH BY PERCENTAGE

1980

1970

Black

1960

1950

1940

Females

Agriculture

1.6

3.8

15.6

16.5

17.7

Business Services

7.0

3.0

2.4

1.4

0.9

Government

8.1

4.4

2.3

1.9

0.7

17.2

12.0

4.4

5.1

3.5

0.9

0.4

OO

0.2

0.3

Personal Services

13.7

34.7

48.9

53.1

65.8

Professional Services

33.0

27.3

15.0

10.4

6.6

Trade

14.3

12.3

10.0

10.4

4.0

Other

4.2

2.1

1.3

1.0

0.5

Manufacturing
Mining/Construction

Table continues on next page

Table 4 (Continued)

Industry

1970

1980

1960

1950

1940

Black Males

Agriculture
Business Services

5.9

3.8

2.7

2.8

2.5

Government

6.4

7.5

5.4

3.6

1.5

Manufacturing

26.9

27.1

23.4

20.9

14.2

13.6

12.6

12.5

10.8

12.6

Mining/Construction

2.5

4.5

6.3

5.3

7.5

Professional Services

12.9

10.3

7.3

3.6

2.8

Trade

14.5

12.9

14.1

10.8

8.2

Personal Services

Other

Table continues on next page

Table 4 (Continued)

Industry

1980

1970

1960

1950

1940

White Females

1.5

1.5

3.0

6.3

5.0

12.0

8.6

7.9

5.0

4.1

5.7

5.2

5.7

6.7

6.3

16.7

19.7

21.6

23.0

22.9

Mining/Construction

2.2

1.7

1.4

1.1

0.9

Personal Services

4.9

6.9

8.6

9.3

16.1

Professional Services

30.0

27.0

20.7

17.0

18.8

Trade

22.2

25.0

25.9

26.7

21.7

Other

4.8

4.4

5.3

5.0

4.3

Agriculture
Business Services
Government
Manufacturing

Table continues on next page

Table 4 (Continued)

1980

Industry

White Males

4.4

5.8

11.2

22.2

30.0

Business Services

9.1

7.9

6.5

5.1

4.4

Government

7.0

7.8

6.3

6.8

5.0

Manufacturing

22.6

23.9

25.8

20.0

16.7

Mining/Construction

15.6

14.7

15.0

14.7

15.5

1.3

1.9

2.2

2.0

2.3

Professional Services

10.7

9.1

5.9

3.8

3.6

Trade

17.7

18.9

17.4

15.9

14.4

Other

11.6

10.0

9.7

9.4

8.3

Agriculture

Personal Services

Sources:

1970 and 1980 Public
Computed from 1940, 1950, 1960,

Use Samples, from U.S. Census of Population.

TABLE 5
MANUFACTURING AND AGRICULTURE EMPLOYMENT

Year

White

White

Black

Black

Males

Faiiales

Males

Females

Manufacturing

1950

110182

63883

34020

2663

1960

137357

82251

34097

3798

1970

162652

50515

25819

106437

Agriculture

1950

72773

7730

89882

27794

1960

33318

4304

43724

14290

1970

18305

2333

15403

3737

Sources:

1950 from U.S. Bureau of the

Census (1953, p. 183); 1960 from

Bureau of the Census (1964, p. 346); 1970 from U.S. Bureau of the
Census (1973b, p. 680).

U.

TABLE 6
AVERAGE AND ADJUSTED YEARS OF SCHOOL COMPLETED

IN

TEXTILES

IN 1960

White Males

Cohort

Average

Adjusted

Average

Adjusted

21-25

9.3

11

10.6

12

26-30

8.7

11

9.6

12

31-35

8.6

11

9.6

12

36-40

8.1

10

9.0

11

41-45

8.1

10

8.0

10

46-50

7.3

9

7.7

10

51-55

6.8

9

6.7

9

56-60

6.0

8

6.4

8

Source:

Computed

from

1960 Public

Use Sample, U.S. Census of Population

TABLE 7
PERCENT OF BLACKS WITH AVERAGE EDUCATION
LEVEL OF WHITES IN TEXTILES IN 1960

Cohort

Black Males

Black Females

21-25

25.9

31.7

26-30

25.4

22.4

31-35

17.7

18.2

36-40

15.3

20.9

41-45

8.4

21.6

46-50

14.2

20.4

51-55

10.2

11.4

56-60

16.2

18.8

Source:

Computed from 1960 Public Use Sample, U.S. Census of Population

TABLE 8
RACE COEFFICIENTS FROM MALE EMPLOYMENT

LINEAR PROBABILITY MODELS
IN PARENTHESES)

(T-STATISTICS

Forestry,

Agriculture,
Year

Fisheries

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

0.185

0.084

0.161

0.034

0.015

(4.73)

(1.16)

(5.74)

(2.69)

(2.55)

Age
21-25

26-30

31-35

36-40

41-45

46-50

51-55

56-60

61-65

0.225

0.281

0.114

0.055

0.005

(5.66)

(4.26)

(3.95)

(4.03)

(0.88)

0.188

0.182

0.083

0.043

0,013

(3.98)

(2.47)

(3.06)

(2.83)

(2.06)

0.305

0.17

0.159

0.025

0.013

(6.63)

(2.33)

(4.92)

(1.59)

(1.7)

0.241

-0.111

0.159

0.038

0.028

(4.33)

(1.09)

(4.27)

(2.34)

(3.14)

0.22

0.256

0.116

0.029

0.021

(4.04)

(2.56)

(3.14)

(1.61)

(2.49)

0.23

0.446

0.117

0.058

0,029

(3.7)

(4.26)

(2.4)

2.46

(2.85)

0.121

0,236

0.205

0.064

0.02

(1.73)

(1.68)

(3.83)

(2.4)

(1.69)

0.204

0.254

0.236

0.001

0.014

(2.53)

(1.66)

(2.5)

(0.04)

(0.71)

Table continues on next page

Table 8 continued

Mining and Construction
Year

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

Age
21-25

26-30

31-35

36-40

41-45

46-50

51-55

56-60

61-65

-0.031

0.021

0.071

-0.042

-0.025

(1.23)

(0.47)

(2.5)

(1.99)

(2.3)

-0.016

-0.049

0.086

0.015

-0.036

(0.59)

(0.99)

(2.54)

(0.7)

(3.39)

-0.058

0.066

0.029

-0.037

-0.015

(1.59)

(1.15)

(0.94)

(1.41)

(1.32)

0.008

0.026

-0.039

-0.035

-0.005

(0.24)

(0.54)

(1.25)

(1.36)

(0.37)

-0.04

0.061

0.022

0.057

0.014

(1.01)

(1)

(0.61)

(2.29)

-0.009

0.087

0.065

0.065

0.013

(0.93)

(0.24)

(1.26)

(1.9)

(2.5)

(0.87)

-0.053

-0.084

0.067

0.017

0.024

(1.15)

(1.42)

(1.55)

(0.62)

(1.51)

-0.014

-0.054

-0.052

-0.044

0.048

(0.38)

(1.05)

(1.1)

(1.41)

(2.64)

-0.076

0.078

-0.038

0.011

0.039

(1.45)

(0.66)

(0.69)

(0.29)

(1.71)

Table continues on next page

Table 8 (Continued)

Transportation, Communication, and Utilities
Year

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

0.013

0.005

0.005

-0.016

-0.023

(0.68)

(0.16)

(0.25)

(1.07)

(2.7)

-0.016

-0.021

0.019

(0.8)

(0.5)

(0.76)

(0.19)

(2.27)

0

0.006

0.013

0.02

-0.01

(0)

(0.14)

(0.47)

(1.05)

(1.05)

0.009

0.098

0.039

-0.015

-0.003

(0.39)

(2.04)

(1.4)

(0.69)

(0.25)

-0.034

0.142

0.038

-0.003

-0.003

(1.17)

(2.03)

(1.48)

(0.17)

(0.22)

0.035

-0.035

-0.001

0.02

0.001

(1.46)

(0.71)

(0.04)

(1.02)

(0.07)

-0.033

-0.028

(1.1)

(1.31)

(0.83)

-0.039

-0.044

0

(1.21)

(1.21)

(0.01)

(1.21)

(1.38)

0.014

-0.041

-0.019

-0.001

0.027

(0.59)

(0.48)

(0.52)

(0.04)

(1.4)

Age
21-25

26-30

31-35

36-40

41-45

46-50

51-55

56-60

61-65

0.028

0.003

0.061
(2.79)

0.023

Table continues on next page

-0.021

0.012
(0.81)
0.021

Table 8 (Continued

Wholesale and Retail Trade
Year

1940

1950

1960

0.035

-0.077

-0.009

(1.31)

(1.39)

(0.23)

-0.033

-0.128

(1.43)

1970

1980

Age
21-25

26-30

31-35

36-40

41-45

46-50

51-55

56-60

61-65

-0.05

-0.048

(2.11)

(3.85)

0.02

-0.052

-0.067

(2.24)

(0.47)

(2)

(5.81)

-0.093

-0.028

0.001

-0.059

(1.03)

(1.4)

(0.73)

(0.03)

(4.9)

-0.047

-0.06

-0.032

0.037

-0.051

(1.56)

(1.02)

(0.84)

-0.027

-0.025

(0.75)

0.031

(1.32)

(3.42)

0.02

-0.008

-0.049

(0.3)

(0.42)

(0.27)

(3.09)

-0.102

-0.013

-0.034

-0.044

-0.051

(2.9)

(0.16)

(0.97)

(1.54)

(2.83)

-0.039

-0.108

-0.065

-0.041

(0.93)

(1.12)

(1.91)

(2.31)

-0.064

-0.145

-0.052

-0.049

(1.8)

(1.52)

(1.48)

(1.64)

(2.24)

-0.021

-0.138

-0.067

-0.055

-0.108

(0.5)

(0.95)

(0.8)

(1.2)

(3.61)

0.017
(0.33)

-0.07

Table continues on next page

Table 8 (Continued)

Federal Government
Year

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

-0.04

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

(0.01)

(0.04)

(0.88)

-0.00

0.00

0.00

Age
21-25

(2.86)

26-30

31-35

36-40

-0.01

-0.01

(0.90)

(0.44) (0.10)

(0.16) (0.30)

0.01

-0.00

-0.00

(0.52)

(0.24)

-0.01
(0.88)

41-45

0.00
(0.05)

46-50

51-55

-0.00

(1.00) (0.27) (0.56)
-0.01

0.00

-0.00

(1.90) (0.54) (0.20) (0.58)
-0.01

-0.01

-0.01

0.00

(0.19) (0.66) (0.67) (0.24)
-0.01

(0.31)

(0.06)

(0.65) (0.67) (0.55)

0.01

-0.03

-0.01

-0.01

0.01
(0.35)

-0.01

0.00

-0.00

(0.73)
61-65

0.03

0.02

0.01

(0.76)

56-60

.

0.00

0.01

(0.57) (0.41) (0.15)

(0.82)

0.01

0.01

0.00
.

0.00
.

(0.26)
-0.03

(0.82)

0.03

(1.45) (0.57)
0.01

0.01

(0.52) (0.63)

Table continues on next page

Table 8 (Continued)

State Government
(Excluding School Teachers)
Year

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

0.00

0.00 -0.00

0.01

Age

21-25

-0.00
(0.63)

26-30

31-35

.

-0.00

(0.25) (0.38)

(0.42) (0.91) (L13)

-0.01

-0.00 -0.00

0.00

-0.01

.

0.00

(0.50)
41-45

-0.01
(0.61)

46-50

-0.01
(0.90)

51-55

(0.18) (2.20)

-0.00 -0.00

(0.61)
36-40

.

-0.03

.

0.00
.

0.00
.

-0.02

-0.01

0.01

0.00

(0.52) (0.48) (0.36)
-0.00 -0.00 0.00
(0.25) (0.61) (0.89)
0.00 -0.00

0.00

(0.04) (0.65) (0.45)
-0.00

0.00

0.02

(0.42) (0.75) (2.75)
-0.00 -0.00

-0.01

(133) (0.54) (0.21) (0.42) (1.19)
56-60

-0.02
(1.01)

61-65

-0.01
(0.59)

0.00
.

0.00
.

-0.00

-0.01

0.01

(0.17) (0.98) (1.00)
-0.01 -0.00

-0.00

(0.41) (0.35) (0.32)

Table continues on next page

Table 8 (Continued)

Local Government

(Excluding School Teachers)
Year

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

Age
21-25

-0.00

0.01

-0.01

-0.00

(0.13)

(0.81)

(1.08)

(059)

0.00

-0.01

-0.01

-0.00

(0.60)

(0.76)

(0.23)

0.07

-0.00

-0.00

0.00

•

(3.29)

(0.35)

(0.10)

(0.40)

.

-0.01

0.00

0.01

0.00

•

(0.46)

(0.08)

(1.30)

(0.24)

.

-0.04

0.01

0.01

-0.00

•

(1.05)

(0.48)

•

-0.04

•

(1.96)

(1.92)

(1.28)

(1.41)

.

-0.02

0.01

-0.03

0.01

.
•

26-30

.

.

•

31-35

3640

41-45

46-50

51-55

.

(0.65)

56-60

.

0.00

(1.43) (0.12)
-0.03 -0.01 -0.01

0.82) (2.28) (1.84)
-0.04
(1.61)

61-65

.

-0.01

(0.76)

-0.01

(0.52)

-0.03

-0.03

-0.03

-0.01

(0.48)

(1.03)

(1.80)

(0.50)

Table continues on next page

Table 8 (Continued)

Personal Services
Year

1940

1950

0.021

0.037

(1.41)

1960

1970

1980

0.022

0.012

-0.002

(1.42)

(1.87)

(1.4)

(0.53)

0.026

-0.009

0.017

0.007

-0.004

(1.58)

(0.54)

(1.15)

(0.84)

(1.41)

0.068

0.084

0.035

0.003

0.003

(3.08)

(2.68)

(2.29)

(0.32)

(0.76)

0.041

0.025

0.009

0.021

0.009

(2.02)

(1.11)

(0.69)

(2.02)

(2.01)

0.008

0.072

0.036

0.012

0.004

(0.38)

(2.05)

(2.99)

(1.12)

(0.96)

0.014

0.052

0.054

0.036

0.019

(0.81)

(0.95)

(3.17)

(3.21)

(3.14)

0.071

0

-0.02

0.017

0

(3.04)

(.)

(0.9)

(1.24)

(0.07)

0.057

0.035

0.104

0.048

0.016

(2.2)

(0.46)

(3.06)

(2.73)

(2.28)

0.024

0

0.013

0.047

0.044

(.)

(0.34)

(2.24)

(3.72)

Age
21-25

26-30

31-35

36-40

41-45

46-50

51-55

56-60

61-65

(1.67)

Table continues on next page

Table 8 (Continued)

Professional Services
Year

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

0.045

0.083

0.031

0.022

(3.97)

(2)

Age
21-25

0.006
(0.49)

26-30

31-35

36-40

41-45

46-50

51-55

56-60

61-65

(1.82)

(2.63)

0.042

0.027

0.069

0.042

0.036

(2.87)

(1.2)

(3.18)

(2.55)

(4.01)

0.037

0.007

0.081

0.053

0.039

(2.19)

(0.22)

(3.81)

(3.07)

(4.09)

0.028

0.072

0.047

0.07

0.028

(1.62)

(2.16)

(2.3)

(3.92)

(2.72)

0.02

0.042

0.055

0.048

0.028

(2.39)

(0.55)

(0.9)

(2.13)

(4.58)

0.029

0.039

0.046

0.056

0.06

(1.65)

(0.88)

(2.22)

(3.04)

(4.63)

0.045

0.094

0.098

0.084

0.062

(2.25)

(1.64)

(3.26)

(3.9)

(4.7)

0.041

0.002

0.025

0.103

0.053

(2)

(0.05)

(0.7)

(4.26)

(3.27)

0.004

-0.011

0.122

0.16

0.107

(0.12)

(0.25)

(2.13)

(4.18)

(4.95)

Table continues on next page

Table 8 (Continued)

Recreation Services
Year

1950

1960

-0.019

-0.007

0.01

-0.005

(0.94)

(1.13)

(2.28)

(1.54)

0.009

0.01

-0.003

-0.001

(0.54)

(1.97)

(0.54)

(0.6)

0.015

0

-0.001

0.004

0.004

(2.24)

(.)

(0.25)

0

0

0.004

0.002

0

(0.03)

(.)

(0.55)

(0.44)

(0.01)

-0.004

0

0

0

0.004

(0.42)

(.)

(.)

(0.01)

(1.27)

1940

1970

1980

Age
21-25

0.007
(1.03)

26-30

0.001
(0.11)

31-35

36-40

41-45

46-50

51-55

56-60

(1.46)

-0.008

-0.005

0.012

0.011

0.007

(0.77)

(0.23)

(1.27)

(2.02)

(1.77)

0.011

-0.013

-0.004

0.003

0.004

(1.23)

(0.33)

(0.51)

(0.41)

(0.99)

-0.006

0

0.031

0.009

0.003

(.)

(2.54)

(1.16)

(0.48)

0

-0.01

-0.004

0.006

(.)

(0.55)

(0.44)

(0.82)

(0.63)

61-65

(0.76)

-0.003
(0.2)

Table continues on next page

Table 8 (Continued)

Financial and Business Services
Year

1940

1970

1980

1950

1960

-0.004

0.008

-0.041

-0.03

-0.019

(0.37)

(0.24)

(2.34)

(2.18)

(2.45)

0.006

-0.012

-0.041

-0.021

-0.021

(0.39)

(0.28)

(1.49)

(1.2)

(2.66)

-0.015

-0.043

-0.041

-0.007

-0.041

(0.76)

(1.14)

(1.8)

(0.38)

(4.38)

-0.006

-0.048

-0.036

-0.049

-0.035

(0.44)

(1.11)

(1.54)

(2.7)

(3.28)

0.023

0.009

-0.007

-0.05

-0.024

Age
21-25

26-30

31-35

36-40

41-45

46-50

51-55

56-60

61-65

(0.27)

(2.64)

(2.03)

0.033

-0.032

-0.045

-0.038

(0.25)

(0.53)

(1.57)

(2.37)

(3.08)

-0.005

-0.049

0.006

-0.013

-0.035

(0.34)

(0.83)

(0.21)

(0.67)

(2.76)

0.047

0.03

-0.007

0.007

(1.95)

(0.85)

(0.21)

-0.006

-0.015

0.05

(0.31)

(0.24)

(0.94)

(1.39)

(0.26)

0.004

(0.33)

-0.01
(0.32)

Table continues on next page

-0.037
(2.46)
-0.049
(2.34)

Table 8 (Continued)

Traditional Manufacturing (Non- textile)
Year

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

0.04

0.14

0.06

0.05

0.02

(1.47)

(2.30)

(1.79)

(2.91)

(1.78)

0.03

0.14

0.02

-0.00

0.03

(0.93)

(2.79)

(0.53)

(0.17)

(4.07)

0.09

-0.00

0.03

0.02

0.03

(2.85)

(0.02)

(1.06)

(1.05)

(3.68)

0.03

0.08

0.14

0.06

0.01

(0.86)

(1.51)

(4.16)

(2.70)

(1.26)

0.01

0.03

-0.01

0.06

0.02

(0.18)

(0.36)

(0.29)

(2.58)

(1.48)

0.03

0.01

0.06

0.04

(0.04)

(0.40)

(0.35)

(2.78)

(3.11)

0.01

0.02

0.02

0.07

0.05

(0.28)

(0.33)

(0.36)

(2.63)

(3.51)

0.02

0.20

0.08

0.02

0.03

(0.50)

(2.42)

(2.02)

(0.92)

(1.96)

-0.00

0.06

-0.03

0.07

0.06

(0.66)

(0.52)

(2.35)

(2.93)

Age
21-25

26-30

31-35

36-40

41-45

46-50

51-55

56-60

61-65

-0.00

(0.16)

Table continues on next page

Table 8 (Continued)

Non-traditional Manufacturing (Non-textile)
Year

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

-0,00

-0.01

-0.02

0.03

0.01

Age
21-25

(0.10) (0.72) (1.00) (1.58) (1.42)
26-30

-0.01

-0,01

-0.03

-0.03

0.01

(0.99) (0.40) (1.20) (1.43) (1.15)
31-35

-0.02

-0.03

-0.02

-0.04

0.01

(1.46) (0.98) (0.80) (1.76) (0.89)
36-40

-0.02

0.01

-0.01

-0.02

-0.00

(1.68) (0.43) (0.30) (1,01) (0,15)
41-45

0.02

0.02

-0.01

-0.03

-0.01

(1.41) (0.39) (0.59) (1.50) (0.62)
46-50

0.00
(0.26)

51-55

0.00

-0.05

0.02

-0.03

-0.01

(1.57) (0,79) (1,53) (0.78)
-0.05

-0.01

0.02

-0.01

(1.05) (0.44) (0.77) (0.59)
56-60

-0.01

-0.04

-0.03

0.02

0.01

(0.74) (0.74) (1.07) (0.94) (0.94)
61-65

-0.01
(0.43)

0.00
.

-0.03

(0,57)

0.01

-0.01

(0.28) (0.26)

Table continued on next page

Table 8 (Continued)

Chemicals
Year

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

0.03

0.00

-0.01

-0.02

-0.01

Age
21-25

(3.11) (0.08) (0.76) (1.60) (1.81)
26-30

0.03

0.00

-0.00

-0.02

0.00

(2.58) (0.18) (0.08) (1.28) (0.12)
31-35

0.02

0.05

-0.01

-0.01

0.00

(1.68) (1.92) (0.36) (0.69) (0.10)
36-40

0.01

-0.01

-0.03

0.01

0.01

(1.76) (0.36) (1.78) (0.52) (1.08)
41-45

-0.00
(0.25)

46-50

0.00
(0.75)

51-55

000
(0.48)

56-60

0.01
(0.60)

61-65

0.01
(0.57)

0.03

0.02

-0.02

0.01

(0.87) (0.98) (1.43) (0.80)
-0.00

0.01

0.01

-0.01

(0.11) (0.56) (0.53) (0.82)
0.00
.

0.04

-0.03

(1.35)
0.02

0.01

-0.02

(0.49) (2.35)
0.01

-0.00

(1.18) (0.94) (0.63) (0.41)
0.00
.

-0.00

-0.00

0.01

(0.08)

(0.24) (0.43)

Table continues on next page

Table

8

(Continued)

Apparel
Year

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

-0.00

0.00

-0.01

-0.01

0.01

(0.90)

(1.21)

(2.83)

-0.02

0.01

0.00

Age
21-25

(0.29)
26-30

0.00

0.00

41-45

0.00

(1.45)
0.00

(2.34) (1.24)
0.01

0.00

.

(0.99)

(0.53) (0.24)

-0.00

-0.01

-0.00

-0.01

(0.53)

(0.74) (0.31) (0.93) (0.09)

-0.00

-0.02

•

36-40

0.00
.

•

31-35

.

-0.01

-0.01

0.00

-0.00

(0.11) (0.91) (0.80) (1.05) (0.28)
46-50

51-55

56-60

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.00

-0.01

-0.01

(0.20)

(0.73)

(1.04)

0.00

-0.01

-0.01

(0.15)

(0.71) (0.99)

-0.02

-0.00

-0.01

(1.10) (0.38) (1.38)
61-65

0.00

0.00

-0.00

-0.00

0.00

(0.08) (0.09) (0.11)

Table continues on next page

Table 8 (Continued)

Textiles
Year

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

-0.26

-0.23

-0.31

0.02

0.05

Age
21-25

(8.89) (4.04) (8.49) (0.63) (4.95)
26-30

-0.30

-0.22

-0.24

0.02

0.05

(9.14) (3.75) (5.87) (0.95) (5.39)
31-35

36-40

41-45

46-50

51-55

56-60

61-65

-0.35

-0.29

(8.76)

(4.28) (5.78) (2.16) (1.49)

-0.34

-0.38

(9.73)

(5.68) (6.13) (4.03) (0.78)

-0.22

-0.18

(5.93)

(2.64) (5.93) (2.75) (1.89)

-0.18

-0.34

(5.24)

(3.93) (5.88) (4.80) (4.17)

-0.22

-0.18

(5.34)

(2.17) (5.04) (6.97) (4.53)

-0.13

-0.26

(3.41)

(2.89) (5.01) (5.92) (5.16)

-0.14

-0.15

-0.20

-0.23

-0.27

-0.22

-0.29

-0.25

0.l6

-0.06

-0.11

-0.07

-0.14

-0.21

-0.20

-0.20

0.02

0.01

-0.03

-0.07

-0.08

-0.11

-0.13

(2.93) (1.52) (2.30) (5.21) (4.87)

TABLE 9

THE EFFECT OF INCREASING BlACK MALE EDUCATION FROM

ITS 1960 TO ITS 1970 LEVEL ON THE
PROBABILITY OF EMPLOYMENT (In

Percents)

SELECTED INDUSTRIES

Age
Industry

Agriculture,

Forestry

and

21-25

26-30

31-35

36-40

41-45

-3.1

-2.6

-2.2

-2.1

-6.9

Fisheries

.1

1.2

1.2

1.0

2.5

1.8

1.4

2.7

2.2

4.7

Federal Government

.5

.1

.1

.1

.5

State Government

.3

.2

.1

.1

-

.4

6.2

.2

-.1

.2

-

.4

Professional Services

2.7

1.4

.3

2.7

-3.7

Financial and Business

- .3

.5

1.2

.3

1.4

1.0

1.5

0.7

1.0

.8

.7

.4

.5

1.0

-1.7

-2.2

-1.5

-2.8

.1

Transportation,

Conununication

-

and Utilities
Wholesale and Retail Trade

(Excluding School Teachers)
Local Government
(Excluding School Teachers)

Services

Non-Traditional

Manu-

8.98

facturing
Chemicals
Textiles

Table continues on next page

Table 9 (Continued)

Age
Industry

46-50

Agriculture, Forestry and

-1.9

51-55

-

.6

56-60

61-65

-1.2

-1.2

Fisheries
1.0

.5

.6

.2

2.3

1.2

1.1

.8

Federal Government

.2

.0

.0

.0

State Government

.2

.0

.0

.0

-

.3

.1

.3

.1

-

.8

-.4

.0

.6

.3

.4

.0

1.83

.6

.2

1.0

.2

.1

.1

.1

.7

-1.2

Transportation,

Communication

and Utilities
Wholesale and Retail Trade

(Excluding School Teachers)
Local Government
(Excluding School Teachers)
Professional Services
Financial and Business

-

.3

Services
Non-Traditional Manufacturing
Chemicals
Textiles

-2.0

-

-

.2

Source: Based on regressions reported in Heclanan, Payner and Butler. For
Education, Public Use Samples, U.S. Census of Population, for 1960
and 1970.

TABLE 10
SOUTH CAROLINA POPULATION AND POPULATION SHARES
SELECTED COUNTIES IN 1960

Percentage

County

White

Black

Size of Population
(Thousands)

Abbeville

68

32

21.4

Anderson

80

20

98.5

Cherokee

79

21

35.2

Chester

60

40

30.9

Greenville

82

18

209.8

Lancaster

73

27

39.4

Laurens

70

30

47.6

Oconee

89

11

40.2

Orangeburg

40

60

68.6

Pickens

90

10

46.0

Spartanburg

78

22

156.8

Source: U.S. Bureau of The Census (1964; p. 42)

IN

TABLE 11
SOUTH CAROLINA COUNTY LEVEL EMPLOYMENT
BY INDUSTRY

IN

1960

Percent of

Percent employed in:
Total

County

Employment

Percent of

Manuf- Textiles

Agri-

Mantifacturing Population

factur-

cul-

Employees

ing

ture

in Textiles

Employed

7763

45

27

9

59

36

Anderson

40401

47

33

6

69

41

Cherokee

12980

46

26

7

57

37

Chester

11232

44

35

10

79

36

Greenville

80944

39

20

2

51

39

Lancaster

14898

55

46

4

84

38

Laurens

17647

47

26

8

54

37

Oconee

15199

47

34

8

71

38

Orangeburg

23427

2u

2

25

10

34

Pickens

18313

53

21

4

40

40

Spartanburg

61762

44

29

5

65

39

Abbeville

SOURCE:

All variables except textile employment from U.S. bureau of the Census

of
(1964, p. 42); Textile employment data from Department of Labor of the State
South Carolina as described in the appendix.
NOTE:

South Carolina Department of Labor data are average annual employment

during the fiscal year July 1959 to June 1960.
time during the Census survey.

Census data are at a point in

Table 12
Box-Cox Demographic Employment

Equations Fit Using

(t statistics
.4

(35.46)

Textile Output .0018 (16.0)
New Estab-

.45

?roch.

shown in parentheses)

(25.5)

.00304 (5.98)

mite

White

Black
Females

Black
Males

The Axnemiya-?owel].

Males

Females
.50

(7.79)

.0025

(15.2)

.0217 (12.4)

.0857 (12.64)

- .0180

(-8.22)

.0208 (13.8)

.0422

(6.16)

- .0038

(-1.74)

- .0011

(-2.742)

.C

(11.15)

0018 (16.89)

- .0108 (7.5l)

lishment
Old Estab-

2.70)

.0040 (

lishment
Non-Textile

- .0008

(-9.28)

- 0009

-.0015 (-10.70)

(-10.65)

Output
Defense

.0013 (3.21)

.0159 (8.808)

.0007

-

(1.23)

.0035

(-10.23)

Contracts
Model With Interactions

slack

slack
Females

Males
A.

.45

Textile Output
New Estáb-

White
Females

(24.14)

.45

(39.73)

.775

.0008

(5.51)

- .0007

(-1.58)

.0154

(6.18)

.0631

(7.78)

White
Males

(13.3)

.80

.0036

(18.97)

.0027

-.0014

(-3.31)

(20.56)

(35.3)

-.0035 (-2.25)

lishment

Old

Estab-

.0231 (15.67)

.0566 (11.94)

(1.32)

.0080

(8.415)

- .0024

(-11.57)

- .0014

(-17.82)

.0006

(1.15)

.0027

lishment
Non-Textile

-0010

(-8.61)

-.0003

(- .654)

Output
Defense

0010

(2.32)

.0107

(8.67)

Contracts
Table continues on next page

-

.0034

(-15.2)

Table 12 (Continued)

Textile

.0014

(921)

.0081

(18.1)

.0025

(912)

.0103

(1.16)

-

.0010

(-5.33)

.0078

(2.07)

-

.0013 (-l6.5

Output
New Firms

.0034 (-3.43)

-

.0429 (-13.69)

Non-Textile -.0002 (-1.69)

-

.0019

Old Firms

-

(-5.46)

-

.0066
.0016

.0018

(-4.92) -3.04xlO6

(8.83)

(1.09)
(- .005)

.0009 (13.72)

Output

ame
The

instruments used to fit these models are X, squares of X and all interactions.
are divided by the grand mean employment (over tine and county) for

each demographic group. These are 4082 for white males, 2687 for white females,
396 for black males and 78 for black females.

Table 13
Effects of Changing Variables on
*

Tetie mp1oyen

1965-1970

Zlack

slack

White

White

Males

Females

Females

Males

From Model Without Interactions

5041

4215

565

-6778

747

823

-319

-3045

From Output

307

116

2179

2131

From New Estab-

489

448

-2256

-2045

-64

-29

61

-103

-75

-21

-651

-608

90

310

347

-2420

Actual Change

Change From
All Sources

lishments
From Old Establishments
From NonTextile
Output
Defense
Contracts

Table continues on next page

Table 13 (Continued)
From Model With Interactions

Change From

1241

820

1412

-1399

903

562

1151

-2743

From Output

126

-26

2590

2946

From New Estab-

365

329

-1292

-601

-68

-40

-38

-174

-85

-5

-994

-827

100

208

257

-2177

223

306

-720

-1418

588

54

884

309

All Sources

Change From
Defense
Contracts and
Structural
Shift

lishments
From Old Establishments
From NonTextile
Output
Defense
Contracts
From Interaction Output
From Interaction New Establishments
Table continues on next page

Table 13 (Continued)

9

30

94

0

-17

-36

636

543

From Interaction Old Eatabliahments

From Interaction Nontextile

Output

*For county

i

and demographic group

of Xiat time

jt

-

to

t

j,t+k

-

j,t

-

Xi

t÷k.2

I

is estimated by

I(lAY

YiLt÷k

-

/

Xit1

is the number of counties, t — 1965, t +

from Table 12 are used.

-

1]

{[

______

where

j the effect of changing the .2th component

k

— 1970. The coefficients

