                        NBER WORICINC PAPER SERIES




         A CROSS - COUNTRY STUDY OF GROWtH, SAVING. AND GOVER}U4ENT




                              Robert   3. Barro




                          Working Paper No. 2855




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 MassachusettS Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                               February 1q89




I have benefited from research asststance by David Renelt.  I appreciate
comments from Gary Becker. Doug Beriteim, George Borjas, Anne Krueger. Paul
Romer, and Larry Summers. This research is being supported by the National
Science Foundation and the Walker Foundation This paper is part of 4BER'S
research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed  are those
                                                           Research.
of the author not those of the National Bureau of Economic
                                          NBER Working Paper #2855
                                          February 1989

            A CROSS - COUNTRY STUDY OF GROWTH • SAVING, AND GOVERNMENT


                                    ABSTRACT




    Model.s of endogenous    economic growth can generate long-ten growth
without   relying on exogenous changes in technology or population. A general
feature of these models is the presence of constant or increasing returns in
the factors that can be accumulated. I use some models of this type to study
the determination of per capita growth investment in physical and human
capital, and population growth. The determinants of these variables involve

aspects of government policy -    - including public infrastructure services,
maintenance   of property rights, government consumption, and taxation - - and
the initial level of per capita income.
     I examine the predicted relationships by using a cross-country sample
that expands on the Summers-Heston set of about 120 countries. Aside from
their data on levels of per capita GDP and the breakdown of GDP into
components, I have added information about the composition of government
expenditures, proxies for economic freedom and property rights, measures of
political, stability, and so on. This expansion in variables reduced the
number of countries to 72.
     The findings verify some of the predictions about the determination of
growth and investment/saving rates. For example, government consumption and
investment spending, and proxies for economic freedom show up as suggested by
the models. Also, the interplay among population growth, investment in human
capital (school enrollment), and the initial level of per capita income
conf in theoretical predictions about the tradeoff between the quantity and
quality of children. I anticipte that additional results will emerge from
my ongoing research in this area.



                                          Robert J. Barro
                                          Department of Economics
                                          Littauer Center
                                          Harvard University
                                          Cambridge. MA 02138
Government policies have numerous effects on a country's economic

performance. In this study I assess the effects of various kinds of public

services     and taxation on long-ten rates of growth and saving. The focus of
the research is an empirical investigation of the growth experiences of a
large number of countries in the post-World War II period. The framework for
this empirical work derives from some recent theories of endogenous economic
growth. In part I, I sketch a model where public services and taxation
affect an economy's long-ter. growth and      saving.   This model   neglects

population     growth, allows no distinction between physical and human capital,

and   concentrates     on steady-state results. Part II extends the theory to

allow for choices of population growth, and for distinctions between physical

and   human capital.     Part III brings in some transitional dynamics. In this

extension, increases in per capita income go along with decreases in

population growth and increases in the amount invested in each person's human

capital. Part IV discusses the empirical findings. These results are

preliminary, and amount to a progress report from an ongoing project on

economic     growth.




J•    Effects j Government Policies 911 Lont- Term Growth        Saving


In    this   section I discuss a theory of the long-term effects of government
policies      on saving and econonic growth. The analysis is an exposition and

extension of a model developed more fully in Barro (1988), which built on

work by Rojoer (1989), Lucas (1988), and Rebelo (1987). The aspects of

government policies considered are the effects of public services on private

production and household utility, the influences of governmental activities
                                                                      2




on property rights, and the effects of taxation on private incentives to save

and invest.

    Assume that the representative household in a closed economy seeks to

maximize




            (1)                     U =
                                          ,f'u(c)emOtdt,


where ii   is   the momentary utility function, c is consumption per person, and

p > 0 is the constant rate of time preference. The form of the utility

function is




                                   I      c
                                              1-u
                                                1-e
                                                    —l


so that marginal utility has a constant elasticity with respect to c. The

case where c =      1   corresponds to log utility. The infinite horizon in

equation (1) applies naturally when parents are altruistic toward children,

who are altruistic toward their children, and so on. Then the rate of time

preference can be thought of as reflecting the degree of altruism toward

children, rather than the influence of time, per Be.        i assume at this point

that population (which equals the labor force) is constant, although later

parts of the paper allow for population growth.

    In the main analysis, the production function has the Cobb-Douglas form,



           (3)                         y =     Akg0,
                                                                     3




where 0 c a < 1, y is output per person (assumed to be net of depreciation of

capital), k is capital per person, and g (representing public services)

corresponds to real government purchases per person. Production could be
                                                                                 I
carried out directly by households, or equivalently by competitive firms.

assume a one-sector production technology, so that (net) product, y, can be

used either for consumption, c, (net) investment, k, or government purchases,

g.

     I assume   that   the government buys only final product from the private

sector, including bridge services, jet fighter services, etc. Alternatively,

the government could buy labor services and capital goods or services from

the private sector, and then use these inputs to carry out public production.

If the tecbnologies for the government and the private sector are the same,

and if capital is mobile between the public and private sectors, the results

would not change. At this point I assume that public services (provided free

of charge to the users) enter into the production function, but not directly

into the utility function.

     The idea behind equation (3) is that some 'infrastructure" activities of

government are inputs to private production and also raise the marginal

product of private capital. For the usual public-goods reasons, such as

non-excludability and perhaps increasing returns to scale, the private market

does not sustain the "appropriate" level of these services. These

considerations apply especially to activities such as the enforcement of laws

and contracts, national defense, and perhaps to highways, water systems, and

so on. In equation (3), output per capita, y, depends on government

purchases per capita, g. In some cases (where public services are truly
                                                                       4




public, in the sense of non-rival), it would be more accurate to relate y to

the total of government purchases, rather than to the amount per capita.

       Equation (3) assumes constant returns to scale in k and g. The variable

Ic should be interpreted as a broad measure of private input, which is viewed

as the service flow from a broad concept of private capital. Thus, k

       physical capital, hu.an capital, and aspects of privately-owned
includes

knowledge. (My analysis does not consider the free-rider problems associated
with   general-purpose knowledge. as analyzed by Romer, 1986.) Then the idea
is that constant returns apply to this broad measure of reproducible capital,
as long as the public service input, g, changes in the sane proportion as k.
    In the initial setup the government is constrained to a balanced budget
and a proportional income tax at rate r. Hence



            (4)                     g = ry   =   rAkIg0

Using   equation (3)   to calculate the marginal product of capital,       k
(calculated when k changes with g held fixed), and substituting        g = ry   leads

to


            (5)                 =
                                    (1_a).Al/O).rfl_)

Given the specification of the production function in equation (3), an

increase in r =    g/y   shifts upward the marginal product of private capital in

equation    (5).

       Given the form of equation (1), the initial capital k(O), and a

proportional income tax at rate r, the first-order condition for each
                                                                            5




household's maximization of utility leads in the usual way to a condition for

the growth rate of consu.ption per person,



                    =         =                                         -
      (6)               è/c


where       denotes a per capita growth rate. The expression within the brackets

and to the left of the minus sign is (1_r)4k. which is the private rate of

return      to investment (and    saving). I assume parameter values for A, a, and p

so   that 7 is positive for sane values of r        (which   means that sustained per
capita growth is feasible in this model), and           values   for A, a, p, and   g so

that   the attained utility, U, is finite for all values of r. (The latter

condition holds for sure if ,            1—for example, with log utility where cr1.)

      In this model the economy is always in a steady state where the variables

c, k, and y all grow at the rate           shown in equation (6). the levels for the

paths of c, k, and y are determined by the initial quantity of capital, k(O).

Using equation (3) and the condition, g =         ry,   the level of output can be

written as




              (7)                  y =




Therefore,      k(O) determines y(O) from equation (7), given the value of r. The

initial level of consumption, c(O), equals y(O) less initial investment,

k(O), and less initial government purchases, ry(O). Using the fact that

initial investment equals 7.k(O) (because the capital stock grows always at

the proportionate rate 7), the initial level of consumption tunis out to be
                                                                     6




              (8)     c(O) = k(o).[(l_T).Al/(   a).Ta/-a)   -




      Figure 1 (which assumes particular parameter values for a, e, A, and p,
and   is    meant only to be illustrative) shows the relation between 7 and    r.


The growth rate i rises      initially with r because of the effect of public
services      on private productivity. As r increases, 7 eventually reaches a

peak and subsequently declines because of the reduction in the term, 1-r,

which is the fraction of income that an individual retains at the margin.

The peak in the growth rate occurs when r =     a.   Given the form of equation

(3), this point corresponds to the natural efficiency condition, fg =         1.    (At

this point, an increment in g by one unit generates just enough extra output

to balance the resources used up by the government.) This result—that the

productive efficiency condition for g holds despite the presence of a

distorting income tax—depends on the Cobb-Douglas form of the production

function. However, the general nature of the relation between         and r

applies for other forms of production functions. The basic idea is that more

government activity of the infrastructure type is good initially for growth

and investment because anarchy is bail for private production. However, as

the government expands, the rise in the tax rate, r, deters private

investment. This element dominates eventually, so that growth and the size

of government are negatively related when the government is already very

large.

      The saving rate is given by




      (9)                  s =   k/y   =
                                                                         7




Substituting the result for '        from equation (6) leads to the relation between

s and    r that   is shown in Figure 2. The behavior is similar to that in       Figure
1, but s must peak in the region where r <        a.

    Inthis type of model, where steady-state per capita growth arises
because of constant returns to a broad concept of capital, the growth and
saving rates,         and s, are intimately connected. The analysis predicts that
various    elements, including government policies, will affect growth and

saving rates in the same direction. This result differs fro. the predictions

of models of the Solow (1956)-Cass (1965)-Koopmans (1965) type, where the

steady-state per capita growth rate (reflecting exogenous technological

progress) is unrelated to the saving rate (or to parameters, such as the rate

of time preference, that influence saving).

    I show the following in Barro (1988):

    (1) With a Cobb-Douglas production technology, the choice r = a, which

            corresponds to fg =     1   maximizes the utility attained by the

            representative household. That is, maximizing U corresponds to

            maximizing 7, even though a shift in T has implications (of

            ambiguous sign) for the level of c, through the impact on c(O) in

            equation (8).

    (2) A command optimum also entails r = a (1g =          1),   but has higher growth

            and saving rates than the decentralized solution. The deficiencies

            of growth and saving in the decentralized result reflect the

            distorting influence of the income tax.

    (3) The decentralized equilibrium corresponds to the command optimum if

            taxes     are lump sum and if the size of government is set optimally at
            g/y   =   a.   (In the present setting, with no labor-leisure choice, a
                                                                       S




         consumption tax     is   equivalent to a lump-sum tax.)   However,   if

        g/y # a, the decentralized results with lump-sum taxes         differ from
         the   command   optimum (conditioned on the specified value of g/y).
        The last    result   reflects external effects that involve the

        determination of aggregate government expenditures (given that the

         ratio, g/y, is set at a specified, non-optimal value).

    (4) The results depend on how public services enter into the production

         function. The specification assumes that an individual producer

         cares about the quaatity of government purchases per capita (and

         not—as    with the space program, the Washington Monument, and not too
         many other governmental programs—on the aggregate of government
         purchases). The      setup assumes also that the quantity of public

         services available to an individual does not depend on the amount of

         that individual's economic activity (represented by k and y). If an

         increase in an individual's production, y, leads automatically to an

         increase in that individual's public services (as with sewers and

         police services, and perhaps with national security), an income tax

         (or a user fee) can give better results than a lump-sum tax.

   Thus far, the model views public services as entering directly into

private proiiuction functions. This form applies to some aspects of highways,

public transportation and communication, enforcement of contracts, and some

other activities. Governments also expend resources on domestic law and

order and national defense to sustain property rights. (Other governmental

activities, such as regulations, expropriation, taxation, and military

adventures—can reduce property rights.) Instead of entering directly into

the production function, one can think of property rights as included in the
                                                                       9




(1-r) part    of the private return to capital, (l-r).fk. That is, greater

property rights amount to a larger probability that an investor will receive

the marginal product, k (and also retain ownership to the stock of capital).

Therefore, more property rights works like a reduction in r. Il the

government    spends resources to enhance property rights, the effects of more
spending on growth       and saving   rates look in a general way like those shown in
Figures 1 and    2.

      Consider now the model's predictions for the relations of the per capita
growth     rate, 7, and the saving (and investment) rate, s, to the government

spending ratio, g/y. Here, I think of g as encompassing only those

activities of government that can be modeled as influencing private

production or as sustaining property rights. Thus, g would not include

public services that enter directly into household utility (discussed below),

or   transfer payments, which are difficult to model in a representative-agent
framework.      In practice, this means that the concept of g considered here

corresponds     to a   relatively small fraction of government expenditures.

      If   governments randomized their choices of spending, the model predicts
that   long-term per capita growth and saving rates,
                                                             and s, would relate to

g/y as shown in        Figures   1 and 2. The relations would be non-monotonic, with

     and s increasing initially with g/y, but decreasing with g/y beyond some

high values.

       The conclusions are different if governments optimize, rather than

behaving randomly. In the model the government optimizes by setting g/y =             a,

which corresponds to the productive-efficiency condition, f = 1.           (Since

optimization     corresponds to productive efficiency for government services,
the results do        not depend on public officials being benevolent. Productive
                                                                     10




efficiency can be desirable even for public officials that have little

concern for their constituents.) In considering long-ten behavior across

countries, observed differences in spending ratios, g/y, would correspond in

an optimizing framework to variations in a. That is, the sizes of

governments would differ only because the relative productivities of public

and   private services are   not the sate in each place. (Perhaps the

differences   in   a relate to geography, weather, natural resources, and so on?)

Whatever the reason for variations in a across countries, the covariation

between g/y and 7 or s that is generated by these variations does not

correspond to the relations shown in Figures 1 and 2.

      Equation (7) shows that, for a given r, the level of productivity, y/k,

depends on the parameter, A"'- a)•       Suppose   that this parameter is held
constant   while a varies across   countries (that is, the variations in relative
productivity of public and     private services are assumed   to be independent of
this concept of     the level of productivity). Then it can    be shown   from

equations (6) and (9) that an increase in a—which implies an        increase in
g/y—goes along with decreases in 7 and s. For a given level of

productivity, the economy does better (and has a higher growth rate) if the

relative productivity of private services is higher—that is, if a is lower.

The reason is that public services require public expenditures, which have to

be financed by a distorting income tax. It is only because of this effect

that the model predicts a nonzero correlation between a and i• The nore

general point is that, if governments optimize, they go to the point where

the .arginal effect of more government on growth is nil. Therefore, there

would not be much cross-country relation between growth rates and the size of
                                                                            11




government    if governments optimize (if we include in government spending only

the activities that relate to private production).

       Governments also carry out consurption expenditures, gC, which do not
affect    private production functions, but do have a direct impact on the
representative       household's utility. With an income tax, a higher level of

gC/y    implies   a lower value of 1-r, but no change in the private marginal

                               an increase   in   gC/y (which may   be   warranted in terms
product,    k•    Therefore,

of maximizing the representative person's utility) leads to lower values for
growth and saving rates. (In an example considered in Sarro, 1988, I showed
that government consumption spending would not affect the optimal share in
GNP    of the government's productive expenditure—this share remained at a in
the case considered.)
       Unlike for productive government spending, the predictions for government
consumption are straightforward. In the case of consumption activities (that
is,    public services that affect utility but not production), a larger share

of government spending would correlate negatively with growth and saving

rates.

       The main difficulty of interpretation is the possibility of reverse

causation from the level of income to the choice of government consumption

spending as a share of GM', gc/y. Suppose, for example, that this spending

is a luxury good in the sense that a higher level of income leads to an

increase in gc/y. (Empirically, I find that this "Wagner's Law" effect

applies to transfers, but not to other types of government spending that I

classify below as consumption.) Given the initial level of income, y(O), a

higher growth rate         means a higher average level of income over the sample,

and hence, a higher sample average for g'/y. (If the growth rate 7 were
                                                                          12




anticipated,    even the initial value of gC/y would be positively correlated

with the sample average of .)         Thus,   this reverse effect could generate a

positive    association between g'/y    and   . In the empirical work I argue      that

this   effect is important   for   transfer payments, but not for other categories
of government spending.


fl. Pornilation Growth 4 flaari avital          Ia      lodel   j   Steady-State Growth

The model described above did not allow for population growth, and it also

did not allow for distinctions between physical and human capital.

Empirically, population growth appears to interact closely with the level and

growth rate of income, as well as with investment in human capital. In order

to incoporate these elements into the model, I use some results from the

existing literature.

    Becker and Barro (1988) and Barro and Becker (1989) consider the

determination   of population growth in a model where altruistic parents choose
own consumption, the number of children, and the         bequests left to children.

However,   these models do not allow for endogenons per capita growth. Becker
and Murphy (1988) and Tamura (1988) have extended the model to analyze the

joint determination of population growth and per capita growth. The
important   consideration—which makes it worthwhile to study population growth

jointly with per capita growth—is that population growth influences

investment,   especially in human capital, and       thereby affects per capita
growth   rates. In effect, population growth is       a for, of saving and
investment (in numbers of children) that is an alternative to investment in

human capital (the   quality   of children). Therefore, factors that lead to
                                                                      13




higher populatiou growth—such as a decrease in the cost of raising

children—tend to reduce the growth rate of output per capita.

      Building on Becker and Barro (1988), Lucas (1988), Itebelo (1987), and

especially Becker and Murphy (1988), I have been working on the following

model:




                                 U =
              (10)
                                       fu(c)e_Pt[N(t)]1dt


              (11)         y = c +     Ic + uk =



              (12)                     h+nh=Bvh- bh



               (13)                     n=N/N=9- 6

For the new variables, N is the level of population, n is the growth rate of

population, Ii is human capital per person, q is time spent raising children,

i'   is   time spent investing in human capital, 1-i-v is time spent producing

goods (used either for consumables or new physical capital), B is a parameter

for productivity in generating new human capital, 9 is a paraaeter for

productivity in raising children, 6 is the mortality rate, and             (0 < e < 1)

is a parameter that measures diminishing marginal utility of children. Time

spent at leisure is ignored (that is, is regarded as fixed).         Government

services      and taxation can   be thought of as effects on the parameters A and B.

For       convenience, I depart from Becker and Murphy in setting up the model in
continuous time. The main abstraction here is that the family size, N(t),
                                                                  14




has to    be thought of as evolving continuously over time. For purposes of

aggregate analysis, I believe that this abstraction is no    problem.
    This model can be used to analyze steady-state per capita growth,
populaton   growth, and saving/investment   rates. The effects associated with
population   growth involve two main channels. First, higher population growth

corresponds to a higher effective rate of time preference (through the effect

of N with 0 C     < 1 in equation (10)). Second, given the mortality rate 5,

higher population growth goes along with more time spent raising children

(q), which implies a lower rate of return on human capital. (This result

assumes    that human capital is productive in producing goods or new human
capital, but not in producing new persons.) Through both channels, forces

that lead to a higher rate of population growth tend to go along with a lower

rate of per capita growth and a lower rate of investment, especially in human

capital.

    The model can be used (as in Lucas, 1988) to assess some effects from an

international capital market. A perfectly functioning world credit market

ensures equal rates of return on capital in all countries. (Given

differences in production functions across countries, wages on human capital

would not be equated in the absence of labor nobility.) Countries may differ

in terms of productivity parameters, A and B, partly because of the effects

of government policies on these coefficients. But countries may be similar

in their productivity for raising childreu, 9. Investments in physical and

human capital would tend to occur in the places with high values of A and B.

(In this constant-returns model, these forces are not offset by diminishing

marginal producitivty of capital.) In effect, countries with low values of A

and B have a comparative advantage in producing bodies, and would concentrate
                                                                               15




on   this activity. The existence of the international credit market means
that countries     with low values of A and      B   end up with lower values of Ic and   h


than otherwise. Hence wage        rates   per person tend to be even lower than
otherwise in these poor countries.
      Countries may   differ   more in the parameter A (productivity in market
goods)   than   in B (productivity in creating human capital). Then, without an
international    credit market, all countries would have similar rates of return

(determined mainly by the similar values of B), but wage rates per unit of

human capital would be increasing in A.              In this case the introduction of a
world credit market has        little impact   on the results. The more significant
element would be mobility of human capital—people would like to migrate with
their    human capital toward the countries with high values of A.

      I hope to go further with this analysis to distinguish effects on

Rational saving from those on domestic investment. Empirically, as observed

by Feldstein and Horioka (1980), these two variables move closely together.

In effect, national saving equals domestic investment plus noise, where the

noisecorresponds to the current-account balance, which is unrelated (over
samples of 15 to 25 years) to variables that I have examined. With a
well-functioning global        capital market, this behavior is puzzling.




UI.      Trazsitional Dynamics Associated       !.iSJ1   Population   Growth

One   well-known   empirical regularity is that population growth declines with

the level of real per    capita income over a broad range of incomes, both
across    countries and over time for a single country. This property does not
emerge from the steady-state analysis considered above. Becker and Murphy
(1988) introduced two sources of transitional dynamics, which can account for
                                                                       16




this behavior of population growth. (In the model outlined in Part II, the

only transitional dynamics involves the relative amounts of Ic and h. This

element    seems important in recoveries from wars    or   other emergencies, but not
in the pattern of long-ten economic development.)
     Becker and   Murphy's   first element that creates dynamics is the treatment
of human capital as the sum      of   raw labor (which comes with all bodies) and
accumulated    human capital. At high levels of development, the raw component
is unimportant, but at low levels, this component is significant for
investment and    growth.    In particular, the fixed component of human capital
implies that the rate of return on investment in human capital is low
initially,    but increases with the amount of investment over some range.

Therefore,    if the amount of human capital per person is low, the low rate of
return tends to discourage investment, and thereby makes it difficult to
escape    from underdevelopment. Becker and Murphy's second dynamic element is

that the cost of raising children (inversely related to 9) includes goods as

well as time. As wage rates become high, the time cost dominates the goods

cost. Therefore, at higher levels of per capita income it is more likely

that an increase in income will lead to lower population growth (because the

substitution effect from higher value of time is more important relative to

the income effect). At low levels of development, it is likely that an

increase    in income leads (along Malthusian lines) to higher population
growth, which makes it difficult for a country to escape from
underdevelopment.
     The   presence of these dynamic elements in Becker and     Murphy's    model leads
to   two types of steady states. Aside from the steady-state growth

equilibrium (as in the model discussed before), there is a low-level
                                                                    17




underdevelopment trap. If an economy starts with low values of human

capital, it may not pay to invest. Such an economy has high population

growth, low investment, and low (or zero) per capita growth. If an economy

starts with sufficiently high values of huean capital, it tends to grow over

time toward a steady state with constant per capita growth. During the

transition,   expansions of per capita income are accompanied   by decreases in

population growth and increases in each person's human capital. Over some

range, the rate of investment in physical capital, and the rate of per capita

growth also tend to increase.




II.   Fanirical Findinis 1Qr    Cross Sectiot 21 Countries

My empirical analysis uses data across countries from 1960 to     1985 to analyze
the   joint determination of the growth rate of real per capita GDP, the ratio

of physical investment expenditure (private plus public) to GDP. a proxy for

investment in human capital (the secondary school enrollment rate), and the

growth rate of population. Thus far, I find that national saving rates

behave similarly to the rates for domestic investment—the present results

refer only to domestic investment.

      I began with data from Summers and Heston (1988), and supplemented their

cross-country data set with measures of government activity and other

variables from various sources (see the data appendix). These additional

variables, such as the breaicdown of government expenditure into various

components, and spending figures at the level of consolidated general

government, necessitated the    reduction in the sample size from about 120
countries from Summers and Heston    to 72 countries. (In a few cases where the

central government was known to account for the bulk of      government
                                                                            18




spending—primarily African countries—the figures refer to central
government.)      After considerable effort, with the help of David Renelt, I

have assembled a usable data set for the 72 countries. (See the data

appendix for a list of the countries included.) The data include total

government expenditures for overall consumption purposes, for investment

purposes, and     for   education, defense, and    transfer   payments. The data I use

are, in most cases, averages over 15 to 25-year periods for the variables

considered.      For a few countries, the averages cover less than 15 years.
This    averaging over time seems appropriate for a study of long-term effects
on growth and investment.
       The sample excludes the major oil-exporting countries. These countries
tend to have high values of real GD? per capita, but—especially with respect
to    population growth and education—act more like countries will lower values

of income. This behavior can probably be explained by thinking of these

countries as receiving large amounts of income from natural resources, but

otherwise not being advanced in terms of technology, human capital, and so

on.    Hence, high income does not necessarily go along with high real wage

rates   and   correspondingly   high real value of time. I plan eventually to
extend the theory to incorporate these countries into the analysis.
      The variables that I use are the following:


           y(O): Real per capita GDP for 1960 in 1980 prices (using the

           Summers   and   ileston   data, which are   designed   to allow a comparison of
           levels of COP across countries).


           ày: Average annual growth rate of per capita GOP from 1960 to 1985.
                                                         19




i/y:   Mtio of real investment expenditures (private plus public) to

real CUP. Although this variable is available from Summers and

Heston   from 1960   for most countries, I have the breakdown between

public   and private   components typically only since 1970. I measured
the variable i/y as an average from 1970 to 1985.


school: Fraction of relevant age group in the 1970s enrolled in
secondary schools. This variable (from the World Bank) is a proxy
for investment in human      capital.



614: Average annual growth rate of population from 1960 to 1985
(from Summers and      Ileston).




gc/y: Ratio to real GOP of real purchases of goods and services for
                                                              The idea
consumption   purposes by consolidated general government.

here   is to obtain a proxy for the types of government spending that
enter directly into household utility, rather than firms' production
functions.    I began with Summers and Heston's   numbers for government

general   consumption expenditures. These figures include substantial

components for spending on national defense and education, which I

would model more like productive government spending (and which are

more like public investment than public consumption). Thus, I

subtracted the ratios to GOP for expenditures on defense and

education from the Summers-Heston ratios for general government

consumption. (However, unlike the values from Summers and Heston,

the defense and educatioli variables are ratios of nominal spending
                                                             20




to nominal GDP, rather than       real   spending to real GOP.) Summers and
Beston's    numbers are   available    since 1960 for most countries, but I
have the data on defense and      education   mainly since 1970. The
variable gC/y is, in most cases, an average from 1970 to 1985.
(Fewer years are    included    for countries with tissing data on defense
or   education.)



g1/y:     Ratio to real GDP of real investment expenditures by
consolidated general government. I think of public investment as a
proxy for the type of infrastructure activities that influence
private production   in the theoretical model. (It is not inevitable

that public investment corresponds to spending that affects

production, whereas public consumption corresponds to spending that

affects utility. But, in practice, the breakdown of government

spending into categories may work this way.) The variable g1/y is,

in most cases, an average from 1970 to 1985. (Fewer years are
available for some countries.) I used the Summers-Heston deflators

for total investment and GOP      to   adjust the data, which were obtained

as ratios of nominal spending to nominal GDP. That is, I assumed

that the deflator for total investment was appropriate for public

iiivestment.




gdiy:     Government spending   for national defense as   a ratio to CDP.
The data are ratios of nominal spending to nominal GOP, and        are in

most cases averages of values      from 1970 to 1985. Holding fixed a
country's external threat, an increase in gd may mean more national
                                                          21




security and hence, more property rights. Then the effects on
growth and invest•eut are   as   worked out for productive government
spending    in the theory. However, defense outlays are highly

responsive to extent! threats (or to domestic desires for military

adventures), in which case gd may proxy negatively for national

security. Thus, it is difficult to predict the relation of defense

spending to growth and investment.



ge/y: Government expenditures for education as a ratio to GD?. The

values are ratios of nominal spending to nominal GD?, and are, in

most cases, avenges of figures from 1970 to 1985.       I anticipate

that this variable would work similarly to the public investment

variable.




g5/y:   Government transfers for social insurance and welfare as a
ratio   to GDP. The variable is, in most cases, an average of values
1 roIl 1970 to 1985. At present, I have data on this variable for

only 66 of the 72 countries that are in the main sample.       I


anticipate that this variable would work similarly to (/ythat is,

associate with lower rates of per capita growth and investment.



pol. rights: Ordinal index, running from 1 to 7, of political

rights from Gastil (1987). (This type of variable has been used in

previous studies of economic growth by Kormendi and Meguire, 1985,

and Scully, 1988.) Figures are averages of data from 1973 to 1985,

with higher values signifying fewer rights. My intention is to use
                                                                  22




this variable as a proxy for property rights; thus, a higher value
of the index should be associated with lower rates of investment and
growth. (One shortcoming of this variable is that, aside from its

subjective nature, it pertains to political rights, rather than to

economic rights, per se. Although countries like Chile, Korea, and

Singapore are exceptions, my         conjecture    is that economic and

political rights are strongly positively correlated across

countries.)



Soc: Dummy variable        taking the value 1 for economic system
primarily    socialistic, and 0 otherwise. The underlying data are

from Gastil (1987).



Mixed: Dummy variable        taking the value 1 for economic system mixed
between    free   enterprise and    socialism,    and 0   otherwise. These data
are    also from Gastil (1987).       Countries   not classified as either
socialistic       or mixed were   in the category, free enterprise.


War:     Duniny variable equal to 1 for     countries that experienced
violent    war    or revolution   since 1960.     (See the appendix for

sources.) The        expectation is that war      and related   aspects of
political    instability compromise property rights and lead thereby to

less investment and economic growth. Refining the variable to

measure number of years of war or         revolution did not add       to   the
explanatory       value.
                                                                 23




        Africa: Dummy variable equal to I for countries in Africa, and 0

        otherwise.



        La. Amer.: Dummy     variable   equal to 1 for countries in Latin

        America (including Central America and Mexico), and 0 otherwise.



   My general strategy is to consider a syste. of equations in which four

key variables are simultaneously determined: the per capita growth rate, y,

the physical investment ratio, i/y, the anount of investment in human capital

(proxied by the variable school), and population growth, AN.     I treat the

measures of government expenditures and the other variables mentioned above

as explanatory variables. The endogeneity of these variables affects the

interpretation of the results. Some of these effects—such as the

consequences of government optimization with respect to choices of productive

spending and the response of defense spending to external threats—have

already been mentioned. I will consider here some issues concerning the

endogeneity of initial real per capita GDP, y(O), and the responsiveness       of

government consumption spending (gc/y and g5/y above) to changes      in income.

    I want to think   of cross-country differences in y(O) in terms of the
transitional   changes in the level of income as an economy moves from a

starting point of low income toward a position of steady-state per capita

growth. Then, in accordance with Becker and Murphy's (1988) analysis,       the

prediction is that higher y(O) goes along with lower population growth and a

greater share of national product devoted to investment in human capital. As

y(O) rises, the extent of these responses diminishes, and eventually vanishes

when the economy reaches the steady-state growth position. There are also
                                                                       24




weaker effects on per capita growth and the physical investment ratio—hut,

over some range, the effect of y(O) on these variables would also be

positive. For countries where income levels are too low to escape the trap

of underdevelopment, the predictions are reversed. That is, in this range,

population growth would rise with       y(O),   whIle human capital investment and

the other variables would decline.

      One   problem is that y(O) may   be   influenced by temporary measuremient error
or   by temporary business fluctuations. These factors tend to generate a

negative association between y(O) and subsequent rates of growth per capita.

For growth rates averaged over 25 years, the business-cycle effect would tend

to be minor. However, measurement error for ClIP can be extreme for the

low-income countries. To assess this effect, I looked at an interaction

between y(O) and the quality of the data (as reported subjectively by Summers

and Heston). The results suggested no effect from data quality, which may

indicate that this type of measurement error is not important.

     A different effect is that y(O) would be positively correlated with per

capita growth in the past. To the extent that the factors that create growth

are persisting (and are not separately held constant), this relation tends to

generate a positive association of y(O) to per capita growth and the

investment variables. At this point I do not see how to gauge the magnitude

of this effect.

      I mentioned before that the ratios of various components of government

spending to CDP could be related to the level of income, and therefore to the

per capita growth rate, .      If   the response is positive (negative), this

element generates a positive (negative) correlation between the expenditure

ratio and the growth rate.
                                                                       25




   Table     1 shows Wagner's Law type regressions for various categories of

govern.ent spending. The table shows the regression coefficient on log[y(0)]

(where y(O) is per capita GD? in 1960) for the ratio of each type of spending

to GOP (averaged typically from 1970 to 1985). The results show that in two

areas—education      and   transfers for social insurance and welfare—the ratio of

spending   to   GD? tends to rise with the level of per capita income.

quantitatively,     the effect is particularly important for transfers, g5/y,
where an increase in y(0) by 10% corresponds to a rise by 1/2 percentage
point in the spending ratio. In the case of government general consumption
(exclusive of defense and       education),   the spending ratio tends to decline
with   the level of income. In two other areas—public investment and

defense—the spending ratios bear no significant relation to the level of

income. Overall, in only one of the five spending categories—transfers for

social   insurance and well are—does the level of income account for a
substantial fraction of the cross-country variation in the spending ratio.
The it2 here is about .6, as compared to values less than .2 in the other
cases.     Therefore, except for the transfers category, the bulk of the

variations across countries in the spending ratios would be predominantly

unrelated to differences in income. Thus, when looking at the relation with

economic growth, the area of transfers is the one case where important

reverse causation (the positive effect of the growth rate on the expenditure

ratio) is likely to be important.

    The main regression results appear in Table 2. Regressions 1, 3, 5, 7

exclude dummies for Africa and Latin America, whereas regressions 2, 4, 6, 8

include these dummies.
                                                                  26




    Consider first the coefficients on the starting (1960) level of income,

y(O),   which appears linearly and also as a squared term. (The quadratic form

is intended as an approximation, which appears satisfactory over the sample,

but could not be extrapolated to very high levels of income.) The linear

terms show a pronounced negative relation with population growth (regressions

7 and 8 of Table 2) and a strong positive relation with schooling

(regressions 5 and 6). (The simple correlation between y(O) and AN is -       .71,
while that between y(O) and schooling is .80—see Figures 3 and 4 for scatter

plots.) The opposing signs on [y(0)]2 indicate that the effects of income on

population growth and schooling attenuate as income rises. At the sample

mean for y(O) of $2200, the coefficients in regression 7 imply that an

additional $1000 of per capita income is associated with a decline in

population growth by .35 percentage points per year. This negative effect of

income on population growth vanishes when income reaches $5600 per capita.

(The highest level of y(O) in the sample is $7380 for the United States.)

For schooling in regression 5, the positive effect of income is gone when

income reaches $6200. (However, the use of the secondary school enrollment

rate as a measure of schooling automatically tends to truncate the sample at

the highest income levels.)

    The results accord with   the   model of Becker and Murphy (1988), in   the
sense   of suggesting an important tradeoff between quality and quantity of
children as the level of per capita income rises. That is, the transition
from low to high per capita income involves lower population growth and more
investment in each person's human capital. I did not, however, find any

indication that the signs of the income coefficients were different for the

countries with the lowest per capita incomes (say less that $500). That is,
                                                                27




I did not see evidence of the particular kind of low-level trap of

underdevelopuent that Becker and Murphy discussed.

    The relation of y(O) to per capita growth, ày, is less pronounced,

although regressions I and 2 of Table 2 show significantly negative effects.

At the sample mean of y(O), an increase in per capita income by $1000 is

associated (according to regression 1) with a decline in the per capita

growth rate of .60 percentage points per year. As discussed by Romer (1989),

this type of inverse relation between the per capita growth rate and the

level of per capita income is present in models that predict convergence of

levels of per capita income across countries (although the inverse relation

is not itself sufficient to guarantee full convergence). The convergence

property tends to arise when there are diminishing returns to capital, but

not in the sort of constant-returns models that I discussed earlier. As

Romer noted, the simple correlation between per capita growth and the

starting level of per capita income is, in fact, close to zero in    the   kind of

cross-country sample that I am using. For my sample, the simple correlation

is .05—see the scatter plot in Figure 5. Therefore, the negative

coefficient on y(O) in regressions I and 2 depends on holding constant the

other variables in the equations.

    For the investment ratio, i/y, the simple correlation with y(O) is

positive (.43—see the scatter plot in Figure 6). The coefficients on y(O)

in regressions 3 and 4 of Table 2 are positive, but insigiiificantly different

from zero.

    I regard the variable g'7y (where g' refers to government general

consumption spending aside from defense and education) as a proxy for

government expenditures that do not directly affect private sector
                                                                                 28




productivity.      It it a robust f lading that gC/y is negatively related to per

capita growth' (regressions 1 and 2 of table 2) and the investment ratio,                     i/y
(regressions    3 and   4).     Figure 7 shows a scatter plot of per capita growth

against   g'/y. In the        sample, gC/y   has a   mean of .107   with   a   standard

deviation   of .054. Regressions 1 and         3 imply    that an increase in gC/y by one
standard    deviation above its mean is       associated with a      decline by 0.8

percentage points in the annual per capita growth rate, and a decrease by 2.2

percentage points in the investment ratio. (Recall that investment includes

private and public components.) The estimated effects of gC/y on schooling

and population growth (regressions 5-8) are insignificantly different from

zero.

      Conceptually, I would expect government transfers to interact with growth
and   investment   in a manner similar to government consumption purchases.               I
added   the variable g5/y to the regressions (where g5              is transfer payments for
social    insurance   and welfare), although this addition necessitated a drop in
the sample size from 72 to 66 countries. The variable g5/y bad a

significantly negative coefficient for population growth, but the other

estimated coefficients were insignificant (and the results for the other

explanatory variables did not change much). For exaaple, for per capita

growth (with continent dummies excluded), the estimated coefficient on g5/y




'Landau (1983) reports analogous results using the Summers-ileston measure of
sovernment consumption. Landau's results hold constant a measure of
investrient in human capital (school enrollment), but not investment In
physical capital. Kormendi and Meguire (1985) report no correlation between
per capita growth and the avera$e growth of a measure of g'/y. However, the
type of growth model developed in part I above (based on constant returns to
a broad concept of capital) suggests that per capita growth would depend on
the   average level of gC/y, rather than on the growth of gc/y.
                                                                  29




was .046, se. = .051, whereas that for the investment ratio was - .33, s.e. =

.19.     It is puzzling that the transfers variables would show up with a

negative coefficient for investmeDt, but a positive point estimate for per

capita growth. My conjecture is that this positive coefficient reflects

reverse causation from growth to the spending ratio, g5/y. Recall from Table

1 that the transfers ratio is, in fact, closely related to the level of

income, so this type of reverse effect is likely to be important here. I

plan to investigate these possibilities further.

       I thought of the public investment ratio, g'/y, as a proxy for government

infrastructure type spending, which affects private sector productivity. The

estimated coefficient of this variable in the growth equation (regressions 1

and 2 of Table 2) is significantly positive. See Figure 8 for a scatter plot

of per capita growth versus gS/y      (Aschauer, 1989, gets analogous results

from the U.S. time series.) Abstracting from the possibility of reverse

causation from growth to the public-investment variable, the results would

indicate that the typical government was operating where the marginal effect

of public investment spending on the per capita growth rate was positive. As

indicated in the theory, this type of result is inconsistent with

public-sector optimization (which dictated the choice of public spending to

maximize the per capita growth rate).

       The estimated coefficients on g'/y are also positive in the equations for

the investment ratio, i/y (regressions 3 and 4 of Table 2). Recall that

investment, i, includes public, as well as private, spending—that is, g' is

a component of i. Therefore, if taken literally, the coefficient of 2.2 in

the regressions for i/y means that an extra unit of public investment induces

about a one-for-one increase in private investment.
                                                                   30




      One problem is that the flow of public investment spending does not

coincide with the flow of services from public capital, which is the concept

that corresponds to the public service input, g, in the theoretical analysis.

If k is the stock of public capital per person, and if this stock grows at

the per capita growth rate ,     the   flow of gross public investment as a ratio

to GNP is given by



           (14)              g'/y =    ( + ii +


where n is the population growth rate and 6g is the depreciation rate for

public capital. Suppose that the flow of public services is proportional to

      and that the quantity of these services as a ratio to GNP is determined

exogenously. Then the variable g'/y, used in the previous regressions, would

vary automatically with the per capita growth rate, 7.       This relation could

explain the positive coefficients on g1/y in regressions 1 and 2 of Table 2,

and the coefficients in excess of unity on g'/y in regressions 3 and 4.

      Table 3 shows regressions where k/y replaces g'/y. Since data on public

capital stocks are unavailable for most countries, I estimated k/y from

division of g'/y by the term, y*n+b, with 5g set (as a rough approximation)

to equal 0.1. The coefficient on k/y is positive (regression 1 of Table 3),

but   no longer significantly different from zero. On the other hand, the
presence of 7 in the denominator of the calculated value of k/ means that
the estimated coefficient could have a serious downward bias if g'/y is not
measured very accurately (as is doubtless the case for many countries). I
plan to think further about how    to assess the effect of public investment on

growth and   total investment.
                                                                        31




       I    looked also at government spending for education, gC/y• My expectation

was that this investment in human capital would operate in a manner similar

to other types of public investment. The enlisted coefficients on gC/y turn

out to be insignificant for per capita growth and the investment ratio. If

added to regressions 1 and 3 of Table 2, the estimated coefficients are .12,

se. = .56 for Ay, and .31, s.e. = 1.53           for i/y.

       The defense spending variable, g'/y, is insignificant In the equations

for growth and investment (regressions 1-4 of Table 2). There is some

indication of a negative effect on schooling (regression 5 and 6) and a

positive effect on population growth (regressions 7 and 8).

       The variable war enters negatively for growth and investment (regressions

1-4), as would be expected if the variable proxies for political instability.

This       variable   is   insignificant for schooling or population growth
(regressions 5-8).
       The political rights variable indicates that fewer rights associate with
lower per capita growth (regression 1 of Table 2), lower investment in

physical and human capital (regressions 3 and 5), and higher population

growth (regression 7). These effects are attenuated with the inclusion of

dummies for Africa and Latin America (regressions 2, 4, 6, and 8). (That is,

the African and Latin American countries tend to have fewer political rights,

although       the data prefer the continent dummies to the particular measure of
these rights.)
    There is some indication that socialistic countries have lower per capita
growth rates, although the small number of these countries in the sample

malces the results unreliable. Countries with mixed economic systems have
                                                                      32




slightly higher per capita growth than the free enterprise economies, but the
difference is not statistically significant.
      Even with the other explanatory variables held fixed, the dummy for
Africa is significantly negative for per capita growth, investment, and
schooling.     The dummy for Latin America is significantly negative for growth
and   schooling,   and significantly   positive for population growth. (The last
effect   does not represent the influence of the Catholic religion. A dummy

variable for Cathol.ism as the majority religion is insignificant in the

equations for population growth or the other variables.) I think that the

continent dummies are proving for aspects of political instability

(especially in Latin America) and governmental restrictions on trade

(especially in Africa), which are not captured well by the other variables.

Better measures of political instability and governmental restrictions, which

I am presently constructing, may make the continent dummies unnecessary—that

is, these other variables may explain why it matters for growth, etc. that a

country is located in Africa or Latin America.

      Table 4 shows correlation matrices for the residuals from the equations

estimated in Table 2. One matrix applies to the regressions that omit the

continent    dummies, and   the other to the regressions that include these

dummies. Although the magnitude of the correlations tends to be weaker in

the latter case, the general pattern of results is similar.

      The results show that the residual for per capita growth is positively

related to that for physical investment (correlation in the equations without

continent dummies of .52) and schooling (.41), and negatively related to the

residual for population growth (-      .35).   These results accord with the theory

discussed before where the determination of per capita growth is directly
                                                                     33




connected to the determination of investment rates. The other striking

finding   is the negative relation between   the   residuals for schooling and
population growth   (correlation = - .50).   This result again suggests the

importance of   the tradeoff between the quality and    qnantity of children.

    Another way to look at the interaction among the dependent variables         is

to consider regressions where the other dependent variables appear as
regressors. With per capita growth as the dependent variable, regressions 9
and 10 of Table 2 show that the estiaated coefficient on the investment

ratio, i/y, is significantly positive,     while that on population growth is

significantly negative. (See Figure 9 and 10       for scatter plots of per capita
growth   against i/y and population growth.) One interesting finding from the

regressions is that the coefficient on the public investment ratio, g1/y, is

insignificant (with negative point estimates) when the total investment

ratio, i/y, is included as a regressor. This result suggests a close linkage

between growth and investment, but not a special role for the public

component of investment. In any event, it would be inappropriate to argue

that regressions 9 and 10 isolate a positive effect from an exogenous

increase in the investment rate (or a negative effect from an exogenous

increase in population growth) on per capita growth. At this point, one can

just as veil tell stories about causation in opposing directions—for

example, Modigliani (1970) argues that the positive relation between per

capita growth and   the   saving rate reflects the effect of growth on an

economy's aggregate propensity to save.

    Regressions 11 and 12 of Table 2 use population growth as the dependent

variable. The coefficients on per capita growth are       significantly   negative,

but the most striking results are the significantly negative coefficients on
                                                                   34




the schooling variable. The scatter plot in Figure 11 shows the strong
negative correlation between population growth and   school   enrollment.


V.   Concludin   observations
I regard the empirical findings as preliminary, but suggestive. Some aspects
of government services (and, implicitly, of the taxes that finance these
services) affect growth and investment as predicted by the theoretical
models.   Notably, public consumption spending is systematically inversely

related to growth and investment Public investment tends to be positively

correlated with growth and private investment, and these results are

interpretable within the models. There is also an indication that property

rights affect growth and investment in ways that the theories predict.

     The results bring out a strong negative interaction between population

growth and investment in human capital (that is, the tradeoff between the

quantity and quality of children). This relation appears partly as responses

to differences in the initial level of income, and partly from the residual

correlation between population growth and schooling.

     I am planning a good deal of additional research on theories of economic

growth and of empirical analysis related to these theories. Many other

researchers have recently become interested (once again) in economic growth,

and a lot of promising work is presently under way.     I am optimistic that

this research will result in greater understanding about the factors that

 influence long-term economic growth, and especially about the role of

government in this process.
                                                                       35




                                        References



Aschauer, D.A.,"Is       Public   Expenditure Productive?," forthcoming, Jotrnal of

    Ioselary Ecosomics, 1989.

Barro, R.J., "Government Spendiag in a Simple Model of Endogenous Growth,"

    unpublished, Harvard University, June 1988.

              and G.S. Becker, "Fertility Choice in a Model of Economic

    Growth," forthcoming, Ecoaome1rica, 1989.

Becker, G.S. and R.J. Barro, "A Reformulation of the Economic Theory of

    Fertility," Qarterlp Journal of Economics, 103, February 1988, 1-25.

              and K.M. Murphy, "Economic Growth, Human Capital and Population

    Growth," unpublished, University of Chicago, June 1988.

Cass, D., "Optimum Growth in an Aggregative Model of Capital Accumulation,"

    Revice, of   Economic Slrsdies, 32, July 1965, 233-240.
Feldstein, M.S. and C. Korioka, "Domestic Saving and International Capital

    Flows, " Eeouomic     Jonaal, 90,    June 1980, 314-329.

Gastil, ft.D., Freedom     is   the World, Greenwood Press, Westport, CT, 1987.

Koopmans, T.C.,"On the Concept of Optimal Economic Growth," in The

    Econometric    Approach     to Development Planing, North   Holland, Amsterda,

    1965.

Kormendi, R.C. and P.G. Meguire, "Macroeconomic Determinants of Growth:

    Cross-Country Evidence," Joirsal       of Ionetary Ecoomics, 16,   September

    1985, 141- 164.

Landau,   D., "Government Expenditure and     Economic Growth: a Cross-Country

    Study,"   Southern   Economic Journal, 49, January 1983, 783-792.
                                                                 36




Lucas, RE., "On the Mechanics of Development P1anning, Jo8flal of Ioiietarv

    Economics,   22, July 1988, 3-42.
Modigliani, F., "The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving and Intercountry

    Differences in the Saving Ratio," in W.A. Eltis, et.al., ed., Isdsctio,,

    Crowth snd Trade, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1970.

Itebelo, S., "Long Run Policy Analysis and Long Run Growth," unpublished,

    University of Rochester, November 1987-

Romer, P.M., "Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth," Journal of     Politici
    Economy, 94, October 1986, 1002-1037.

             "Capital Accumulation in the Theory of Long-Run Growth,"

    in R.J. Barro, ed., loden Bisiizess Cycle Theory, Harvard University

    Press, Cambridge MA, 1989.

Scully, LW., "The Institutional Framework and Economic Development," Journal

    of Political Economy, 96, June 1988, 652-662.

Solow, R.M.,"A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth," Qtgarterly

    )oir,,al of Economics, 70, February 1956, 65-94.

Summers, It. and A. ileston, "A New Set of International Comparisons of Real

    Product and Price Levels. Estimates for 130 Countries, 1950-1985," The

    Review of Income and Wealth, 34, March 1988, 1-25.

Tamura, ft., "Fertility, Human Capital and the 'Wealth of Nations',"

    unpublished, University of Chicago, June 1988.
                                        Table 1
          terressions j Government Soendint Ratios             jJ Level Qj Income


 Category        No. Ohs.      Constant           Log[y(0)]          it2
of Spending
  [mean]

                    74           .115                - .027         .19       .050
  gC/y
 [.105]                         (.006)               (.006)

 g'/y               73           .032                  .002         .01       .016
 [.033]                         (.002)                (.002)

                    74           .031                  .001         .00       .040
                                (.005)                (.005)


  gC/y              75           .040                  .007         .15       .014
 [.042]                         (.002)                (.002)


  g5/y              68           .038                  .047         .58       .038
 [.057]                         (.005)                (.005)




Note: The table shows a regression of each expenditure ratio (calculated as
an average fran 1970 to 1985) on the logarithm of y(O), which is the 1960
value of real per capita GOP. Standard       errors   are shown in parentheses and u
is the standard error of estimate. (        refers    to government general
consumption spending (excluding defense and education), g' to public
investment1 gd to defense spending, ge to educational expenditures, and g5           to
transfers for social insurance and welfare.
                      Table 2: Basic Rnressions fg 72 Countries
                    (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)


Dep. Var.             Ay    [.024]                  i/y [.21]                school [.41]

constant            .059            .063          .203         .215         .246         .253
                (.010)          (.009)        (.038)       (.038)       (.104)       (.099)

                -   .0084      - .0107            .018         .009         .165         .181
 (0)
                (.0041)         (.0043)       (.016)       (.018)       (.043)       (.047)


                    .0005           .0007     -   .0026    -   .0017    -   .0133    -   .0165
[y(0)]2
                (.0006)         (.0006)       (.0022)      (.0024)       (.0059)     (.0064)

 C/y            -.154           -.132         -.41         -.35         -.27         -.12
¶.1o8]          (.034)          (.032)        (.13)        (.13)         (.37)       (.35)


                    .262            .255      2.22         2.21         1.55         1.31
?.03]           (.099)          (.091)        (.39)        (.38)        (1.06)       (.99)


gd/y                .005        -.004             .17          .16      -   .70     -1.00
                (.046)          (.044)        (.18)        (.18)         (.49)       (.48)

war             - .0098         -   .0122     -   .037     -   .045         .015         .013
[.35]           (.0037)         (.0036)       (.014)       (.015)        (.040)      (.039)

poi. rights     -.0038          -.0020        -.0112       -.0065       -.041        -   .025
J3.2]               (.0013)     (.0013)       (.0050)      (.0052)       (.014)      (.014)

soc             -    .0095      -   .0141         .047         .033         .150         .136
[.04]               (.0088)     (.0082)           (.034)   (.034)        (.093)      (.089)

mixed                -0061          .0046          .006         .002        .071         .056
[.47]               (.0034)     (.0031)           (.013)   (.013)        (.036)      (.034)

africa               --         - .0178            --      - .049            --      - .109
[.22)                           (.0053)                        (.022)                (.057)

lat. amer.           --         - .0117            --      - .027            --      - .145
[.25]                           (.0041)                        (.017)                    (.044)


                     .45             .56           .62          .66         .75           .79

                     .0131           .0119         .051         .049        .139          .129

Note:     Standard errors      of coefficients shown in parentheses, means of
variables shown in brackets. c               is   the standard error of estimate. See text
for definitions of variables.
                                        Table 2... continued
                    (7)          (8)            (9)             (10)         (11)             (12)
Dep. Var.             A1 [.0183                        ày                            AN

constant            .0246        .0254          .045            .052         .0308            .0316
                (.0041)      (.0039)        (.012)          (.012)       (.0046)          (.0049)
                - .0062      -   .0080      - .0166         - .0183      - .0048          - .0068
y(O)
                (.0017)      (.0019)        (.0037)         (.0044)      (.0018)          (.0021)

[y(0)32             .00055       .00083         .00135          .00157       .00045           .00071
                (.00023)     (.00025) (.00047) (.00055)                  (.00022) (.00025)
                    .008                    -   .096        - .090       - .005           - .004
gC/y                             .005
                (.015)       (.014)         (.030)          (.029)       (.014)           (.014)

g'/y            -.068        -.054          -.068           -.026        -.065            -.057
                (.042)       (.039)         (.100)          (.099)       (.044)           (.044)

gd/y                .062         .078           .032            .035         .046             .058
                (.019)       (.019)         (.040)          (.043)       (.017)           (.018)
war             -.0002       -.0009         -.0057          -.0081       -.0002           -.0011
                (.0016)      (.0016)        (.0032)         (.0033)      (.0015)          (.0016)
poi.   rights       .0012        .0008      - .0011         - .0006          .0003            .0003
                (.0005)      (.0005)        (.0011)         (.0011)      (.0005)          (.0005)
Soc             -   .0084    -
                                 .0089      -   .0224       -   .0243    -   .0081        -   .0094
                (.0037)      (.0036)        (.0074)         (.0074)      (.0034)          (.0034)

mixed           -   .0033    -
                                 .0029          .0023           .0020    -   .0015        -   .0015
                (.0014)      (.0014)        (.0029)         (.0028)      (.0013)          (.0013)

africa                           .0013          --          - .0106          --           - .0013
                             (.0023)                        (.0048)                       (.0022)

lat. amer.                    .0056             --          - .0039                           .0027
                             (.0018)                        (.0039)                       (.0017)
ày
                                                                --       - .120           -   .120
                                                                         (.056)           (.058)

i/y                                             .120            .106         .026             .024
                                            (.027)          (.027)       (.014)           (.014)

school                            --            .015            .011     -   .0176        -   .0152
                                             (.012)         (.012)       (.0047)          (.0048)

AN                                          - .59           - .59
                                             (.28)          (.28)


                    .70          .74            .67             .69          .79              .81
a                   .0055        .0052          .0104           .0102        .0047            .0046
                                       Table

Refressions IQL       Conntries. Usinz Estimate                f   Public          Capital Stock



                          (1)             (2)        (3)                (4)


    Dep. Var.                             i/y       school                  AN

    constant              .064            .235          .270                .0238
                      (.010)          (.039)        (.102)          (.0040)

                      -       .0082       .011          .161        -       .0059
    y(O)
                      (.0043)         (.017)        (.045)          (.0018)

                              .0005   -
                                          .0022     - .0132                 .00053
    [y(O)12
                      (.0006)         (.0023)       (.0060)         (.00024)

                      - .154          -   .45       - .29                   .010
    gC/y
                      (.036)          (.14)         (.37)           (.015)

                              .020        .275       .17            - .0096
     [.23]                (.015)       (.059)       (.15)           (.0060)

                              .017        .24       - .65                .060
    gd/y
                          (.047)       (.19)        (.49)               (.019)
    war               - .0104         - .043            .011                .0000
                          (.0039)         (.015)    (.040)              (.0016)

    poi.     rights
                          -   .0040   -    .0129    -   .042             .0013
                          (.0013)         (.0053)   (.014)              (.0005)

     soc                  -   .0104        .028         .139            -   .0077
                          (.0092)         (.037)    (.095)              (.0038)

     mixed                    .0053        .004         .068            -   .0033
                          (.0035)         (.014)     (.036)             (.0014)


     a2                       .40          .57          .75                 .70

     c                        .0136        .054          .140               .0055
                      Correlation
                                    Table 4

                                    latrix   f   Residuals


                       Ay           i/y       school         AN

                                    .52        .41       -
                                                             .35
                                [.46]         [.31]     [-   .29]

        i/y                                    .28       -   .04
                                              [.21]      [.03]


        school                                           -
                                                             .50
                                                        [-   .42)



Note: The entries give the correlation of the residuals from regressions
with the indicated dependent variables. The upper figure in each cell refers
to regressions 1, 3, 5 and 7 from Table 2. The lower namber (in brackets)
refers to regressions 2, 4, 6 and 8, which include dummies for Africa and
Latin America.
                                Data ADnendix
                  List of 72 Countries Included in Main Sasnie

Botswana
Cameroon
Egypt
Ghana
Kenya
Liberia
Mal awl
Mauritius
Morocco
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Swaziland
Tunisia
Uganda (X)
Zaire
Zambia
Burma
India
Israel
Japan (X)
Jordan
Korea (South)
Malaysia
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Austria
Belgium
Cyprus
 Denmark
 Finland
 France
 Germany (West)
 Greece
 Iceland
 Ireland
 Italy
 Luxembourg
 Malta
 Netherlands
 Norway
 Spain
 Sweden
 Switzerland
 Turkey (X)
 United Kingdom
 Barbados
Canada
Costa Rica
Oo.inicu Republic
El Salvador
Guatemala
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
United States
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia (X)
Ecuador (X)
Guyana
Paraguay (X)
Peru
Uruguay
Australia
Fiji
New Zealand
Papua New Guinea


(X)    indicates missing data on transfers for social insurance and welfare.
                                    Sources L Q&a



      I   plan to prepare a detailed data appendix, giving detailed sources and

the   values of variables, especially on the various components of government

expenditures. Bowever, at this point, additional data are                still being
assembled.

      Aside   from Summers and Heston (1988), the sources for data on government
expenditures were International Monetary          Fund,    Qoversmest   IiIJance Statistics

Yearbook,     1987, 1983, 1978, and   Iuter,atioiizl      fisascial Statistics,

Stppleme.t     ou Coverumeftt !isallce, 1986; OECD, Natio,al Acco,nts, various

years;     United Nations, rearbook of Natioial Accents Statistics, various

years; World Bank, World Tables, 1st and 2nd editions; and u'ESCO, Yearbook,

1987. The series on secondary school enrollment rates was from World Bank,

Yorid Tables.      The data on war and       revolution   were from R.E. Dupuy and     T.N.

Dupuy, Eicyclopedia     of   lilitarp History, Harper       and Row, New York, 1986; CD.

Kaye, TEA. Grant, and     E.J.   Emond, Major Armed Cosflict: a Compendism of

Isterstate and J'st rast ate Conflit, 1720 to 1985, Orbita Consultants, Ltd.,

Ottawa, 1985; and M. Small and        J.D.   Singer, Resort to Ar,u:       Interiational
and Civil Wars, 1816-1980, Sage Publications, Beverly Hills, 1982.
Growth       0.03
I.ts   -

CT)


             0.02


             0.01


             0.00


           —0.01



           —0.02



           —0.03
                                .08     .1.6   .24    .32      .40       .4&    .36   .64      .72   .80    .88     .96
                                                                                                     £xpcaditisr. Sbart (T)
                                                                     Fj.psrel
                                               The Crouth Rate and     tnt Sir, of Govertttt
                                                                                                 'tins area a 1.     U —   .25.
           Non;   The    cone    hon    the growth rate.   •   fro. .quatio (6). The parneter
                    -.          •sja_         Th.cp values         that the maxiaa valu, of y is .02.
                                        lit                 I ,1v
Saflng    0.50
Rat.
C.)

          D.25


          0.00


         —025


         —0.50


         —0.75


         —1.OD




                          .08    .3.6       .24.      .32    .40         .45   .56    .64     .72    .80   .88      .96
                                                                                                     Expenditurt Share  (1)
                                                            Fipure   2
                                        The Saving Tate and the      Si;e of Coveroent
                 The   cur., shows Lb. savbg       rat.. s, frot   equatiot          ?arne'ter values are indicated it
         )WTE:                                                                 ().
                 Figure 1.
0.04




0.03




0.02




0.01




0.00
                                                              )r(O)
   0.0                2.5              5.0              7.5
       Figure 3 Population Growth versus the irdtiai Level
              of Per Capita GDP for 72 countries
         1.25



         1.00




         0.75

school

         0.50



         0.25



         0.00                                                      3r(O)
            0.0              2.5             5.0             7.5
         Figure 4 The Secondary School Enrollment Rate (sohopi) versus
             the Starting Level of Per Capita GDP for 72 Countries
 0.10




 0.05                   +
                         4       4..
                                                 4
            • • 4
                                             4
                                         4                      4
            $•
                                                       —            —
               •4
                                                            4.          4
                    .                                                       +
                •       4
            4       4        4    •.
                        4
           ••
 0.00•




—0.05                                                       I
     0.0                               2.5                 5.0                  7.5
        Figure          5        Per Capita Growth versus the initial Level
                                   of Per Capita GDP for 72 Countries
      0.4




      0.3




i/y   0.2




      0.1




      0.0                                                                     1(0)
         0.0                    2.5                5.0                  7.5
            Figure   6    the Investment Ratio (i/y) versus the
               Initial   Level of Per Capita GD?   for   72 Countries
 0.10




 0.05
                       *4




 0.00
                                             +

                             +    4




—0.05              I
    0.00         0.05                 0.15               0.25
  Figure   7   Per Capita Growth versus g°/y for 72 Countries
0.10




0.05




0.00




   0.000          0.025        0.050         0.075            0.100 g1/y
 Figure   8   Per Capita Growth versus   g'/y for   72   Countries
0.075




 0.050




 0.025




 0.000




—0.025
                                                         0.4
        Figure 9   Per Capita Growth versus the Investment
                   Ratio (j/v'i for 72 Countries
0.075



                           4

0.050
                                                           4

                       t
                                       4           4




 0.025
                                   •   4
                                                           ••
                                   •                            +
                                               •       4
                               4
                                                                    +
 0.000
                                                                4

                                                           4



—0.025.                    I               I
                                                                        AN
     0.00              0.01         0.02        0.03        0.04
        Figure   10   Per Capita Growth versus Population Growth
                               for 72 Countries
0.04




0.03




0.02




0.01




0.00                                                             school

 Figure    11    Population Growth versus the Secondary
       Sehoafr   EnroIImnt Ptp (cnhnnl'l fnr   72   Cniintrjpq
