NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INWARD VERSUS OUTWARD GROWTH ORIENTATION

IN THE PRESENCE OF COUNTRY RISK

Joshua Aizenman

Working Paper No. 2868

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1989

The research reported here is part of NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author

those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

not

HEER Working Paper *2868
February 1989

INWARD VERSUS OUTWARD OROWO-I ORIENTATION IN THE PRESENCE OF COUNTRY RISK

ALSCT

The purpose of this paper is to model the role of trade dependency in determining the
access of a developing economy to the international credit market, and its desirable
growth strategy. With full integration of capital markets the choice with respect to the
inwardness of a technology is irrelevant: investment will be channeled to the more

productive sectors, independently of their trade inwardness, With limited capital
market integration a given investment will generate two effects. The first is the
standard, direct productivity effect that is associated with the change in future output.

The second is the trade dependency externality, generated by the change in future
bargaining outcomes due to the change in the trade dependency of the nation. With
partial integration, investment that increases trade dependency is desirable. If the

credit markets are disjoint due to partial defaults, higher trade dependency is
disadvantageous. Thus, higher trade dependency generates a positive externality with
partial integration of capital markets, and a negative externality with disjoint credit

markets. We show that credit market integration is determined by the size of the
indebtedness relative to the trade dependency, as reflected by the repayment burden
that is supported by the bargaining outcome. The repayment bargaining outcome is
determined by the sectoral composition of the economy and by the effective size of the
developing and the developed economies.
Joshua Aizeruian
Economics Department
The Hebrew University
91905, Jerusalem
I SRAEL

-2The development literature of the early sixties evolved around the two—gap
models. The two-gap approach

emphasized the availability of foreign exchange and

prospects of
external credit as relevant factors in restricting the long run growth
developed nations. These considerations are relevant in determining the attractiveness

of inward versus outward growth strategies or alternatively regarding the merits of
exports promotion versus imports substituting growth strategies.1 The expansionary
experience of the late sixties and early seventies, coupled with the access of some
developing countries to the credit market in the seventies, reduced the interest in these

models. In the early eighties we have experienced the collapse of the credit market
facing most developing nations, and the partial default of several major borrowers.
These events have renewed the interest in the role of credit constraints in determining
investment and growth prospects of the developing nations.

A limitation of the early discussion is the exogenous nature of the credit
constraint facing developing nations. It overlooked the links between the sectoral
composition of domestic supply and access to the international credit market. The
purpose of this paper is to model this gap, focusing on the role of the trade dependency

(or openness) of the economy in determining access to the international credit market

and the desirable growth strategy. While the trade dependency of a nation is
exogenously given in the short run, it is endogenously determined in the long run by
the sectoral composition of investment. The purpose of this paper is to model the linkage
between the investment policies of a country, the availability of external credit, and
growth.

1.

For the two—gap approach see Chenery and Bruno (1962); for a critical exposition

see Findlay (1973).

—3-

We consider a two-period, two blocs of nations, asymmetric world. One bloc of
nations (developing) is characterized by the relative scarcity of capital and savings, and

by a greater trade dependency relative to the second bloc of nations (developed).
Consequently, with free mobility of capital and a competitive equilibrium, the
developing nations will borrow in the first period, to finance investment. We use the
competitive equilibrium as a benchmark case for an analysis of the more general
equilibrium, where the mobility of capital is endogenously determined due to the
presence of country risk? This risk is reflected in the presumption that the effective
collateral guaranteeing future repayment of external debt is the trade dependency of a

nation. We assume that a partial default will trigger bargaining over the effective
repayment schedule. The threat associated with such bargaining is that in the absence

of agreement autarky will prevail. Thus, the bargaining is determined by the trade
dependency, as measured by the magnitude of the gains from trade. We apply the fixed

threat Nash bargaining framework to derive the bargaining outcome, and we study the
nature of the resultant intertemporal rational expectations equilibrium.

If we start with low initial debt, our developed economy is characterized by
resource transfers to the developing nations in the first period, and by resource
transfers from them in the second period, This is a mutually beneficial trade. The
aggregate gains from trade have two dimensions. The first is the temporal gain from
trade, generated by the access of the developing nations to foreign inputs. The second is

the intertemporal gain from trade, generated by the access of the developing nations to

2.

For an analysis of country risk see Harberger (1976), Kharas (1981), Eaton and

Gersovitz (1981), Sachs (1984), Kletzer (1984), Dornbusch (1984), Krugman (1985),
Smith and Cuddington (1985), Edwards (1985), Folkerst-Landau (1985), Diwan and
Donnenleld (1.986), Dooley (1986), Aizenman (1986), Bulow and Rogoff (1987), Helpman
(1987), Cole and English (1987), Krugman (1987), Alesina and Tabellini (1987), Aizenman

and Borensztein (1988), Froot (1988), Calvo (1988) and Claessens and Diwan (1988).

-4the savings of the developed nations. These savings are financing part of the first period

investment in the developing nations. The distribution of the gains from trade is
dictated by the price mechanism in the competitive equilibrium, and by the relative
bargaining power in the bargaining regime.

The analysis demonstrates that the choice of inward versus outward growth
strategies is determined by the degree of access to the international credit market. We

define three degrees of credit market integration: full integration, partial integration,
and disjoint credit markets due to partial defaults. Full integration of credit markets
occurs when agents anticipate that the borrower will pay in full, and that no borrowers
will default. Partial integration of credit markets occurs when the borrower is not in
partial default in the present, but agents anticipate that he will partially default in the
future. Disjoint credit markets occur when the borrower is already in partial default,
and agents anticipate him to remain so in the foreseeable future.

To facilitate the discussion we contrast three types of regimes, corresponding to
the above described three types of credit markets. The first is the standard competitive
world, with full integration of the international credit market. The second one is a world

where the initial indebtedness is small enough in the first period, but large enough in

the second. Consequently, in the second period the economy is operating in the
bargaining regime, and rational agents allocate credit in the first period, while
discounting the results of the second period bargaining outcome. The third regime
describes an economy that starts with a substantial initial debt, such that bargaining
determines the repayment in all periods. We show that the credit market integration is

determined by the size of the indebtedness relative to the trade dependency, as
reflected by the repayment burden that is supported by the bargaining outcome, The
bargaining outcome is determined by the sectoral composition of the economy and by

the effective size of the two economies. Greater relative size of the more trade
dependent sector, and higher growth rates increase the repayment supported by the
bargaining outcome.

-5We refer to the choice of inward (outward) growth strategy as a choice to invest

in the sector that reduces (increases) the trade dependency of a nation. We show that
the choice of the growth strategy is determined by the nature of the credit market
regime in which the economy operates. With full integration of capital markets, the
choice as to the inwardness of a technology is irrelevant: investment will be channeled
to the more productive sectors independently of their trade inwardness. With limited

capital market integration, the choice among the various sectors is more involved. A
given investment will generate two effects: The first is the standard, direct productivity
effect associated with the change in future output The second is the trade dependency
externality generated by the change in future bargaining outcome due to the change in
the trade dependency of the nation, We refer to this effect as an externality, because
the economic agent ignores it in a competitive equilibrium. Thus, optimality calls for a
set of optimal taxes that will internalize these effects into the price system.

The desirability of a higher trade dependency is determined by the integration of
capital markets. With partial integration, investment that increases trade dependency
is desirable: it increases the credit available to the economy because it increases the
future repayment supported by the bargaining outcome. If the credit markets are
disjoint due to partial defaults, higher trade dependency is disadvantageous: it increases

the repayment on past debt without the beneficial effect of higher contemporaneous

credit. Thus, higher trade dependency generates a positive externality with partial
integration of capital markets, and a negative externality with disjoint credit markets.

In Section 1 we review the building blocks of the model by characterizing
preferences, production level and the intertemporal budget constraints. We characterize

the equilibrium in several steps: In Section 2 we study the Pareto allocations that yield

an exogenously given real transfer target; we review the equilibrium with the help of
an Edgeworth box. In Section 3 we analyze the competitive global equilibrium in the
absence of defaults. Next, in Section 4, we characterize the equilibrium in the presence
of endogenous partial defaults, when repayment is determined by bargaining. 1± Section

-65 we integrate the various steps to characterize the equilibrium with limited capital
market integration, and contrast it to the competitive regime. Section 6 closes the paper
with concluding remarks.
1. THE MODEL

We describe the model by reviewing the preferences, the production and the budget
constraints3.
ii. PREFERENCFS AND PRODUCTiON

The preferences are given by:

(1) U.C1i-pC2 ;

u*cC;+psc;

where C (Ct) is the consumption at time t of the developed (developing) nations.

The final good is produced using two traded inputs (the domestic and the foreign
input) and capital. The final good.. can be either consumed or invested domestically in

period one to increase future productive capacity. Productive capital is location and
sector specific. International trade occurs only at the input level, and the final good is
non-traded. A production process s of the final good is defined by the following C.E.S.
function:
(2)

4(X,Y;K) • h((X)5

+

(y)r (l(€*0;

0c

I and

I

3.

The model applied throughout the paper extends Aizenman (1988), which focused
en the role of conditionality in an environment where we start with partial default due

large debt overhang. The present paper allows for various levels of initial
indebtedness, focusing on the dependency of the desirable investment in trade
dependency and growth strategy on the initial indebtedness and on anticipations
Po a.

regarding future growth.

-7where Z is the final good, X and V are the developed and developing countries
intermediate products, and lQ is the capital stock. Note that the elasticity of
substitution between the intermediate products is given by 11(1-c). The term h is a
technological coefficient.

We assume that the developing countries are more trade dependent than the

developed nations, and that they face a choice regarding their trade dependency.
Henceforth we will refer to the sector producing 7€ as sector c. One way of
characterizing this situation is by assuming that the developing countries have access
8; where I < 8 < 1 ¶ The
to two technologies with different c, denoted by c •
discussion is greatly simplified by assuming that the developed nations have access to a

production technology that allows perfect substitutability between the various
intermediate products, with c • 1.. We normalize productivity such that the
productivity coefficient for the developing country is unity (hence hei 1). To focus on
the role of substitution flexibility in determining the trade dependency, we assume that
all technologies share the same capital intensity (thus all have the same
1.2 THE BUDGET CONSTRAINTS

We assume a given endowment of traded inputs, and units are normalized such that
the supply of intermediate products is equal to one in both blocks of nations in the first
period. Thus.

4.

The supply side is using a framework related to Ethier (1982). In Ethiers model

the gains from trade stem from 'international" returns to scale. These scale economics

are the result of an increase division of labor (and other inputs) due to the rise in thc
market size.

-8X1s1 X2=tri
where

Yji, Y2a1+1

and

X and V denote the supply at time t; rj and r' measure the growth of the

traded inputs between periods. The use of X and V by the developing (developed)
countries at time t is denoted by Xt (Xt) and Y (t) and the investment level in the
developing and the developed countries is denoted by 1; and I , respectively. The use of
the two intermediate products by industry c in the developing countries Cc - 8 or r) is

denoted by X and
(3)

. The

Ct+lt-Zt

C flt=zt
=

(4)

periodic budget constraints are given by

=

Xv.t 'Xe.t ;

'r1t

X X— t;

Y

i=1,

Vj=1, Y2—1n

x2=1÷n;

'Vt- V

where
(5)
(6)

— h1(X (Y,)9' (K,)t + hJ(XO' + (y505JP16 (Xst)'
-

Xt

+

V - v;flx1-s.

We now turn to the characterization of the &obal equilibrium.

-92. THE EQUILIBRIUM

Borrowing and investment occur in period one, and repayment is due in period two. The

implicit agreement is that a default in the second period will initiate a bargaining
process that will dictate the effective repayment. The bargaining outcome is derived by
the Nash fixed threat bargaining framework.5 In the absence of default we will observe
a competitive equilibrium. Let us denote by R4 the repayment due in the second period,

by Rb the repayment supported by the bargaining outcome, and by R the actual
repayment. We assume that the default rule is that if the repayment due exceeds the
bargaining outcome, partial default will occur1 and only the bargaining outcome will be
repaid. Consequently.
(7)

R=

Mm

{Rdb Rb).

2.1 THE PARETO ALLOCATIONS

Since both the competitive and the Nash bargaining outcomi result in an allocation
that is Pareto efficient, we will gain further insight by focusing on the nature of the
efficient allocations.6 Note that the two inputs are perfect substitutes in the production
process of the developed nations. Consequently, in a Pareto allocation the marginal
product of both X and Y should be equal for all activities. This implies that Pareto

See Nash (1950) and Roth (1979). The solution of this bargaining problem is
obtained by the allocation that maximizes the products of the trad gains for each
party (relative to the fixed threat allocation). A useful characteristic of the solution is
S.

that it is a Pareto efficient allocation (see Roth (1979)1.
6.

This efficiency refer only to the temporal allocations. In both the competitive and

Nash bargaining equilibria, the welfare in one nation can not be raised without reduthi
the welfare in the second nation with exogenously given stocks of capital.

- 10 —
efficiency is characterized by an allocation where equal quantities of both intermediate

goods are used in the production processes employed by the developing country (i.e., X
e

Lt

Xst — Yet).

For a given X, the Appendix shows that the efficient allocation is given by:

X1—(-X)s1; X6. (R-X)(i—s)

(8)

RyKy 2

where

5y•
g1g1 2

for B B/Cl — B) ,

2

. ())1/(1i)

(for s

1,6);

and

XY1 ;Xe.Yo;X*.V*.Xs+Xy. Sj'\
- V - 'r.

(9)

Y

Note, too, that (9) implies that the division of intermediate inputs between sectors & and

I is determined by the relative share of the effective capital (es)' obtained by
B/S

weighting the capital stock by E,2

(for

.

6,1).

The properties of the Pareto

allocation imply that for a given X we can completely characterize the solution by
equation (8) and (9).

Since X and Y are perfect substitutes in the production process of the developed
nations, a free trade, competitive equilibrium is characterized by a unitary terms of
rade. In the absence of default, the exports of the developing nations finance the
imports and the transfer R to the developed nations:

— 1i_ —

(10)

V-'r- x-X+R.

Negative values of R correspond to resource transfers from the developed to the
developing nations, as may occur in the first period. Applying the property of the Pareto
allocation, where Y X - X we derive that

(10) R- 2X+Y-2X.
A default will move us to the bargaining regime, yielding an allocation that is
characterized by a level of X, denoted by Xb. The equal proportions of X and 'I in all the

activities imply that Xb fully characterizes the system and the developing nations use
• Y3l =

- xj ,X -

. The

bargaining allocation is obtained by the exchange of

- Xb units of the developed countries intermediate product for V - (i - Xb) units of ths
developing countries intermediate product. Thus, the bargaining allocation is equivalent
to a competitive allocation in which the resource transfer is given by Rb
2Xb + V — 2X. The term P4, defines the effective ceiling on repayment: if the repayment

due exceeds P, the developing nations will prefer to partially default1 and will transfer
only Rb. Consequently, one can view Xb as the key variable in determining the smooth
functioning of the international credit market. A larger Xb is associated with a world
system that allows greater capital flows from developing to developed countries.

We can summarize this insight with the help of an Edgeworth Boc diagram (see
Figure 1), whose dimensions are given by the global endowment of X &nd '1. where 0
and 0 denote the origin of the developed and the developing countries, respectively. The

V

Ut

6

'2X a - 21

FIGURE 1

- 12 —

Pareto

allocations are given by poe.

The

line T0* corresponds to the repayment

schedule, defined by (10). The autarky allocation is given by the endowment point E. A

competitive allocation A corresponds to a repayment of R0 (measured by the vertical
bold line). It is associated with an income level (in terms of the traded inputs) of 01 for
the developed nations and 0*1* for the developing nations. Total gains from trade are
measured by GE (or GE). The allocation A,, is associated with a division of the gains

from trade of GI* and 1E between the developing and the developed countries,
respectively.
Suppose that the bargaining allocation is given by the point Ab, corresponding to X

4. The resource transfer ceiling is Rb, and the feasible range of competitive free trade
equilibria with lull integration of capital markets is given by those X to the left of 4,
in which the repayment due is T(0, with Re < Rb. The bargaining defines the lowest
income achievable for the developing nations, given by 1b• The precise location of the
free trade equilibrium is characterized by the desirable level of resource transfer. In the
absence of resource transfer, the equilibrium will occur at the point A0. where IC = Y 5? - V/2.

A resource transfer to the developing nations will imply an equilibrium to the

left of A0. The bargaining allocation is determined, among other factors, by the
curvature of the Z*Z* schedule. This curvature is affected by the sectoral composition in

the developing nations. As we will show, higher relative weight given to the trade
dependent sector Cr) result in stronger curvature, greater trade dependency and a shift
of point 4 to the right. The following analysis will Identify the factors determining the
optimal investment strategy, which, in turn, will determine the cur-valxwe of the Z*r
schedule.

7.

Curves ZZ (ZtZ) describe allocations that yield a constant output in the developed

(developing) countries, respectively. Curves ZE (Z;E) describe allocatinn t2ut yield th
autarky output in the developed (developing) countries, respectively.

- 13 -

3. FULL CREDIT MARKETS INTEGRATION: THE COMPETITIVE EQUILIBR1UM

Suppose that initial debt is small enough such that agents anticipate full repayment. We
can apply the characteristics of the periodic Pareto allocations• to derive the perfect

foresight competitive equilibrium in the absence of default. Let us denote by r the
interest rate in terms of the traded inputs, and by B the indebtedness position of the
developing countries. Note that in a competitive equilibrium the relative price of X and

because the two inputs are perfect substitutes in the production process
employed by the developed countries. Applying this property we get from (5) and (8)

V

is unity,

that
(11) Z(V + Xt) =
where

'r.Kvfir2

(Vt +

X) Ktt• ; Z(X]

(X)O fit) 1—p

+K5152

We can view 'r as a measure of aggregate capital stock, where the physical capital (Kr.

14
K5)

B'8

,

is weighted by the productivity coefficients (Ri. 2

2

).

Henceforth

we will

refer to these coefficients as the marginal contribution of investment to the aggregate
capital stock. Equation (11) was derived for the case of international trade that allows
the attainment of the Pareto allocations. In autarky we get that8

the result reported in (i1)-(12) regarding
8 s 1, is obtained by noting
0
- X). The autarky output for the case where
Applying equation (8) to (5)

yields

that for the r process both inputs must be used in order to produce anything. Thus, in
autarky only the 8 process is employed, yielding the 2(O) in (12) If the elasticity of
substitution

exceeds unity in both activities (i.e. if

0

8 s 1) then the autarky

11 -

Zt() • (X )P Kt1
(12)

Zt(O)

*

hs@t)BK5

1-p for 3 (Ot 8 1 and

z(O) (;)r(g1K + H5K6)1

for 0 < , S s 1.

For exposition simplicity we assume that the initial debt is zero. The trade accounts are
described by:

(13) V1—y+. x
(14)

Y2Y2

+g(1+rL

Applying (4) and (9) we infer that

(15) (1#)/2— x;*y;;
(16)

Y1sXj.1— B/2;V2= (t+n'+gfl÷rn/2

Xz—1+r- (1+n*_(1+r})/2.

output is obtained by choosing V that maximizes Z', The case in which the elasticity
of substitution is below unity for both sectors corresponds to the case in which, in the
absence of trade, output is zero in the developing nations. Because this is such an
implausible outcome, our analysis ignores this possibility.

— 15

-

for a given interest rate, B fully determines the available traded inputs. The
optimizing problem facing agents in the developing nations is to find the values of
Thus,

indebtedness (B) and investment (I) that maximize:

(17)

z1[j]-l1—Is+p'z2[

1+n*_B(1+r)
1

2

where 'h is the investment in sector h (h = M. and Zt[X] is the output produced at

time t with X, given by (11).
The

first order conditions characterizing an internal solution where there is

investment in both activities are:

(18)

a.

MP •

' sp'(l+r)MP

z1.x1

S.

1=pMMP*

Z2;Ir

where MP * is the marginal product of

h -

To

*

z21x2

c.

1= p'MP.

with respect to h (i.e., MP
Zt;h

for

X ,l5andlr).
gain further insight we should solve for ZLX}. Applying (17) to (18) we get the

following conditions:

- 16 -

(X)01 (r1)1 • p (in)

a.

(x;)o-1 (12)
5/b'

N

(18) b.

1

- p (l—&(X2) (121P 1 2

c.

1

• p (i-5)(x2) (12)-e

N

He 2

Inspection of (18 bc) reveals that investment will be channeled to the sector with the
htgher marginal contribution of investm!nt to the aggregate capital stock (i.e., to the
5/2
sector whose productivity coefficient S 2 , z f,8; is higher).
—

Similar conditions apply for the developed countries. Their problem is to choose
investment I and lending B such that
(19)

ZiU - g) - 1

+

p Z2(1 +

where Ike the investment (thus K2 — Kj

+ ri)1
+

II. The first order conditions characterizing.

the solution are:

a.

MP

b.

1

• p (in)

MP

(20)

•pMP
Z2;l

Applying (11), (14) to (20) we get the following first order conditions:
a. (1 — 5)o-l(K1)i-0

=

p

(1cr) (1 +

+ g(1 +

- 17

-

(20)
b.

=

1.

t qp (j + r))(K2Y

p (1. -

Equations (18' a-c) and (20 a-b) comprise a system of live equations, whose
simultaneous solution determines I, iy, r, I, g.
The above analysis assumed an equilthrium where the resultant indebtedness is

small enough to rule out default, thus b 5(1 + r). We turn now to the analysis of the
equilibnum observed if the indebtedness is large enough to motivate a partial default.

4.

LIMITED CREDIT MARKET INTEGRATION: THE BARGAINING EQUILIBRIUM

We now turn to the characterization of the bargaining equilibrium. We start by
analyzing the periodic bargaining outcome, using the fixed threat Nash bargaining
framework.
4.2.

THE BARGAINING

The bargaining allocation is characterized by the X value that maximizes the products
of the gains from trade. We denote by Z(X +'1) and Z( X - X) the production level of the
developed and the developing nations that is generated with an allocation of CX, X - X)

of input X between the developed and the developing nations, respectively Ithese
functions are given by (11)]. Note that the autarky production level of the developed

9.

1+

It can be shown that:

r • C (K1 ()—l/((I — a)) +

C • (1 -

B)1

-

2

-

—

(*)—1/{P(1

and B —

—

afl(1201—aJ1/(1

for

s

-

where

- 18 and

the developing nations is given by Z(X) and zN(o) [see (12)]. the bargaining

allocation Xb is found by solving1:

(21) MAX

[Z(2X + V - ) - z(Th] [z*(R - X)

- z(o)].

X

We focus on the case where l < 0 < & s 1. All our results carry over to the case
where 0 < 1, 8 s 1. It is instructive to define terms that measure the relative allocation
of inputs:
1 +Tl0

-jç

and

X • X/(1 + ii). The term

is the relative supply of inputs, whereas x

measures the the developed nations share of the X input. We can apply (5) (8), (11)
and (12) to (21), taking a logarithmic transformation and using the definitions of and
x obtaining that the bargaining allocation is obtained by finding % that maximizes:11

(22) MAX lnR - 1 + 2X)8 - 11 + ln[ {txf

The

(}1i

-

two terms measure the percentage increase in the production (relative to autarky)

of the developed and developing countries, respectively. Note that the gains from trade
for the developing nations depend positively on ¶1K6. Inspection of (11) reveals that

¶/l( depends positively on the capital ratio in the sector with the low substitutability
relative to the high substitutability (i.e., on K1/K5). thus, the developing nation& gains

10. Note that (9), (10) and (10) implies that X + Y • 2X + V - X.
11.

Henceforth we restrict our attention to the bargaining region in which there are

gains from trade for both blocs of nations, in terms of (14) we assume that

I- O

<

<1 -

Sx6

—19-

from trade depend positively on the KfK5 ratio. The rationale for this outcome is that

in autarky only sector 8 is producing. Sector & is ideal, because it can not produce
without imports of X. Consequently, the gains from trade are greater I or sector than
for sector 8, and these gains are tied to the relative size of sector W ,as measured by the
K/X5 ratio.
Maximizing (22) yields the following first order condition:

23

2B

(12x)(1÷2x)1

=

_________________________

c1x)(1%)l1ce {hSK$}1J

The left hand side measures the percentage increase in the developed nations'
gains from trade that is associated with a marginal increase of X, and is described by
curve OD (Figure 2). The right hand side measures the percentage loss in the developing

nations' gains from trade associated with a marginal increase in )(, and is described by
schedule (36. The feasible bargaining range is given by the shaded values of X (rigure 2),

and the intersection of both schedules gives the bargaining outcome (%b) At this
allocation a marginal transfer of % will cause percentage losses of the gains from trade

to one party that equal the percentage gains to the other party.
The relative size of the two sectors (K/K5) and the relative supply of inputs ()
play a key role in determining the bargaining outcome. A greater trade dependency is

associated with a higher relative size of the sector with lower elasticity of substitution.
Basically, higher K1/K5 ratios are associated with a rise in

and an increasi in the

gains from trade of the developing nations. In terms of Figure 2, a higher X/K6 ratio
will shift (3(3 downward and rightward, increasing the bargaining solution. In terms of

Figure 1, the resultant increase in Xb will shift Xb rightward, raise the range of no
default, and increase the resource transfer. The insight behind these results is clear: a

0

DD(t)

0

I

0
FIGURE 2

- 20 —

higher relative stze of the sector that is more trade dependent increases the bargaining

power of the developed nations, thereby increasing their willingness to supply creditand
reducing the tendency of the developing countries to default

An increase in the relative size of the developing nations is associated with a hike

(see the Appendix for further details). In terms of Figure 2, it results in shifting
schedule GG leftward, thereby reducing x. The Appendix shows that a supply expansion
In

of both countries causes higher repayment, and that:

(24)

>0,
K5

5.

%• x(M Rb. Itb(tl itir);
<0 ;

>01

where

an >01

>0.

K5

THE EQUILiBRIUM ALLOCATION WITh LIMITED CAPITAL MARKET iNTEGRATION

We turn now to the derivation of the general equilibrium allocation in the presence of
endogenous defaults. We assume that agents In period one are fully Informed as to the

default rule and the factors determining the effective repayment, as are summarized
by (7), (24). Borrowing Is substantial enough, so that we operate in a regime in which
the repayment in the second period is determined by Rb [see (24)). We characterize
conditions for the optimal allocation of resources in an intertemporal equilibrium We

distinguish between two extreme cases: In section 5.1 we assume that the initial
indebtedness is zero, but the first period borrowing is sufficiently large to operate in the

bargaining regime in the second period, and the first period credit allocation is
determined by agents who discount the second period bargaining outcome. In section 5.2

we consider the case where initial indebtedness Is large enough, such that in both
periods we operate in the partial default region, where repayment is dictated by the
bargaining outcome and where the developing country cannot raise fresh credit. While

— 21 —

two cases represent polar possibilities, a comparison between them allows us to
gain insight into the investment consequences of initial indebtedness,
these

5.1 LIMITED CAPITAL MARKET INTEGRATION WITH NO INITIAL INDEBTEDNESS

The optimizing problem facing the developing nations in the bargaining equilibrium
differ from that in competitive equilibrium because repayment is determined by the
bargaining outcome: B a Rb/Ct + r), Formally, the problem is to find the values of
investment (lyl& that maximize:

(25) tx z1[ 1+Rb/(1+r)
}—l--I5+pZ2[ 2 1
2
N

N

where Z is given by (11). The first order conditions for internal equilibrium for this

problem are:

a.

I•

p' MP N

Rb; I'

0

12.
(26)

b,

where R1.,.. - —
GIL)1

N

1

Rb;B

p

+j D

for h - ,8; and

-p(1r)MP N

Z1;X1

The term D is a measure of the distortion introduced due to country risk, being

equal to the intertemporal wedge between the marginal productivity of the foreign

- 22 nput in period one and two. Note that (18) implies that D equals zero in the absence of
country risk factors12. Scarcity of credit implies a positive o.13 Equation (26) has a
simple interpretation: the marginal cost of investment in sector z (z — r,6) should be

equal to the marginal social benefit, as shown on the right hand side. The cost is
measured in terms of the consumption forgone in period one. The benefit is composed of

the discounted value of the marginal productivity of investment Q2IAA the externality

effect of investment on the credit ceiling. A marginal investment will change the
marginal funds available to the economy by affecting the bargaining outcome, as
Rb;h

measured by -ç- (for h = ,6). This will increase welfare by the distortion D times the
increase in the credit ceiling (

yielding the last term in (26). Note that the sign of

the term Rb.h is an indication of the trade dependency of sector h. and is positive
(negative) for sector f (8).

To gain further insight into the optimal investment, note that

1.2.

Note that if D is positive there is room in a competitive equilibrium for simple

arbitrage: borrow today to finance a

• 0.5, and repay tomorrow by reducing the

effective use of X by 0.5(1 + H. This will increase welfare by 1). Note that country risk

considerations limit the feasibility of such arbitrage due to the unavailability of credit.
which makes the cost of the marginal fund to be 1. + r> 1 + r.
1.3.

This observation follows from the fact that [applying (11) and (15) and the various

definitions to Di

1-p - (1 + r)plii + 1
+
'r1
([1 i.+r1
from which we infer that D/ 8b < 0.
D•

—

b

I

p-I

'T2

- 23

•

Nt?

a Nt?

Tb

for h

Z27Ih

-

V,S and Th fi.
h

Thus,

an internal equilibrium also

implies that

pMP (Ts-Tj •

(27)

{

Z2;'r

%-%.6)

Note that because sector V is biased towards trade dependency, whereas S is
biassed towards trade independence, Rb;V - Rb;5

>

0.

When D ' 0 we get that for an

internal equilibrium the marginal contribution of investment in sector S to the
aggregate capital stock should exceed that of investment in sector V (i.e., 'vs ) r, or

S2

f, 2

) by a margin that will compensate for the negative externality

generated by investing in closeness, relative to the positive externality generated by
investing in trade dependency.

Recalling that in the absence of country risk considerations international
borrowing will yield 3 a 0, (27) implies that with perfect integration of international
capital markets the investment strategy is independent of anticipations regarding the

future growth of the various countries, whereas in the presence of country risk the
investment strategy will be determined by both the anticipation regarding future

— 24

economic conditions

-

and the direct productivity and the strategic effects of investment

on trade dependency.14

If we anticipate full integration of capital markets, we invest in the technology
with the higher marginal contribution of investment to the aggregate capital stock (i.e., the technology with higher Th h - W,8), regardless of its marginal contribution to trade
dependency. lf we anticipate a bargaining regime in the future, we tilt the investment

towards the activities that generate greater trade dependency externality. If, f or
example, the productivity contribution in the less trade dependent sector marginally
exceeds that of the more trade dependent sector (i.e., 'r5 > 'rr), but the trade dependency
externality Rb;w - Rb;8 is large enough' anticipations of a competitive equilibrium calls

for investment in sector 5. Anticipation of future bargaining equilibrium will motivate
diversification, channeling investment towards sectors.
5.1.1 ThE ROLE OF POLICIES

Our previous discussion adopted the central planners point of view. We now turn to the
analysis of the design of the policies needed to yield the planner allocation in developing

countries with competitive

domestic credit markets. As the previous analysis

demonstrated, the possibility of a partial default will result in an equilibrium where the

developing nations will face a credit ceiling given by the net present value of Rb. We
assume that the central planner in the developing country borrows the available credit

and auctions it domestically, in a competitive domestic market. We analyze the
behavior of private agents in the resultant competitive equilibrium, deriving the first

14.

Anticipations regarding future growth determine the credit ceiling ERb/(1 + rfl.

n'

will move us from
High enough growth rates, as measured by high anticipated nand
a credit rationing regime towards full integration of credit markets (see (24)].

- 2b

-

order conditions. Optimal policies are derived by finding the set of borrowing taxes that

will equate the same first order conditions of the private problem to the first order
conditions of the planners problem.
Suppose the domestic interest rate (in terms of the traded input) for consumption

borrowing is rt, whereas for investment borrowing in sector h it is r, for h =

l',S.

The

interest rate r is the rate that clears the domestic market for the available external
credit,

The wedge between r* and rh is policy driven, by investment taxes/subsidies,

The problem facing the producer is to choose V1, X1, Y2, X2, I. 15 to maximize the net
present value of profits, given by:

- Pj(Yi + X1) +

(28)
__________

(PZ;2Z2 —

Px;2(1Fr*)

Pa(2

+ X2)

- x-2

pj 11(2.

N

r1)

- x'2

+

where P)?,11 P,,2 and P2,2 are the prices of inputs in period one and two, and the price

of the final good, respectively, all in terms of the first period consumption good (i.e., P,j
—

1)i5 Similarly, the consumer problem is to maximize C1
p +C2 , subject to the

budget constraint:

15.

In writing (28)—(29) we should take care that all interest rates are in terms of the

traded inputs, whereas the consumption and production decisions are implemented in

terms of the final (non-traded) good. Thus, investment 1 is measured in terms of
and is associated with repayment in period two of
x;1

11(1

re).

-26(29)

pt

C1 +

{Ii

—

Y1

-

Cl

1(1 + rt) +

_P.
.2
\Y2)

z;2

The resultant first order conditions for an internal equilibrium are (for the investor and
the consumer, respectively):

s -MPw
(30) MP
z1,x1

z'i

q • P2MP w i •
Pz2MP
z2,Y2
z2,x2

P2.2 MP'

P2

—

(1 +

ri);

P2 MPz;i -

r2

(1.

• r8)

Py;
lp *(l+r) y;1z;2

(31)

Suppose now that the optimal solution yields an internal equilibrium with 1)) 0 (i.e., an

equilibrium with investment in both sectors, w and 8). The optimal domestic policies
should yield the same first order conditions in (30)-(31) as in (26). These policies can be

implemented by imposing interest rate taxes of a. a1 a5 for borrowing for imports of
the traded input, and investment in sector V and 8, respectively. With these taxes the
corresponding domestic interest rates are given by [1 +

Ri

+

r)(1

given by

+

ab), (1 +

rfl1

+

ar), (1 + r*)(1

+ a6)].

r, 1 +

r

1+

r51

=

The values of the optimal taxes are

- 27

(32) cxb.-.D/1p(I +

r)MPzutxw];
2' 2

—

a=-

Rb;

Rb;8

D ; a5— —

D

The value of the optimal taxes is proportional to the scarcity of funds, as measured by
the distortion D. Note that assuming scarcity of funds (D > 0) the optimal policy calls for

subsidizing investment in sectors that increase trade dependency, and taxing
investment in sectors that reduce trade dependency, relative to borrowing for
consumption. The magnitude of the optimal policies is proportional to the scarcity of
funds, as measured by 0. The role of investment policies is to internalize the strategic

effect generated by the investment via its effect on trade dependency and the
consequent change of the bargaining outcome. This effect is measured by the net
present value of the change in the bargaining outcome

Rb.z

for z =

i,&)

times the

initial distortion (0).
5.2

DISJOINT CAPITAL MARKETS: THE CASE OF SUBSTANTIAL INITIAL INDEBTEDNESS

Our analysis assumed zero initial indebtedness. We turn now to the other polar case,

where initial indebtedness is high enough that we operate in both periods in the
bargaining regime. Contrasting the two polar cases will shed light on the consequences of

partial defaults on the investment incentives. Starting with substantial indebtedness
implies that all investment is domestically financed, and that in each period the
developing nations transfer to the developed nations the bargaining outcome, Rb. The
problem facing the developing nations in period one is given by:

(33)

1R1.b

'
2 ]IrIs4PZ2[_________
2

where tb Rt;b( .Z

Vt) is the repaent dictated by the bargaining outcome

period t, given by (24). The first order conditions for internal equilibrium for this
problem are:

1 • p'MPN

a.

2' V

(26)

ta

b.

p1MP'
z2118

is the marginal social product of investment in sector h (h —
where MP •
Z2.lh

Formally, MP .
Z2;lh

where

R2;b;h •

- 0.5 MP

lvi?

Z2;Ih

Z2;X2

for h • V.8.

The optimal investment rule is to equate the marginal cost (the forgone
consumption) to the marginal benefit. The marginal benefit is the discounted sum of the

direct productivity effect, plus the external effect that operates via the investment
consequence on the future bargaining outcome. For example, investment that increases

trade dependency generates a negative externality it reduces the bargaining power of

the nation, thereby increasing the future repayment. in terms of our model,
investment in sector V will imply a hike of future repayment of 2bi' and a

— 29 —

consequent drop in future output of 0.5 MP N

• R2.b.f. The resultant drop in output,

z2,x2

in terms of the first period, is given by p' R2.b.z 0.6 MP •
z2,x2
Note

that from (26) we infer that an internal equilibrium implies that

(271

Recalling

that

{, - ¶5) = .5 MPUN {R2.bl - R2;b.6).
2' 2

lvi?

-

> 0 we get, for an internal equilibrium, that the marginal

contribution of investment in sector to the aggregate capital stock should exceed that
of investment in sector S (i.e.1 T5 ) w1) by a margin that will compensate for the

negative externality generated by investing in a sector that increases the trade
dependency relative to the positive externality generated by investing in a sector that
reduces trade dependency.

Further insight can be gained by comparing the optimal investment rules in the

two bargaining regimes. Equation (27) corresponds to the case of zero initial
indebtedness, and (271 to the case of substantial initial indebtedness. While investment

in period one will affect the future trade dependency and repayment in the same way

in both regimes, the welfare consequences will work in opposite directions, With no
substantial initial debt, higher trade dependency generates positive externality: it will
increase the willingness of creditors to supply more credit in the first period, because
higher trade dependency increases the credit ceiling supported by the bargaining. With

substantial initial debt, higher trade dependency generates negative externality: it will

- 30 -

future repayment without generating new marginal credit. Consequently, we
conclude that the switch from low to high initial indebtedness will reverse the attitude
Increase

towards trade dependency in the developing nations. While in the low indebtedness
regime higher trade dependency is preferable, lower trade dependency is desirable with
high indebtedness regime.

An important consequence of country risk is that the investment strategy will be
determined by both anticipation regarding future economic conditions as well as by the
productivity and the strategic effects of investment on trade dependency. For example.

suppose we start with high initial indebtedness yielding an outcome in the bargaining
regime. If we observe an internal equilibrium with investment in various sectors, we
will observe higher direct productivity in the trade dependent sectors relative to sectors

associated with lower trade dependency, by a margin that should compensate for the

negative externality associated with higher trade dependency. Thus, high initial
indebtedness introduces a bias against investment in trade dependency. Starting from
such an equilibrium, anticipations of higher growth rates in the future will result in
increasing Rb. If this effect is large enough relative to the initial indebtedness, it will

move the economy away from the bargaining regime in the future (second period),
eliminating the anti-trade bias.

-316. CONCLUDING REMARKS

The key result derived in this paper is that the choice of inward versus outward growth

strategyis determined by the degree of access to the international credit market. With
full integration of capital markets, the choice regarding the inwardness of a technology

is irrelevant. With partial integration, Investment that increases trade dependency is

desirable. If the credit markets are disjoint due to partial defaults, higher trade
dependency is disadvantageous. Thus, higher trade dependency generates a positive
externality with partial integration of capital markets, and negative externality with
disjoint credit markets.
Throughout the paper we assumed away uncertainty. Allowing for uncertainty
will enrich the model in several ways. First, it may explain how we switch from a
regime in which we anticipated integrated capital markets) to a regime in which capital

markets are disjoint due to partial defaults, and it may generate a diversification
motive in investing in sectors with various degrees of trade dependency due to an
insurance motive.16 Secondly, it may enrich the policy conclusion of the paper for the

case where we start with a substantial debt overhang. For example, starting with debt

overhang, under certain conditions it may be beneficial for both blocks of nations to

renew marginal resource transfers from the developed to the developing countries,
under the terms of targeting the investment in projects that will increase the trade
dependency of the developing countries. Such an investment will increase future
resource transfers supported by the bargaining outcome, allowing higher repayment in
the future [see Aizenman (1988)L17 As the present paper has demonstrated, the success

16. On investment diversification motive due to anticipated embargos see fihagwati
and Srinivansan (1976) and Arad and Hillman (1979).

17, The possibility for Pareto improvement stems from the fact that with disjoint
credit markets the real interest rate is higher in the developed nations. The need for
conditionality stems from the fact that in a partial default regime the developing

-32of such & policy may hinge on the future growth of the developed nations: higher

growth rates will be associated with more favorable outcomes of an outward
investment of the indebted countries.18 Thus, higher trade dependency will increase the
exposure of the indebted nations to the risk associated with the business cycle of the
developed countries. This may imply that the adaptation of outward growth strategies

by the indebted developing nations will be facilitated by arrangements that will
transfer some of the business cycle risk associated with greater trade dependency to the

developed countries. Such an arrangement may be a component of the conditionality
that accompanies the refinancing package.

nations will prefer to channel investment toward reducing trade dependency. For
further discussion regarding the conditions allowing for Pareto transactions see
Aizenman (1988).
18.

This follows from the observation that Rb.v.n 0.

- 33

-

APPENDIX

The purpose of this Appendix is to derive some of the key results reported in the text.
Appendix A.1 reviews the derivations of the Pareto allocations and the bargaining
outcome, and in Appendix A.2 we analyze the dependency of the bargaining outcome on

the relative size and the sectorial composition of the various countries.
A.1 THE BARGAINING OUTCOME

A useful characteristic of the bargaining outcome in the Nash fixed threat framework is

that it is Pareto efficient [see Roth (1979)]. We start the analysis by deriving the
characteristics of the contract curve, defined by the Pareto efficient points. A point on
the contract curve is defined by an allocation of X and '1 among the various activities
that maximize the global weighted average of output Therefore, for a given c,
0 C w ( 1 we maximize:
(Al)

coZt.(l-)Z.

Equivalently maximizing

(A2) c(t — Xt
(1 —

w){hy[(X,t)t +

+

— Y] (KOhi +

(Xyt)1 + h$(Xt X,)5 +
—

—

(Ks,t)1).

The weight w corresponds to the relative importance attached to the developed nations,

and varying it will move us along the contract curve. Direct optimization (with respect

to

X; and 1it) gives us the following first order conditions:

- 34
+

(A3) co(R —

{A4) i4t —

U—

— y;)e—1 (Kt)1

— vt (Kt)'

+

-

—

(1-

c){hJQ$](P16)_t(xt

—

)(h5{c25)1"'(?

Xt)6 (K51)hi)

—

—

(AS)

hy[QIB11 (x8)l-e (X1•O'1 = h6[Jb6b6) (K)l0 (X —

(A6)

h[QI"'1 (K.t)'1 (Y,t) — h6EQ6](W6) (Ko,t)'1
— (Xt)' + (YEt for s —

where

Y,)'' (o,t)11}

—

8.

Taking the ratio of (A3) and (A4) yields

(A7)

— Yt -

—

Y.t.

Taking the ratio of (AS) and (A6) yields

(A8)

(xt/yr.t)rt

—

X,t)/(Yt

—

Applying (A7) and (4) to (A8) yields

(A9)

—

Xst

Y.t;

=

can apply (A7) and (A9) to (AS). replacing the terms involving Y with the
terms involving X. Solving the resulting equation for X.t yields (8) in the text.
We

-35A.2 INVESTMENT, RELATIVE SIZE AND BARGAINING

We now turn to the derivations of the results reported in (24). Let us denote by H the

term {

H6x5 i-p

. Applying this notation we can rewrite the condition defining tb

—}

(equation 23) as

(AIC) ( — I + 2x) — ( - i. 4. 2x)i

2ftl—x) - (i.%)ui

For simplicity it is useful to derive all the results around an initial equilibrium, where
= 1.

From which we derive

-

(All)

1—

(l-)(i-xY FI+i— (1—B)(2x31

ln the initial equilibrium there are gains from trade for both parties, and thus it follows

from (AiD) that 1 >

(l-jyP H and 1 )

C

2%)i. Thus, the denominator of (All) is

positive. From the definition of H we get
aN

(A12)

-i—Co I
K5

at— > 0.

a

and therefore

Kb

We turn now to the derivation of & vat.. From. (A1O it fóllbws that:

(A13)

ax

—

-2

28(l_%)ui H÷i—(i-Ø(271
1— (1 -pXl_YYU 11+1 — (i—X2xY

From (10) and definitions it follows that

CO.

— 36

(A14)

Rb -

(1 +

—

- 2(1 -

Thus,

(AlS)

• -211-X

a
+;

aab
—a

ax

Applying to (A15) equations (AlO) and (A13) it can be shown that

(A15)

—>0.
0; ORb

- 37

-

REFERENCES

Aizenman, Joshua. "Country Risk. Incomplete Information and Taxes on International
Borrowing,' 1986. forthcoming in Economic Journal.
_________ "Trade Dependency, Bargaining and External Debt, manuscript, The
International Monetary Fund. 1988.
_________ and Eduardo R. Borensztein. Debt and Conditionality under Endogenous
Terms of Trade," The LM.L Staff Papers, December 1988.
Alesina Alberto and Guido Tabellini. "External Debt, Capital Flight and Political Risk,'
manuscript, 1987.
Arad W. Ruth and Arye L. Hillman. 'Embargo Threat, Learning and Departure from
Comparative Advantage,' Journal of International Economics, 9, 1979.
Bhagwati J14. and T. N. Srinivasan. •Optirnal Trade Policy and Compensation Under
Endogenous Uncertainty," Journal of International Economics, 6, 1976.
Bulow I. Jeremy and Kenneth Rogoff. "A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign
Debt," manuscript, 1987, forthcoming in Journal of Political Economy.
Calvo, Gulliermo. "A Delicate Equillbrium: Notes on Debt Relief and Default Penalties in

and International Context,' manuscript , 1988.
Chenerry, H. B. and M. Bruno. 'Development Alternatives in an Open Economy, the Case

of Israel," Economic Journal, 1962.
Claessens Sti,jn and Ishac Diwan. "Conditionality and Debt Relief,' manuscript, 1988

Cole Harold L and William B. English,

'Expropriation and Direct Investment,'

manuscript, 1987.
Diwan, Ishac and Shabtai Donnenfeld. •Trade Policy, Foreign Investment and Portfolio

Expropriation,' Studies in Banking and Finance, 3, 1986.
Dooley, Michael P. 'Country-Specific Risk Premiums, Capital Flight and Net Investment

Income Payments in Selected Developing Countries," manuscript, the
international Monetary Fund, 1986.
Dornbusch, Rudiger. 'External Debt, Budget Deficits and Disequilibrium Exchange rates,
NBER Working Paper No. 1336, 1984.

Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz. "Debt with Potential Repudiation Theoretical and
Empirical Analysis,' Review of Economic Studies 48, 1981.
Edwards, Sebastian. 'Country Risk, Foreign Borrowing and the Social Discount Rate in
an Open Developing Economy,' NBER Working Paper Series No. 1651, 1985.

Ethier, Wilfred. 'National and International Returns to Scale in the Modern Theory of
International Trade," American Economic Review 72, 1982.

- 38
Findlay,

-

R. 'International Trade and Development Theory,' Columbia University
Press, 1973.

Folkerst-Landau David. The Changing Role of International Dank Lending in
Development Finance,' The I. M. F. Staff Papers 32, 1985.
Froot, Ken D. 'Buybacks, Exit Bonds and the Optimality of Debt and Liquidity Relief,'
manuscript, 1988.
Harberger. Arnold C. 'On Country Risk and the Social Cost of Foreign Borrowing by
Developing Countries,' manuscript, 1976.
Helpman, Elhanan. The Simple Analytics of Debt-Equity Swaps,' manuscript, 1987.
kharas, Homi, J. 'Constrained Optimal Foreign Borrowing by L.D.C. 's Domestic Finance
Study No. 75, The World Bank, Washington, D.C., 1981.
Kletzer, Kenneth M. 'Asymmetries of Information and LDC borrowing with Sovereign

Risk,' Economic Journal 94, 1984.
Krugman, Paul. international Debt Strategies in an Uncertain World,' in Smith, W.G.

and Cuddington, J. T., eds., international Debt and the Developing
COuntries', A World Dank Symposium, The World Bank, Washington, DC.,
1985.

'Financing versus Forgiving a Debt overhang', 1987, forthcoming, Journal
of Development Economics.
Nash, John F. 'The Bargaining Problem,' Econometrica, 1950.
Roth, Alvin E. Aziomatic Models of Bargaining, Springer-Verlag. 1979.

Sachs, Jeff ery D. 'Theoretical Issues in International Borrowing.' Princeton Studies in

International Finance 54, 1984.
Smith, Gordon, W. and John 1. Cuddington. 'International Debt and the Developing
Countries,' A World Bank Symposium, The World Bank, Washington, DC.,
1985.

