NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SCHOOL DISTRICT LEAVE POLICIES,
TEACHER ABSENTEEISM, AND STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT

Ronald C. Ehrenberg
Randy A. Ehrenberg
Daniel I. Rees
Eric L. Ehrenberg

Working Paper No. 2874

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

-

March 1989

Irving M. Ives Professor of Industrial and Labor Relations and Economics at
Cornell University and Research Associate at NBER; Vice-Principal DeWitt
Middle School, Ithaca City School District, Ithaca, NY; Ph.D. Candidate in
Labor Economics at Cornell University; and undergraduate. College of Arts and
Sciences, Cornell University. Research support was provided by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No. SES-8719592. We are grateful to the
Foundation for its support, to Ann Cray, data archivist at the Cornell
Institute for Social and Economic Research (CISER) for obtaining some of the
data sets used in our analysis, to Roberta Troike and Julie Hotchkiss for
helping us to code some of the data creating extracts, and merging these
together, and to numerous colleagues for their comments on earlier versions.
This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

MEEK Working Paper #2874
March 1989

SCHOOL DISTRICT LEAVE POLICIES,
TEACHER ABSENTEEISM, AND STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT

ABSTRACT

In

an effort to reduce salary costs, many school districts have begun

to offer teachers financial incentives to retire early. Of Sn, however,
these districts have limits on the number of cumulated unused sick leave

days that teachers may

receive

cash payments, credits toward future health

insurance, or retirement credits for, at retirement. Thus, one might
expect that in addition to stimulating early retirement, early retirement
incentive programs may interact with sick leave provisions and provide an

unintended incentive for increased teacher absenteeism. To the extent
that less learning occurs when regular teachers are absent and student

motivation to attend school is also reduced, student academic performance

may suffer. This surely would be an unintended side effect of these
policies.

To address these issues, this paper, which is based on an extensive
data collection effort by the authors, presents an econometric analyses of
variations in teacher and student absenteeism across the over 700 school
districts in New York State in 1986-87 and of how such variations
influence student test score performance.

Ronald C. Ehrenberg
Randy A. Ehrenberg
Daniel I. Rees
Eric L. Ehrenberg
NYS SI LR

Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14851-0952

I.

Introduction

In

an effort to reduce salary costs, many school districts have begun

to offer teachers financial incentives to retire early. Often, however,
these districts have limits on the number of cumulated unused sick leave

days that teachers may

receive

cash payments, credits toward future health

insurance, or retirement credits for, at retirement. Thus, one might
expect that in addition to stimulating early retirement, early retirement
incentive programs may interact with sick leave provisions and provide an

unintended incentive for increased teacher absenteeism. To the extent
that less learning occurs when regular teachers are absent and student
motivation to attend school is also reduced, student academic performance

may

suffer.

This surely would be an unintended side effect of these

policies.

Somewhat surprisingly, the study of the causes and effects of teacher

absenteeism has received very little attention. The "educational
production function" literature contains no references to the effects of
teacher absenteeism on student academic performance, although a few
studies have addressed the related topics of the effects of student
absenteeism and the amount of weekly instructional time on student

performance.1 While there are numerous studies of the determinants of
worker absenteeism by economists and industrial psychologists, only a
small number of these deal with how sick leave policies influence
absenteeism. 2

Moreover, there have been only two studies of the effects of sick

leave policy on teacher absenteeism. The first used data for 57
elementary schools in California and Wisconsin in 1974-75 and

found

that

the presence of income protection plans (for long-term sick leave) was

2
associated with higher absenteeism, while the requirements that teachers
provide proof of illness and report illness directly to the principals

were associated with lower absentee rates.3 This study, conducted a
decade ago, did not have data on a number of provisions governing sick
leave in teacher contracts (such as number of leave days per year, maximum
number of leave days teachers can cumulate, "pay-offs" to teachers for
unused sick leave days, and the presence of a "sick-leave bank") that are

important today. The second was a case study of one school district in
New York State and showed, using before-after comparisons, that the
institution of pay incentives for good attendance in 1986-87 was
associated with a significant reduction in the district's mean number of

sick days used.4 The paucity of research on teacher absenteeism is
undoubtedly due to the fact that data on teacher absenteeism are not
regularly reported by school districts to state education departments and
data on the leave provisions in collective bargaining agreements that
teachers work under in each school district are not regularly tabulated
anywhere.

This paper, which is based on an extensive data collection effort
conducted by the authors, presents an econometric analyses of the
variations in teacher and student absenteeism across the over 700 school
districts in New York State (excluding New York City) in 1986-87 and of

how such variations influence student test score performance. We begin in
the next section by presenting the conceptual framework upon which our

empirical work is based. Section III discusses the data we use and
presents some descriptive statistics. Our econometric estimates are

3

presented in section IV and their implications are discussed in a brief
-

concluding section.

II.

Conceytual, Framework; Teacher Absenteeism. Student Absenteeism, and
Student Test Score Performance
A.

Teacher Absenteeism

Consider first how a school district's sick leave and pther leave

policies might be expected to influence teacher absenteeism. The nature
of these policies, at least for tenured teachers, suggests that the
appropriate framework to use is a life-cycle one that incorporates

uncertainty. For expositional convenience we will act as if all teacher
leave usage is sick leave usage; this assumption is reined in our
erpirical work.

Teachers use sick leave either for serious illnesses (when their
health unambiguously prevents them from coming to work), for minor
illnesses (when they have some discretion about whether to come to work)

and, in the absence of requirements for doctofs notes certifying short
illnesses, for additional paid vacation" on days when they actually have

no health problems. While in the aggregate teachers in a district have no
control over their usage of sick leave for the first purpose, they do
control the usage for the latter two purposes and thus absenteeism can be
analyzed in a rational choice framework.5

We will consider the effects of four key aspects of teacher leave

policies for which we have data. First, the annual leave days permitted
per teacher. Second, the maximum number of unused leave days that can be
cumulated and used (if needed) in future years. Third, whether teachers
can receive either direct cash payments at retirement, subsidies for post-

4
retirement health insurance costs, or credit for additional

retirement

date, for unused

cumulated

service at the

leave.6 Fourth, the dollar value

per day of unused leave to them if any of the latter forms of payment
exist.

A simple model in which teachers value both leave days that they use
and the payoff that they receive for cumulative unused leave days implies
(see Appendix A) that ceteris paribus, the greater the number of days of

leave granted annually, the greater the absentee rate will be. An
increase in the payoff for unused days will, ceteris paribus, have an
ambiguous effect on the absentee rate because it will have both income and

substitution effects. While a higher payoff increases the cost of using
sick leave days and therefore should decrease usage (substitution effect),
it also increases teachers' wealth and this should increase usage (income

effect). The net effect of higher payoff rates on teacher absenteeism ir
thus

an empirical question.
Of course, teacher absentee rates will vary across school districts

for a number of reasons other than leave provisions and these must be

controlled for in our empirical analyses. For example, factors that
influence teachers' disutility of work (or the value they place on leave
days) surely matter and a school district's characteristics such as its

size or whether it is in an urban area may matter. Similarly, factors
that influence the incidence of illness among teachers, such as the
incidence of illness among students and the age distribution of teachers
surely matter.

The life-cycle aspect of absenteeism decisions arises because
teachers' preferences for paid leisure (the third use of sick days) may

5

vary

both over their life-cycles and with whether they have tenure and

because
them

of the possibility that a serious illness may arise that requires

to use

granted

in a year sore than

the number of

eligibility for in that year.

unused sick

In

sick leave days

they

are

the absence of having cumulated

leave days from previous years. a serious illness that

exhausted current year sick leave days could lead to a substantial

earnings loss.7 Since the incidence of such illnesses are a priori highly
uncertain, teachers will have a precautionary demand for sick leave days

and will want to accumulate some unused days across years. Of course,
some school districts do have 'sick leave banks' from which a teacher who
has used up his or her sick leave can 'borrow' days from other teachers in

the district. The existence of such sick leave banks will reduce
teachers' precautionary demand for unused sick leave days and should lead

to increased teacher absenteeism. More generally, one would expect to
observe teachers accumulating sick leave days when they are young and then

'spending' them as they near retirement. So for this reason also, the age
distribution of teachers in a district should affect its absentee rate.
The

maximum number of leave days that teachers can cumulate should

also affect annual usage. If cumulated days can not be 'cashed in" at
retirement, an increase in the maximum number of days that can be
cumulates

the

might

be expected to decrease absenteeism for young teachers (in

'saving' phase of

their life cycle)

but increase absenteeism for older

teachers (in the "drawing-down' phase). While on

the district-wide absentee rate is ambiguous in
days

be

balance the effect on

this case, if cumulated

cashed-in, one would expect an increase in the number of days

6

that can be cumulated to be associated with a lower district-wide absentee
rate.

In this life-cycle framework, early retirement incentive plans that
induce some people to retire earlier than would otherwise be the case will
likely increase the absentee rate of older teachers (they will have a

smaller number of years left to use up" their cumulated leave days). In
theory, then an unintended short-term side effect of such plans will be
increases in teacher absentee rates.8

The discussion above leads to the specification of teacher
absenteeism equations of the form

Ai —

(1)

FA(Li,

Rj, Ti, 0Ai' Si) +.EAi

Here Ai is the absentee rate of teachers in school district i, Li is a
vector of contract provisions that govern teacher usage of leave days in

the district, Rj is a dichotomous <1,0) variable that takes on the value
of one if an early retirement incentive program is in effect in the

district, Ti is a vector of teacher characteristics in the district,
DAi is a vector of characteristics of the school district (e.g., size)
that might be expected to influence the absentee rate of teachers in the

district, Si is the absentee rate of students in the district, and EAi
is a random error ten.

B.

Student Absenteeism

What are the factors that one might expect would influence the

absence rate of students in a school district? As with teacher
absenteeism, we can distinguish three different types of student

absenteeism in theory, althoug we can not separate them out in our data.

7

First, some absent students have serious illnesses that render them unable

to attend school. Second, some have minor illnesses (e.g., minor colds)
and potentially could attend (without infecting their classmates) if they

chose to do so. Third, some are not ill at all and have either tricked
their parents into believing they are ill and/or are truants who are
absent without justification.

The first type of absenteeism is likely to depend primarily on
unobservable factors (e.g., the incidence of illnesses,pcross school
districts) although district wide economic variables (e.g., family income)
may influence the nutrition that children in the district get and hence

their health. If these unobservable factors simultaneously increase the
incidence of illness among teachers and students, higher teacher absentee
rates may also be positively correlated with higher pupil absentee rates.
The latter two types of student absenteeism are more the results of

choice made by students in the district. Characteristics of teachers in
the school district (e.g., age or gender) may affect these choices. The
age distribution of students in a district may also matter, as elementary
grade students may be more likely to stay in bed in response to a minor

illness but less likely to be truant. Socioeconomic variables that
reflect the value that parents in the community place on education (e.g.,
family income or parental education) also likely will matter, as will the

size of the district. Finally, higher teacher absentee rates may reduce
students motivation to attend school and further lead to higher student
absentee rates. Together, these factors suggest that the student absentee
equation can be specified as

(2)

Si —

F3(Ti.

Dzi. Ai) +

8

where the vector Dj includes all the district-wide variables noted
above (student age distribution, school district size, sociodemographic
and economic variables) that have been postulated to influence student

absenteeism and EBI is a random error ten.

C.

Our

Student Test Scores

final

concern is with how student absenteeism and teacher

absenteeism in a school district affect student academic performance (ri)

in the district. To estimate these relationships one must control for
characteristics of teachers (e.g., education, experience), characteristics
of the school systems (e.g., class size, expenditure per pupil) and
characteristics of the community (e.g., parental income and education
levels, racial and ethnic mix) that one might expect to influence

educational achievement. Denoting these latter three types of district
variables by Dci, this leads to specifications o.f student performance
equations of the form

—

F(DcJ

Ai. Si) + Eci

where ECi is a random error term.9
In the analyses that follow various measures of student performance

will be used. In addition, since student absenteeism and teacher
absenteeism are specified to influence each other (equations (1) and (2))
tests for whether they should be considered endogenous in each other's
equation will be conducted.

9

111. The Data

One reason that few studies on the determinants and effects of
teacher absenteeism have been conducted is that data on teacher

absenteeism and contract provisions governing school district leave

policies are not systematically collected and reported. To analyze these
issues required us to undertake a major data collection effort.
A survey was sent to the superintendents of all 722 public school

districts in New York State (excluding New York City) in October of 1987
requesting information on a number of variables including teacher usage of

leave days during the 1986-87 academic year. Two follow-up surveys were
sent to nonrespondents in January and April of 1988. In total 419
districts, or nearly 60% of the school districts in the state, responded
to the survey.

The survey asked respondents to include in usage of leave days "sick
leave and other leave days (e.g., family leave, personal leave, religious,
conference and/or visitation days) taken by teachers during the academic

year". The 381 districts that reported this information reported that, on
average, teachers in each district used 8.9 leave days per teacher in
1986-87, with the standard deviation of mean usage across districts being

3.3 days)- Given a school year of about 180 days, the absentee rate of
teachers in the state was slightly less than 5% in 1986-87. While this
number is somewhat higher than absence rates found in May 1985 Current
Ponulation Survey data, it must be stressed that the rate for teachers
includes all of the nonsick leave forms of absences enumerated above)-1
Simple tabulations also suggest that mean usage of leave days per teacher

10

increases with school district size; private sector studies have also
observed that absenteeism increases with establishment size)-2
Data on leave provisions specified in New York State teachers'

contracts in 1986-87 were compiled from contracts that over 100 of the
superintendents returned with their surveys, from special reports prepared.
for the authors by F.A.C,T.S. (a Palmyra, New York firm

files

that maintains

on teacher contracts) and from teacher contracts that are on file at

the Albany offices of the New York State Public Employment Relations Board

(PERB). From these sources, contract information for S45 school districts
in

the state, including

survey,

virtually all districts who

responded

to our

was compiled.

These contracts indicate that provisions governing teacher leave vary
widely

in the state. Total leave days available per teacher each year was

coded as the sum

religious

of sick leave, personal leave, family illness leave,

leave, and bereavement leave (the latter included nb when days

used for it were deducted from the days

categories'
per

provided in another of the

days). While the modal contract permitted 15 days

year, others permitted between 9 and 37 days

per

total leave

year. Of the

contracts that included a separate bereavement leave category, most
frequently

the

they provided for the availability of 3 to 5 days of leave in

event of a death of a close family member.
While

most frequently contracts permitted between 180 and 200 days of

unused sick leave to cumulate, about 10% of the contracts specified less
than 180 days (or did not mention cumulation), while over 10% permitted

more than 200 days. Over two-thirds of the contracts allowed at least
part of unused accumulated sick leave to be "cashed in" at retirement <or

11

sometimes before) either in the form of cash payments, terminal year
salary increases, or the funding of health insurance after retirement.

The dollar amount paid" for day

of

unused leave varied widely across

diètricts and, within a district, often varied with &

retiree's

age.13 In

some districts all retirees were eligible, while in others, only people
retiring by specified ages were eligible to cash in unused sick leave
days.

Over two-thirds of teacher contracts specified teacher eligibility
for a fixed number of visitation, conference and/or professional days,

with 3 or 5 days per teacher per year specified most frequently. The
other one-third either did not mention such days, or indicated that they

were allocated at the discretion of school administrators. Finally,
almost 60% of the contracts indicated that some form of sick leave bank
was present in the district.

The other data used in the analyses all came from New York State

Education Department (NYE) or U.S. Bureau of Census sources. The NYE
1986-87 Personnel Master File contained the age, sex, degrees, teaching

experience, tenure status, class size, and class "quality for every
assignment for every public school teacher employed in the state in the

spring of 1987. This enabled us to construct district-wide averages for
these variables. Data on sociodemographic characteristics of students in
the district and the communities in which they reside came from the NYE
1986-87 Basic Educational Data System File and the 1980 Census of

Population School District File. Data on student absenteeism were

obtained from NYE Annual Education Summary: Nineteen Eighty-Six
Seven.

12

The only standardized tests that jfl

students in New York State take

are third and sixth grade standardized reading and math tests (PEP tests),
a sixth grade social studies test (PET) and eighth or ninth grade

competency tests in reading and writing (PCT). High school students going
for Regents diplomas also take various high school Regents academic
examinations (REGENTS), while other high school students take Regents

competency examinations (RCT). Data on the percentage of students who
passed each of these tests were obtained from the NYE 1987 Comprehensive
Assessment Reoort.

A limitation of these test score data is that they permit us to look
only at the academic performance of students in the lower-tail of the

academic talent distribution in each district. That is, together with the
prior mentioned data, they permit us to study how teacher and student
absenteeism affect pass rates (and hence failure rates) but not how
teacher and student absenteeism affect scores of students who perform well

above the passing level. While this is a limitation, one may plausibly
argue that the lower tail of the academic talent distribution is the group
whose academic performance will suffer the most from teacher and student
absences.

A complete enumeration of all of the variables used in the analyses
that follow and their sources are found in Appendix B.

IV.

F.mvirical Analyses
This section presents our econometric analyses of the determinants of

teacher and student absenteeism in New York State school districts in
1986-87 and of the effects of these variables on students' test score

13

performance. Teacher and student absenteeism are each first analyzed
treating the other as exogenous and then consideration is given to whether

they should be treated as jointly endogenous. Finally, their effects on
students' test score performance are estimated.

A)

Determinants of Teacher Absenteeism

Table 1 presents estimates of teacher absenteeism equations for the
subset of responding districts in our sample whose teacher contracts had
provisions for "buy back" at the retirement date of unused cumulative sick
leave days, the formula for computing the buy back was explicit and a

stated maximum number of days that could be bought back was present. The
dependent variable in each of these equations is the average number of

leave days used by teachers in a district in 1986-87. The equation in
column (1) specifies that teacher absenteeism depends only on the leave

provisions found in the contract. These include the annual number of
leave days permitted (nleave), whether a sick leave bank is present
(bank), the number of days of bereavement leave permitted for one family
member (ber) •

the

maximum dollar per day buyout of unused cumulative leave

days at retirement (buydd), the maximum number of days to which unused
leave can cumulate (cum), and the annual number of visitation,
professional and conference days specified in the contract (vis).14
Although our primary interest is in the effects of these variables,
succeeding columns generalize the specification to allow for the effects

of other variables. These include district size, as measured by the
number of teachers in the district (ne); the average number of days
students in the district were absent in 1986-87 (stuabs); three variables

14
measuring teacher characteristics, the proportions of male teachers
(pmaled), teachers age 55 and older (page55d), and tenured teachers
(ptend) in the district; and two variables measuring demographic
characteristics of the district; the proportions of students in the
district in 1980 that resided in an urban area (purban) and that were

white (pwhite). To correct for heteroscedascityof the residuals, all
-

observations are weighted by district size.

Quite

strikingly, the leave policy variables all significantly

influence teacher usage of leave days and the magnitudes of their effects
are relatively insensitive to the other variables included in the

analyses. As expected, the larger the number of annual leave days
permitted the higher annual leave usage is. although the marginal effect
is significantly lower than unity. Districts that have sick leave banks
average approximately one day per year more leave usage than other
districts and districts that explicitly provide for bereavement leave, but
do not deduct usage of such from other leave categories, also experience
higher leave usage.

The presence of more generous provisions for the buy-back of unused
sick leave days does lead to lower annual

usage of

leave days. On the one

hand, increasing the number of days that unused days can cumulate to by 30
would decrease annual

usage

of sick leave by about one day. On the other

hand, increasing the dollar per day buyout by $50 would decrease annual

usage by slightly more than one-half a day a year.15 We return below to a
discussion of the wisdom of such changes.

Districts that provide for an explicit numbers of days for annual

visitation,

conference, and professional days

are

seen to have lower

15

teacher usage of actual leave days. Since superintendents were instructed
in our survey to include visitation, conference and professional days in
total leave days used, this result may appear to some as

counterintuitive.16 One plausible explanation, however, is that the
provision of such days (and the treatment of teachers more generally as
professionals) reduces by a greater amount the number of sick leave days

that teachers feel they need use for what is popularly called rest and
recuperation" purposes.

Briefly turning to the other findings, higher student absenteeism is

associated with higher teacher absenteeism. Contrary to our priors, the
greater the proportion of teachers older than 55, the lower the usage of
sick leave, perhaps because the payoff for unused sick days will be

received by older teachers in the near future. There is also some
evidence here that tenured teachers have higher usage of sick leave days
than nontenured teachers; a perhaps unintended side effect of the tenure
system.

Tables 2 and 3 generalize the equations estimated in Table 1 to

permit us to analyze data from larger samples of school districts. In
Table 2 we drop the restriction that there must be a maximum stated number

of days to which unused leave can cumulate and include a dummy variable if

unlimited accumulation of leave is permitted (dcl). Districts which allow
for unlimited accumulation are seen to have somewhat lower annual usage of
sick leave than other districts.'7
In Table 3, the further restriction is dropped that districts must
have buy-back provisions at retirement whose formulae we explicitly know.
The sample now used includes districts without buy-back provisions,

16

districts with provisions for buy-back at retirement whose formulae we
don't know, and districts that provide for another form of buyout of

unused leave days (typically prior to retirement). As such, the
specifications in this table also include a dichotomous variable that
takes on the value of one if the buyout formula is not known to us or if
there is another form of buyout for unused leave days and zero otherwise

(buy4). Furthermore, since the affect of the number of unused days
teachers may accumulate likely depends on whether a buyout provision
exists, the coefficient of this variable is allowed to vary with whether a
buyout provision exists (CUMl -

provision,

CUI4O -

no provision), as is the

coefficient of the dummy variable for districts that permit unlimited
accumulation of unused leave days (dell -

provision,

dclO - no

provision) 18
Due to severe collinearity problems among the latter four variables,

no significant effects for them are found in this table. Otherwise, the
pattern of coefficients of the leave policy variables is similar to,
although somewhat smaller and less significant, than those found in the

preceding tables. The large negative and significant coefficient for buy4
provides additional support for the notion that provisions for buybacks of
unused sick leave days reduce teacher usage of sick leave.

One final extension warrants being briefly reported here,
Superintendents were asked in our survey if a retirement incentive program
existed in their district and this was included as a dichotomous variable

in preliminary specifications. However, this variable never proved to be

significant. This result was not unexpected for two reasons. First,
superintendents who responded to oursurvey reported that even in

17

districts with such programs, on average, less than 2% of their teachers

retired in 1986-87. Even if retirees substantially increased their
absenteeism in response to a retirement incentive program, the effect on
the district-wide average absentee rate would probable be too small to

estimate. Second, many of the districts may well have considered their
buy back provisions as a retirement incentive program and variables to
capture these provisions were already included in the analyses.

B.

Determinants of Student Absenteeism

Table 4 presents estimates of equations that seek to explain average
absence days per student in New York State school districts in 1986-87.
Student absenteeism is postulated to vary with characteristics of the
district's teachers (the proportion that is male (pmaled), the proportion
that has tenure (ptend), the proportion that is 55 or older (pageS5d)),
sociodeuiographic characteristics of residents of the school district

(median household income (mhi79), proportion of adults with at least some
college education (pc), percent residing in urban areas (purban), and
percent that is white (pwhite)), characteristics of the school district
(proportion of students in elementary grades (felem), expenditures per
pupil (exppup), and total student enrollment (te67)), and the average
number of leave days used per teacher in 1986-87 (

ne)).

Separate

estimates are presented for the entire sample and for the subsamples of

school districts used in Tables 1 and 2. To correct for heteroscedascity,
each district's observation is weighted by total student enrollment in the
district.

18

Focusing initially on the specifications that treat teacher
absenteeism as exogenous (the columns denoted WLS), a fairly consistent
pattern of results emerges from these weighted least squares estimates.
Ceteris paribus, higher teacher absenteeism is associated with higher
student absenteeism, although the relationship is significantly less than

one-to-one. Similarly, larger districts and districts with a higher
proportion of teachers older than age 55 have higher student absentee

rates. In contrast, ceteris paribus, increases in the proportions of
students in elementary grades, male teachers, tenured teachers, and
residents that are white all are associated with lower absentee rates, as
are increases in household incomes in the community.

C.

Should Teacher end Student Absenteeism be Treated as Jointly
Determined?

The estimates discussed above treat student absenteeism as exogenous
in the teacher absenteeism equation and teacher absenteeism as exogenous

in the student absenteeism equation. The structure of these equations
suggests that they may well be Jointly determined and consequently

weighted two-stage least squares estimates (2SLS) of the student and
teacher absenteeism equations appear in Tables 4 and 5 respectively.19
Two striking results emerge from these tables.
On the one hand, student and teacher absenteeism no longer appear to
significantly influence each other; the relevant coefficients decline both

in their magnitudes and their statistical significance. On the other
hand, allowing each to be treated as endogenous in the other's equation
does not appear to affect any of the other coefficients in the model.

Most important, given our focus on the affects of school district leave

19

policies on teacher usage of leave days, the effects of leave policies are
invariant to whether student absenteeism is treated as endogenous in the
teacher absenteeism equation.

Of course, one can, in fact, conduct formal specification tests to

test the hypotheses that student absenteeism should be considered
endogenous in the teacher absenteeism equation and visa versa.20 These
tests, which are omitted for brevity, suggest that one can reject the
hypothesis that teacher usage of leave days is endogenous in the student
absentee day usage equation for all three samples used in Table 4 and that
one can similarly reject the hypothesis that student absentee day usage is
endogenous in the teacher usage of leave days equation for all but the
Table 1 sample.

Recall that teacher usage of sick leave days may appear to positively

affect student usage of absentee days for two reasons. On the one hand,
there is the "behavioral explanation" that increased teacher absences from
the classroom may reduce students' motivation to attend school and thus

increase students' absentee rates. On the other hand, there is the
possibility that an omitted district-specific variable (e.g., incidence of
illness) simultaneously causes both teacher and student absenteeism to be

high in a district. The latter explanation, however, is JQS consistent
with our rejection of the hypothesis that teacher usage of leave days
should be considered endogenous in the student absentee days usage
equation.

Taken together, these findings suggest that one should place more
confidence in the estimates in Table 4 that treat teacher leave usage as

exogenous, that teacher usage of leave days is consequently positively

20

associated with student usage of absentee days and that the Thehavioral

explanation" for this association is the correct one. Our discussion in
the concluding section of the paper of the benefits of reducing teacher
usage of leave days will make use of these results.

D.

Do Teacher and Student Absenteeism -Influence Student Test Score
Performance?
-

Table 6 presents estimates of the determinants of the percentages of
students

that

passed various standardized tests in New York State school

districts in 1986-87. Pass rates are specified in these equations to be
functions of vectors of characteristics of teachers in the district,
characteristics of classes in the district, characteristics of the racial,

ethnic and income distributions of students in the district, and of the
average number of days that students in the district were absent during
the year.

The estimates suggest that, ceteris paribus, teachers with less than
a master's degree (PthAST) are associated with lower and those with more

than a master's degree (PCTMAST) higher, student achievement. Pass rates
also tend to be consistently (across tests) lower in districts with higher
percentages of black students (BLKP), hispanic students (HISP) and

students from low-income families (SOCIN). Student absenteeism also
appears to be important; for every three additional days students on
average are absent, the percentage of students who pass the various tests

falls by about 1.0 to 2.5 percentage points.21 This should be contrasted
with mean pass rates on the various tests that range from 82 to 93%22,23
Teacher usage of leave days data were available for only about 55% of

the districts. To estimate the effect of teacher absenteeism on student

21
test score performance, the equations in Table 6 were reestimating adding
teacher leave day usage to the equations, assigning this variable a value
of zero if it was not reported, and then adding a (1,0) nonreporting of

teacher leave usage variable to the equation.24 This was done separately
for the average number of leave days used by teachers in the district
variable and, for tests taken in the elementary and secondary grades
respectively, for estimates of the average number of leave days used by
elementary and secondary teachers in the district respectively.25
The inclusion of these teacher absentee variables had virtually no

effect on the coefficients of the other variables in the model. Estimates
of the coefficients for the teacher and student absences variables are

presented in Table 7. Quite strikingly, for only one of these
standardized tests, the preliminary competency test (PCT) taken in the
eighth or ninth grades, is there any evidence that teacher absenteeism

adversely affects student test score performance. The estimates imply
that if teacher absenteeism in a district could be reduced by five days
per year, pass rate on the PCT in the district would rise by about .75 to

.85 percentage points.26 We stress, however, that these results suggest
that teacher absenteeism does not influence student performance on any of
the other elementary and secondary school standardized tests.
Several extensions of these analyses warrant briefly being reported

here.27 First one may argue that the purpose of providing teachers with
conference, visitation, and professional days is to increase their

effectiveness in the classroom. Thus including these days in total leave
days used, as we have done, may confound the effects of other types of

leave days on student test score performance. While our data do not

22

permit us to separate out conference, visitation, and profàssional days

actually used by teachers in each district, we do know for many

districts

the number of such days specified in union contracts that teachers may

take (vis). Reestimation of the equations in Table 7 with this variable
included as an additional explanatory variable did not cause the

coefficients of teacher usage of leave days to increase in size or
significance, nor were the coefficients of this variable systematically
either positively (or negatively) associated with student test score
performance.

Second, one may argue that the positive partial correlations we
observe between student absenteeism and student test score performance
arise because students doing poorly in school tend to be those who are
less motivated and thus absent more, not because student absenteeism leads

to poorer test score performance. To test for this, we reestimated the
test score equations in Table 6 and the student absentee equation in Table

4, adding

the vector of test scores as additional explanatory variables in

the student absentee equation and treating the test scores and student
absentee

rate as being simultaneously determined.

On average, treating student absenteeism as endogenous in the student
test score equations did not lead to smaller estimates of

the effects of

student absenteeism on student test score performance. Furthermore,
including

student test score performance in the student absentee equation

only marginally reduced the effect of teacher usage of leave days on
student absenteeism. 28

23
V.

Conclusions
Two

principal

sets of findings have emerged from our analyses.

First, school district policies governing the annual usage of teacher
leave days that appear in teacher contracts clearly do influence teachers'

usage of leave days. Ceteris paribas, a larger annual number of leave
days permitted, the presence of a "sick leave bank", a larger number of
days granted for bereavement leave, and a smaller number of professional1
visitation and conference days specified in the contract, are all

associated with higher actual teacher usage of leave days. Similarly,

policies that govern the "buyback' of unused sick days clearly matter. In
districts in which cumulated unused sick leave days can be "bought back",
typically at retirement, increases in the number of days that can be
"cashed-in" or in the dollars per day buyout are both associated, ceteris
paribus, with lower leave usage.

Second, higher student absenteeism is associated with lower pass
rates (higher failure rates) for students on a set of standardized tests.
In contrast, teacher absence from the classroom, at least at the levels
currently observed in New York State, for the most part does not appear to
be associated with students' pass rates on these tests.
Of course one should not conclude from this last statement that

teacher absenteeism has no impact on student learning. As already
discussed, our analyses focuses on pass rates on a set of standardized
tests; they thus do not permit one to conclude anything about how teacher
usage of leave days affects students whose academic performance is well-

above the "minimum pass" level on the exams nor how it affects aspects of

learning not measured by them. Moreover, one might reasonably suspect

24

that the variable measured with the greatest error in our analyses was the
teacher usage of leave day variable, as all other variables came from
annual reports filed by school districts with New York State, census data,

or union contracts. As is well known, if the measurement error in the
teacher absenteeism variable is random, this will cause its estimated
effect on student test score performance to be biased towards zero.29
Taking these latter results at face value, however, one can use our
findings to indicate the components that would go into a benefit/cost
analysis of the wisdom of changing the various provisions governing

teacher leave found in teacher contracts. For example, suppose one wanted
to increase the dollar per day buyout for unused leave by $50. Our
estimates (Table 1) suggest this would reduce teachers usage of sick leave
by more than one-half a day per teacher per year.

Now the benefits of such a reduction would take several Eons.
First, districts would incur lower costs for substitute teachers; the
savings here would depend on the salaries they pay for substitutes, as

well as on the extent to which lower teacher absenteeism would lead

districts to reduce their usage of substitutes,3° Second, to the extent
that lower teacher absenteeism behaviorally leads to lower student
absenteeism, as our discussion in section IV.C suggests, districts would
benefit financially because state aid to education formulae in New York

are based on school districts' average daily attendance.31

Third, to the

extent that lower student absenteeism leads to higher student test score

performance, as the results in Table 6 suggest, student test scores would
increase and the districts should place some value on this outcome;

25

The costs of such a reduction would be the higher payments for unused
sick days that districts would be obligated to make when teachers retire.
These payments would increase both because the dollar per day payment had
increased and because the number of leave days teachers use had decreased.

Of course, not all teacher in a district actually remain in a district
until their retirement date and, to the extent that these buybacks have
minimum age requirements (they typically apply only if one leaves the
district at age 55 or later), the buybacks may not be as expensive as
crude estimates might suggest.

26

1..

Eric HanUshek's (1986) survey of the educational production

function literature never mentions teacher absenteeism. Richard Humane
(1976) did find that student absenteeism adversely affected math test

scores in his sample of inner city children. Ann Summers and Barbara
Wolfe (1977) similarly find student absenteeism to negatively impact on
test scores, however other studies such as Lynn M. O'Brien, Ronnie
Meszaros, and William Pulliam (1985) and Robert Ziomek and William

Schoenberger (1983), do not find such a relationship. Studies of the
affects of the weekly time teachers spend on instruction on test scores
include Byron Brown and Dan Saks (1984), N.J. Kiesling (1984), and Charle.
Link and James Mulligan (1986).

•2. Studies by economists, that treat absenteeism as a choice-

variable in "labor-leisure" or "compensating differential for unfavorable
job characteristic" frameworks, include Steven Allen (1981a) (1981b)

(1983) (1984), and James Chelius (1981). Research by industrial
psychologists and management specialists on absenteeism is critically

reviewed in Paul Goodman, et al. (1984). The few studies on the
relationship between absenteeism and sick leave policies include Dan
Dalton and James Perry (1981), Paul Edwards and Hugh Scullion (1979),

Barron Haney, Jerome Rogers, and Judy Schultze (1983), Richard Kopelman,
Ceorge Schneller and John Silver (1981), and William Woska (1972); in the

main these are case studies or simple correlational analyses based on a
small number of employers.

3. Donald Winkler (1980).

4. Stephen Jacobson (1989).

27

5. In some districts teachers receive end of year cash bonuses if
their sick leave usage falls below prescribed levels.
6.

See1 for example, Allen (l98lb) and Chelius (1981).

7. Most long-term disability plans have six month waiting periods
and thus offer only limited earnings protection against long (but
temporary) illnesses).

8. If the plans do succeed in reducing the average age of teachers
in the district, in subsequent years, ceteris paribus, absentee rates may
be lower.

9. Ehrenberg, Chaykowski, and Ehrenberg (1988) have estimated
school district test score performance equations using earlier years data

for New York State than are used here. Their analyses, however, only used
a subset of the educational performance and district-wide measures used in
this paper and did not include measures of teacher or student absenteeism.

10. Respondents who did not report usage of sick leave either chose
not to participate in the study or claimed they lacked the resources to
compute sick leave usage for us.

11. See Bruce Klein (1986). While nationally 4.7% of all workers
were absent sometime during the survey week, the proportion of weekly
hours lost due to absenteeism (which corresponds to our absentee rate) was
2.6%.

12. See ENA's Job Absence and Turnover Report" (1988).
13. The credit received for unused day

is

sometimes specified as a

dollar amount, sometimes as a percentage of the individual's salary and,
still other times, as a percentage of the district's starting or average
teacher salary.

28
14,. ZUYDD was

as

a

calculated as follows. If the formula was specified

fixed dollar amount per day,

the amount

this amount was

used. In cases

where

varied (typically inversely) with age at retirement, the

largest fixed dollar amount was used. If the formula was specified as a
fixed percentage of either a teacher's final salary or of the average
salary in the district, this percentage was applied to the average teacher
salary in the district that we computed from individual teacher salary

data found in the NYE 1986-87 Personnel Master File. Again, in cases
where the percentage varied with age at retirement, the largest percentage
permitted was used.

15. To judge the magnitude of such an increase, the mean value of
buydd in this sample was $48.53 dollars/day and the standard deviation was

$48.12. Actual values ranged from $5.00 to $228.56 per day across
districts.

16. See section III.
17. The mean level of CU)! in districts with a specified maximum

limit was about 200 in this sample. The product of 200 and -.03 is -6.00
which is slightly lower (in absolute value) than the -6.6 coefficient of
dcl in column (5).

18. See section II.
19. For comparison purposes, IlLS estimates of the teacher
absenteeism equations are also reproduced in Table 5.

20. To test whether teacher usage of leave days should be considered
exogenous in the student absentee day usage equation, for example, one
reestimates the student absentee day equation including both teacher usage
of leave days and an instrument for teacher usage of leave days in the

29

equation.

If the former's coefficient proves to be statistically

significantly different from zero but the latter's does not, one can
reject

the hypothesis that teacher usage of leave days is endogenous in

the student absentee equation. See 3.
21.

A.

Hausman (1978) for details.

The mean number of days students were absent in each district

was about 10, while the standard deviation of wean absence days across
-

districts was around 2.5 days.

22.

The PET score reported is the district's percentile rank in the

state and thus is lower on average, than the other test scores.

23. One extension warrants being briefly reported. It is reasonable
to assume that unobserved district specific factors will cause the
residuals for a district to be correlated across equations in Table 6.

Efficiency can be improved in such a case by estimating the equations as a
system of "seemingly unrelated regressions" over the set of districts for

which data on all test scores were available. When this was done, using a
smaller sample of 610 districts, virtually identical results to those in
Table 6 were found.

24. This is known as the "modified zero-order regression" method for
regression analyses with missing data. See Maddala (1977).

25. About 250 school districts reported leave days used by secondary
school teachers in their survey responses as well as total teacher leave

day usage. For these districts we were thus able to estimate elementary
teacher usage of leave days.

26. Across districts in the sample, the mean pass rate on the PCT
was close to 93% and the standard deviation was 6%:

27. These results are available from the authors.

30

28. The .086 coefficient of ne in column 4 of Table 1 fell to .075
when the student test score performance variables were included and the
latter treated either as exogenous or endogenous.

29. See l4addala (1977) or any other econometrics text. Strictly
speaking, the direction of the bias can be signed only if all other

explanatory variables in the model are measured without error. Random
measurement error in dependent variables leads to inefficient but unbiased
estimates so our estimated coefficients in the teacher usage of sick leave
equations remain unbiased.

30. Salary data for substitute teachers are typically not found in
teacher contracts, as in most districts substitute teachers are not part

of the teacher bargaining unit. Special tabulations made by the Division
of Research and Educational Services of the New York State United Teachers
for four downstate counties (Suffolk, Putnam, Westchester, and Rockland)
suggest that starting salaries for certified per diem substitutes
typically were in the $40 to $65 per day range.

Our survey also asked school districts to report their usage of
substitute teachers and approximately 350 reported this along with teacher

usage of leave days. While on average, the two numbers were quite close
one-quarter of the districts reported that they used 15% or more

substitute days than teachers' used leave days. Similarly, another
quarter reported that they used 11% or less substitute days than teachers'

used leave days. Thus, decreases in teacher usage of leave days do not
lead necessarily to equal decreases in the use of substitute days.

31

31. The specification tests described in the text imply that the
estimates in Table 4 that treat teacher leave usage as exogenous (the ones

labelled WLS) are the ones too focus on. They suggest that each
additional day of teacher absenteeism increases student absenteeism on

average by about .1 days. Hence, if increasing the buyback at retirement
for unused leave days by $50 would reduce teacher leave usage by .5 days
per teacher, it would decrease average student usage of sick leave days by

.05 days. Based on a 180 day school year, this would increase average
daily attendance in the district by .028%.

Now in 1986-87, per-pupil state aid to education averaged $2,754 in
districts outside New York State (Office of the New York State Controller,

1987). Assuming a mean class size of 25 students per teacher, the average
increase in state aid oer teacher that would result would be
(.028/100) (2754) (25) or slightly over $19.

32

aEz&nMn
Steven Allen, Compensation Safety, and Absenteeism: Evidence from the
Paper Industry," Industrial and Labor Relations Review 34 (January
1981): 207-218 (1981a).

Steven Allen, "An Empirical Model of Work Attendance," Review of Economics
and Statistics 63 (February 1981): 77-87 (l981b).
Steven Allen, "How Much Does Absenteeism Cost?," Journal of liuman

Resources 28 (Summer 1983): 379-393.
Steven Allen, "Trade Unions, Absenteeism and Exit Voice," Industrial and
Labor Relations Review 37 (April 1984): 331-345.
"BNA's Job Absence and Turnover Report - 2nd Quarter 1988," Bulletin to
Manaaement 39 (September 8, 1988): 284-286.
Byron Brown and Daniel Saks, "The Microeconomics of Schooling" (mimeo,
Vanderbilt University, 1984).

James Chelius, "Understanding Absenteeism: The Potential Contribution of
Economic Theory,' Journal of Business Research 9 (

1981):

409-

418.

Dan Dalton and James Perry, "Absenteeism and the Collective Bargaining

Agreement: An Empirical Test,0 Academy of Mana2ement Journal 24
(June 1981): 425-431.

Paul Edwards and Hugh Scullion, Does Sick Pay Encourage Absenteeism,"
Personnel Mana2ement 11 (July 1979): 323-335.
Ronald C. Ehrenberg, Richard P. Chaykowski and Randy A. Ehrenberg,
'Determinants of the Compensation and Mobility of School
Superintendents," Industrial and Labor Relations Review 41 (April

1988): 386-401.

33

Paul Goodman, Robert Atkin and Associates, Absenteeism (San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass, 1984).
Eric Hanushek, "The Economics of Schooling," Journal of Economic
Literature 24 (September 1986): 1141-1177.
Barron H. Harvey, Jerome Rogers and Judy Schultze, "Sick Pay Versus Well

Pay: An Analysis of the Impact of Rewarding Employees for Being On
the Job," Public Personnel ManaEement Journal 12 (Fall 1983): 218224.

Stephen L. Jacobson, 'The Effects of Pay Incentives on Teacher
Absenteeism,' Journal of Human Resources 243 (Spring 1989).

H. J. Kiesling, "Assignment Practices and the Relationship of
Instructional Time to the Reading Performance of Elementary School

Children," Economics of Education Review 3 (1984): 341-350.
Bruce Klein, 'Missed Work and Lost Hours, May 1965," Monthly Labor Review

109 (November 1986): 25-30.
Richard Kopelman, George Schneller and John Silver, 'Parkinson's Law and

Absenteeism: A Program to Rein in Sick Leave Costs," Personnel

Administrator 26 (May 1981): 57-64.
Henry H. Levin and Hun C. Tsang, "The Economics of Student Time,'
Economics of Education Review 6 (No. 4, 1987): 357-364.
Charles Link and James Mulligan, "The Merits of a Longer School Day,"

Economics of Education Review S (No. 4, 1986): 373-381.
C. S. Madd.ala, Econometrics (New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 1977).

Richard Humane, The Impact of School Resources on the Learning of Inner
City Children (Cambridge, MA: Eallinger, 1976).

34

Lynn M. O'Brien, Bonnie Meszaros and William Pulliam,

"Effects

of Teacher

Use of Objectives on Student Achievement in Social Studies," Theory

and Research in Social EducationS (Fall 1985): 57-65.
Office of the New York State Controller, Financial Data for School

Districts for Fiscal Year Ended June 30. 1987 (Albany, NY: 1987).
John Pencavel, "Industrial Morale" in Orley Ashenfelter and Wallace Oates,

eds., Essays in Labor Market Analysis (New York: John Wiley and

Sons, 1977): 129-146.
Ann Summers and Barbara Wolfe, "Do Schools Make a Difference?," American

Economic Review 67 (September 1977): 639-652.
Donald R. Winkler, "The Effects of Sick Leave Policy on Teacher
Absenteeism," Industrial and Labor Relations Review 33 (January

1980): 232-240.
William J. Woska, "Sick Leave Incentive Plans: A Benefit to Consider,"
Public Personnel Review 33 (January 1972): 21-24.
Robert Ziomek and William Schoenenberger, "The Relationship of Title I

Student Achievement to Program and School Attendance," The Elementary
School Journal 84 (

1983):

232-240.

Appendix A

ASimvle

Model of Absenteeism

Consider the following simple model of absenteeism that abstracts
from many of the complexities discussed in the text. Let L be the
maximum annual number of days of leave teachers are eligible for each

year. Let S(<L) be the annual number of sick leave days they

use

each year due to illness; this is assumed to be known with certainty and
too be constant over their work life.

Let A be the number of leave days that teachers use each year and
assume that they are allowed to "save" each year's unused sick leave days

for potential use in the future. Any cumulated unused sick leave that is
unused as of their retirement date is "bought back" from them by the
school district at a rate of $6 per unused day.
To further simplify ignore discounting and assume that teachers get
utility from the sum over their worklives of leave days that they use each
period that are not required due to illness and from the payments (Y) they

receive at retirement for unused leave days. That is; assume that they
have a quasi-concave utility function (U) of the form

(Al) u — u(n(A-S),Y)
> 0,

where n is the number of periods they plan to work until retirement and

(A2) Y — bn(L-A)

A-2

to choose value, of A to maximize

Teachers seek

L—

u(n(A-S),Y) +

A

(bn(L-A)-Y).

where A is a lagrangian multiplier. The

order conditions

first

for a maximization require that
(Ma) nu1 - Abn — 0
(A4b) u2
(A4c)

-

A—0

bn(L-A)-Y —

0

From (A4a) and (A4b) it iuciediately follows that A > 0

in

and that

equilibriwn b — (u1/u2) > 0.
Totally diffrentiating the first order conditions and writing the
results in matrix notation, one obtains

r1 'sun
-bn] rdA-i
"as .11 II lTaz

L-bn

-l

Let D denote
side of

0 J

LJ

r
I

An

0

Ab-u11 r

°

Ldn
J ia
I

LA.isn -bn

(A-L)b

the determinant of the 3 by 3 matrix on the

left-hand

(A5). Second order conditions for the solution to the

optimization problem to be a maximum guarantee that I) > 0.
Comparative

static

results can be obtained by solving (AS) using

Cramer's Rule. It is straightforward
order condition result that

b—

to show (making use

u,/u2) that

of the first

A-3

(Ak)

and

8A/BL — (bn2/u2D)

(Al) BY/ÔL — (b2n/u1D)(u12u1.-u2u11)

If the usage of leave days and the payments at retirement for unused
-

leave days are both normal goods then
uizu2-ujua > 0

Thus,

an

increase

in the number of leave days teachers are eligible for

each year will increase both

payments

(A8)

they

0.

and u12u1-u21.½1 >

their

receive for unused

ÔA/oL>0

annual

leave

usage of

leave days and the

days

ôy/8L>0

Taken together, this implies that an increase in the

days

number of leave

teachers are eligible for each year will lead to a smaller increase

in the number of leave days used each year since part of this increase in
"wealth" is used to "purchase" increased income at retirement.

(A9) 0<oA/ÔL<l

It is similarly straightforward to show that

(AlO)

8A/ab — (-An/D) + ((L)/b)(aA/ÔL).

A-4
Unambiguous predictions about the effect of an increase in the size
of the payment at retirement for unused

sick

leave days can

not

be

obtained. The first term in (AlO), which represents the substitution
effect, is always negative. However, the second term in (AlO), which
represents the income effect of the change in the "price0 of unused days
is positive.

Finally, it is also straightforward to show that

(All)

ÔA/8n —

((L.A))/n)(oA/an)

>

-

0.

Teachers with longer horizons (those farthest from retirement at the
date of hire) will use more days of leave per year.
We must stress that this model abstracts from many important

complexities. These include a varying incidence of the number of sick
days that must be used each year over the life cycle and the uncertainty
associated with these days, varying preferences for usage of leave days
over the life cycle, positive rates of discount, an upper limit on the

number of leave days that may be cumulated, and allowing the usage of

leave days to vary over the life cycle. Nonetheless, the model clearly
illustrates how leave policies may influence absenteeism.

Appendix b

$ources of Data
A)

From Authors' Survey of School Superintendents in New York State
(all
data refer to the 1986-87 academic year)

Number of teachers in the district
1—presence of a retirement incentive plan, 0—no
Leave days used per teacher in the district
Retirement rate of teachers in the district
B)

From FACTS, contracts provided by the superintendents, and contracts
on file at PEltS in Albany (all data refer to the 1986-87 academic
year)
NLEAVE

-

Annual leave days (including bereavement leave if part of

another category), 0—missing or unlimited
Days that unused leave can cumulate to, 0—not reported or
unlimited
- 1—cumulative leave days unlimited, 0—other
QQII
BANK
1—sick leave bank present, 0—no
Days of bereavement leave for one family member if
bereavement leave is a separate category, 0—other
BUYDD - Estimate of maximum $/day buyout at retirement, 0—no buyout
or another form of buyout
l—buyout takes a different form, and/or additional buyout
provisions are present, 0-either a $/day or % salary/day
form is used or no buyout provision is present
Annual visitation, professional, and conference days
specified in the contract
-

C) From the 1986-87 New York State Education Department Personnel Master
File (when E or S replaces D, variable is for elementary or secondary
grade teachers in the district).
MSALARYD (E,S) - mean salary of teachers in the district
PMALED (E,S)
percent of male teachers in the district
PLThA$TD (E,S) - percent of district's teachers with less than a
master's degree
PGTMASTD (E,S) - percent of district's teachers with more than a
master's degree
PINDLYD (E,S) - percent of district's teachers who taught in the
district last year
PTEND (E,S)
percent teachers with tenure in the district
- mean
MEXP3D (E,S)
years total teaching experience for district's
teachers
PACESSD (E,S) - percent of teachers age 55 and older in the district
MASSEXPD (E,S) - mean years experience for the district's teachers in
the particular assignment
- mean
MSIZED (E,S)
class size in the district

3-2

PMIXD

(E,S)

)WOM000 (E,S)

D)

- percent
-

of the district's classes that are of mixed
skill level
mean quality in homogeneous classes in the district
(1—below average, 2—average, 3—above average,
4—honors, S—advanced placement)

From the 1986-87 New York State Education Department BEDS (Basic
Educational Data System) file.
TE67

-

LIMEP67

-

total

district enrollment

1NDP67 - percentage of students that are American Indian
BU(P67 - percentage of students that are black
HISP67 - percentage of students that are Hispanic
SOCIN67 -

percentage of students with limited English proficiency
socioeconomic indicator for the district (percentage of
children age 5 to 17 in families below the poverty line)

E)

From the 1987 New York State Education Department Comprehensive
Assessment Retort data file.

of districts 3rd grade students above the SRP on
the PEP tests
PEP6
percent of district's 6th grade students above the Sfl on
the PEP tests
PEPALL - percent of district's 3rd and 6th grade students above the
SRP on the PEP tests
percentile rank of the district's students on the grade six
social studies PET test
percent of district's students taking PCT reading and
writing tests that passed
RcT
percentage of students who took regents competency tests
who passed them
REGENTS - percentage of students who took regents exams who passed
them
FELEMTE - fraction of district's enrollment in elementary grades
PEP3

F)

percent

From Annual Educational Summary
(State Education Department)
STUAES
EXPPUP

C)

-

-

-

Nineteen

Eighty-Six-Ei2htv-Seven

Average number of days students were absent from school

Expenditures per pupil in the district

From 1980 Census of Population: School District File (all data refer
to 1979)
?ffi179

-

Median household income

Percent urban
PWHITE - Percent white
PURBAN
PHHWC

-

- Percent households with children
- Percent adults with at least some college education

Table 1

Determinants of Teacher Usage of Leave Days in New York State
in 1986—87: Sample of School Districts With "Buy—Back"
Provisions and Stated Maximum Number of Days That Can Be Bought Back
(absolute value t statistics)
(1)

(2)

11.560 (5.5)

11.254 (5.7)

nleave

.179 (2.9)

.145 (2.5)

bank

.916 (2.0)

1.000 (2.3)

ber

.344 (3.2)

buydd

Constant

(3)

9.987 (4.4)

(5)

3.480 (1.0)

—.626 (0.1)

.124 (2.1)

.116 (2.0)

1.001 (2.4)

.836 (2.0)

1.021 (2.4)

.233 (2.2)

.233 (2.2)

.204 (2.0)

.182 (1.8)

—.007 (1.8)

—.011 (2.8)

—.010 (2.5)

—.011 (2.8)

—.013 (3.2)

cum

—.030 (3.0)

—.030 (3.2)

—.028 (3.0)

—.028 (3.0)

—.031 (3.3)

vis

—.918 (3.2)

—.729 (2.6)

.753 (2.7)

—.761 (2.8)

—.838 (3.1)

.005 (4.3)

.004 (3.2)

.004 (2.9)

.004 (2.2)

.108 (1.2)

.185 (2.1)

.310 (2.7)

2.194 (0.6)

2.373 (0.6)

—9.905 (2.3)

—12.659 (2.7)

8.228 (2.4)

6.531 (1.9)

ne
stuabs

.140 (2,4):

pinaled

page55d
ptend
purban

.958 (1.5)

pwhite

5.196 (1.8)

n
-

(4)

.162

.248

.288

.296

.307

162

162

162

162

160

where
— annual leave days permitted per teacher in the district (includes
bereavement leave if it is part of another category)
— 1—sick leave bank present in the district. 0—no

nleave

bank

—

ber

days of bereavement level permitted for one family member if bereavement

cum

leave is a separate category
— maximum dollar/day buyout of unused cumulative leave days at retirement
— maximum number of days to which unused leave can cumulate

vis

—

-

buydd

ne

stuabs

pmaled

annual visitation, professional and conference days specified in the contract
— number of teachers in the district
— average number of days students in the district were absent in 1986—87

fraction
fraction
—. fraction
— fraction
— fraction
—

of male teachers in the district

pagessd —

of teachers age 55 and older in the district

ptend

of teachers with tenure in the district

purban
pwhite

of students in the district residing in an urban area in 1980

of students it the district who were white in 1980

See Appendix B for sources of data.

Table 2

Determinants of Teacher Usage of Leave Days in New York State
in 1986—87: Sample of School Districts With "Buy—Back" Provisions
(absolute value t statistics)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

10.818 (5.3)

10.442 (5.5)

9.131 (4.2)

3.763 (1.1)

1.482 (0.3)

.192 (3.4)

.183 (3.4)

.179 (3.4)

.172 (3.3)

.170 (3.2)

1.163 (2.8)

1.059 (2.7)

1.069 (2.7)

.876 (2.3)

1.012 (2.5)

.298 (3.1)

.214 (2.3)

.201 (2.2)

.181 (2.0)

.151 (1.6)

buydd

—.005 (1.5)

.010 (2.7)

—.009 (2.5)

—.010 (2.7)

—.011 (3.0)

cum

—.028 (2.9)

—.030 (3.3)

—.027 (3.0)

—.029 (3.1)

—.031 (3.3)

dcl.

—5.317 (2.8)

—6.036 (3.3) —5.553 (3.0)

—6.078 (3.3)

—6.559 (3.4)

vis

—.714 (2.8)

Constant

nleave
bank

ber

ne

—.539 (2.2)

—.561 (2.3)

—.561 (2.4)

—.592 (2.5)

.005 (4.8)

.004 (3.9)

.004 (3.6)

.004 (3.0)

.102 (1.3)

.180 (2.3)

.247 (2.7)

3.140 (0.9)

3.548 (1.0)

—10.400 (2.6)

—12.527 (2.8)

6.541 (2.1)

4.949 (1.5)

stuabs
pmaled
page5sd

ptend
purban

.798 (1.3)

pwhite

3.301 (1.2)

2
n

.152

.244

.247

.286

.288

190

190

190

190

188

where

cmi — maximum number of days to which unused leave can cumulate, equals 0 if
unlimited

dcl —

1—unlimited accumulation of unused leave days. 0—limited accumulation

All other variables are defined as in Table 1.

Table 3

Determinants of Teacher Usage of Leave Days
in New York State in 1986—87
(absolute value t

statistics)

(2)

(1)

(3)

(4)

(5)

7.582 (5.3)

7.039 (4.6)

5.073 (2.9)

—.699 (0.3)

.149 (aM)

nleave

.081 (2.0)

.085 (2.1)

.080 (2.0)

.070 (1.8)

.071 (1.8)

bank

.451 (1.4)

.506 (1.6)

.479 (1.4)

.364 (1.1)

.357 (1.0)

bet

.160 (2.2)

.137 (1.8)

.119 (1.6)

.089 (1.1)

.091 (1.1)

buydd

—.005 (1.3)

—.004 (1.2)

—.004 (1.0)

—.008 (2.0)

—.007 (1.9)

buy4

—.996 (2.0)

—.985 (1.9)

.799 (1.6)

—1.292 (2.5)

—1.315 (2.5)

cuml

.001 (0.2)

.004 (0.5)

.006 (0.8)

.004 (0.5)

.005 (0.7)

cumø

—.003 (0.5)

—.002 (0.3)

.001 (0.1)

—.003 (0.4)

—.001 (0.2)

dcli

.531 (0.3)

.897 (0.6)

1.332 (0.9)

.843 (0.6)

1.048 (0.7)

Constant

dclØ

—.721 (0.5

—.340 (0.2)

.269 (0.1)

—.281 (0.2)

—.038 (0.0)

via

—.176 (0.5)

—.160 (1.1)

—.158 (1.0)

—.146 (1.0)

—.148 (1.0)

.000 (1.0)

—.000 (0.7)

—.000 (0.7)

—.000 (0.6)

.170 (2.4)

.211 (2.9)

.192 (2.1)

pmaled

2.335 (0.8)

2.320 (0.8)

page55d

—.474 (0.1)

.029 (0.0)

ptend

7.040 (3.0)

7.486 (2.9)

ne
stuabs

—.213 (0.4)

purban

—1.211 (0.5)

pwhite

1)

.039

.039

.053

.086

.081

331

331

331

331

328

whet e

buydd — maximum dollar/day buyout of unused cumulative leave days at retirement
if known

to

us, 0—other

buy4

— 1—other form of buyout (including prior to retirement) or formula not
known to us, 0—other

cumi

— •cum if buyout provision exists, —0 otherwise

cumø

— —cum if no buyout provision, —0 otherwise

dcli

—

dclø

— —dcl if no buyout provision, —0 otherwise

dcl

if buyout provision exists, 0 otherwise

All other variables are defined as in Tables 1 and 2.

Table 4

—2.088 (1.0)

(2.4)

—3.683 (2.5)

ptend

—.112 (4.5)
—2.641 (1.9)
.791 (2.4)

.203 (1.6)
.704

—.130 (5.3)
—2.980 (2.2)
.617 (1.9)
—9.876 (9.2)
.177 (9.8)
.086 (2.8)
.688

mhil9C

Pc

purban

te6f

Zne

1.

336

.142 (7.5)

(3.6)

188

.660

2SLS —

WLS —

.104 (2.3)

.169 (2.9)

—12.404 (8.7)

.600 (1.3)

—2.061 (1.0)

—.165 (5.0)

.301 (1.5)

9.771

weighted
weighted

188

.648

(2.2)

.

160

732

.152 (3.4)

.206 (3.0)

.140 (0.3)
—13.088 (9.7)

2.671 (1.2)

—.188 (5.9)

.265 (1.2)

11.166 (4.3)

—4.611

—5.328 (2.1)

—11.164 (6.1)

wis
31.998 (13.8)

total

-

(1.9)

(1.2)

(3.4)

160

.715

.038 (0.3)

.252 (3.1)

.257 (0.6)
—13.181 (9.8)

2.571 (1.1)

—.199 (6.1)

.241

10.220

—3.332 (1.5)

—4.944

—10.541 (5.3)

32.033 (13.9)

2SL5

Buy—Back.,
Provision Subsample

least square estimates

.026 (0.2)

.187 (2.9)

—12.439 (8.7)

.749 (1.6)

—1.720 (0.8)

—.175 (5.3)

.248 (1.3)

8.903 (3.0)

—1.447 (0.1)

—5.382 (2.0)

—9.042 (4.7)

30.245 (13.2)

25L5

Restricted

two—stage least square estimates
ccoefficient has been multiplied by 1000.
where
felem — fraction of students in the district in elementary
grades in 1986—87
exppup — expenditure per pupil in 1986—87
tthil9 — median household income in the school, district in 1979
— fraction of adults in the school district with at
pc
least some college education in 1979
—
te67
student enrollment in the district in 1986—87
—
Lne
average leave days used per teacher in the district in 1981—87
All other variables are defined in Table 1.
See Appendix B for data sources.

bsanple used in Table

asample used in Table 2.

n
359

.209 (1.4)

.493 (3.4)

exppupC

—12.753 (8,5)

6.665 (3.1)

6.168 (2.9)

pagessd

—4.256

—5.801 (2.2)

—5.214 (2.6)

—3.409 (1.8)

pmaled

—9.476 (5.0)

—8.890 (5.6)

—7.735 (4.8)

30.029 (13.1)

WLS

felem

30.264 (14.8)

2SLS

Buy—Rack Provision Subsamplea

26.519

(15.6)

WI_S

Entire Sample

Constant

pwhite

statistics)

Determinants of Average Student Absentee Days in New York State School Districts In 1986—87
(absolute value t

(1.6)

.310 (2.1)
2.373 (0.6)

stuabs

pmaled
(2.2)

See Tables

188

.288

3.301 (1.2)

.198 *1.3)

4.949 (1.5)

—12.527 (2.8)

definitions.

160

.271

I, 2 and 3 for variable

160

.307

.251 (0.0)

5.196 (1.8)

pwhite

n

.800 (1.2)

5.769 (1.6)

—10.763

.958 (1.5)

6.531 (1.9)

.241 (2.7)

3.255 (0.8)

3.548 (1.0)

.005
(0.0)

.004 (3.0)

.005 (2.7)

purban

ptend

—12.659 (2.7)

.004 (2.2)

me

page55d

—.838 (3.1)

via
—.592 (2.5)

(2.6)

188

.271

1.876 (0.5)

.174 (1.3)

4.775 (1.4)

—11.888

3.703 (1.1)

.151 (0.8)

.004 (3.0)

—.569 (2.3)

(3.4)

(2.5)

(1.9)

—.001

(0.2)

.005 (0,7)

—1.315

—.007

.091 (1.1)

.357 (1.0)

(0.8)

328

.081

—1.211

(0.5)

—.213 (0.4)

7.486 (2.9)

.029 (0.0)

2.320

.192 (2.1)

—.000 (0.6)

—.148 (1.0)

(0.0)

—.038

—6.525

—.031 (3.2)

—.011 (3.0)

.159 (1.7)

1.025 (2.5)

.071 (1.8)

.149 (0.0)

(1.0)

(1.5)

(0.2)

(0.8)

(0.3)

(2.5)

327

.067

—4.696 (1.1)

—.168

6.835

.600 (0.1)

2.537

—.025 (0.1)

.000 (0.3)

—.147 (1.0)

—.095 (0.1)

1.139 (0.7)

—.001

.005 (0.6)

—1.421 (2.6)

—.007

.106 (1.3)

.438 (1.3)

.075 (1.9)

5.767

2SLS

Table 3 Sample

dclP

6.559 (3.4)

—.031 (3.3)

—.011 (3.0)

.151

.171 (3.2)

3.664 (0.6)

WLS

1.048 (0.7)

—.724 (2.5)

—.031 (3.1)

(3.2)

1.012 (2.5)

.170

1.482 (0.3)

2SLS

Table 2 Subsample
WLS

dcli

dcl

curnø

cunl

corn

buy4
—.031 (3.3)

—.013 (3.2)

—.013 (3.2)

buydd

.180 (1.7)

.182 (1.8)

bet

1.026 (2.3)

.131 (2.2)

6.753 (1.1)

1.021 (2.4)

.116 (2.0)

nleave

bank

—.626 (0.1)

Constant

WLS

Table 1 Subsample
2SLS

Comparison of WLS and 2SLS Estimates of the Determinants of Teacher Usage of Leave Days
(absolute value t statistics)

Table 5

1.007 (1.2)

(1.3)

(0.1)

—1.229

—.109

.105 (0.6)

PHI?

?4HOHOG

—.38?

—.232

—.308

LIHEP

SOCIN

STUABS

686

5(5*) Coefficient

n

.034

lISP

.280

—.037

BL1CP

—.199

(6.8)1

(0.8)

(0.1)

(1.4)

(0.3)

—.382

(4.7)5

(5.0)*

(6.8)1

(0.7)

(1.2)

(4.9)5

(2.6)1

(0.4)

(0.0)

(L9)51

(3.9)5

(4.7)5

.397
690

—1.359

—1.082

(4.2)1

(8.4)1

2.182 (3.2)*

—.875

—.316

.069 (0.3)

4.923 (2.0)1

3.06t (0.8)

—.317

.027 (0.0)

—6.321

—.016

10.180 (1.4)

—13.163

9.672 (0.8)

90.773 (28.0)

PET

(1.9)

(0.4)

(11.3)1

(0.9)

(0.1)

(2.7)1

(1.3)

(I.8)**

(5.8)*

.322
620

—.365

—.170

(3.6)1

(4.0)1

.160 (0.7)

—.126

—.132

.005 (0.1)

.610 (0.7)

—3.111

—.069

.066 (0.4)

4.236

—.020

4.093 (1.9)1*

—3.160

—1.585

93.233

PCTb

(2.2)*

(0.4)

(0.5)

(0.7)

(1.0)

658

.445

—.825

—.057

—.458

—.051

—.178

—.128

—.102

(0.3)

(2.1)1

(0.2)

(4.0)*

(0.2)

(1.5)

(2.0)*

(8.0)1

.453
660

—.421

—.223

(3.6)*

(4.7)5

.332 (1.3)

—.169

—.196

.098 (1.0)

5.781 (4.6)*

—2.491

.047 (0.8)

—.045

20.487

—.062

6.073 (2.5)1

—.610

—6.745

61.559 (10.8)1

REGENTSC

two—tail test.

(7.2)1

(1.2)

(1.9)1*

(0.6)

(7.5)5

(1.4)

(0.1)

2.839 (1.7)**

—.124

—.087

2.926

—.173

—2.499

3.06/ (1.4)

.427 (0.1)

100.820 (18.5)*

RCT

different from zero at the .05 (.10) level of significance,

686

.382

—.208

—.102

—.067

—.077

.029 (0.5)

.655 (1.1)

—.745

—.004

.176

(4.5)5

(0.1)

(1.2)

(5.7)5

(1.8)1*

(1.5)

—1.130

—.161 (1.1)

1.764 (1.1)

(3.5)1

3.085 (1.1)
—4.254

is statistically significantly

686

.324

—.526

—.044

(2.1)1

(3.6)1

—.098

—.131

—.030

(0.5)

(2.1)1

.161 (0.1)

(0.3)

—.099

(2.0)

.084

HSIZE

INDP

.273

(0.4)

.056

MASSEX?

.653 (0.1)

(0.1)

.470

(1.0)

PINDLX5

—.221

(0.9)

—.145

.539 (0.2)

HixP35

PGTMAST'

3.501 (2.0)1

_5547 (3.2)1

(1.9)1*

—2.528

PLThAST

(0.!)

—0.47?

(2.7)*

7.865

PHALE°

PEPA

(19.6)1 100.599 (28.0)1

(24.8)

INTERCEPt

101.491

PEP6

98.358

PEP3

the Percentages of New York State School District Students
That Passed Various Standardized Tests 1986—87 Academic Year

Deterainante of

Table 6

6
(continued)

-

-

Authors' co.putstiona from various New York State Education Department sources: (I) 1967
Comprehensive Assessment
Data File — PEP) to RECENTS (2) 1986—67 Basic Educational Data System (BEDS) — INDP to SOCIN; (3) 1986—87 Annual Report
—
Educational Suwaary (preliminary tables) STUABS; (4) 1986—87 PersonneL Master File — PHALE to MUOMOG;

placement)

calso included in the equation is a control for the fraction

of eligible students

who took the regents exams.

ba1so included in the equation are controls for the fraction of eligible students who took the PCT tests
and the grades and times of
year that the PCT reading and writing tests were given;

avariable used is average for elementary grade teachers in PEP3, PEP6, PEPA, PET, and PCT
equations and average for secondary grade
teachers in RCT and REGENTS equation;

and

Table

of district's 3rd grade students who scored above the 5K? on the PEP tests
of district's 6th grade students who scored above the SRP on the PEP tests
of district's 3rd and 6th grade studens who scored above the 5K? on the PEP tests
rank of district's students on the grade six social studies PET test
of district's students taking PCT reading and writing tests that
passed
of district's htudents who took regents competency exams that
passed them
of district's students who took regents exams that passed them
proportion of wale teachers in the district
proportion of teachers with less than a master's degree in the district
proportion of teachers with more than a waster's degree in the district
mean years total teaching experience for district's teachers.
proportion of district's teachers who taught in the district last year
mean years experience
for teachers in the district in their particular assignment
mean class size in the district
proportion of the district's classes that are of mixed skill level
mean quality
in homogeneous classes in the district (1—below average, 2—average, 3—above average,
4—honors, 5—advanced
percentage of students that are American Indian
of
students that are black
percentage
percentage of students that are Hispanic
percentage of students with limited English proficiency
district socioeconomic indicator (percentage of children age S to 17 in fasilies below the
poverty line)
average numb!r of days students in the district were absent

percentage
percentage
percentage
percentile
percentage
percentage
percentage

Data Sources:

STIJABS

HISP
LIME?
SOCIN

fizz?

IND?

MIIOHOC

NASSEAF
MSIZE
PHIX

PINDLY

MU?)

PLTMAST
PGThAST

PMALE

PEP3
PEP6
PEPA
PET
PCT
RCT
REGENTS

where

(0.3)

.017 (0.2)

—.528 (4.7)'

O32

—.532 (4.8)'

PEP6

statistic)

(35)'

—.155 (1.8)"

355

—.173 (1.9)"

—.340 (3.3)'

PCT

(7.2)'
.033 (0.3)

—.825

.001 (0.0)

—.824 (7.1)'

RCT

—.105 (0.9)

—.406 (3.5)'

—.063 (0.6)

—.422 (3.6)'

REGENTS

are included in the underlying analyses as well as a dummy variable for

.008 (0.0)

—1.363 (4.2)'

—.032 (0.1)

leave

leave days used in 1986—87 per elementary school teacher in the district

leave days used in 1986—81 per high school teacher in the district

LEAVEE

LEAVES

days used in 1986—87 per teacher in the district

6

.023 (0.4)

—.384 (5.0)'

.014 (0.2)

—1.351 (4.1)'

PET

value t

LEAVEA

where

PEPA

(absolute

—.387 (5.0)'

¶411 the explanatory variables included in Table
nonreporting of teacher usage of leave days.

LEAVES

STUABS

.077 (1.1)

LEAVEE

(0.3)

—.312 (3.7)'

.027

—.311 (3.6)'

STUABS

LEAVEA

STUABS

PEP3

+

Marginal Effects of Student Absence Days and Teacher Use of Leave Days on the
Percentage of New York State School District Students that Passed
Various Standardized Tests in the 1986—87 Academic Yeara

Table 7

