NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REAL BUSINESS CYCLES: A NEW KEYNESIAN PERSPECTIVE

N. Gregory Mankiw

Working Paper No. 2882

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1989

Professor of Economics, Harvard University, and Research Associate, National
Bureau of Economic Research. This paper was prepared for the Journal of
Economic Persyectives. I am grateful to Laurence Ball, Susanto Basu,
Marianne Baxter, Mark Bils, Lawrence Katz, Deborah Mankiw, David Romer,
Joseph Stiglitz, Lawrence Summers, Timothy Taylor, David Weil, and Michael
Woodford, for helpful discussions and comments, and to the National Science
Foundation for financial support. This paper is part of NBER's research
programs in Economic Fluctuations and in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2882
March 1989

REAL BUSINESS CYCLES: A NEW KEYNESIAN PERSPECTIVE

ABSTRACT

This paper is a critique of the latest new classical theory of

economic fluctuations. According to this theory, the business cycle
is the natural and efficient response of the economy to exogenous changes

in the available production technology. This paper discusses several
versions of this theory and argues that this line of research is unlikely
to yield an empirically plausible explanation of observed economic
fluctuations.

N. Cregory Mankiw
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

The debate over the source and propagati on of economj C
fluctuations rages as fiercely today as it did fifty years ago in
the aftermath of Keynes's The

Theory and in the mi dst of

the Great Dep ression. Today, as then, there are two schoo is of
thought

The cia ssical school emphas iz es the optimization of

private economic actors, the a dj ustment of re lative prices to
equate supply and demand, and the effic iency of unfettered
markets.

The Key nesian schoo 1 believe s that understand in g

economic fluctuati ons requires not just study ing the intri cacies

of general

e qu ii ib rium,

but als 0 appreci ating the possibil ity of

market fai lure on a grand scale.
Real bus mess cycle theory is the late St incarnation of the

classical view of economic fluctuations.

It

assumes that there

are large random fluctuations in the rate of technological
change.

n response to these fluctuations, i ndividuals

rationally alter their levels of labor supply and consumption.
The busine ss cycle is, according to this theo ry, the natural and

efficient response of the ec onomy to changes in the available
product i o n

technology.

My goal in this essay is to appraise this newly revived

approach to the business cyc le
am not an advocate.

I should admit in advance that I

In my view, real business cycle theory does

not provide an empir ically plaus ible expi anat ion of economic
fluctuations

Zoth its reliance on large technol ogical
1

disturbances as the primary source of economic fluctuations and
its reliance on the intertemporal substitution of leisure to
explain changes in employment are fundamental weaknesses.
Moreover, to the extent that it trivializes the social cost of
observed fluctuations, real business cycle theory is potentially

dangerous. The danger is that those who advise policy-makers
might attempt to use it to evaluate the effects of alternative
macroeconomic policies or to conclude that macroeconomic policies
are unnecessary.

Wairasian Equilibrium and The Classical Dichotomy
The typical undergraduate course in microeconomics begins

with partial equilibrium analysis of individual markets. A
market for a good is characterized by a downward sloping demand

curve and an upward sloping supply curve. The price of the good
is assumed to adjust until the quantity supplied equals the
quantity demanded.

The course then builds up to Wairasian general equilibrium.
In this Wairasian equilibrium, prices adjust to equate supply and

demand in every market simultaneously. The general equilibrium
system determines the quantities of all goods and services sold

and their relative prices. The most important theoretical
result, after the existence of such a Wairasian equilibrium, is
the "invisible hand" theorem: the equilibrium is Pareto
efficient.

Courses in microeconomics thus show how employment.
2

production, and relative prices are determined without any
mention of the existence of money, the medium of exchange.

The

simplest way to append in oney to the model is to specify a money

demand function and an e xogenous morey supply. Money demand
depends on the level of output and the price level. The 1evel of
output is already determined in the Walrasian system.

The price

level, however, can adjust to equat e supply and demand in the
money market.
Introduc in g money in t his way leads to the classical

dichotomy.

(Pa tinkin 1956)

Real variables, such as employment,

output, and tel ative prices, including the real inte rest rate,

are determined by the Ja1ras jan system. Nominal
as

var j ables

the pri ce level, the nominal wage, and the nom inal

rat e,

such

inte rest

are then determined by the equilibrium in the in oney market.

Of cou rse
the

since nominal van ables do not affec

ney m arket is not very impor tant

t

real var i ables

This c lass ic al vi ew of

the ec onomy suggests that, fo r mos t po licy disc uss ion s, th e money

mar ke

t

can be ignored

The profe ssor of macroeconomic s must in some way deal with
the class ical dichotomy. Given th e assumptions of Walrasian
equi librium, money is largely irre levant. The macroeconomjst

must either destroy this classical dichotomy or learn to live
with it

Keynesian macroeconomics destroys the classical dichotomy by
abandoning the assumption that wages and prices adjust instantly

to clear markets. This approach is motivated by the observation
3

chat many nominal wages are fixed by long-term labor contracts
and many product prices remain unchanged for long periods of

time. Once the inflexibility of wages and prices is admitted
into a macroeconomic model, the classical dichotomy and the
irrelevance of money quickly di sappear
Much of the early work in the new classical revolution of
the l970s attempted to destroy the classical dichotomy without

abandoning the fundamen tal axiom of continuous market clearing.

(Lucas 1972,1973) These models were based on the assumption that

individuals have imperfect information regarding prices. These
individuals therefore confuse movements in the overall price
level (which under the classical dichotomy should not matter)

with movements in relative prices (which should matter). An
unanticipated decrease in the money supply leads individuals to
infer that the relative prices of the goods they produce are
temporarily low, which induces them to reduce the quantity
supplied. TJhile the fascination with this sort of story was

substantial in the l970s, it has attracted relatively few

adherents in the 1980s. It is hard to believe that confusion
about the price level is sufficiently great to generate the large
changes in quantities observed over the business cycle.

In contrast to both the Keynesian and the early new
classical approaches to the business cycle, real business cycle

theory embraces the classical dichotomy. It accepts the complete
irrelevance of monetary policy, thereby denying a tenet accepted

by almost all macroeconomists a decade ago. Nominal variables,
4

such as the money supply and the price level, are assumed to have
no role in explaining fluctuations in real variables, such as
output and employment.

Real business cycle theory thus pushes the Walrasian model

farther than it has been pushed before. In evaluating whether it

provides

a successful explanation of recessions and booms, two

questions naturally arise. First, why are there such large
fluctuations in output and employment? And second, why do
movements in nominal variables, such as the money supply, appear
related to movements in real variables, such as output?

Classical and Keynesian Views of Economic Fluctuations
The only forces that can cause economic fluctuations,
according to real business cycle theory, are those forces that

change the Wairasian equilibrium. The Walrasian equilibrium is
simply the set of quantities and relative prices that
simultaneously equate supply and demand in all markets in the

economy. To understand how real business cycle theory explains
the business cycle, it is necessary to look into the fundamental
forces that change the supplies and demands for various goods and
services

Many sorts of macroeconomic disturbances can in principle

generate fluctuations in real business cycle models. For
example, changes in the level of government purchases or in the
investment tax credit alter the demand for goods and therefore

affect the WaIrasian equilibrium. Changes in the relative price
5

of oil

alter

the equilibrium allocation of labor among

alternative uses. Many of the macroeconomic disturbances that
receive much attention among Keynesian macroeconomists will also

have important effects in real business cycle models. There is,
however, substantial disagreement between the two schools
regarding the mechanisms through which these disturbances work.
Consider the case of a temporary increase in government

purchases. Almost all macroeconomists agree that such a change
causes an increase in output and employment, and the evidence,

mainly from wartime experience, supports this prediction. Yet
the explanations of this effect of government purchases differ
greatly. (Cf. Barro 1987 and Dornbusch and Fischer 1987)

Real business cycle theory emphasizes the intertemporal
substitution of goods and leisure.

It begins by pointing out

that an increase in government purchases increases the demand for

goods. To achieve equilibrium in the goods market, the real
interest rate must rise, which reduces consumption and

investment. The increase in the real interest rate also causes
individuals to reallocate leisure across time. In particular, at
a higher real interest rate, working today becomes relatively
more attractive than working in the future; today's labor supply

therefore increases. This increase in labor supply causes
equilibrium employment and output to rise.

While Keynesian theory also predicts an increase in the real
interest rate in response to a temporary increase in government
purchases, the effect of the real interest rate on labor supply
6

does not play a crucial role. Instead, the increase in
employment and output is due to a reduction in the amount of

labor unemployed or underutilized. In most Keynesian theory, the
labor market is charac terized as of ten in a state of excess

supply

•

Inc ontrast

the Wa].ras ian approach of real bus mes s

cycle theory does not allow for the possibility of invol untary
unemp I oyment.

Both real busi ness cycle theory and Keynesian theor y thus

conclude that incre ases in government purchases increase output
and employment
imp 1 i cation s

This example shows that some of the prominent

of Keynesian models also come Out of intert emp oral

Wairasian mod els

Macroeconomists face a problem of app rox

ima te

observational eq uivalen Ce: many ob served phenomena are consistent

with both the ci assical and Keynes ian paradigms.

The Cen tral
Wh ile many sorts of macroeconomic disturbances can in
princ ip le cause economic fluctuations in real busine ss c ycle

mode ls, most attention has foc used on technologic al disturbances.
The reason is that other sorts of disturbances ar e unlikely to

gen erate fluctuations in real business cycle mode Is that resemble
act ual economic fluctuations.

An obvious but important fact is that over the typical
bus mess cycle, consumption and lei sure move in opposite

dir ections.

When the economy goes into a reces sion, consumption

fal Is and leisure rises. When the economy goes

7

into a boom,

cons ump t Lon rises and leisur e falls. Explaining this p henome non
is p 0 tCfl tia lly problematic f or real business cycle theo ry:
cons urnp t ion and leisure woul d often be expected to move together.
s inc e

bo th are normal goods.

In the example of a

t

e mp

0 rary

increase in government purchases, both consumpt ion and leisure

should fall. Many other changes in the demand for goods, such as
a change due to a temporary inves tment tax cred it, also should
cause consumption and leisure to move together.
Real business cycle theo ry must explain why mdiv iduals in

a

recession find it rational to increase the quantity of leisure
they demand at the same time they decrease the quantity of goods
they demand.

The answer mu st be that the price of leis ure

relative to goods, the real wage, falls in a recession.
crucial implication of real business cycle theory is tha C

Hence

a

the

real wage is procyclical.1

If the production function were unchanging and demand shocks
were the source of fluctuations, real business cycle theory would
have tro uble generating a p rocyc I ical real wage.
input is low in a recession

S

ince labor

one would expect that the marginal

product of 1 abor and thus the real wage should be high. With an
unchang i ng p roduction function, diminishing marginal returns to

labor wo uld produce a countercyclical real wage, not the
procyci i cal real, wage necessary to explain the fluctuations in

'Alternatively, one could explain the observed pattern
without a procyclical real wage by positing that tastes for
consumption relative to leisure varyover time. Recessions are
then periods of "chronic laziness." As far as I know, no one has
seriously proposed this explanation of the business cycle.
8

consumption and leis ure.
Real b usiness c ycle theorists there fore assume that there

are substan tial fluc tua

t ions

in the rate of technological change

In a recess ion, th e available production technology is relatively
The marginal product of labor and thus the real

unfavorable

wage are low

In response to the low return to working,

individuals reduce consumption and inc rease leisure.
Since real bus mess cycle theory describes economic
fluc tuat ion 5 as a c hanging

Walrasian e quilibrium, it implies that

these fluct uations are efficient. Civ en the tastes of
individuals and the technological p055 ibilities facing society,
the levels of emplo yment, output, and consumption cannot be
improved.

Attempts by the government to alter the allocations of

the private market, such as policies to stabilize employment, at

best are me ffective and at worst can do harm by i mpeding the
"invisible h and

Of all the

N

implicat ions

of real business cycle theory, the

optimalicy of e conomic f luctuations is perhaps the most shocking.
It seems un deni able that the level of welfare is lower in a
recession t han in the bo om that preceded it.

Keynesian theory

explains th e reduc tion in welfare by a failur e in economic
coordinatjo n: beca use wages and prices do not adjust
ins tan taneously to

equate supply and demand in all markets, s ome

gains from trade go unrealized in a recession. In contrast, real

bus me ss cycle theo ry allows no unrealized gains from trade.
reason welfare is 1 ower in a recessiqn is, according to these
9

The

theories, that the technological capabilities of society have
declined.

The Evidence on Technolo ical Di s turbance s
Advocates of real business cycle theories

have trouble

convincing ske ptic s that the ec on o my is subject to such large and

in technology. It is a
accumulat ion of knowle dge a nd

sudden changes

more standard presumpt ion

that the

the concurrent increas e

in

the economy's techno logical opportunities take place graduaLLy

over time. Yet to m imic observed fluctuations, real busi ness
cycle theorists must mai ntain
run fluctuation 5

that there are s ub St anti

t (I 986)

has

the importance of te chno logic al

changes in tot al fac tor

the

shares. This

offered some direct evidence on

disturbances.

produ ctivity

He examines

for the U nited

States

in Out put less th e percent change in
the di ffe rent inputs are we ight ed by their factor
Solo w res idua I" sho uld measure the rate of

p ercent

inputs, where

short

in the produ ction function.

Edward Pr escot

economy- -

a 1

change

technological progre ss. Pre scott points out that there are

substantial El uc tuat ions in the Solow residual, a finding which
suggests a pot ential ly impor tant role for technological
disturbances as a source of business cycle fluctuations.
Figure

the percent

1

presents my ca iculation

change

of the Solow residual and

in output yearly since 1948. (Both variables

are for the private economy less agriculture and housing
services

Like Prescott, I find substantial fluctuations in

10

measured tota 1
factor produc
3.4 percent.

factor

tivity

productivity. For

fe 11 by 3.5 percent,

example, in 1982
while in 1984 it

total

rose by

One might interpret these numbers as showing that

the economy' s ability to convert inputs into outputs--the

aggregate pr oduction function--varies substantially from year to
year.
Figure 1. also shows that measured productivity is highly

cyclical. In every year

in which output fell, total factor

productivity a lso fe 11.

If the Solow residual is a va lid measure

of the change fn the available production technology, then
recessions are perio ds of technological regress.

The Solow res id ual need not be interpreted as evidence
regarding exoge nous technological disturbances, however. The
standard explan ation of cyclical productivity is that it reflects
labor hoarding and o ther "off the production function" behavior.
Productivity ap pears to fall in a recession because firms keep
unnece ssary

and

unde rutili zed labor. In

labore rs begin to pu t Out greater effort;
wi thou t

a large

A n examina

a boom the hoarded
output

inc r ease j n measured labo r input

tion of the

data

from the

increases
2

earl y 1940s appears to

support this standard explanation of the cyclical behavior of
2

A related explanation of the procyclical behavior of the
Solow residual has recently been proposed by Hall (1987): Hall
points Out that if price exceeds marginal cost because of
imperfect competition, then the measured Solow residual will
appear procyclical even if the true production technology is
unchanging. Alternatively, the Solow residual could reflect
endogenous changes in technology due to demand shocks: such
endogeneity might arise if, for example, learning-by-doing is
important.
11

productivity. The increase in output associated with the World
War II build-up is most plausibly a demand-driven phenomenon.
Yet from 1939 to 1 944 measured tota 1 factor produc tivity grew an
average of 7. 6 per cent per year.

By contrast, th e most

productivity has g rown in any year since then is 5 .2 percent

n

1950.) One might interpret this f inding as showin g that the
economic boom of t he l940s was in fact driven by s upply shoc ks
rather than de mand shocks. A mor e appealing inter pretation is
that the Solow res idual is not a good measure over short hor izons

of changes in the economy's tech nological abilities.
Once the Solo w residual is rejected as a measure of year-toyear changes in th e available production technol ogy, there is no
longer any di rec
disturbances.

t

evidence for substantial techn ological

Yet to generate fluctuations that mimic observed

fluctuations, real buS mess cycle models require such
disturbances.

The ex 1. stence of large fluctuatio ns in the

available tech no

lo gy

i

s a crucial but unjustifie d ass ump

t ion

of

real business cyci e th eory.
An advoca te 0 f re al business cycle theory might respond that

economic model s of ten rely on ass umptions for which there is no
formal evidenc e

Yet more casual evidence also does not give

plausibility t 0 the as sumption of subs tantial technological

disturbances. R ecessi ons are important events; they receive
widespread atten tion from policy-maker s and the medi a. Th ere is,
however, no disc ussion of declines in the available techno logy.
If society suffered some important adverse technological shock,
12

we would be aware of it. My own reading of the newspaper,
however, does not lead me to associate most recessions with some
exogenous deteriorati on in the economy's productive capabilities.
The OPEC ene r

gy

price changes of the l970s illustrate that

when the econo my expe riences large real shocks, these shocks are
ab le

easily identif i

that the econo my

and much discussed. Figure 1 indeed shows

exp e rienced

large negative Solow residuals in

1974 and 1979, as one might have expected.3 Yet the five other

recessions in the pos t-war period also exhibit large negative
Solow residual S.
changes in the

To explain these Solow residuals as adverse

ag gre gate

production function, one would need to

find events wi th the economic signi ficance of the OPEC price
increases

The apparent absence of such events is evidence that

these recessions cannot be easily attributed to exogenous real

shocks

4

Labor Suoolv and Intertemooral Substitution
Real business cycle theori sts assume that fluctuations in
employment are fully voluntary.

In other words, they assume the

economy always finds itself on the labor supply curve. Yet over
the typical business cycle, emp loyment varies substantially while

Whether changes in energy prices affect the Solow residual
computed from GNP depends on a variety of issues involving the
construction of index numbers like CNP. See Bruno and Sachs
(1985, P. 43) for a discussion.
4Hamilton (1983) finds oil price changes are also associated
with the pre-OPEC recessions. Yet these prices changes are much
too small to explain plausibly such large declines in
productivity.
13

the determinants of labor

s

upply - - the

interest rate- -vary only sl ightly.

pattern, rea 1

business

real wage and the real

To mimic thi s observed

cyci e model s require that individuals be

very willing to reallocate leisure over time.

Individuals must

significanti y reduce the qu anti ty of 1ãboTth ey supply in
response to small temporary reduc t ions in the real wage or in
response to small decreases

in

the real interes

t rate

It is u nlikely, howeve r, that individuals are so responsive
to interternp oral relative p rices.

Econo metric evidenc e on labor

supply typic ally finds that the w ill ingn ess of individ uals to
substitute 1 eisure over tim e is s light.

inter tempo r a lly
assume, then

If lei sure we re highly

substitutable, as real b us mes s cycle theorists

in dividuals

facing exp

e C

te d

wage should wor k little today and much

in

increa ses in their real

the future.

Individuals fac ing expected decre ases i n their real wage should

work hard to day and enjoy leisure in th e future. Yet studies of
individual 1 ab

the

or

supply over time find

that

expe cted changes in

real wage lead to only small change 5 in hour s worked.

(Altonj i

1985

Ball 1985)

Indivi duals do not re spond to expected

real wage changes by substantially real lo cating leisure over
time.

Personal experience and introspec tion provide ano ther way
to judge the behavioral re sponses on wh ich real busines s cycle
models rely.

One key beh avioral respo nse is that quan tity of

labor supplied reacts subs tantially to the real interes t

Jithout such intertemporal substitution
14

rate.

real business cycle

models are unable to explain how a temporary increase in
government purchases increases output and employment.

Yet such a

behavioral response does not se em pla usible. The real imte rest
rate is simply not a significan t cons ideration when md ivid ual
decide to leave their jobs or t 0 acce Pt new employment.

s

Jh ile

economists can easily convince laymen and students that the

quantity of apples demanded dep ends on the price of app les, it is
much harder to convince them th at labo r supply depends on the

real interest rate. The implic ation I draw from this o bservation
is that the intertemporal subst i

tutab i lity

of leisure i s very

likely- far too weak to get real business cycle models to work

Real Business Cycle Th eories with Mul tiole Se c
The real

bus imes s

tots

cycle theories I have been dis cussing so

far treat pro duct ion as if it takes place in a single industry.

This abstractio n, however, is not characteristic of all real
business cycle theories
Some real business cycle theones emphasi ze changes in the

technologies of different sectors

rather than economy-wide

changes in techn ology. (Long and Plosser 1983)
highlight the in teractions among the sectors.

These model 5
Even if the shocks

to the different sectors are inde pendent, the outputs of th e
different sectors move together.

For example, an adverse s hock

to one 5 ector reduces the wealth of the individuals in the
economy; these individual s respond by reducing their demand for
15

all goods. An observer would see an aggregate business cycle,
even without a single aggregate shock.

To get these real business cycle models to work, however,
the number of independent sectoral shocks cannot be too great.
If there were many independent sectoral shocks and labor were
mobile between sectors, then the law of large numbers would
guarantee that these shocks and their effect on the aggregate

economy would average out to zero. To get an aggregate business
cycle, these models therefore require that there be only a few
sectors and that these sectors be subject to large technological

disturbances. These models are therefore similar to the singlesector theories and suffer from the same weaknesses: the absence
of any direct evidence for such large technological disturbances
and the implausibility of strong intertemporal substitutability
of leisure.

A second type of sectoral shock theory emphasizes the costly

adjustment of labor among sectors. (Lilien 1982) These models,
which depart more from the Walrasian paradigm, assume that when a
worker moves from one sector to another, a period of unemployment

is required, perhaps for job search. In this case, independent
shocks across many sectors do not offset each other. Recessions
are, according to these theories, periods of more sectoral shocks
and thus greater intersectoral. adjustment.

This type of real business cycle theory may appear more
plausible than those relying on substantial aggregate

productivity shocks and intertemporal substitution. It is
16

perhaps easier to imagine that recessions are characterized b y an
unusually great need for intersectoral reallocation than by s ome
sort of major technological regress that makes leisure unusua 1

ly

attractive. Yet the available evidence appears not to suppor t
this intersectoral story. If workers were unemployed volunta r

i ly

in recess ions because they were moving to new jobs in other

sectors

we would expe Ct to find high unemployment coinciding

with high job vacancy.

Yet observed fluctuations have just the

opposite pattern: high unemployment rates coincide with low
levels of help wanted advertising. (Abraham and Katz 1986)
Moreover,

in contrast to the prediction of this theory, the

measured mobility of w orkers between sectors is strongly
procyclic al.

(Murphy and Topel 1987)

This real business cycle

theory is also unable to be plausibly reconciled with observed
economic fluctuations

Money and Prices over the Business Cycle
Before real business cycle theory entered the macroeco nomic
debate in the early 1980s, almost all macroeconomists seemed to
agree on one conclusion: money matters.

Both historical

discussions of business cycles (Friedman and Schwartz 1963) and
more formal econometric work (Barro 1977) pointed to the Fe deral
Reserve as an important source of macroeconomic disturbances.
While there was controversy as to whether systematic monetary
policy could stabilize the economy, it was universally accepted
that bad monetary policy could be destabilizing.
17

it is ironic that real business cycle theory arose in the

wake of Paul Voicker's disinflation. Many economists view this
recent experience as clear confirmation of -the potency of

monetary policy. Voicker announced he was going to slow the rate
of money growth to achieve a lower rate of inflation; the rate of
money growth in fact slowed down; and one of the deepest post-war
recessions followed, as did an eventual reduction in the rate of

inflation. This set of events is easy to explain within the
context of Keynesian theory with its emphasis on the gradual
adjustment of wages and prices.

It is less easy to explain

within the context of real business cycle theory.5
Robert King and Charles Plosset (1984) explain the
historical association between money and output by arguing that
the money supply endogenously responds to fluctuations in output.
Standard measures of the money supply such as Ml are mostly

inside money, that is, money created by the banking system. King
and Plosser suggest that the transactions services of inside
money should be viewed as simply the "output" of one sector of

the economy, the banking sector. Just as one should expect the
outputs of different sectors to move together within a multisector real business cycle model, one should expect the output of

the banking sector to move with the outputs of other sectors. An
increase in productivity in any sector will tend to increase the

The recent disinflation is not unusual. Romer and Romer
(1989) show that output typically falls after the Fed makes an
explicit decision to reduce inflation, which they interpret as
evidence against real business cycle theory.
18

demand for transactions services; the banking system responds by
creating more inside money.

Hence, the procyclical behavior of

standard monetary aggregates cannot necessarily be interpreted as
evidence that changes in outside money caused by the monetary

authority have real effects.
While the story of K ing and Plosser can explain the
procyclical behavior of money, it cannot explain the pro cyclical
behavior of prices.

It is a wel 1 documented fact that,

absence of identifiable real sho
changes, inflation tends to r ise

in the

s such as the OPEC oil price
I-

n booms and fall in re ce

This famous Phillips curve co rre La tion

played

S S ions

a central role in

the macroeconomic debate of t he 19 60s, and it was the pr ima ry

empirical motivation for the ea ny new classica 1 theories in the

1970s. (Friedman 1968, Lucas

1 972

Yet since the model o f King

and Plosser generates procycli cal money through the demand for

transactions services, these fluctuations in money will be
associated with fluctuations in real balances not with
fluctuations in prices.

The short-run Phillips curve has thus

been left without an explanat ion by real business cycle
theorists

6

6

Indeed, as King and Plosser point out, their model makes
the counterfactual prediction that the price level should be
countercyclical: since the demand for real outside money probably
rises in a boom, and it is the outside money stock that pins down
the price level, equilibrium in the market for outside money
requires that the price level fall in a boom.
19

The Tradeoff between Internal, and External Consistency

A good theory has two characteristics: internal consistency

and external consistency. An internally consistent theory is one
that is parsimonious; it invokes no ad hoc or peculiar axioms.
An externally consistent theory is one that fits the facts; it
makes empirically refutable predictions that are not refuted.
All scientists, including economists, strive for theories that

are both internally and externally consistent. Yet like all
optimizing agents, scientists face tradeoffs. One theory may be
more "beautiful," while another may be easier to reconcile with
observation.

The choice between alternative theories of the business
cycle--in particular, between real business cycle theory and new
Keynesian theory- - is partly a choice between internal and

external consistency. Real business cycle theory extends the
Wairasian paradigm, the most widely understood and taught model
in economics, and provides a unified explanation for economic

growth and economic fluctuations. New Keynesian theory, in its
attempt to mimic the world more accurately, relies on nominal

rigidities that are observed but only little understood. Indeed,
new Keynesians sometimes suggest that to understand the business
cycle, it may be necessary to reject the axiom of rational,

optimizing individuals, an act which for economists would be the
ultimate abandonment of internal consistency.

The tension between these two goals of science will

undoubtedly continue. Each school of macroeconomic thought will
20

highlight its strengths while trying to improve on its
weaknesses.

My own forecast is that real business cycle

advocates will not manage to produce convincing evidence that
there are substantial shocks to technology and that leisure is

highly substitutable over time. Without such evidence, their
theories will be judged as not persuasive. New Keynesians,
however, have made substantial progress in recent years toward
providing rigorous microeconomic foundations, the absence of
which was the fatal flaw of the Keynesian consensus of the l960s.
Jhile real business cycle theory has served the important
function of stimulating and provoking the scientific debate, it
will, I predict, ultimately be discarded as an explanation of
observed fluctuations.

21

References

Abraham, Katharine G • and Lawrence F. Katz, "Cyclical
Unemployment: Sec toral Shifts or Aggregate Disturbances?"
Journal of Politi cal Economy, June 1986, jj, 507-522.
Altonji, Joseph G., "Intertemporal Substitution in Labor
Supply: Evidence from Micro Data," Journal of Political
Economy, June 198 6, Part 2, 2.

Sl76-S2l5.

Ball, Laurence, "Inter temporal Substitution and Constraints on

Labor Supply

Evidence from Panel Data," manuscript, M.I.T.,

1985

Barro

Robert J • ,"Unanticipated Money Growth and UnempL oyme rtt

the United S tates,"

American Ecpnomic Review. 1977,

101-

115.

Barro, Robert J

Macroeconomics, New York: Wi ley, 1987.

Bruno, Michael, and Jeffrey Sachs, Economics o f Worldwide
Staf].ption, Cambridge, MA: Harvard Unive rsity Press, 1985.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Stanley Fischer, Mac roeconomics, New

York: McGraw-Hill, 1987.

Friedman, Milton, "The Role of Monetary Policy." American

Economic Review, 1968, , 1-17.
Friedman, Milton, and Anna Schwartz, A Monetary History of the
United States, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1963.
Hall, Robert E. ,

"Market Structure and Macroeconomic

Fluctuations," Byookjngs Papers on Economic Activity,
1987:1, 285-322.
22

in

Hamilton, James D., "Oil and the Macroeconomy since World
War II," Journal of Political Economy, April 1983, 2.1,

228-248.
King, Robert G., and Charles I. Plosser, "Money, Credit, and
Prices in a Real Business Cycle," American Economic Review,

June 1984, j, 363-380.
Lilien, David M., "Sectoral Shifts and Cyclical Unemployment,"
Journal of Political Economy, August 1982, Q., 777-793.
Long, John B. Jr., and Charles I. Plosser, "Real Business
Cycles," Journal of Political Economy, February 1983, jJ,,
39-69.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr., "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,

Journal of Economjc Theory, 1972, , 103-124.
Lucas, Robert E. Jr., "International Evidence on Output-Inflatjc
Tradeoffs," American Economic Review, 1973,

326-334.

Murphy, Kevin M. , and Robert H. Topel, "The Evolution of

Unemployment in the United States: 1968-1985,"
NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1987.

Patinkin, Don, Money. Interest, and Prices: An Interation of
Monetary and Value Theory, Evanston, I1l.:Row, Peterson, 1956
Prescott, Edward, "Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement,"
CarneEie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy, Autumn 1986,
21,

11-44.

Rotner, Christina, and David Romer,

"Does Monetary Policy

Matter: A New Test in the Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz,"
NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1989, forthcoming.
23

</ref_section>

-1

0
(0

0 xl

C-)

-1

N)

-D -1

(0

0

P1

0

cr,

Lfl

(1 P1 xl

0 I- 0

c-f)

I

I

0

r%)

-

-

co

o

PERCENT

PER

YEAR

