                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        MEASUREMENT ERROR IN CROSS-SECTIONAL AND LONGITUDINAL LABOR
           MARKET SURVEYS:  RESULTS FROM TWO VALIDATION STUDIES




                                 John Bound
                                Charles   Brown

                               Greg J. Duncan

                             Willard L. Rodgers




                           Working Paper No. 2884




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 March 1989




Prepared for the symposium "Panel Data and Labor Market Studies" held in
Amsterdam, December 15-17, 1988. Research reported in this paper was
supported by NSF grant SES 86200-86 and reflects the work of the authors,
Alan Krueger and Nancy Mathiowetz. Lynn Dielman provided inspired research
assistance throughout the data collection of the second wave of the PSID
Validation Study and in the analysis of those data represented in this paper.
Dawn von Thurn was also instrumental in the data collection phase.   It has
benefited from comments of participants in the Cornell Labor Workshops. We
also owe special thanks to several members of the personnel and payroll
offices of the firm that cooperated with us in the PSID Validation Study. We
regret that our pledge of confidentiality precludes listing their names to
give them some well-deserved recognition. This paper is part of NBER's
research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #2884
                                                March 1989


              MEASUREMENT ERROR IN CROSS-SECTIONAL AND LONGITUDINAL LA8OR
                 MARKET SURVEYS: RESULTS FROM TWO VALIDATION STUDIES


                                          ABSTRACT



      This paper reports evidence on the error properties of survey reports of labor
market variables such as earnings and work hours. Our primary data source is the PSID
\1alidation Study, a two-wave panel survey of a sample of workers employed by a large
firm which also allowed us access to its very detailed records of its workers earnings. etc.
The second data source uses individuals' 1977 and 1978 (March Current Population

Survey) reports of earnings, matched to Social Security earnings records.
      In both data sets, individuals: reports of earnings are fairly accurately reported,
and the errors are negatively related to true earnings. The latter property reduces the
bias due to measurement error when earnings are used as an independent variable, but
(unlike the classical-error case) leads to some bias when earnings are the dependent
variable. Measurement-error-induced biases when change in earnings is the variable of
interest are larger, but not dramatically so. Various measures of hourly earnings were
much less reliable than annual earnings. Retrospective reports of unemployment showed

considerable under-reporting, even of long spells.


                                                John Bound
                                                Charles Brown
                                                Greg J. Duncan
                                                Willard L. Rodgers

                                                Institute for Social Research
                                                University of Michigan
                                                Ann Arbor, MI 48106-1248
                                     I. Introduction

      In contrast to our knowledge of most other aspects of labor market phenomena.
conventional wisdom about the nature and effects of the measurement properties of
earnings, work hours, tenure and other key concepts is based on assumption rather than
on direct observation. Most empirical studies of labor market behavior ignore
measurement error altogether or, at most, view it as a harmless component of the
stochastic disturbance of their behavioral models.
      Measurement error models presented in econometric and statistical textbooks

typically make strong — and exceedingly convenient — assumptions about the properties
of error (cf. Fuller, 1987). Most frequently measurement error in a given variable is
assumed to be uncorrelated with the true level of that and all other variables in the
model, measurement error in other variables and the stochastic disturbance (e.g.,
Kmenta, 1986; Pindyck and Rubinfeld,1981). From these assumptions comes the most
elementary version of conventional wisdom about the effects of measurement error on
estimates of cross-sectional models: (i) error in the dependent variable neither biases nor
renders inconsistent the parameter estimates but simply reduces the efficiency of those
estimates and (ii) error in the measurement of independent variables produces
downward-biased and inconsistent parameter estimates, with the extent of bias and
inconsistency dependent upon the extent of the error.
      The novelty of panel data has produced a less well-defined body of conventional
wisdom about the measurement properties of such data. The most convenient
assumption is that measurement errors in a given variable are uncorrelated across time,
leading to the conventional wisdom that measures of change produced by panel data are


                                             1
                                              2

much noisier than correspon4ing measures of levels. Allowance for autocorrelation in

these errors (as in Griliches and Hausman. 1987) but retention of the other assumptions
leads to a focus on the relative sizes of the the correlation across time in the error and

the true level of the variable.
      The research summarized in our paper is based on direct observation of the
measurement error properties of interview reports of such labor market measures as
earnings, work hours and tenure. Our principal data source, the PSID Validation Study.
is a unique two-wave panel survey of a probability sample of workers from a single large
manufacturing company. As detailed in the appendix, some 418 workers were
interviewed in the first wave, conducted in the summer of 1983, using a sampling
scheme that produced approximately equal numbers of hourly and salaried workers and
a uniform age distribution. Interviews were conducted four years later with 341 of the
original sample and with 151 additional hourly workers drawn at random from company
employment lists just prior to the interview.
       Access to very detailed company records enabled us to obtain virtually error-free
validation of survey responses for a host of interesting labor market measures. However,
the advantages of such precise validation are offset to some extent by the restrictive
nature of the single-firm sample; all hourly workers in the firm are unionized and the
distribution of earnings appears to be much more compressed within the firm than

among general population samples of workers even within the same industry. Company
records for hourly workers also showed surprising variability in work hours and earnings
from one pay period to the next. The extent to which this variability is unique to this
                                             3

company or its industry is an important and, as yet, unanswered issue for considering
how our results may apply to data from larger, more representative samples.
      A second data source used in the paper makes possible direct observation of
measurement error by matching panel data on earnings from the March, 1977 and 1978

waves of a general population survey — the U.S. Current Population Survey — to Social
Security earnings records for those same individuals. Sample sizes in this data set are

much larger — 2924 men and 465 women. Also described in the appendix, this source
provides general population coverage at a cost of some degree of imprecision in the
validating information and problems arising from the truncation of earnings in the Social

Security records.
      These data sources provide much information that challenges the conventional
wisdom. We find that the amount of measurement error in cross-sectional reports of
annual earnings is rather low in both data sets. Error in reports of annual work hours is
higher, while error in reports of hourly earnings, obtained by dividing annual earnings by
annual hours, is quite high. An investigation of the error properties of alternative
measures of hourly earnings produced the surprising result that reports of either "usual"
or last pay period earnings and hours appear to be even less reliable than reports of

hourly earnings obtained by dividing annual reports of earnings and hours.
       Although not as high as for cross-sectional measures, the reliability of panel
 survey measures of change in earnings appeared to be surprisingly high. Over 75
 percent of the observed variation in first-differenced 1977 and 1978 annual earnings is
 true variation, while more than half of the observed variation in earnings differenced
 over the four-year interval between 1982 and 1986 appears to be real.
                                              4

       Some of the surprising reliability in the cross-sectional and panel measures is due

to what Bound and Krueger (1988) have called "mean-reverting" measurement error
— a   pronounced negative correlation between the error and true level of many of the
measures we were able to validate. Such correlations are assumed to be zero in classical
measurement error models but are clearly pervasive in both of our validation data sets.
       Classical measurement error models of erroi--induced bias on right-hand side
variables commonly presume zero covariances between measurement errors in a given
measure and the true levels of other variables in the model. As with another validation
study using a different data source (Rodgers and Herzog, 1987), we find considerable
evidence of nonzero covariances, with earnings reporting errors at times negatively
correlated with job tenure and positively correlated with schooling levels.

       An investigation of the quality of retrospective reports of unemployment spells in
the company sample showed massive underreporting. Scarcely one-third of the
unemployment spells that appeared in company records were reported in the interview.
Longer and more recent spells were more accurately reported, although the fraction of

quite long and quite recent spells still unreported was uncomfortably high. Although
consistent with other research on episodic recall, the poor quality with which event-
history employment data are reported has received surprisingly little attention.

                                 II. Econometric Issues

       If one is likely to have measurement error, assuming it is of the classical variety is
obviously convenient. But in most social-science contexts there is no a priori reason to
believe that the correlations assumed to be zero in the classical case are in fact zero in
                                             5

one's data. In addition to providing some evidence about the magnitude of measurement
errors, validation studies permit one to determine whether measurement errors are

uncorrelated with other variables.

      Suppose we believe the true model is
                                       Y = X8 +
where is uncorrelated with X. Instead of X and Y, we observe



                                       Y+v
We will not assume u and v are uncorrelated with X and Y, but we will assume that E is
uncorrelated with X, u, and v. The motivation for this last assumption is partly
strategic, partly conventional: a validation study in principle allows us to observe u and v

but never (so we have little to say about such correlations) and they are in any case
treated in the literature (e.g., correlation between X and leads to a standard "omitted
variable" bias).
      Whether we have validation or not, we observe      and '2. The least-squares

estimator of 3 is

                                b=   (5)1'Y
      We will present a general approach to dealing with measurement errors in X and
Y which are correlated with the true X andlor Y. Before doing so, however, it useful to
highlight a few results for the biases due to measurement errors when convenient
assumptions hold. To simplify discussion of the various biases, we assume throughout
that the Xs have been defined so that $O. Consider three special cases:
                                                        6

             First, if there is classical measurement error in only one independent variable X,
 2               2        2
         =               +o   The proportional bias in estimating 3. (i.e., minus the ratio of the bias
                          J                                         3
     j               J

                                      22
             3
                                       Jj
to the true 3.) depends on u.1°.• In particular, with only one independent variable in
the regression, the proportional bias is just equal to this ratio. Alternatively,

                 + o), the ratio of true to total variance, gives the ratio of the expected value of
the estimate b3 to the true L3. This is probably the most common textbook result about
measurement error.
             Second, even if the error u is correlated with the true X3 (or other Xs), the
proportional downward bias is equal to the regression coefficient for XJ from a
hypothetical regression of u, on the set of measured X's. If there is only one independent
variable in the model, this reduces to the simple regression coefficient                 (In the case

where u and X are uncorrelated, Ub , is equal to the variance ratio q"/(c +
                                                                                 922
                                                                                 Uu           .   But if U
                                                                                          X
and X are negatively correlated,                 can be smaller than in the classical case.)'

             Third, if the dependent variable Y is measured with error, and that error is
correlated with the true Y (v = 5? +              v where v is uncorrelated with X, Y, and u) and
the Xs are measured without error, then the proportional bias in estimating each .i3 is
just equal to 8. To emphas.ze the similarity to the previous case, note that S can be
thought of as the regression coefficient by.

             1
         In the U.S., there have been occasional proposals to add measurement errors to
"strategic" variables in some data files in order to avoid confidentiality problems. The
result in the text suggests that if one goes this route, the error (in variables that are
expected to be used as independent variables) should be non-classical.
substituting X for K, etc. But when one uses .'2' and       .
      Each of the above results applies to cross-section analysis, and to panel data by
                                                                as   one's dependent and

independent variables, another aspect of the data becomes important — the correlation
over time in the true values (the correlation between Y at time t and at time t-1, and
similarly for X) and in the measurement errors (the correlation between v at time t and
at time t-1, and similarly for u). A general result is that, if the variance of a variable
(say, X) is the same in both years, the variance of .X is equal to 2c4(1-r x
                                                                                  t. t—1
which is greater or less than (4as rX x         is   less than or greater than one half. A
                                       t' t—1
common concern, usually expressed in the context of classical measurement errors, is

that true values of X will be highly correlated over time, while the measurement errors
will be more or less uncorrelated. In this case,
                                                     2.is less than    2
                                                                           but   2.is greater
than o-, so that moving from "levels" to "changes" intensifies the bias due to errors in
measuring the independent variable(s).
      This increase in bias does not necessarily mean that using "change" variables is to
be avoided. In most cases, differenced models are used when the analyst suspects that
the error term contains a component which is constant over time and, contrary to our
assumptions, correlated with     (typically because some variable which doesn't change

over time cannot be measured). In this case, regressing'? on X will produce estimates of
8 which are biased by both measurement error and the omitted variable, while
regressing '? on       eliminates the latter bias. We have not been able to derive any
                                             S


particularly illuminating results for comparing the gain from eliminating the omitted
variable bias with the potential intensification of the bias due to measurement error.2
      Having highlighted some special cases in which the consequences of measurement

error can be succinctly summarized, we turn to a more general model. With u and v

potentially correlated with X and Y, the least-squares regression coefficient can be

rewritten as

                               b = (X'X'X'(Xi3-u8+v+)

                                =3+     (.)1X'(-u8+v+e)
      Therefore, the bias of the least-squares estimator b is

                           plim b-$ =   plim(')      1I'(-u3+v)
      It is useful to collect the measurement errors and their coefficients:




                                        -t



                                                 —
                         plim b-3 =   plim(') 1'w          plim A-y


       2To get some sense of how elusive such a result is likely to be, note two results
which are easy to see or derive for classical errors in measuring X: (1) If X and are
positively correlated, the omitted variable bias and the bias due to measurement error
work in opposite directions, so eliminating the latter may make things worse; (2)
Classical error in measuring X tends to reduce the bias due to the omitted variable — in
the limit, if X is all classical noise, it can't be correlated with at all!
                                                        9

      If there are k separate variables in the independent-variable matrix X, then A is k
by k+ 1. It can be rewritten in a more intuitive form as

                                               A=
                                                    [b b]   I




where the jth column of            consists of the coefficients from regressing u on , and        bj
is the set of coefficients from regressing v on X.
      If there is measurement error in only one independent variable X,, only one
column of A is non-zero, and                        as claimed in our discussion of special cases. If
                                    .11

               *                      *        *
V=5Y + v           =   6X/3   + &+v       ,   v is uncorrelated with the other variables of the

model, and the independent variables are measured without error, then                     is a matrix
of zeros and           = 6. Thus, the proportional bias for each coefficient equals 5.

       It is also useful to note the analogous expressions among strictly observable
variables; i.e., before taking plims. Let bR be the OLS coefficients from regressing Y on
X (the record variables), and b1 be the OLS coefficients from regressing? on X (the

interview variables).
                                               10


Then

                                b1 =     ('t1X'Y
                                =   ()       ''(bR.ubR+v+fl
                                =        +
                                    bR

                                 = bR + Ac +

where



                                                1



We can calculate b1, bR, A, and c, thus neglecting the last term (which vanishes in the
probability limit). The fact that it doesn't necessarily vanish in the actual sample data
could in principle tell us whether our assumption is correct that the equation error in
the model with the correct variables, is uncorrelated with the measurement errors u and
v. However, in our data this discrepancy is usually small, so we have not pursued this
issue.

    III. Measurement Error in Annual Measures of Earnings and Work Hours

         Throughout this paper, we treat the "record" value of a variable, either from the
company's own records (PSIDVS) or from Social Security records (CPS-SSA), as the
"true" value, and treat the difference between the individual's report and this record
value as measurement error. We do this for two reasons. First, we have a great deal of
confidence in the accuracy and recording of the company records, in part because of the
                                             11

extraordinary cooperation of the company involved. We believe the assumption that the
Social Security records are correct is at least defensible, in part because in choosing the

sample those who were most likely to present problems (e.g., job changers were
excluded. Second, as a practical matter, there seems to be no way to relax this
assumption without making other less plausible ones (e.g., that errors in records are
uncorrelated with the true values).
      In Table 1. we present simple summary statistics for the errors in measuring
earnings in the PSID Validation Study data3 and in the CPS-SSA data analyzed by
Bound and Krueger (1988.. In each case, we present five summary statistics
                                                                 2.2      2
descnbed above: the ratio of error to error plus true variance O•uI(O•X +o); the regression

coefficient from regressing the earnings error on interview earnings, bu which would
equal the variance ratio in the first column if the error and true values were
uncorrelated); the regression coefficient from regressing the earnings error on its true
value, by; and, for the change in earnings only, the correlation over time in the
measurement errors and in the true values. We switch to v and Y (in column 3) from u
and X (in the remaining columns) to highlight the fact that the regression of the

       3We included only individuals who reported working 520—3500 hours and earning
at least $1000.
       4We used the Bound-Krueger results from Table 4, part B, which gives the
relevant variance-covariance matrix for those with earnings below the Social Security
earnings ceiling (Social Security earnings, taken as the "true" value, are reported only up
to a ceiling ($15,300 in 1976 and $16,500 in 1977). For this sample, the variance-
covariance matrix for X and u can be calculated in the usual way. They also report an
estimated variance-covariance matrix which uses the full sample, and uses maximum
likelihood methods to correct for the fact that X is truncated at the Social Security limit.
Not surprisingly the variance of X is larger in this sample (by about one third) but the
error variances are very similar.
                                             12


measurement error on the true value is most interesting when in-earnings is the
dependent variable; but throughout X and Y refer to true in-earnings while u and v refer
to the difference between reported and true values of in-earnings. All estimates refer to
males, who make up an overwhelming fraction of the workers at the plant that
cooperated in the PSID Validation Study.
      The first two rows of the Table present results for cross-section analyses, based on
the PSID Validation Study data. Judged by the variance ratio, the bias due to errors in
measuring earnings when earnings is an intependent variable is appreciable, but
perhaps not alarming; depending on the year in question, the effect of earnings on some
other variable would be understated by 15 to 30 percent.5 However, the variance ratio
considerably overstates the likely bias, because the measurement error is negatively
correlated with the true value of earnings. As a result, the likely bias is on the order of
8 to 24 percent. This "good news" for using earnings as an explanatory variable is to
some extent tempered by the corollary for using it as a dependent variable: the negative
correlation between true earnings and the measurement error means that the impact of
other variables on earnings could be understated by 10 to 17 percent. So, while the
classical assumptions lead to the conclusion that mismeasurement produces bias when
earnings are used as an independent variable but not if they are used as the dependent
variable, we find that because of violations of the classical assumptions a bias is
introduced in the latter case but the bias in the former case is reduced.

      5The 15 percent value for 1982 is considerably lower than the 30 percent for
1986 or the CPS-SSA estimates discussed below. It reflects unusually large true
earnings variance in 1982, a year of significant unemployment at the studied firm.
                                            13

        The third row of the table allows us to compare the biases one might expect using
change variables with those that arise in cross-section analysis. The variance ratio does

go up (to 29 percent, from an average of 23 percent in the two cross sections), and the

more appropriate measures         and by also grow by a roughly similar proportion.
However, the biases do not increase as sharply as one might have expected, because
—   while the correlation in the errors is near-zero, as is sometimes assumed — the
correlation between 1986 earnings and earnings four years earlier is only .452 in these

data.
        The second set of three rows of the table present analogous summary statistics
from Bound and Krueger's CPS-SSA analysis. The three major conclusions discussed
above — that b    is less than the variance ratio, that      and       are of similar

magnitude, and that differencing increases the importance of measurement error, but

probably not disastroüly so for most applications — can be seen in their data as well.
The correlaticns over time for u and X are higher, a point we discuss below.
        In comparing the detailed results, two differences between the studies should be
 emphasized. First, the PSID Validation data come from a single, unionized firm. This
 considerably restricts the true variation in earnings .see Appendix Table 1, making
 measurement error more serious than it might be in a broader sample. It is also possible
 that measurement errors are smaller, (e.g., because our workers did not change jobs in
 the year preceeding the interviewl, though this difference is likely to be less important
 than the restriction in the variance of true earnings. Second, the PSID Validation
 Study's earnings change spans a four-year period, while the CPS-SSA data span a pair of
 adjacent years. Thus, we should expect a higher correlation for u over time and for X
                                            14


over time in the Bound-Krueger data. Indeed, if measurement error had only first-order
serial correlation, a one-year correlation of .37 would imply a four-year correlationof .02,

so the .073 in Table 1 is higher than the simplest back-of-the envelope calculation would

suggest.
      The PSID Validation data include interview and record information on hours

worked per year for hourly cnon-salaried) workers, so one can also explore consequences
of errors in earnings per hour. The findings turn out to be quite different for earnings

per hour than for earnings per year: the biases due to measurement error are
considerably more severe than those in Table 1.
       Table 2 has three sections. The first presents results for the annual earnings of all
hourly workers. While there are some differences between these numbers and those of
the combined sample of salaried and hourly workers shown on Table 1 the sample of
hourly workers has less difference between the two cross sections, larger values of   by in
the cross sections but a smaller value for the changes), these differences are negligible
when compared with the impact of moving from annual earnings to earnings per hour for

 hourly workers.
       The biases arising from using earnings per hour as an explanatory variable are,
 depending on one's perspective, serious or alarming (middle section of Table 2). Using
 the variance ratio, the downward bias is two-thirds of the true value in cross-section

 analysis, and (unlike annual earnings) the more general measure bu gives a very
 similar estimate. The consequences of using earnings per hour as a dependent variable
 are less clear, with proportionate biases of essentially zero and 30 percent in the two

 cross-sections.
                                             15


       If one instead uses the change in earnings per hour, matters are worse still
—   proportional biases of 82 or 87 percent when the change is the independent variable,
and 37 percent as a dependent variable.6
       To interpret these results, it is important to keep in mind the peculiar features of
the data: the variance in true earnings per hour is understated by our focus on a single
firm, but the four-year gap spanned by the change in earnings per hour should produce
less biased estimates than one would expect from one-year changes.
        The last three lines of the table present the summary statistics for hours per year.
Measurement error here is severe enough to produce non-negligible biases when hours
are either an independent or dependent variable, but they are not so badly measured
that the poor showing of earnings per hour can be attributed to the poor measurement of
the denominator.7 Rather, the problems of measuring earnings per hour in the PSID
Validation data arise from an unhappy combination of errors in measuring earnings,

errors in measuring hours, and the intercorrelations involved. The correlation between
 true earnings and hours is very high in these data, reducing the variance of true
 earnings per hour, while the correlation between the errors in earningsand hours is

 much smaller.8

       6Altonji (1986) reaches similar conclusions, using PSID data and a variety of
 more complex indirect estimation techniques.
        71t is important to keep in mind that the PSID annual work hours measure is
 constructed from an elaborate question sequence asking about work lost to sickness,
 vacation, strike, unemployment and time out of the labor force. Simpler question
 sequences may produce greater error variance.
       8The correlation between record ln(earnings) and ln(hours) was .858 in 1986 and
 .879 in 1982. In contrast, the correlation between the errors in ln(earnings) and
 ln(hours) was .407 in 1986 and — .169 in 1982.
                                             16


Implications for earnings functions
      As an illustration of the more general methodology, we present an analysis of the
consequences of measurement error for estimates of a simple earnings function. As with

a similar analysis of the 1983 wave of the PSID Validation Study conducted by Duncan
and Hill (1985), we regress the logarithm of annual earnings on education, tenure (years
with current employer), and experience prior to starting work with current employer.9
As is often done in such contexts, our measure of pre-company experience is age minus
schooling minus 5 minus tenure. We focus on cross-sectional estimation, because the

change in our explanatory variables is either zero (education, pre-company experience or
approximately constant (company tenure).
      We have interview and record values of earnings and tenure; as it turns out,
errors in the latter are negligible, so our emphasis is on the impact of errors in reporting
earnings, and in particular whether they are correlated with the explanatory variables.
We have no independent verification of education (as reported in the interview) or pre-
company experience.'0 Given that these seem likely a priori to be relatively well-
measured, and that we have no independent way of verifying workers' reports, we
assume these variables are measured without error.

       9Mellow and Sider 1983) ran similar regressions using 1977 Current Population
Survey data, but had been restricted to information provided by the employers of CPS
respondents. Since there was no other attempt to verify the employer information, their
data is best thought of as two fallible indicators of the underlying wage and other
employment conditions. They find very few differences between coefficients obtained
from the interview and employer data.
       '°Pre-company experience is equal to age (based on company records, but these
were based on information originally provided by the worker) minus education (reported
by the worker) minus 5 minus tenure (from company records).
                                            17


      Table 3 is an elaboration of the algebraic relationship among b bR. c, and A.
The first column gives values of b1, regression coefficients based on interview data. The

second gives values of bR, based on the record data, and hence (apart from sampling
error) gives the "true" coefficients. Since only tenure and In earnings are assumed to be
measured with error, the A matrix has only two non-zero columns, these being the third
and fourth columns of the table. The final column is the discrepancy, which occurs
because the correlation between the equation error (using the record values of the
variables) and u or v is not zero in the sample. The top part of Table 3 refers to the
1986 cross-section, while the bottom part refers to the 1982 data.
      The estimated coefficients of the earnings function, based on the interview data
(b1) are similar to what one finds in the literature, with two exceptions. First, they are
generally smaller in absolute value, because our data refer to one firm and part of the

return to education and experience comes from access to higher-paying firms. Second.
the coefficient of pre-company experience is negative in the 1986 data, which is not what

one finds in other data sets.
       Differences between the coefficients obtained from record data and interview data

 may be due to three sources: a relationship between the error in tenure and the
 measured X, b             a relationship between the error in earnings and measured X,
                 Tenure
      or the residual discrepancy. In Table 3, the relationship between the error in
 tenure and the measured variables (including measured tenure) is negligible, because
 these workers are able to report their tenure very accurately." On the other hand,
 errors in measuring earnings are significantly related to education in the 1986 data and

       "The correlation between reported and true tenure exceeded .99 in each year.
                                            18


to tenure in the 1982 data. As a result, the proportionate difference between b1 and

in these cases is not negligible — interview data overstate the record return to education
in 1986 by about a third (.025 vs. .018, with at statistic on the difference of 2.1) and
understate the return to tenure in 1982 by almost the same proportion (.011 vs. .014,

with at statistic on the difference of 4.4L12
      The discrepant pattern of covariances affecting the earnings functions between the
1982 and 1986 cross-sections is disturbing because it implies that biases due to such
covariances change, perhaps unpredictably. We searched for factors that might reconcile

the discrepancies and discovered that the much more extensive unemployment prior to

the 1983 interview seemed largely responsible.
      Workers with extensive unemployment tended to overreport earnings, perhaps
because they reported "typical" annual earnings, not realizing that 1982 earnings had
been reduced by their unemployment. The prevalence of unemployment is negatively
related to company tenure, producing the negative covariance between earnings.
reporting error and tenure shown in Table 3. Calendar year 1986 produced no
unemployment and, perhaps, a more "normal" relationship between reporting error and
the earnings function covariates. At any rate, the addition to the 1982 earnings function
of the amount of unemplos-rrient in 1982 as revealed in company records produced
earnings function estimates that were much more similar to those found for 1986.

       12                            .
         The results for 1982 are quite similar to those of Duncan and Hill (1985), who
compare b1 and bR using a slightly different sample from the first PSID Validation
Study wave. Bound and Krueger (1988) report regressions of errors in measuring In-
earnings on measured values of variables like those in Table 3 (plus additional
demographic variables such as marital status and region). They find small coefficients
which are not very stable across two adjacent years.
                                             19


Specifically, the regression coefficients and, in parentheses, standard errors for the
regression of 1982 earnings error on education, pre-company experience, tenure and

dummy variables for actual 1982 unemployment (corresponding to the column labeled

b in Table 3 were:
     v=    — .0433   +   .0036 Education — .0016 Tenure   + .0000 Pre-cornpany experience
                         (.0036)           .0009)           (.0013)

Dummy variables for substantial unemployment had a positive and highly significant
effect on earnings error and the addition of the dummy variables increased the R2 from

.054 to .138.

           IV. Error Properties of Alternative Measures of Hourly Wages

       Evidence presented in Table 2 showed a substantial proportion of measurement

error in reports work hours and, especially, earnings per hour. One source of the
 measurement error may be fluctuation in the conditions about which reports are elicited.
 Week-to-week variability in hours may be caused by several factors, including holidays,
 vacations, illness, and overtime. Depending on the type of job. these variations in hours
 may or may not he reflected in paychecks; and earnings may furthermore be
 supplemented by bonuses and incentive pay or reduced by disciplinary actions.
        Faced with such instability in the target, researchers have adopted various
 measurement strategies. Perhaps the most straightforward is to ask about a specific
 (preferably recent) pay period. This is a standard approach in U.S. Bureau of Labor
 Statistics establishment surveys, but is not common when workers are being interviewed

 about their earnings. If the concept of interest is a longer range level of compensation,

  per pay period measurement might be thought to produce a higher proportion of
                                             20

stochastic variability for the sake of a lower proportion of measurement error although
whether this strategy in fact leads to a reduction in measurement error is a matter for
empirical veriflcation. A second strategy is to ask questions about a longer period of
time, typically a calendar year, on the assumption that the availability of year-end
reports from the employer and the preparation of tax returns increases the accuracy of
reports of earnings although there is no reason to make a similar assumption for
accuracy of reports on hours worked). This approach is taken by the Current Population
Survey in its March Supplement each year and in the PSID. Prior calendar year
information has the disadvantage of not reflecting "current" compensation to which
current working conditions can be related, an especially critical problem if the respondent
worked for a different employer or held a position different from his or her current one

for all or part of the preceding calendar year. A third strategy is to ask about "usual"
 hours and "usual" pay, in effect asking the respondent to do the appropriate integration

 and trend analysis to arrive at a report that best reflects his or her current conditions.
 This approach is used by U.S. Current Population Surveys and, e.g., by National
 Longitudinal Surveys in obtaining weekly earnings and hours.


 Weekly earnings
        All three of these measurement strategies were employed for hourly workers in
 the PSID Validation Study.'3 Because information was available from company records

        13A measurement strategy for wage rates that is used in some surveys is to ask
 respondents to report their hourly earnings as CPS does for workers paid by the hour,
 rather than (or in addition to) dividing their reports of earnings for a week or other
 period by the hours worked in that period as was done exclusively in the present study.
 This strategy has the advantage that some employees (particularly hourly, as opposed to
 salaried, workers) may be more aware of their wage rates than of their gross pay for a
                                            21


about hours and pay on a weekly basis. it is possible to assess the accuracy of answers to
each type of question. The findings are summarized in Tables 4 through 6. Table 4

shows that the correlation between the log of company record earnings for the previous
calendar year (1986 and the log oU the respondents' reports of their earnings for that

year is 0.81. This is a high value, compared with others that will be examined, but
nevertheless indicates only two-thirds of the variance in the survey reports reflects valid
variance. iNote that this corresponds to one minus the ratio of the error to the total
variance, the statistic reported in the first column of Table 1.' The correlation between

records and survey reports for the pay period immediately preceding the interviews is
only 0.46. indicating that less that a quarter of the variance in this measure is valid.14
The third measure of earnings, "usual" earnings, has about the same level of validity as

the reports on the preceding pay period. The correlation between the reports of usual
earnings and the average value in the records for the preceding 12 "normal" weeks1 is

0.46.

 pa' period. A disadvantage is that many workers do not have a constant hourly rate,
 especially if they work overtime. We were unable to validate responses to such a
 question for hourly workers in our firm sample.
        t4As noted, the analysis reported in this section is restricted to hourly employees
 because of the absence of records on hours worked by salaried employees. We did,
 however, examine the correlations of records and survey reports on annual earnings and
 earnings for a recent pay period for salaried workers. The correlation of the annual
 earnings reported by salaried employees and the record value is 0.715, comparedto the
 correlation of 0.806 observed for hourly employees. The correlation of earnings reported
 for the most recent pay period, and the recorded earnings for the last payperiod in June,
 is 0.667, compared to the 0.456 observed for hourly employees.
        laCases were excluded from this analysis if fewer than 12 of the most recent 22
 weeks were "normal" weeks, as defined by having worked at least 30 hours (according to
 the records) and earned at least $100. That is, weeks during which the respondent did
 not work close to full time (because of illness or vacation, primarily) are not included in
                                            22

      Table 4 also provides information about the stability of earnings. If the mean

value of earnings for the preceding 12 "normal" weeks (labelled "REMN in the table) is
taken as the best indicator of "current" earnings, the correlations of the other two
measures abstracted from the records (labelled "RES86" AND "RELST' in the tabl&

provide information about stability of earnings, and in this case indicate a rather low
level of stability. The correlation between the current mean and the 1986 level is 067,
while the correlation between the current mean and earnings in the preceding pay period

is only 0.52.
       Mean earnings per week over the preceding 12 normal weeks were about 15

percent higher than mean earnings per week during 1986, and about 4 percent higher
than earnings in the preceding pay period. These differences in means reflect several
sources of variation, including the fact that there are "abnormal" weeks when the
 individual works few or no hours because of vacation or illness, or on the other hand

 receives incentive pay, bonuses, or other types of income beyond that based on hours
 worked during that week. The average correlation between the earnings in each pair of
 weeks among the 12 "normal" included in the mean is 0.49. From the covariances
 among these items, the reliability of the mean of these 12 weeks as an indicator of
 current "average earnings is estimated to be quite high — 0.92.16 That is, it is

 the calculation of average earnings. Cases with average earnings per week across the
 most recent "normal" weeks of less than $200 were also excluded. As in all analyses
 reported in this section, only males were included (there were not enough femalesin the
 sample to support analysis of sex differences), and only hourly workers were included
 (because records about hours worked were not available for salaried workers).

             is the alpha coefficient — a measure of reliability developed by
 psychometricians (see, for example, Nunnally, 1967, p. 196).
                                                23

appropriate to think that this records-based indicator itself has error. If account is taken
of this error, by dividing the observed correlation between the record mean and the

reports on usual earnings by the square root of the reliability coefficient,the corrected
correlation rises slightly from 0.45 to 0.47.
      The rather low week-to-week stability in earnings, as assessed from the company
records for these workers, raises two questions. First, to what extent does the instability

reflect "abnormal" weeks — weeks with a lot of overtime hours, or receipt of overtime
pay, for example? Second. how typical are the earnings patterns observed for the
employees in this particular plant of hourly workers in general? Further analysis
provides some insights relevant to both of these issues, although direct assessment of the
second question is not possible without information from the employment records of other

companies.
       Examination of the distributions of company-recorded weekly earnings reveals that
 there are indeed a small proportion of "abnormal" weeks, during which the respondent
 worked very few or very many hours or received large bonuses or other types of pay

 beyond those based on hours worked during that particular week. In using the mean of
 the preceding 12 "normal" weeks to define "true" usual earnings, the previously reported

 analyses took account of one extreme — weeks during which a respondent worked fewer

 than 30 hours or received less than $100 were ignored in calculating the average
 earnings. If such weeks are not ignored, the average between-week correlation is 0.38
 instead of 0.49. If, however, weeks at the other extreme (specifically, those in which the
 respondent worked more than 80 hours, received more than $1,800, or had an hourly
                                                 24

pay rate of more than 30 dollars) are also ignored, the between-week correlation does not

improve 'in fact, it drops slightly, to 0.48).
      With respect to how typical these workers are of hourly workers in general, we are

not aware of data based on company records of earnings for a broad sample that could be
used for comparison with the PSID Validation Study sample, so we cannot address this
issue directly. It is possible, however, to ask how sensitive the correlation between
reports of usual earnings and the record values is to stability in earnings for individual
workers. Across the whole sample, the average value of the variance in the logarithms
of weekly earnings (ignoring "abnormal" weeks of both types described in the previous
paragraph) is 0.085, with a range from 0.001 to 0.171. If the workers with above-
average standard deviations are ignored, the correlation of a worker's record mean with
his report of usual earnings does not increase at all. Specifically, for all workers the
correlation is 0.445; if those with the highest ten percent of values on the standard
deviation are ignored, the correlation is 0.439; if the highest twenty-five percent are
ignored, the correlation is 0.438; and if the highest fifty percent are ignored, the
correlation is 0.460. Thus, our finding that most of the variation in interview reports of
usual earnings is "noise" rather than "news" appears quite insensitive to the variability
of record earnings.


Weekly hours worked
       Data about agreement between survey reports and company records on hours
worked per week are shown in Table 5. Unlike the case for weekly earnings, there is
little evidence that any one of the three survey measures is superior to the other two.
The correlations between the survey reports and the corresponding records information
                                             25

are all in the range of 060 to 0.64. There is considerable week-to-week variation in
number of hours worked: the average correlation between hours worked in each of the

twelve preceding normal weeks is just 0.42.1 This variability in hours is reflected in
the rather low correlations among the three measures derived from company records.
These correlations of variables based on records are, in fact, at best only slightly higher

than the correlations among the corresponding survey reports. The answers to the
survey question about hours worked in the preceding pay period actually correlate
somewhat more highly with the mean record value for recent weeks r.65) than do the
answers to the question about number of hours usually worked r = .61).
       Unlike the pattern observed for weekly earnings, eliminating respondents with
 high week-to-week variability in hours worked does at least slightly improve the
 correlation between reports of usual working hours and the mean of the record hours.

 Across all respondents (and ignoring both unusually "low" and unusually "high" weeks,
 the correlation between these two measures is 0.607. Eliminating the ten percent with
 the greatest variance in weekly hours improves this correlation to 0.639; eliminating the
 highest fifty percent improves it to 0.664. Part of this improvement is probably best
 interpreted as reflecting improved reliability of the records-based measure,but the rest
 of the improvement if statistically significant, a hypothesis that is not readily testable)

        1 'This is the correlation if weeks are ignored during which, according to the
 records, the respondent worked less than 30 hours or earned less than $100. If such
 weeks are not ignored, the correlation is only 0.27. If weeks at the other extreme (as
 defined earlier, those during which the respondent worked more than 80 hours, earned
 more than $1800, or more than $30 per hour worked) are also ignored, however, this
 does not improve the week-to-week stability (the correlation actually drops slightly, from
  0.42 to 0.41).
                                            26

may reflect greater accuracy on the part of those respondents who have a more stable
work pattern.1S


Hourly wage rates
      The respondents were not asked to report their hourly wage ratesdirectly, but
these rates were calculated by dividing the various reports on weekly earnings by the
corresponding reports on number of hours worked per week. These ratios were also
calculated from the records. The correlations between the wage rates as calculated from
the respondent reports and those calculated from the records are shown in Table 6. The
calendar year-based survey and record measures of wage rates correlate somewhat less
closely with one another at r= .56 than do the corresponding survey and record
measures of hours worked (at r= .64 and considerably less than do the corresponding

survey and record measures of weekly earnings iat r .81. The other pairs of measures
of wage rates, however, correlate even less with company records: for the reports based
on the most recent pay period, the correlation of the survey measure of hourly earnings
 with the records measure is 035, while the hourly earnings measure based on reports of
 "usual" hours and earnings correlates with the average wage rate for recent weeks at
 only 0.25. The latter correlation suggests that the proportion of valid variance in a

        Correcting the correlation between the two types of measure for the assessed
 reliability of the records-based measure, the correlation for all respondents is 0.642,
 while that for respondents with standard deviations on the weekly hours below the
 median is 0.683.
                                            27

commonly used indicator of wage rates is only six or seven percent of its total
            19
variance.
      The apparently extremely low validity of the survey-based measure of hourly wage

rate raises the issue of how respondents arrived at their answers to questions about their
earnings and work hours. The rather low correlations of these reports with the mean
values from companY records for recent weeks, and the very low correlation of the ratio

of these reports to the corresponding ratio based on the records, suggests that
respondents may assess their "usual" earnings and work hours in a manner other than
simply taking an average across recent weeks. Several possibilities can be imagined; for
example. they may give more weight to recent pay periods than to less recent ones; they
may give more weight to "above average" or to "below average" weeks; or they may
report a "typical" week. If the latter, the question arises as to whether "typical" is
operationalized more closely by the median or the mode, rather than the mean.
       Evidence on these issues is shown in Table 7. The correlation between the

 interview report of usual earnings per pay period with recorded earnings for the most
 recent pay period is 0.32. but this rises to 0.40 if earnings during the most recent
 "normal" pay period are considered that is, substituting for the most recent pay period if
 the employee happened to work few hours during that two-week period. The correlation
 rises again, to 0.45. if an average is taken of the recorded earnings for the twelve most
 recent "normal" weeks. A similar pattern is observed with respect to the measures of
 hours worked per week, but no such pattern exists for the ratio of these measures (i.e.,

        19Correcting the correlations between the two measures for the assessed reliability
 of the records-based measures, the correlation for all respondents is 0.266, while that for
 respondents with standard deviations on hourly wage rates below the median is 0.297.
                                           28

for the dollars earned per hour worked. The pattern for weekly earnings and hours
worked suggests the importance of variability in the actual pay and hours worked by
these employees Other entries in Table 7 indicate that the mean value of recent normal

weeks is probably the closest counterpart to the reports by the respondents of their usual

pay and hours. For weekly earnings, the correlation of usual pay with the mean of the
record values, at 0.45. is somewhat higher than for the median or mode of the record
values, while for hours worked the median is correlated at approximately the samelevel

as the mean 0.62) and both correlate somewhat more strongly than does the mode
 0.6W. The data also indicate that the minimum earnings and hours worked correlate
less strongly with the reports on usual levels than do the maximum values, but that both
extremes correlate less strongly than do the measures of central values. This pattern is
also seen when the weekly values are ranked and means taken of each quartile.
       Additional analysis showed little evidence that any more complex combinations of
data from records would have a higher correlation with the reports. Very little
explanatory power is gained by using earnings (or hours or hourly wage rates of each
 individual week, rather than their mean, as predictors in a multiple regression analysis
 of the survey reports of usual pay. it appears, then, that these respondents arrived at
 their answers to the questions about usual pay and usual hours by a fairly
 straightforward process of finding a central value corresponding most closely to the
 mean of recent weeks', but did so with considerable error. It also appears to be the case
 that their answers to the two questions, about usual earnings and usual hours, were
 arrived at independently rather than, for example, using estimates of their hourly wage
 rate and of their hours to calculate their weekly earnings. The consequence is that the
                                            29

measures of hourly wage rate, as calculated by dividing the reports of earnings by the
reports of hours, contain measurement error from both sources and therefore are with

the exception of the measure based on annual earnings and work hours) only barely
associated with the corresponding ratios based on records.20


Bias in survey reports
      As shown in the first row of Table 8, the average biases in the various survey
measures of weekly earnings (where bias is operationalized as the discrepancy between
the survey measure and the corresponding measure derived from company records' are
generally small. Also shown in this row are the average values of the absolute values of
these discrepancies. The lowest bias, and the lowest average measurement error, is for
the report of total earnings in 1986, while the largest bias .an underestimation by about

six percent — the only bias in Table S that differs significantly from zero is for the
reports of usual earnings as compared with the mean recorded earnings for the twelve
 preceding normal weeks. However, the standard deviation of the errors in the reports
 for the preceding pay period (shown in the second row of Table 8) is considerably higher

 than the standard deviation of the errors in reports on usual earnings, so the root mean

        20The low validity of the survey measure of hourly wage rate relative to the
 validities of the survey measures of weekly earnings and hours is not due to greater
 instability in the actual hourly wage rate. Across the 12 most recent normal weeks, the
 average correlation of the recorded weekly earnings is .492; that for the recorded hours
 worked is .4 20; and that for the hourly wage rate (derived as the ratio of the preceding
 valuesi is .476. It is perhaps surprising that the stability of the hourly wage rate is not
 higher than that for weekly earnings or for hours. At least in the company used for this
 study, hourly wage rates depend on the particular job performed at any given time and
 increase for overtime hours.
                                             30

square error 'shown in the third row) is greater for the reports on the preceding pay

period than for the reports on usual earnings.
      The lower half of Table 8 shows the correlations of the discrepancy scores with

other variables. The first covariate shown is the variability in weekly earnings, which is
seen to be associated both with bias and with total error in the reports on usual
earnings, but not significantly related to errors in the other two survey measures. More
specifically, individuals with greater week-to-week variations in their earnings
underestimate their usual earnings to a greater extent than do those with smaller
weekly variations. The remaining rows of Table 8 indicate greater underreporting of
usual earnings, and larger absolute discrepancies with the records, by those with less
education, by older workers, and by those who have worked longer for the company.2'
The correlations of the discrepancies on the other survey measure based on annual
earnings generally follow the same pattern, but tend to be weaker and are less likely to
be statistically significant. None of the correlations of the discrepancies based on

earnings in the previous pay period is statistically significant.
       Table 9 shows similar data for the various survey measures of hours worked per
week. The relative errors in the reports on usual hours per week are considerably
smaller than for reports     usual earnings per pay period. so that the total error as
assessed by the root mean square error) in this measure of hours is only slightly larger
than that in the measure of annual hours. Moreover, there is little bias in this measure,

       2
                     in the simple discrepancy columns are the bivariate counterpart to
the regression-based partial correlations shown in columns of Table 3 labelled
Table 3 information is based on annual earnings reports for both salaried and hourly
workers.
                                            31

and the amount of bias is not related significantly to week-to-week variations in hours
worked. The pattern of correlations with education, age, and tenure are quite similar to

that observed in Table S.
      Errors in the derived measures of hourly wage rates are summarized in Table 10.

The measure based on reports of usual hours and usual earnings is underreported. on
average, by about six percent. while the hourly wage rate measure based on reports
about. the preceding pay period has a positive bias of about four percent. Moreover, the

total error in the measure based on a usual weekly earnings and hours is actually
greater than for the measure based on the preceding pay period, as well as being much
greater than for the measure based on the preceding calendar year. Errors in the
measure of usual wage rate are not related to weekly variability in the wage rate, nor
are there iwith one exception significant correlations with education, age, or tenure.
       The data presented in this section lead quite clearly to the conclusion that the
 most valid measure of earnings, at least among the three evaluated in this study, is one
 based on the preceding calendar year. This measure is much more strongly related to
 the records t.han is a measure either of usual earnings or of earnings in the preceding
 pay period. Moreover, unlike the reports on usual earnings, the reports on annual
 earnings are essentially unbiased. For measuring work hours, the choice between a
 measure based on reports of annual hours and one based on reports of usual hours is less
 clear cut. The annual reports are somewhat more valid, but the difference is much
 smaller than for reports on earnings, and there is little bias in either of these survey

 measures. For measuring hourly wage rates, which is generally the variable of most
 conceptual interest to labor economists, the choice suggested by the presentdata is a
                                            32

measure obtained by dividing annual earnings by annual hours. While the validity of
this measure is lower than might be wished, it is considerably more valid than measures

based on reports of usual weeks or the preceding pay period. Moreover, the annual-
based measure is only weakly biased compared with the other two measures.
      The evidence displayed here supporting the superiority of annual measures of
earnings and wage rates is limited to the amount of measurement error in the various
measures. The conclusion that the annual measures have less measurement error than

do other measures must be weighed together with considerations about the
correspondence of each type of measure to the theoretical concept of interest.


           V. The   Quality of Retrospective Reports of Unemployment'

       Event-history models of labor market phenomena such as unemployment typically
rely heavily on retrospective information provided in interviews. There have been very
few validation-based studies of the quality of such data, and those studies that have been
conducted on episodic recall suggest the potential for massive measurement error, the
 implications of which have been almost universally ignored.
       Ts'pical of the findings on the quality of episodic recall in survey settings, although
 unusually thorough in methodology, is the research conducted by Cannell and his
 colleagues on the quality of retrospective reports of hospitalizations (Cannell and Fowler,
 1963). Overnight stays in hospitals might be expected to be at least as salient as labor
 market events such as unemployment or job or position changes. When asked to recall

       22Thjs section draws heavily from work reported in Mathiowetz and Duncan
 (1988) and Mathiowetz (1985).
                                             33

hospitalizations within ten weeks of the interview, respondents failed in only three
percent of the cases. If the elapsed time increased to one year, however, the failure rate
increased to well over 25 percent. Not only length of recall period, but also interviewer
behavior, question wording, the social desirability of the response, the salience of the
event and the number of related events have been linked to a respondent's ability to
report accurately te.g., Bradburn, Sudman and Associates. 1979; Cannell. Fisher and

Baker. 1965; Jabine. Straf, Tanur and Tourangeau. 1984; Lansing. Ginsburg and

Braaten, 1961; Tulving and Thompson, 1973).
      The 1983 wave of the PSID validation study gathered retrospective reports of
unemployment episodes that had occurred between January 1. 1981 and the date of the

interview.23 Detailed employee records covering the same period provided precise
information on periods of time when an individual was not working for the given

company. Four respondents who reported employment with other firms were eliminated
from the analysis, since it was impossible to validate their secondary employment.)

        2'The actual questions were as follows: "Were there any periods since the
 beginning of the year before last, January, 1981. when you were unemployed and
 looking for work or temporarily laid off for a week or more?" "What months(s) and
 vear(s (was that'were those)?" "Any other such periods?" "Were there any periods since
 the beginning of the year before last, January, 1981, when you were completely out of
 the labor force, that is. neither unemployed nor temporarily laid off nor looking for work
 for a week or more?" Since these questions followed a sequence of questions that asked
 the respondent to account for weeks of work, vacation, sick time, and other reasons for
 nonemployment during calendar years 1982 and 1981, they might be expected to
 stimulate recall of the nonemployment episodes. On the other hand, there was no
 attempt to ask the episodic unemployment questions in the context of an event calendar
 that associated employment history with other domains of life events. Such calendars
 appear to improve the accuracy of reporting of event-history information (Freedman et
 at. 1988). Similar questions were incorporated into the 1987 questionnaire. although
  there was so little unemployment during the 1985—87 period that it was impossible to
  replicate the first wave analysis on the second wave sample.
                                            34

There was no attempt to distinguish between the states of "unemployment" and "out of
the labor force", since validation of the distinction was impossible. Technically, then, the

validation check was against episodic reports of nonemployment from the given company.
      Company records gave the precise dates of the beginnings and endings of all spells
of nonemployment. The information obtained in the interview was less precise, dating
nonemployment to the month in which it occurred, A case-by-case examination of
records and interviews, incorporating a rather generous allowance for what constituted a

"correct" interview report, produced data on which unemployment spells appearing in
the company record were accurately recalled by the respondent.24
       Table 11 shows the performance of respondents in reporting unemployment spells
of various lengths and at various times since the previous interview. It is obvious that
respondents have great difficulty in recalling unemployment spells, especially short and
distant ones. Only one-third of all unemployment spells that appeared in the company
records were reported in the interview.25 Even very long spells (more than 29 weeks)
were seriously underreported; the fraction not reported was more than one-third,
Similarly, although spells occurring close to the interview were recalled more accurately,
more than half of such spells were not reported in the interview.

       2If company records showed that a respondent was unemployed in a given month
and if that respondent reported any unemployment in either that or an adjacent month,
then the given unemployment spells was considered to be accurately reported in the
interview.
      25Underreporting of unemployment spells was far more prevalent than
overreporting. There were some 45 unemployment spells reported in the interviews that
did not occur within one month of spells appearing in company records, as compared with
321 company record spells that were not reported in the interviews.
                                             35

      Mathiowetz and Duncan '1988 take a closer look at the nature and correlates of
unemployment reporting error. Interestingly, they find that while unemployment spells
elicited through episodic recall are seriously underreported. estimates of calendar year
amounts of unemployment in the two calendar years prior to the 1983 interview
appeared relatively unbiased. They speculate that episodic recall and estimation place
different demands on memory and that respondents might be able to provide reasonably
unbiased estimates of total amounts of time spent in given states without being able to

recall the precise timing of the episodes.
      Mathiowetz and Duncan (1988 also estimate a model of response error in which
the probability that employment status in a given month is reported erroneously is
:-elated to a set of demographic factors and measures of the likely salience of the events
of the given month. Consistent with some past research, they find a number of simple
associations between reporting error and demographic measures, with younger and less
educated workers more likely to provide erroneous reports of employment status in a
given month. Measures of the likely salience of employment status in a given month
(e.g., the total length of the spell of unemployment in which a given months
unemployment was imbedded) were also found to be important predictors of reporting
error that account for the simple associations between demographic factors and reporting

error. 26


        26Di.mcan and Mathiowetz (1985) conduct an analogous investigation of response
 error in retrospective reports of positions held in the company between January 1, 1981
 and the 1983 interview. They find that the chance that a given month's occupation is
 misreported rises from about 12 percent at the time of the interview to over 20 percent
 for more distant months. (The 12 percent error at the time of the interview appeared to
 be accounted for largely by hourly workers who had been demoted to lower-status
 positions and continued to report holding their previous higher-status positions).
                                               36

       It is difficult to draw clear implications from this evidence for the estimation of

event-history models that rely on retrospective data. Since the spells of nonemplovment

from the company are entirely a function of company policy rather than worker
behavior, one cannot use interview and validation record data to compare estimates of
"error-ridden" and "true" unemployment duration models as was done for earnings

functions in Table 3. At this point we can only note that the ingredients for grave
concern about the quality of parameter estimates are certainly present: massive
underreporting of spells and correlations between reporting error and demographic
measures typically included in such models. Clearly more work is needed in this area
—   on the econometrics of the effects of measurement error on estimates from duration

models. on the validity of actual reports of retrospective data and on ways in which the

quality of survey-based event-history data can be improved.

                                      VI. Conclusions

       The two validation data sets used in this paper produce a number of facts that
 contradict assumptions made in and implications drawn from traditional measurement
 error models. Since the validation data sets themselves have features that might limit
 their relevance for other situations, we order our discussion of implications according to
 the confidence we have in their generality.
        Both data sets showed that annual earnings are fairly reliably reported. The
 tendency for workers with lower-than-average earnings to overreport and high-wage

 Estimates of a reporting error model showed associations with demographic factors and
 measures of salience that were quite similar to those found in models of reporting error
 in unemployment status.
                                             37

workers to underreport their earnings — a covariance almost always assumed to be zero
in measurement error models — increased the reliability of annual earnings reports
considerably. The implied biases due to errors in measuring earnings when earnings is a
right-hand independent variable ranged from 18 to 24 percent. Mean-reverting error
also produced biases to right-hand side variable coefficients when annual earnings is a

dependent variable that ranged from 10 to 17 percent. The restricted variability of true
earnings from the single-company sample probably leads to an overstatement of these

biases.
          Furthermore, each data set also showed a surprisingly small decrement to
reliability when going from cross-sectional measures of earnings level to panel measures
of annual earnings change —there was more "news" than "noise" when earnings were
differenced over either one- or four-year intervals. Reliability was also fairly high in
panel reports of change in annual work hours. Indeed, apparently turbulent employment
conditions produced cross-sectional reports of earnings and hours in one of the survey

 waves that were less reliable than the corresponding change measures.
          Covariance between earnings error and right-hand side measures such as

 education, age and job tenure also appeared in both validation data sets. These
 covariances are also typically assumed to be zero in measurement error models, helping

 to produce the conventional wisdom that error can only bias right-hand side coefficients
 toward zero. However, depending on the pattern of covariances between the error in
 measuring an independent variable and true levels of independent variables,
 measurement error can readily lead to either downward or upward biases in right-hand

 side variable coefficients.
                                            38

      We found that the size and statistical significance of these covariances varied
across data sets and within waves of each data set; none was consistently large. In one

wave of our data a positive covariance between earnings error and schooling produced an
upward bias in the payoff to schooling when a cross-sectional earnings regression was
estimated with interview data, while a negative covariance between earnings error and
job tenure produced a downward bias on the tenure coefficient. However, variability in
the estimated pattern of these covariances leaves us unable to assert with confidence
what these covariances and likely biases will be in general population data sets.
       As shown by other papers at this conference, longitudinal studies of labor market
phenomena are increasingly turning to event-history models and data. In the company
sample we were able to validate reports over a two-and-a-half year period of spells of
nonemployment from the firm as well as changes in positions held within the company.
We concentrated on qia1ity of retrospective reports of unemployment and found that
only one-third of the spells of nonemployment appearing in company records were
reported in the interviews. Shorter and more distant spells were more likely to be
unreported, although the fraction of presumably salient longer and more recent spells
unreported still exceeded one-third. Furthermore, the incidence of reporting error
appeared to be correlated with typical right-hand measures such as age and schooling.
Thus, all of the ingredients for coefficient bias due to measurement errors would appear
 to be present in unemployment event-history data. But despite longstanding evidence
 that reports of episodic events are quite faulty, there seems to have been virtually no
 attention paid in the econometrics literature to the possible biases caused by

 measurement error in retrospective event-history reports.
                                             39

      Perhaps our most surprising — and tenuous — findings came for the variable most
dear to the hearts of labor economists: hourly earnings. Here we find that all of the
cross-sectional reporting of hourly earnings measures we could validate appeared to be

quite unreliable. In this case the characteristics of our validation study sample lead us

to be rather cautious. Reports of hourly earnings could be validated only for hourly
workers and the pay period-to-pay period variation in work hours and earnings in

company records were larger than most readers would anticipate. Whether the
conventional wisdom is in need of revision here too is less clear.

      At any rate, we found that only about one-quarter of the variation in a cross-
sectional hourly earnings measure obtained by dividing interview reports of annual
earnings by annual work hours was valid, while only about one-tenth of the variance of
hourly earnings measures based on "usual" or last pay period hours and earnings was
valid. The implied bias in using any of the hourly earnings measures as right-hand side
 variables is very large. Measurement properties of the one measure of change in hourly

 earnings available to us (four-year change in the ratio of annual earnings to annual
 hours, showed it to be even less reliable than its cross-sectional counterpart.
       Taken together, the results from the two validation studies show a clear need to
 recognize the potential importance of measurement error and incorporate more realistic
 assumptions about the properties of measurement error into measurement error models.
 Mean-reverting negative covariances between the error and true level of a given measure

 were pervasive in our data. Covariances between error and the true levels of other
 measures of interest were also widespread although not as consistent across waves and
 between the two data sets. Positive autocorrelation in measurement errors was also
                                            40

apparent in our panel data, constituting a third type of error covariance that need to be
built into error models of panel data.
      Building realistic ti.e., nonzero) assumptions about these covariances into
measurement error models will complicate the conventional wisdom regarding
measurement errors, but also force researchers to consider whether conventional
assumptions are warranted in their models. A useful by-product of these considerations
is the recognition of the need for direct measurement of the covariances through

validation studies.
      The case for additional survey-based validation studies of labor market panel data
is compelling. Here the importance of the quality of the validation data leads us to
recommend that additional firm samples be drawn. Such samples will shed light on the
question of how representative the employment practices of the firm that cooperated in
providing data for our study are as well as opportunities for testing new methods for

motivating respondents to provide high quality survey information. The disturbingly
high error in retrospective reports of employment events and cross-sectional reports of
hourly earnings makes these topics the highest priority for future studies.
                                      Table 1

     Summary Statistics for Earnings Errors for Salaried and Hourly Workers



     Data              Earnings           2
    Source             Variable          2
                                        o.X+c.u
                                                 2                     rt ,   t—1
                                                                                    rXt,X
                                                                                        t—1
                                          .303        .239 —.172          —            —
PSID Validation in i1986 Earnings(
Study           N=422                                (.028) (.031)
                                          .150        .076 —.104          —            —
                 in 1982 Earnings(
                 N=320                               (.024) (.023)

                 4-yr. 1n Earnings        .294        .213 —.214         .073         .452
                 N=206                               (.043) (.043)

                                          .221        .158    — .138      —            —
CPS-SSA Data     in (1977 Earnings)
                 N = 1575                            (.014)   (.014)

                                          .210        .108    — .190      —            —
                 In 1976 Earnings)
                 N1575                               (.015)   013
                 1-year . In Earnings     .322       .231     — .238     .372         .635
                 N=1575                              .017)    (.017)


    Note: Standard errors are given in parentheses beneath coefficients.
                                 Table 2

             Errors in Earnings. Hourly Earnings, and Hours
                           for Hourly Workers


                                2
          Earnings             a_u
                                                          r
          Variable            2 + a_ 2 bu                            1
                                                                         rXX     1
                              x u

in 1986 Earnings)             .276     .190 —.192
N=277                                  (.035:)   (.035)

in (1982 Earnings)            .241      .120 —.208
N= 141                                 (.049) (.044)
4-yr. . In Earnings           .260      .217 —.104            .146        .330
N=86                                   (.056) (.064)


in t1986 Earnings/Hour)       .670      .667     .021          —
N=277                                  (.028) (.086)
In (1982 Earnings/Hour)        .693     .737 —.301
N = 141                                .O47) (.125)
4-yr.     In Earnings/Hour)    .821     .870 — .369           .084        .542
N=86                                   (.047) (.230)

in (1986 Hours)                .366     .306 —.244             —
N=277                                  (.040) (.043)
In :1982 Hours)                .284     .184 —.226             —
N=141                                  (.053) (.050)
4-yr.     in (Hours)           .312     .267 — .140           .050        .126
N86                                    (.061) (.072)
Source: PSID Validation Study
Note: Standard errors are given in parentheses beneath coefficients.
                                         Table 3
Impact of Errors on Cross-Section Earnings Function for Salaried and Hourly Workers

                                b
                                    I
                                           bR       b              -   b-
                                                                        vX
     Independent Variable                               UTenureX                Discrepancy

   1986 Earnings N417
                                  .025                    — .005         .008     — .00012
   Education                                .018
                                (.006)     (.006)         (.020')      (.003)

                               — .008     — .007          — .005       — .001     — .00021
   Pie-Company Experience
                                (.003)     (.003)         (.009)       (.002)

                                 .003        .004          .002        — .001     — .00002
   Tenure
                                (.OOfl     (.001)         L005)        (.001)

    1982 Earnings N317
                                 .035        .038            .032      — .003     — .00032
    Education
                                (.008)     (.008)         i..026)      (.004)

                                  .004       .005         — .000       — .001     — .00018
    Pre-Company Experience
                                (.003)     (.003)         (.011)       (.001)

    Tenure                       .011        .014         —.007        —.004        .00048
                                (.002)     (.002)          (.006)      (.001)


    Source: PSID Validation Study
    Note: Standard errors are given in parenthesis beneath coefficients.
                                           Table 4

Correlations of Interview Reports and Records Data about Weekly Earnings for Hourly Workers


                  RE86         1E86        RELST          IELST        REMN          IEUSU

   RE8Ô            1.000
   1E86            0.806       1.000
   RELST           0.299       0.270         1.000
   IELST           0.368       0.384         0.456          1.000
   REMN            0.672       0.616         0.523          0.549         1.000
                   0.299       0.389         0.321          0.576        0.461          1.000
   IEUSU

    Mean           6.485       6.469         6.578          6.539        6.624         6.437
    St.Dev.        0.181       0.194         0.350          0.310        0.221         0.240

 Source: PSID Validation Study
   Note: Variables are defined as follows (all measures are logarithmic transformations of
         earnings in dollars):

    RE86: Records data on total earnings in 1986, divided by 52.
     1E86: Survey report on total earnings in 1986, divided by 52.
  RELST: Records data on earnings in last two week pay period, divided by 2.
   IELST: Survey report on earnings in last two week pay period, divided by 2.
  REMN: Records data on earnings in preceding twelve "normal" weeks, divided by 12.
  JEUSU: Survey report on usual earnings per pay period, divided by 2.
                                         Table 5

Correlations of Interview Reports and Records Data about Weekly Hours for Hourly \Vorkers


                   RHR86     1HR86      RHRLST        IHRLST       RHRMN        IHRUSL

   RHR86            1.000
   Il-1R86          0.640      1.000
   RHRLST           0.374      0.237       1.000
   IHRLST           0.313      0.374       0.603        1.000
   RHRMN            0.539      0.380       0.682        0.649         1.000
   IHRUSU           0.364      0.462       0.390        0.610         0.613         1.000

   Mean             3.668      3.683       3.840        3.865         3.844        3.8 13
   St.Dev.          0.136      0.150       0.194        0.189         0.138        0.147

  Source: PSID Validation Study
    Note: Variables are defined as follows (all measures are logarithmic transformations of
          hours):
    RHR86: Records data on total hours worked in 1986, divided by 52.
     1HR86: Survey report on total hours worked in 1986, divided by 52.
  RHRLST: Records data on hours worked in last two week pay period, divided by 2.
   IHRLST: Survey report on hours worked per week in last two week pay period.
  RHRMN: Records data on hours worked in preceding twelve "normal" weeks, divided by
             12.
   IHRUSU: Survey report on usual hours per week.
                                            Table 6

Correlations of Interview Reports and Records Data about Hourly Wage Rate for Hourly Workers


                   RWG86 1WG86            RWGI..ST       IWGLST RWGMN I\VGUS
    RWG86            1.000
    1WG86            0.558       1.000
    RWGLST           0.610       0.310        1.000
    IWGLST           0.261       0.230        0.351          1.000
    RWGMN            0.758       0.420        0.817          0.334        1.000
    IWGUS            0.213       0.212        0.288          0.483        0.254        1.000

    Mean             2.812       2.775        2.764          2.679        2.766        2.624
    St.Dev.          0.089       0.154        0.117          0.212        0.104        0.216

   Source: PSID Validation Study
     Note: Variables are defined as follows (all measures are logarithmic transformations of
           earnings in dollars per hour):
     RWG86: Records da4a on total earnings in 1986, divided by total hours worked in 1986.
      1WG86: Survey report on total earnings in 1986, divided by hours worked in 1986.
   RWGLST: Records data on earnings in last two week pay period, divided by hours worked in
             that pay period.
    IWGLST: Survey report on hours worked per week in last two week pay period.
   RWGMN: Records data on earnings in preceding twelve "normal" weeks, divided by hours
             worked in those pay periods.
     IWGUS: Survey report on usual earnings per pay period, divided by twice the number of
             usual hours per week.
                                      Table 7

        Correlations of Interview Reports on Usual Earnings and Hours for
          Hourly Workers with Summary Measures from Records Data


                                        Pay/week     Hours/week      Dollars/hour

Most recent pay period                     .321          .380               .258

Most recent "normal" pay period            .395          .452               .242

Across given worker's 12 most
recent "normal" weeks:

 Mean                                       .449         .616               .227
 Median                                     .434         .620               .205
  Mode                                      .397         .595               .196
  Minimum                                   .373         .356               .198
  Maximum                                   .392         .482               .209

Quartiles of given worker's 12 most
recent "normal" weeks
  Lowest                                    .428         .484               .219
  2nd                                       .433         .614               .215
  3rd                                       .428         .617               .201
                                            .411         .549               .233
  Highest
 Number of cases                            275           287               275

Source: PSID Validation Study
                                           Table 8

    Average Magnitude and Bias in Survey Reports of Weekly Earnings for Hourly Workers


                                 1986 Totals                  Usual            Last Pay Period

                                           ABS                        ABS                  ABS
                              Discrp.     Discrp.    Discrp.      Discrp.     Discrp.     Discrp.

Mean                          — .006        .033      .066*           .096     — .019        .075

Standard Deviation              .051        .039       .109           .084       .156        .138

Root mean square error          .051                   .127                      .157

Correlation with:

    Record variability          .037        .055      — .187*         .176*    — .076        .085

    Education                   .081      —.161        .178*                     .112        .029

                                            .098      —.151           .109       .068      —.046
    Age
                                            .087      — .197*         .180*      .035      — .046
    Tenure                    — .165


Notes:

All reports and record entries have been transformed by taking logarithms.

The discrepancies labelled "1986 totals" are defined as the difference between the annual
measures (survey and records), after dividing both by 52.

The discrepancies labelled "usual" are defined as the difference between the respondent's
report of usual earnings (divided by 2) and the mean of the records for the 12 most recent
"normal" weeks.

The discrepancies labelled "last pay period" are defined as the difference between the
respondent's report and the record of earnings for the most recent two-week pay period (both
divided by 2).

"Record variability" is defined as the standard deviation of the records data (for each
individual) for the 12 most recent "normal" weeks.

  Discrepancy or correlation differs significantly from zero (p < .05). (Such tests are
*

inappropriate for the absolute discrepancies.)
                                         Table 9

                    Average Magnitude and Bias in Survey Reports on
                      Hours Worked per Week for Hourly Workers


                             1986 Totals                Usual           Last Pay Period
                                       ABS                    ABS                  ABS
                           Discrp.    Discrp.      Discrp.   Discrp.    Discrp.   Discrp.

Mean                         .005        .033                   .042      .011*      .042

Standard Deviation            .053       .042        .056       .039      .072       .060

Root mean square error        .053                   .057                 .073

Correlation with:

 Record variability           .032       .089      — .051       .180    —.021        .094


 Education                    .131*    —.065         .207*   —.114        .100       .068


 Age                                   —.069                    .086    —019       —.045

 Tenure                     —.099      —.051                    .121*   —.021      —.020

Source: PSID Validation Study
  Notes: See notes to Table 8.
                                   Table 10

                Average Magnitude and Bias in Survey Reports on
                     Hourly Wage Rate for Hourly Workers

                            1986 Totals            Usual          Last Pay Period
                                    ABS                  ABS                 ABS
                         Discrp.   Discrp.    Discrp.   Discrp.   Discrp.   Discrp.

Mean                     — .013*     .039     — .059*      .086     .038*      .061

Standard Deviation         .056      .043       .101       .079     .089       .076

Root mean square error     .057                 .117                .097

Correlation with:

 Record variability        .024    — .002       .036     — .057   —.165      — .081

                          — .029                .081     —.039    —.040        .031

 Age                      — .041     .064     — .057       .037   — .071     — .105

 Tenure                   — .069     .090     — .080       .090   — .030     — .059

Source: PSID Validation Study
  Notes: See notes to Table 8.
                                     Table 11

                Fraction of Actual Unemployment Spells Reported in
                   Interview by Length of Spell and Recall Period

                                 Percent of Spells
                               Reported in Interview          Number of Spells

  Length of
  Spell in Weeks

   1                                   25%                           243

   2                                   34                            117

   3—4                                 39                             31

   5—12                                43                             14

   13—20                                56                            34

   21—28               —                51                            23

   29 or more                           63                            19


   Length of Recall
   Period in Months

   8 or less                            49%                           47

   9—12                                 44                           169

   13—18                                26                           131

   19 or more                           25                            140


   Total                                34%                          487

Source:        Calculated from Mathiowetz (1985), Table 1, based on data from the
               PSID Validation study.
                                       Appendix

      The validation study providing data for this paper gathered interview and

company record data from a single large manufacturing firm with several thousand
employees. The firm's hourly work force is completely unionized and virtually all
workers, both hourly and salaried, work full time. At the time of the initial interviewing

in the summer of 1983, the company work force was considerably older (and with more
job tenure) than was true of a national sample of workers, in part resulting from layoffs
and relatively few new hires in the two years prior to the initial interview. These

deviations were offset by a sampling procedure that stratified the employee list by age
and type of worker (hourly vs. salaried) and selected a larger proportion of younger and

salaried workers.
       The resulting 1983 sample was evenly divided between salaried and hourly

 workers and had a fairly uniform age distribution. Interviews were conducted by
 telephone with a questionnaire similar to that used in the Panel Study of Income
 Dynamics, with 418, or 78.3 percent of the 534 potential respondents (or proxies)
 completing interviews. A more detailed explanation of study procedures involved in the
 initial round of interviewing is given in Duncan and Mathiowetz (1985).
       A second round of interviewing was conducted in the summer of 1987 with the

 1983 respondents and a fresh sample of hourly workers. Some 122 of the individuals
 with whom interviews were attempted in 1983 had retired, left the company for other
 reasons, had unlisted telephone numbers or for some other reason were not appropriate
 potential 1987 respondents. Reinterviews were successfully conducted with 341, or 82.4

 percent of the remaining 1983 sample; 275 individuals were respondents in both 1983
and 1987. Given the much richer company record information available for hourly
workers, it was decided that additional interviews should be conducted only on hourly
workers. An additional random sample of 202 hourly workers was drawn and interviews
were successfully conducted with 151, or 75 percent of them. Thus, the 1987 data
collection had a total of 492 interviews with a total response rate of 79.9 percent.
      A comparison of the interview reports of earnings and work hours from the 1983
and 1987 validation study samples to data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics

and Current Population Surveys is given in Appendix Table 1. The distributions of
annual and hourly earnings for the validation study sample have considerably higher
means and much lower variance than for the national samples, even when those national
samples are restricted to unionized hourly workers in durable manufacturing industries
and the validation sample is restricted to hourly workers. The reduced variance has
implications for the generalizability of findings about the extent of measurement error

found for the validation study sample.
        Validation sources were company payroll records, company "activity records"

 showing for hourly workers a daily accounting of work or unemployment, and general

 company policies on various fringe benefits. Our analysis of the interview data is
 restricted to information for which there was a very close match between the information
 sought in the questionnaire and the information available in the company records and for
 which validating information was judged likely to be highly accurate. Interview and

 company records were compared to identify cases with substantial apparent reporting
 error. Both interview and record information in all such cases were rechecked to ensure
 that differences were not the result of coding errors.
                                                        Appandis Tab). I.
                          Means and Standard Deviations of Interview Reports of Earnings and Work Hour8
                                in th PSIO VaIid.tio.i Study. PSID and Curr.nt Population Survey


                                                  Salary and Hourly                                         Hourly Only

                                               Panel Study Of     Current Population                 Panel Study of       Current Popu-
                                               Income Dynamics          Survey                      Income Dynamics       lation Survey

                                                                                                     Unionized              Unionized
                                                    Durable              Durable                      Workers                Workers
                                P510                 Manu-                Mario-           PSID      in Durable             in Durable
                             Vaild5tion     Al)    facturing     All    factoring       Validation Manufacturing          Manufacturing
                                Study   Industries    Only   Industries    only            Study     Industries             Industries

In Annual Earnings                                                            -                         -
                                1050       -             -         -                      10.44
1987 r.port of 1986
                                 (.224)                                                    (.193)
                                 -                                 -          -            -           10.15                  -
1985 report   of   1984                   9.94          10,10
                                          (.715)         (.579)                                         (.339)
                                                                   -          -                         9.87                  -
1983 report of 1982             10.30      9.82          9.97                             10.20
                                 (.284)    (.7281        (.627)                            (.256)       (.451)


In U$ua1" Weekly Earning,                                                                               .
1987 Report                     6.55       -             -        6.04        6.   17     644                                 6.15
                                (.298)                             (.589)     (.461)       (.256)                             (.300)


ln Hourly Earning,
1983 report of straight          -         -             -         -          -            2.44         2.28                  2.25
  tim. hourly wage rate                                                                    (.170)       (.262)                (.300)

1987 report of 1986 annual       2.83      -             -         -          -            2.79         -                     -
  •arnings/.nnual hour,          (.188)                                                    (.161)
                                 -                       2.46      -          -            -            2.50                  -
1985 report of 1984 annual                 2.33
 earnings/annual hoUr,                     (.625)        (.498)                                         (318)

1983 Report of 1982 annual       2.78      2.24          2.40      -                       2.71         2.37                  -
  earnings/annual hour.          (.197)    (.63))        (.534)                            (.208)       (.342)


In Annual Hours                                                                                         -
1987 report of 1986              7.65      -             -         -          -            7.63                               -
                                 (.1481                                                    (.152)
                                 -         7.61          7,64      -          -            -            7.65
1985 report of 1984
                                           (.296)        (.2541                                         (.184)

                                 7.54      7.58          7.56      -          -            7.43         749                   -
1983 report of 1982
                                 (.2)7)    (.313)        (.247)                            (.223)       I    251)

NOTE:   All samples used for annual measures are restricted to male respondents who work 520 - 3500 annual hours in the
        given calendar year. had more than $1000 in earnings and had unimputed data.  'the CPS and P510 samples are
        restricted to males age 25-65, and the PSID is further restricted to household heads.
      Matched CPS-Social Security data come from the 1978 CPS-SER Exact Match

File, which was created jointly by the U.S. Census Bureau and Social Security
Administration. The Exact Match file matches respondents to the March, 1978 Current

Population Survey with Social Security Administration earnings histories from 1950 to
1978. CPS earnings questions and Social Security earnings records closely approximate
the same concept. As described in Bound and Krueger (1988), cases on this file were

then matched to the March, 1977 Current Population Survey Demographic File to obtain
the subset of individuals who responded to both the March 1977 and March 1978 CPS

and for whom 1976 and 1977 Social Security earnings information was available.
        The file was further restricted to private, nonagricultural workers with positive
Social Security earnings in both years. positive, non-imputed CPS earningsin both years
and who reported neither self-employment income nor income from tips in either year
and who reported that their longest job held during the year was in a covered occupation
 and industry. The latter restrictions should ensure that the earnings concept used in the
 Social Security records match with the earnings concept sought in the CPS interview,
 although some residual matching error no doubt remains. These various matching and
 sample restrictions resulted in a sample of 2924 males and 465 females of a total of
 27,485 potentially matchable households, although an examination of the characteristics
 of the remaining cases, described in Bound and Krueger (1988), suggests that their mean

 ages, schooling, weeks worked and self-response rate are similar to the full 1978 March

 cPS.
         A prominent problem with the Social Security earnings information is that they

 are censored at the maximum taxable amount — $15,300 in 1976 and $16,500 in 1977.
Although only about five percent of the women had earnings at or above the maximum,

nearly half of the men had censored earnings. This paper restricts its analysis to the
nontruncated sample; Bound and Krueger (1988) use maximum likelihood procedures on

the whole sample and obtain similar results.
                                     References
Altonji, Joseph G. (1986). "Intertemporal substitution in labor supply: Evidence
      from Micro Data". Journal of Political Economy, 94, No. 3, Part 2, S 176-
      S2 15.

Bound, John and Krueger, Alan B. (1988). "The exhort of measurement error in
     longitudinal earnings data: Do two wrongs make a right?" Working Paper.
     Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social Research, The University of Michigan.

Bradburn, Norman, Sudman, Seymore, and Associates (1979). Improving
     Interview Method and Questionnaire Design. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Cannell, Charles C. and Fowler, Floyd J. (1963). A Study of the Reporting Visits
     to Doctors in the National Health Survey. Research Report. Ann Arbor,
     MI: Institute for Social Research, The University of Michigan.
Cannell, Charles, Fisher, Gordon, and Bakker, Thomas (1965). "Reporting of
     Hospitalization in the Health Interview Survey." (Vital and Health
     Statistics. Ser. 2, Report 6). Washington, DC: Public Health Service.
Cannell, Charles F.. Miller, Peter V. and Oksenberg, Lois (1981). "Research on
     Interviewing Techniques." In Samuel Leinhardt (ed.), Sociological
     Methodology 1981. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Duncan, Greg J. and Hill, Daniel H. (1985). "An investigation of the extent and
     consequences of measurement error in labor economic survey data." Journal
       of Labor Economics, 3, No. 4, 508—522.

 Duncan, Greg J. and Mathiowetz, Nancy A. (1985). A Validation Study of
      Economic Survey Data, monograph. Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social
      Research, The University of Michigan.
 Freedman, D.. Thornton, A., Camburn, D., Aiwin, D. and Young-Demarco, L.
      (1988). "The Life History Calendar: A technique for collecting
      retrospective data." In N. Tuma (ed.), Sociological Methodology. San
      Francisco:Jossey Bass.
 Fuller, Wayne A. (1987). Measurement Error Models. New York:John Wiley &
       Sons.

 Griliches, Z. and Hausman, J.A. (1986). "Errors in Variables in Panel Data",
       Journal of Econometrics 31, 93—118.
Jabine, Thomas, Straf, Miron, Tanur, Judith, and Tourangeau, Roger
      (eds.) (1984). Cognitive Aspects of Survey Methodology: Building a Bridge
      Between Disciplines. Washington DC: National Academy Press.

Kmenta, J. (1986). Elements of Econometrics 2nd ed. New York: MacMillan.

Lansing, John B., Ginsburg, Gerald P. and Braaten, Kaisa (1961). "An
      Investigation of Response Error" ("Studies in Consumer Savings," No. 2),
      University of Illinois, Bureau of Economic and Business Research.

Mathiowetz, Nancy A. and Duncan, Greg J. (1988). "Out of Work, Out of Mind:
     Response Errors in Retrospective Reports of Unemployment," Journal of
      Business and Economic Statics, 6, 2. 221—229.
Mathiowetz, Nancy A. (1985). "The Problem of Omissions and TelecopyingError:
     New Evidence from a Study of Unemployment." Proceedings ofthe Social
     Statistics Sector, American Statistical Association.
Mellow, Wesley and Sider, Hal (1983). "Accuracy of response in labor market
     surveys: Evidence and implications." Journal of Labor Economics, 1, 331—
       344.

Nunnaily, J.C. (1967). Psychometric Theory. New York:McGraw-Hill.
 Pindvck, R.S. and Rubinfeld, D.L. (1981). Econometric Models and Economic
       Forecasts 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
 Rodgers, W.L. and Herzog, A.R. (1988). "Covariances of measurement errors in
      survey responses." Journal of Official Statistics Vol. 3, No. 4, 403—4 18.
 Tulving, Endel, and Thomson, D. (1973). "Encoding Specificity and Retrieval
       Processes in Episodic Memory." Psychological Review, 80, 352—372.
</ref_section>
