                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE EFFECT OF TAKEOVERS ON THE EMPLOYMENT AND WAGES OF
                     CENTRAL-OFFICE AND OTHER PERSONNEL




                           Frank R.   Lichtenberg

                               Donald   Siegel




                           Working Paper   No. 2895




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02133
                                 March 1989




This research was performed at the Census Bureaus Center for Economic
Studies with financial support from the National Science Foundation. We
thank both organizations for their support. This paper is part of NBER's
research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper #2895
                                          March 1989


                THE EFFECT OF TAKEOVERS ON THE EMPLOYMENT AND WAGES
                       OF CENTRAL-OFFICE AND OTHER PERSONNEL


                                     ABSTRACT




     This paper presents evidence based on establishment-level Census
Bureau data concerning the effects of ownership change on the employment
and wages of both central—office workers and manufacturing plant employees.
We find that central offices that changed owners between 1977 and 1982
had substantially lower -- about 16% lower -- employment growth during
that period than central offices not changing owners.   (There was,
however, no significant difference in the growth of R&D employment.) In
                                                                    owners
contrast, employment growth in production establishments changing
was only 5% lower than it was in production establishments not changing
owners.   (The relative employment decline in production establishments
changing owners occurred in the 2 or 3 years before the takeover; after
the takeover, employment recovered a bit, but not enough to offset the
previous decline.) This implies that the ratio of central-office to
                                                               about 7.2
plant employees declines about 11% in firms changing owners:
administrators per 1000 plant employees are eliminated. These findings
are consistent with the view that reduction of administrative overhead is
an important motive for changes in ownership. Failure to account for
reductions in central—office employment results in a substantial (about
40%) underestimate of the productivity gains associated with ownership
change.   We also provide evidence concerning the relationship between
firm size and administrative-intensity.




Frank R.    Lichtenberg                   Donald Siegel
Graduate    School of Business            National Bureau of Economic Research
Columbia    University                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
726 Uris    Hall                          Cambridge, NA 02138
New York,    NY 10027
        During the 1980s there has been a rapid increase in the rate of

business ownership change in the United States.     The value of the   cornpa-

flies   involved in such transactions increased almost sixfold between 1980

and 1986.     The proliferation of takeovers has stimulated growing interest

(and in some cases concern) among policymakers, scholars,    and the public

about the causes and effects of ownership change, particularly about its

effects on efficiency (hence 'competitiveness).

        One view of the process of ownership change is that takeovers

(actual or threatened) are often necessary to force or allow significant

changes in management practices, particularly substantial curtailment in

(some of) the firm's activities.     Shleifer and Vishny (1988, p.11), for

example, argue that

        hostile takeovers affect industries in decline or sharp change where
        managers fail to shrink operations rapidly enough or to make other
        adjustments. In maintaining full-scale operations, managers may be
        guarding the domain of their control or trying to protect employees
        from dismissal or wage cuts.


The group of employees that top executives may try    hardest to protect    are


their immediate subordinates:     managers and administrators employed at

corporate or divisional headquarters. If so, a change in ownership would

have a much greater impact on these employees than it would have on those

lower down in the corporate hierarchy.

        Prominent corporate "raiders" claim that this is indeed the case.

Henry Kravis (1989, p. 71) makes the following statements concerning

leveraged buyouts:

        People who produce things will stay. We look at the people who
        report to people who report to people. We'll often cut fat at the
        corporate level. There'd be much less of this... if chief executives
        felt the pressure from their directors to do the cutting that they
        only do when they're threatened by takeover.
In a   similar vein, Carl Icahn (1989) asserts that we have

       created a corporate welfare state. . . companies are burdened by
                                              .


       layers of vice presidents  who not only don't produce, hut are often
       counterproductive... .1 and other 'raiders" usually eliminate the
       people who are most responsible for the mess —- the "Top Brass"..
       In 1986, 1 took control of T.W.A. .. .and managed to eliminate more
       than $300 million a year in waste and bureaucracy.


       This kind of "restructuring" can occur in the absence of a major

shock to the organization, such as a takeover or bankruptcy.        General

Electric and Monsanto provide two recent examples of this:

       [The chief executive of General Electric turned] GE from a textbook
       case of a massive, bureaucratically managed conglomerate into a new
       model of decentralised, liberated management... .He has dispensed
       with layers of headquarters staff, cutting it from 1700 to 1000 by
       removing the administrators that acted as filters between each
       business unit and the bose's office.

       Monsanto's main orgamiaational change in its factories has been to
       do away with most of its foreman, supervisors, and quality inapec
       tors and instead to invite plant workers to oversee themselves...
       Another useful change has been to give workers contact with their
       customers, so that they know where the product goes and wy...
       Previously, they would have gone through the sales staff.


Although these specific reductions in adminiatrative overhead occurred in
the absence of takeovers, we hypothesize that in general such reductions
are much more likely to occur in firms experiencing changes in corporate
control than in other firms.
        In this paper we   test this   and other hypotheses by providing   esti-
mates   of the effects of takeovers on the employment and wages of employ-

ees in both auxiliary establishments (which include central

administrative offices) and production establishments. These estimates

are obtained via econometric analysis of large longitudinal data sets




1       The Economist (1989, p. 55).
2       Ibid, p. 56.
based on Census Bureau surveys or censuses of both types of estabiisn-

ments.    For each type of establishment, we estimate differences between

establishments changing and not changing owners in the growth of

employment and wages, so we can contrast the effects of takeovers on

auxiliary- and production-establishment employees. We can also identify

the effects on a small but important subset of personnel -- employees
                                          -- and distinguish between the
engaged in research and development (R&D)

effects on production and nonproduction workers in productson

establishments.

      There is a small previous literature on the labor impact of owner-

ship change, but no previous studies have examined administrative employ-

ment separately.      In Section II we briefly review the existing evidence

In Section III we describe the nature of our data and provide some

background and historical information about auxiliary-establishment

employment and wages.      The core of our empirical investigation is con-

tained in Section IV.      There we provide descriptive statistics, a discus-

sion of methodological issues, and presentation and interpretation of our

econometric estimates.      In Section V we consider theory and evidence

concerning the relationship between firm size and administrative-intensity
                                                       A summary and
(the fraction of employees engaged in administration).

conclusions appear in Section VI.

II.     Previous research on the labor impact       of   ownership chang

        We are aware of three previous studies --        all   of which examined

firm-    or   plant-level data --   that   provided evidence concerning the labor

impact of ownership change.         The first was our 1987 paper on productivity

and changes in ownership of manufacturing plants, which analyzed longitu-

dinal Census data for almost 20,000 establishments. Although the effect
                                          4



of ownership     change on   total-factor productivity   (TFP) waa the    primary
emphasis   of   the atudy, we also   presented estimates of differences       in the
growth of total labor input, during each of        the years   t7   to t+7,

between plants changing owners in year t ("changers") and plants in the

same industry not changing owners in year t ("nonchangers").             The data

indicated that 'changers" had significantly lower labor input growth

rates    than "nonchangers"in years t-2, t-1, and t --      the   respective

differences were —0.8, 2,2, and —4,1 percentage points              but slightly

higher growth rates in years t+l, t+2, and t+3 (0.4, 1.0, and 0.6             per
centage pointa)    .          about 2½ years before to 2½ years after the

ownership change, mean labor input of 'changers" declines 5.1 percent

relative to that of "nonchangers." But the decline occurs largely if not

entirely before the change in ownership; after the change, there is a

relatiwe increase in labor input, although too small an increase to

completely offset the previous decline.

        Our previous paper did not contain any evidence about the behavior

of wages or compensation (wages plus supplements) in connection with

ownership change, nor did it distinguish between production and

nonproduction employees. Moreover, the analysis was based only on data

for manufacturing (production)       establishments; central administrative

offices, which in 1982 accounted for 10.0 percent of manufacturing

payrolls, were not included.         If the effects of ownership change on




3       Total labor input was defined as "production-worker—equivalent
        manhours," i.e. as production-worker manhours times the ratio of
        total wages and salaries to production-worker wages.
4       Almost all of these differences were due to differences in employ-
        ment growth, rather than differences in growth of average annual
        hours of work.
employment in production establishments and in administrative offices

differ substantially, then failure to account for administrative offices
                                                                    In this
may result in seriously biased estimates of the effects on TFP.
                                                                and wages
paper we estimate the effects of ownership change on employment

iC   administrative   offices and contrast them with the corresponding

effects in production establishments. This comparison is of interest in

its own right, and it also enables us to assess and eliminate the bias to

which our earlier productivity estimates were subject. We also

re-examine the labor impact of ownership change in production establish-

ments in greater detail

       The second study that provides evidence on the labor impact of

changes in ownership is Kaplan's (1988) analysis of a sample of 33 large

(over $50 million) management buyouts of public companies completed

between 1980 and 1986.      Kaplan compared the number of employees at the

end of the first full post-buyout year in which employment numbers were

                                                  before the buyout.5 He
reported with the number of employees in the year

found that the median employment change for all 33 firms was 00%, but

the median                       employment change was -15.3%, i.e. employ-

ment growth among buyout firms was 15.3 percentage points below growth

                                                  When he restricted the
among aon-buyaut firms in the same industry-
                                                                      and
analysis to 22 firms not engaged in extensive post-buyout acquisition

divestiture activity,     the raw and industry—adjusted median employment

                                                          much smaller
changes were 3.3% and -11.4%, respectively. Thus Kaplan's

and more narrowly—focused data set revealed declines in relative employ—




 S     Kaplan did not have access to wage data.
                                        6



ment about 2    to   3 times greater than ours did, and over a narrower   "event
window"

        The third study of ownership change, by Brown and Medoff (1988), is

the only one whose principal focus      is on its effects on labor, and is the

ooiy one to provide estimates of wage effects. These authors analyzed

quarterly employment and payroll data contained in unemployment insurance

records kept by the Michigan Employment Security Commission.        As they

acknowledge, an important disadvantage of this data set is that it covers

only a single state.      Consequently, the data do noi reflect what is

happening in othar locations of multistate companies, and few large
acquisitions are recorded in their data. Brown and Medoff distinguished
three    kinds of ownership change:    (1)   "simple sales":   firm A changes

ownership without being integrated with any other firm; (2) "assets-only

sale":     firm A purchases the assets of firm B without absorbing its

workforce; and (3) "merger":       firm A purchases firm B and (at least

initially) absorbs (most of) firm B's workers, or firm A and firm B

combine to form firm C, with (at least initially) firm C including (most

of) the workers of firms A and B.       Their estimates of the employment and

wage changes associated with each type of transaction are as follows:
                                        employment          wage
                                        change              change
                    simple sale           +9%                —5%


                        assets-only sale        -5%                 +5%

                        merger                  +2%                 -4%

Farber (1988) observed that the fact that transactions were classified on

the basis of employment changes makes it difficult to interpret the

employment effects, and the authors themselves acknowledge that the

estimates of these effects are sensitive to specification details; the

wage effects were less ambiguous. Because only about 1/3 of these
                                       7



transactions were    assets-only sales, their estimates imply that on

average wages fall slightly
                            -— about I or 2 percent -—    in connection with
ownership change.     They observe that in the case of mergers, the wage

decline may partly be due to the departure of the relatively highly-paid

head of the acquired firm.

       Auerbach (1988, p. 2) suggested that perhaps the most important

conclusion that can be drawn from the Brown and Medoff study is that the
                                                             are of
employment and wage changes associated with ownership change

"relatively small magnitude." But even if the effect of ownership change

on overall employment and wage rates is small, it may have a sizeable
                                                                    Our data
impact on the employment and wage of specific types of workers.

enable us to determine the effects of ownership change on a relatively

                                               work in auxiliary estab-
small, but key, subset of employees: those who

lishments --   the   locus of employment for many top managers, administra-

tors, and R&D   personnel.
III.    Data and descriptive statistics

       The empirical analysis described in this paper is based on three

distinct data sets, each based on a different Census Bureau census or

survey of establishments or firms.     The first data set is based on

                                                             the 1977 and
"Auxiliary Establishment Reports" collected in the course of

1982 Economic Censuses.      Researchers have not, to our knowledge, previ-

ously analyzed these data at the micro level.      The Census Bureau defines

auxiliary establishments as those

            whose employees are primarily engaged in general and tusiness
            administration; management; research, development, and testing;
            warehousing; electronic data processing; and other supporting
            services performed centrally for other establishments of the
                                           S



               same
                      c1pany
                               rather than for other    companies or    the general
        -
               public.
               The primary functions of these eatabliahments are to manage,
               administer, service or suppo the         activities
                                                             of the other
               establishments of the company


The   Census   of auxiliary establishments collects data         on   the number of
employees,     by type of work performed,      annual   payroll, depreciable     assets,

capital     expenditures,    and other variables and attributes of the estab-

lishment.      in   1982,                    auxiliary establishments,
                            there were almost 36,000

and almost 2.6 million people were employed in them. Table 1 shows the

1982 distribution of auxiliary establishment employees by type of work

performed. About one—third of employees are classified as "administra-
tive and managerial."8 The principal activity of 9.3 percent (240
thousand) of these employees was research,          development, and testing.9

      We obtained data for the entire set of auxiliary establishments in

each of two adjacent Census years —— 1977 and 1982 —- and when records

for   a given establishment (identified by a unique establishment code)

were present in both years, we linked them togetber.0                 Each record also

contains a     code   identifying the parent    company   that   owns the   establish-


6     U.S. Bureau of the Census (1986, p. A-I).
7     U.S. Bureau of the Census (1986, p. 2).
8     In contrast, according to the Current Population Survey,  about 11
      percent of      all
                     nonfarm employed persons identify themselves as
      managers and administrators. See U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
      (1980, p. 34).
9     The National Science Foundation, on the basis of its annual survey
      of industrial R&D, estimates that there were 510 thousand
      full-time-equivalent scientists and engineers engaged in R&D in
      industry in 1982.
10    As discussed below, a substantial fraction of the establishments
      that were ever observed were observed in only one year, presumably
      due to closing and opening of establishments. Since 1982 was a very
      severe recession year, our sample period is probably not representa-
      tive of the entire recent postwar era.
merit.    We assumed that the establishments owner changed if and only if

there was a change in the value of this code between 1977 and 1982.     This

procedure is probably subject to both type I and type II error:     some

non-matches of the code may be due to coding errors, and certain owner-

ship changes may not result in changes in the code.     Measurement error

contained in our indicator of ownership change is likely to bias towards

zero the estimated differences in behavior between establishments chang-

ing and not changing owners.     Unfortunately, the data don't permit us to

classify ownership changes into different "types", e.g. hostile versus

friendly takeovers.

         The data set described above enables us to contrast the employment

and wage behavior of auxiliary establishments changing owners with that

of auxiliary establishments not changing owners.     We also wish to con-

trast the former with the behavior of production establishments changing

owners.     To accomplish this we utilize a second data set, the Longitudi-

nal Establishment Data (LED).     This data set, based on the Annual Surveys

and Censuses of Manufactures, contains annual data for the years 1972-81

on the output and inputs of almost 20,000 manufacturing (production)

establishments.     It was the basis for our previous (1987) study of

productivity and ownership change, and also for Lichtenberg's (1988)

study of internal costs of adjustment, and is described in detail in

those two papers.

         Table 2 presents data on the aggregate employment and payroll of

both auxiliary and production establishments in manufacturing, for Census

years from 1963 to 1982.     Auxiliary—establishment employment grew much

more rapidly than production—establishment employment. The number of

auxiliary-establishment employees per 100 production—establishment
                                        IC




employees increased from     45   in 1963 to   72   in 1982.   Payrnll per employ

cc    is much higher in auxiliary than in production       establishments, hut the
gap   has been narrowing;    auxiliary establishment employees on average
earned 68     percent more in 1963, but only 56 percent more in 1982.
IV     ricaipl          sis of the effects of takeovers
       We   begin our empirical analysis of the labor impsct of ownership
change by considering the data presented        in Table   3 on mean   values of
employment and wage levels and changes, 197782, by status of auxiliary
eatsblishment.1l The  four mutually exclusive, exhaustive statuses and
the criteria for assigning them to auxiliary establishments were as
follows; (1) "no change"; the establishment was present in both 1977
and 1982 censuses and had the same owner ID; (2) "changed owners"; the
establishment was present in both years and had diffe6ent IDs; (3)

"closed': the establishment was present in 1977 only; (4) "opened"; the
establishment was present in 1982 only. Previous studies have documented
the    high rate of closing and opening of production establishments between

census years.      For example, Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson (1988, Table

Ib) estimated that 25 to 40 percent      (depending on     plant age) of the
manufacturing establishments present         in a given census had closed by the

next census.      Table 3 indicates that a similar "failure rate" (36.3

percent in manufacturing) applies to auxiliary establishments. Also as

in the case of production establishments, auxiliary establishments that

close are smaller on average than those that survive.




11      Because we will want to contrast the effects of takeovers on auxil
        iary establishments with their effects on production establishments,
        and we lack data on nonmanufacturing production establishments, we
        present estimates for auxiliary establishments only in manufacturing
        as well as for those in all industries.
                                     ii




     Despite the fact that the number of establishments closing and

opening is large relative to the number of surviving establishments, and

very large relative to the number changing owners, in the remainder of

this paper we analyze only the data on surviving establishments. Because

we observe establishments that close or open only once, we cannot compare

their employment or wage changes with those of surviving plants.     One

might hypothesize that the probability that an establishment closes is

related to whether or not it changes owners.    In their study of mergers

and acquisitions in the New Jersey economy, however, Yago and Stevenson

(1986) found no evidence of plant closings occurring as a result of

hostile takeovers. Also, Brown and Medoff (1988, pp. 22-23) reported

that including firms that 'died" in their sample did not materially

affect their results.'2

     Among the surviving establishments, those that change owners are

smaller and pay lower wages than those that do not.    10.5 percent of all

                                                                 manufac-
surviving auxiliary establishments, and 10.8 percent of those in

turing,   changed owners.   To calculate the percent of employees affected

by changes in ownership, we can weight the number of establishments by

their respective mean employment; in manufacturing, the proportion of

employees affected is 6.5 percent.13

     Perhaps the most interesting statistics in Table 3 are the mean

growth rates (changes in logarithms) of employment and wages.      Employment

growth in auxiliary establishments that changed owners was 19 percent




12   See Lichtenberg and Siegel (1987, pp 661—2) for a discussion in a
     slightly different context of the effect of censoring failing
     establishments.
13   Brown and Medoff found that 16 percent of all workers sampled were
     involved in a change in ownership over a five-year period.
                                      12



lower (16 percent in the case of manufacturing establishments) than it

was in establishments that   didnt change   owners,   Moreover the latter

experienced modest positive growth whereas the former experienced sharp

declines in employment. Establishments changing owners also had lower

growth rates of nominal wages, although only in the case of manufacturing

establishments is the difference nonnegligible    —   4.4 percentage
       14
points.

     The differences between growth rates are interesting and suggestive,

but for at least two reasons one might believe that the simple differ-

ences are biased estimates of the true effects of ownership change.

First, the data analyzed in Table 3 were not standardized by industry.

If the incidence of ownership change is greater in industries with above-

or below-average employment growth, then differences between           /


unstsndardized growth   rates may prnvide a distorted picture of the impact

of ownership change on employment. Blair (1988) found that the level of

merger activity tends to be higher in industries experiencing lower

employment growth, suggesting that the estimates reported above overstate

the industry-adjusted differential.

     Second, it is well known that there is a strong negative correlation

between the initial size of firms and their subsequent growth rates.

Hall (1987, p. 603) has recently shown that "neither measurement error in

employment nor sample attrition can account for the negative coefficient

on firm size in the growth rate equation." Since establishments changing

owners sre smaller than those not changing owners,     in the absence of any




14   The change between 1977 and 1982 in the logarithms of the Consumer
     Price Index and of the Gil!' Implicit Price Deflator were .466 and
     .390, respectively.
                                                 13




former to exhibit           r
effect of ownership change on employment growth one would expect the

                                    employment growth. The employment-growth differ-

ences shown in Table 3 would therefore underestimate the effect of

ownership change.

     We can eliminate both of the potential biases (which may be offset-

ting) by estimating regression models of the form

                            =           +        ln                +
                                                                       u..
            ln
                                  OC                  X15 +                               (1)

where X denotes either employment or wages; the subscript ijt refers to

establishment         i    in 4-digit SIC industry j       in   year t; OC equals 1 if the

establishment changed owners between t-5 and t, and otherwise equals

zero; and   is   is       a classical disturbance.       Simply comparing the growth

rates of establishments changing and not changing owners is equivalent to

imposing the restrictions                   1   and y. =   1,V.        We   now relax those

restrictions.

        Estimates of the parameter f3             in   equation (1), for auxiliary

establishments in both all industries and in manufacturing, and produc-

tion establishments in manufacturing, are reported in Table 4.                        Relaxing

the restrictions reduces slightly the estimated employment effect of

changes    In ownership of auxiliary establishments: the mean relative

                                                            16-17 per-
employment of establishments changing owners declines about

cent.     In contrast,          relaxing the restrictions has a substantial impact on

the estimated wage effects: controlling for industry and the initial
                                                                  owners
wage level, mean wage growth of auxiliary establishments changing

is 9.2 percentage points lower (6.0 percentage points in manufacturing)

than that of establishments not changing owners.                       These estimates imply

that employment and real wages fell significantly more in auxiliary
                                      14



establishments changing owners between 1977 and 1982 than in those that

did not.

        In addition to estimating the effect of ownership change on the

total employment of auxiliary establishments, for a subset of establish-

ments we can also estimate the effect on R&D employment, i.e. the number

of persons whose principal activity is reaearch,    development, and test-

ing.    As Auerbach (l988,p. 3-4) notes, some parties to the popular and

policy debates about takeovers are concerned that takeovers,      actual or

threatened, may reduce investment in long-term projects, particularly

R&D.    We have estimated equation (1) --   defining X   as R&D employment --

for    the subset of 1099 establishments in all industries that reported

positive values of this variable in both years.15 The point estimate

(t-statistic)   for     from this equation is —.039 (0.5): The estimate is

less than one-fourth as large in magnitude as the corresponding estimate

for total    employment, and it is far from statistically significant.

Hence we cannot reject the null hypothesis of no difference between

establishments changing and not changing owners in the growth of R&D

employment. This finding is consistent with that of Hall (1988), who

"found very little evidence in the existing data (through 1985) that

acquisitions cause a reduction in R&D spending;     in the aggregate, firms

involved in mergers showed no difference in their pre and post—merger R&D

performance over those not so involved."

        In order to contrast the effects of ownership change on auxiliary

establishments with its effects on production establishments, we also




15      In the future we also plan to compute the number of establishments,
        by status, going from zero R&D employment in 1977 to positive R&D
                                    15



                                                                       16
estimated equation (1) using the LED   for   production establishments; the

results are shown in the last line of Table 4.     Ownership change is

associated with relative declines in employment and wages in production

establishments, but the magnitudes of the declines is only about

one-third those for auxiliary establishments, The growth rate of employ-

ment is 4.5 percentage points lower for production establishments chang-

ing owners between 1976 and 1981 than it is for other production

establishments, controlling for industry and initial size.     As noted

earlier, production establishments changing owners tend to have higher

employment growth in the first several years after ownership change than

production establishments that have not changed owners; the negative net

effect of ownership change on 5-year employment growth is due to large
                                                                17
                                         preceeding the change.
     -
relative employment declines immediately

     The wage effects shown in Table 4 are based on the definition of the

wage as payroll per employee,   i.e. supplementary labor compensation is

excluded.   In the case of production establishments, we were also able to

estimate the model for X defined as total compensation (payroll plus

supplementary compensation) per employee.      Using this more comprehensive

wage measure changes the estimated wage effect        (and its t-statistic)

from -.021 (4.7) to —.029 (7.8).    The relative decline in total compensa-

tion per employee is 38 percent greater than the relative decline in

payroll per employee. Because the ratio of aggregate supplementary labor




     employment in 1982, and the number going from positive to zero R&D
     employment.
16   Data limitations forced us to define t as 1981 rather than 1982.
17   Because we observe auxiliary establishments only twice, we cannot
     determine for them the extent to which the decline in relative
     employment and wages occurs before vs. after ownership change.
                                                16



compensation to aggregate total compensation is about .2, this implies

that the effect of ownership change on supplements per employee is -.061,

about three times as great as its effect on payroll per employee.

     The difference between the employment effect of ownership change in

auxiliary and production establishments has some interesting and

important implications.          Let   a represent
                                                 the               difference between estab-

lishments changing and not changing owners, A represent

auxiliary—establishment employment, P represent production-establishment

employment, N represent their ratio A/F, and let dot superscripts repre-

sent growth rates.       Then


                     =   M   -      =   -157        -    (-.045)   =   -.112

so that ownership change reduces the ratio of auxiliary establishment

employment to production establishment employment by 11.2 percent. As

Table   I   shows, the simple average of the 1977 and 1982 aggregate values

of this ratio is (5.8 +          7.2)12   =   6.4       percent.    Evaluated at this popula-

tion mean, the 11.2 percent reduction in N implies the elimination of

about 7.2 auxiliary establishment jobs for every 1000 production estab-

lishment jobs.     This reduction in N is consistent with the examples of

"restructuring" described earlier in the paper.

     In our earlier study of the effects of ownership change on

total-factor productivity, the measure of labor input we used did not

account for auxiliary establishment employment;                        it was based only on

production establishment employment.                     Because ownership change results in

a reduction in N, we underestimated the true relative decline in labor

input, and the true relative increase in TFP, that occurs in connection
                                               17




with ownership change.            The difference in the growth in true labor input

L* is


                    =
                        SAM
                              +
                                  (1_SA)AP
                                             =P   +
                                                      SA   (MP)   =P+SAtR

where        is the share of auxiliary establishment payroll in total
        SA
(auxiliary-    plus production-establishment)payroll.                 The mean of the 1977

and 1982 aggregate values of SA is equal to 9.2 percent.                    Before our


measure of labor input growth was simply P; the error e in our measure

was

                         -        =
                =
                                      SR =   (.092)    (-.112)    -.0103.

Since LP =     - .045,   this represents a percentage error of about 23 percent.

To assess the resulting error in the estimate of the effect of ownership

change on TFP growth, we need merely to multiply c by (-1 times) labor's

share in gross output, which is approximately 1/3.                   Because true relative

labor input fell 1.03 percentage points more than we had estimated, true

relative TFP increased .34 percentage points more than we had estimated.

We had previously estimated that ownership change is associated with

relative TFP increases of .42 to .51 percentage points.18                    Thus, our

estimate of the effect of ownership change on TFP is increased about
                                                -- when we
75 percent -- from .46 to .80 percentage points            properly

account    for changes in auxiliary-establishment employment.
        The preceding calculations were implicitly predicated on                the assump-

tion that the differences in employment growth between firms involved and

not involved in ownership change is identical to the difference between




18      See Lichtenberg and Siegel (1987, p. 660).
                                                     18




establishments involved and not involved in ownership change. It is

possible, though, that when a firm acquires an administrative office, it

transfers or reassigns some of its employees                       to offices it already

operates.         If that were the case, we would have overestimated the net

decline in relative administrative employment accompanying ownership

change,      in order to investigate this possibility, we generalized equa-

tion (1) to include additional regressors,                       including a dummy variable

equal to one if the 1982 owner of the establishment had acquired other

auxiliary establishments since 1977, and otherwise equal to zero.                               A

positive coefficient             ()   on this    variable        would be consistent     with   the

hypothesis        of transfers     of employees        from acquired       establishments,

although     it    could   also   simply   reflect        that   firms   acquiring   establishments

are also     otherwise      growing    more rapidly          (e.g., by building new production

establishments). When this variable was included in the employment

equation, the estimates of                 and        were as follows:



All industries               —.180                   .007
                             (8.0)                   (0.4)

Manufacturing                —.192                   .074
                             (5.3)                   (2.8)

The coefficient             is far from significant in the regression estimated on

establishments from all industries.                    In the case of manufacturing,

however, it is positive and significantly different from zero, indicating

that auxiliary establishments owned by firms that have been acquiring

other auxiliary establishments experience above-average growth in employ-

ment.      The magnitude of            is only 39 percent as large as the magnitude

of
     , but        the initial size of establishments owned by firms that have
                                          19



been acquiring other establishments is probably greater than the initial

size of acquired establishments.

    To calculate the extent to which reductions in employment in ac-
                                                             in employ-
quired auxiliary establishments might be offset by increases

ment in other auxiliary establishments owned by the acquiring firm, we

need data on (1) the proportion      it   of cases of au.xiliary-establisbment

acquisition in which theacquiring firm owns other auxiliary establish-
                                                                  estab-
ments, and (2) the ratio 8 of mean initial employment of acquired

lishments to mean initial employment of other establishments owned by
                                                                          between
acquiring companies. Our estimate of the difference                  Mf
                                                                not
auxiliary establishment employment growth in firms involved and

involved in acquisitions would be              =    +   it       8
                                          Af
                                     and 8 are not available at this time,               and
Unfortunately, direct data on   it



                                                                                   is simply
we are therefore forced to use crude proxies. Our proxy for                   it




the proportion of all auxiliary establishments (not just ones that changed

owners)   that are owned by firms that own more than one auxiliary estab-

            this fraction is approximately 2/3.              Our proxy for 8 is the
lishment;

ratio of mean 1977 employment for         'no change" establishments to the mean

                                                             this
for establishments that changed owners; as shown in Table 4,

                                                             +                         =
ratio is 156.3/93.2 =   1.68,   Hence      A.Af
                                                   -.192         (.67)   (1.68) (.074)


-.109,    and our estimate of the magnitude of the effect of ownership
                                                      is reduced by about
change on relative auxiliary-establishment employment

a third, from -.157 (from Table 3) to -.109.                 We have not investigated

whether employment growth in production establishments owned by firms

 that are acquiring other production establishments is above— or
                                      20



below-average, but we assume that this is not the rase, and therefore

that - 045 is    a valid estimate of bP.   Then the magnitude of our estimates

of tE and c is redured by 43 percent to — .064 and — .0053, respectively.

The correction to our previous paper's estimate of the relative TIP increase

associated with ownership change is also proportionately reduced, from .31

to .18 percentage points.     Our admittedly crude attempt to adjust for

employment growth in nonacquired establishments of acquiring firms thus

reduces the size of the effects of interest,    but it does so only in

manufacturing, and even there the effects remain sizeable after adjustment.

        Up until now we have been analyzing one kind of relative-employment

effect of ownership change:     its effect on the ratio of

auxiliary-establishment employment to production-establishment employ-

ment.     As we noted earlier, theCensus data enable us to distinguish

between two different types of employees in production establishments:

production and nonproduction workers. About one—fourth of

production-establishment employees are nonproduction workers.

Nonproduction workers in production establishments (denoted NP) may be

more similar to auxiliary-establishment employees (denoted A), in terms

of the nature of their work and their earnings (skill) levels, than they

are to production employees in production establishments (denoted




19      Average payroll per employee in 1982 for PP, NP, and A workers was
        16.5, 25.2, and 29.8 thousand dollars, respectively.
                                                       21



We   therefore consider next the effect of ownership change on the ratio

NP/PP and also on (NP +           A)/PP.20
      Because we have annual -- as opposed to merely quinquennial -- data

on production establishments, our method of analysis will differ slightly

from the one developed earlier.                       Our procedure is to estimate regressions

of the form

      in X..           =       OC..    +    y.j   +
              ij,t+k       k     ijt                   ij,t+k
where X denotes        either P(PP+NF), PP, or NP; the subscript ij,t+k denotes

establishment i in industry                  in year t+k (k-5, -4,... ,-3, +4);
                                        j                                             OC..
equals    1   if the establishment changed owners between t-l and t, and

otherwise equals zero; y. is a 'fixed effect" for industry j; and                     u   is a

classical disturbance. Hence                          is the percentage difference in the mean

value of X in year t+k between establishments changing and not changing

owners between t-1 and           t.    Estimates of the             are reported in Table 5.

The figure -.082 in the first row and column indicates that establish-

ments that will change owners between four and five years later on

average employ 8.2 percent fewer workers than those that will not change

owners.       As in the case of auxiliary establishments, the probability of

future ownership change is inversely related to current size.                       The first

column clearly documents the fact noted earlier, that the relative total

employment of plants changing owners declines sharply until immediately

after the change, and then increases slightly.21




20     This analysis will not have implications for our previous measures
       of labor-input or TFP growth, since these were already based on an
       appropriately- (relative-wage-) weighted index  of PP and NP.
21     The relative wage -— payroll per employee —- displays a similar
       pattern, falling from -.020 in year  t-5 to -.039 in years t-1 and t,
       and then increasing slightly to - .036.
                                      22




       As columns 2 and 3 of Table 5 show, the data on total employment

mark very different pstterns for production and nonproduction employment.

Whereas plants changing owners on average employ 7-13 percent fewer

production workers than plants not changing owners in every year from t-5

to t+4, they employ 1-2 percent more nonproduction workers in every year,

and the differences are mostly significant.       The ratio of nonproduction

to production employees is 9-16 percent higher in plants changing owners

Moreover, the decline in relative employment prior to ownership change,

and the partial subsequent recovery,       is confined almost entirely to

production-worker employment. There is very little movement over time in

the relative employment of nonproduction workers.

       In order to obtain estimates of the effects of ownership change on

PP and NP workers that are comparable to our estimates of the effects on

A workers, we compute averages of the 5 five-year differences           -
                                                                            n-s.
   -   4             —    Estimates   of the effect of ownership change on

five-year relative-employment growth, for PP, NP, and A, are as follows:

                               unadjusted                    adjusted
                                estimate                     estimate

                 PP               -.036

                 NP               -.001

                 A                —.157                       — .109


Whereas the relative decline in   A   associated with ownership change is

apparently much greater than the relative decline in PP, the relative

decline in NP is essentially zero.      In 1982 there were 10.3 A workers and

43.7 NP workers per 100 P workers in manufacturing, so the mean value of

the fraction a = A/(A+NP) is .191.     Hence the relative decline in the sum

SA+NP    is
                                              23




                           aM   +   (1-a)NP    - .030

which    is close to, indeed slightly less than, the mean relative decline

in production-worker employment           P    - .035.
                                                         Although the ratio of

auxiliary-establishmentemployees to production workers declines sharply

in connection with ownership change, the ratio of total 'indirect" labor

(A + NP) to "direct" labor (P) does not ——              in   fact,   it appears to in-

crease slightly —- due to the negligible effect of ownership change on

the employment level of nonproduction workers in production

establishments.

V.   The relationship between firm        size and      administrative intensity

        Table 2 provided aggregate time-series data on the relationship

between auxiliary-establishment employment and production-establishment

employment.      We believe that firm—level cross-sectional dàtacbaracterIz-

ing this relationship are also of interest.              A number of economists and

organization theorists have developed theoretical models of the hierar-

chical or administrative structure of organizations, which have testable

implications for the relationship between the number of administrative

employees A and the number of production employees P.                  Starbuck (1964, p.

499) observes that early organization theorists tended to view the

administrative structure as a pyramidal hierarchy. One man comprises the

top level in this hierarchy; be has S subordinates who comprise the

second level; each of these has S subordinates, giving S2 people in the

third level; and so forth.           (S is referred to as the "span of control.")

The total number of administrators in a hierarchy with X levels is A =

(5X -    1)/(S   —   1).   If there are   production workers per foreman then the
                                      24



total number of production workers is P = a .                  and total   emploent
is

                                                          Al
                           T=A+P=—+a                  S




Starbuck showed that, for plausible, assumed values of S and a, the ratio

A/P would be essentially independent of T (or A) for values of T above a

relatively low threshliold (i.e., 1        100).   In other words, increasing

the dumber A of hierarchical levels of an organization (hence its size 1)

would generally not result in an increase in the proportion of adminis-

trative employees.L2 Similarly, Beckmann (1977, p. 1) argued that the

claim that 'increasing size of the organization burdens every productive

worker with an ever increasing number of administrators per production

worker" was not theoretically valid.        Previous theorists, such as Knight

and Kaldor, had hypothesized that there are increasing costs of adminis-

tration per worker; in the presence of increasing returns to production

activities (which they also hypothesized), the existence of an optimal

firm size required there to be diseconomies of administration.

     Existing evidence on the relationship across organizations between

administrative-intensity (A/P) and size (T) is very limited.               Starbuck

(1964, PP. 501-2) cites four studies:        one of California school dis-

tricts,   which found a positive relationship,      two of firms, which found

essentially no relationship, and one of 30 organizations of various




22   The proportion of administrators could even by a decreasing function
     of size if the span of control S tended to be greater in larger
     organizations, as some fragmentary evidence indicated.
                                     25



kinds, which found a slightly negative relationship. We seek to shed

further light on this relationship by examining the correlation across

firms between total firm employment and either (a) total employment in

auxiliary establishments or (b) managerial and administrative employment

in auxiliary establishments. Data on total firm employment were obtained

from a third data source, the NSF/Census Survey of Industrial R&D.23

Parent-company identification codes were used to aggregate auxiliary

establishment employment data to the firm level and then to link them

with the data from the R&D survey.    This yielded a sample of almost 2800

firms, which was biased towards large, R&D-intensive firms in

manufacturing.

     Perhaps the most straightforward way to examine this relationship,

and to test the hypothesis of increasing costs of administration, would

be to regress the logarithm of auxiliary-establishment employment on the

logarithm of total employment. But 55 percent of the firms in our sample

did not have any auxiliary establishments.24 Therefore we decided to

examine this relationship nonparametrically, by ranking and grouping the

firms into 10 size classes on the basis of total employment, and comput-

ing the ratio of auxiliary establishment employment (or managerial and

administrative employment in these establishments) to total firm employ-

ment in each class.    We computed both weighted ratios (i.e., the ratio of

class means) and unweighted ratios (i.e., the class mean of the ratio);

the latter is more sensitive to outliers,   particularly among the smallest

size classes.    The results are presented in Table 3.   The data provide




23   See Lichtenberg (1989) for a discussion of these data.
24   Only 0.4 percent of the entire 3.4 million companies recorded in
     Census data had at least one auxiliary establishment.
                                         26




strong   support   for the hypothesis that both auxiliary establishment

employment as a whole, and its administrative and managerial component,

increase more than proportionately with firm size.        These findings appear

to be inconsistent with the pyramidal model of administrative structure

sketched above,       We need to recognize, however, that because managers and

administrators are employed in production establishments as well as in

auxiliary establishments        about 25 percent of production establishment

employees are nonproduction workers           the data in Table 3 may partly

reflect the fact that larger firms locate a larger fraction of their

nonproduction activities in auxiliary establishments. Although it would

be possible in principle to control and test for this, we have not had

the opportunity to do this,         Thus it is perhaps premature to reject the

hypothesis of nonincreasing costs of administration.

VI.   Summary   and   conclusions

      In this paper we have reported analyses of three large Census Bureau

establishment— or firm—level data sets designed to yield insight into the

effect of changes in ownership on the employment and wages of several

important categories of workers. We were particularly concerned with the

effects on workers in auxiliary establishments, since it is there that

top managers and administrators and many R&D personnel are employed.

Since the number of these (relatively highly—paid) workers is small

compared to the number in production establishments, the effects of

ownership change on them have not been captured or have been heavily

masked in previous studies of the labor impact of takeovers.

      One of our major findings is that employment growth is much lower --

 17 percentage points lower over 5 years          in auxiliary establishments

changing owners than in those not changing owners.         Mean employment
                                     27



growth is slightly positive for establishments not changing owners,    arid


is sharply negative for establishments changing owners.    There is,

however, no significant difference between changers and nonchangers in

the growth of R&D employment.

        The increase in payroll per employee was 9 percentage points lower

among auxiliary establishments changing owners than it was among other

auxiliary establishments, controlling for industry and the initial wage

rate,    The relative decline in total compensation (including supplements

to payroll) was perhaps 1/3 higher, about 12 percentage points.

        The relative declines in employment and wages of workers in auxilia-

ry establishments are about three times as great as the corresponding

declines in production establishments. (In the latter case, the data

indicate that the declines occur immediately before ownership change and

are to a small extent reversed soon after.     Unfortunately, due to the low

frequency of the auxiliary establishment data, we cannot determine how

much of the employment and wage declines there occurred before vs. after

                                                              in reduc-
ownership change.) This implies that ownership change results

tions in the wage and especially in the employment of auxiliary-esta-

blishment employees relative to those of production-establishment

employees.     Taken at face value, it implies that the ratio of auxiliary-

establishment to production-establishment employment declines 11.2 percent

in firms involved in ownership change relative to firms not so involved.

This translates into the elimination of 7.2 auxiliary establishment jobs

for every 1000 production establishment jobs.

        Some people express concern about the number of lawyers, investment
                                                                     or
bankers, and other highly-paid professionals devoted to facilitating
                                       28




implnenting takeovers, and think thst this may constitute a waate of

valuable human resources       But the quantity and quality of labor engaged

in thia activity may not be high relstive to the quantity and quality of

central-office labor "saved" as a consequence of ownership chsoge.

     Because we failed to account for auxiliary-establishment employment
in our earlier investigstion cf the effects of ownership change on
productivity, we    may bsve underestimated tbe productivity gain associated

with ownership change by as much as 42 percent. The underestimate may

not have been that great, however, if the declines in employment in

auxiliary establishments changing owners are partially offset by increas-

es in employment in other auxiliary establishments owned by acquiring

firms.   There is no evidence that this is the case in the economy as a

whole, but the data just for manufacturing (which may be more reliable)

are consistent with the hypothesis of partially-offsetting employment

increases in these other establishments. An admittedly crude attempt to

adjust for this reduces from 16 to 11 percent the magnitude of the

relative auxiliary—establishment employment decline of firms involved in

ownership change.     A   more refined analysis of this issue is warranted,

however.

     In addition to revealing important differences between the effects

of ownership change on auxiliary and production establishments, our

analysis also indicated clear (although smaller) differences between its

effects on production and nonproduction workers in production establish-

ments.   Only the production employees in these establishments appear to

experience relative employment declines in connection with changes in

ownership. Because the relative employment of nonproduction employees in

production establishments doesn't decline, the overall ratio of
                                   29



"indirect' to "direct   labor isn't reduced in the course of ownership

change.   But the composition or locus of indirect labdr does change

significantly, as the fraction of it accounted for by au.xiliary estab-

lishments is reduced.

     The paper also provided some evidence concerning the relationship

between firm size and administrative-intensity, defined as the ratio of

auxiliary-establishment employment to total firm employment. Certain

models of organizational structure imply that administrative-intensity

should be constant or even declining with respect to firm size throughout

most of the range of firm size, but our data reveal an almost strIctly

increasing relationship throughout the range.   Here,   too, further re-

search is needed to illuminate the nature of returns to scale in

administration.
                                    30




                                  TABLE 1


              Distribution of Auxiliary-Establishment Employees
                         by Type of Work Performed,
                            All Industries, 1982

eoforkrformed
Administrative and Managerial
                                         es
                                         Number of


                                            906
                                                             Percent of
                                                             eml2ys
                                                                  35.3
Office and Clerical                         663                   25.8
Research, Development,and Testing           240                    9.3

Warehousing                                 268                   10.4

Electronic Data Processing                   134                   5.2

Direct Sales to Customers                    73                    6.1

Other Activities                             85                     7.9


Total                                       2570                  100.0



    Note:     Number of employees in thousands.
                                                  31



                                           TABLE 2

                                 Employment ad Payroll of
                          Auxiliary and Production Establishments
                               in Manufacturing, 1963 - 1982

         (1)        (2)            (3)      (4)        (5      (6)            (7)               (8)

        Auiiiary Establisnments             Productioc.Establishments
                                                                                    (4)
                                            arOli5LEm.
                                Payroll                      Payroll    (1)   'r


Yea"    Lisp.    Payr"l_ppmP.                                           (percent)

1963     727                                 16232     93      5.7            4.5               1.68

1967     831       9            10,8         18492     123     6.7            4.5               1.61


1972     994       14           14.1         18034     16      8.9            5.5               1,58

        1074       22           20 5         18516     242    13.1            5.8               1.57
1977

1982    1276       38           29.8         17818     341    19.1            7.2               1.56

       Note'    Employment in thousands.
                Payroll in billions of dollars.
                Payroll per empioyee in thousands of dollars.
       Source:   U.S.     Bureau   of the Census,
                  1982 Census of Manufactures, Subject Series MC82-S—1 (Part              1),
                  General Summary, p. 1-98.
                                       TABLE 3


                       Mean Values of Employment and Wage
                          Levels and Changes, by Status
                       of Auxiliary Establishment, 1977-82


Status         N     anEloent
                     2977  1982
                                             Mean change
                                             in in (emp.),
                                                               WE
                                                             2:227_J
                                                                              bean change
                                                                              in in   (wage,
                                               1977—82                        1977-82
                                ALL INDUSTRIES

No Change    16730    93.2   99.6              .031          17.6      26.8

Changed
Ownecs        2027    57.9   63.2             —158           14,7      22.1

Closed       22184    34.0                                   15.7

Opened       17219     ——    45.0


                                    NANUTACTL'RING

No Change     5390   156.3   174.3             .042          20.0      30.1       .398

Changed
Owners         633    93.2   101.0            —.120          18.6      26.8

Closed        3437    52.5    ——                 —-          17.6       ——

Opened        4134     --    65.3                             --       29.0



     Note:   Employment is number of workers,
             Wage is payroll per employee, in thousands of dollars,
                                        33



                                      TABLE 4


                  Estimated Effects of Ownership Change on
                           Employment and Wage in
                   Auxiliary and Production Establishments


Type of                                   Effect of Ownership Change on:
Establishment             Industry        Employment                        N

Auxiliary                 All                —.167              -   .092   12499
                                                    (8.4)       (7.3)


Auxiliary                 Manufacturing             .157        -   .060   5949
                                                    (4.6)       (3,1)

Production                Manufacturing         -   .045        -   .021   18586
                                                    (5.4)       (4.7)




    Note:    Each of the effects reported above ia an estimate of the
             coefficient    in a regression of the form


             lnX = 1            +
                                     2 lOX_5           +    ÷

             where X denotes either employment or the wage rate; the
             aubacript ijt refera to eatabliahment i in industry   in
             year t; OC equala I if the establishment changed owners
             between t — S and t, and equals zero otherwise; y. ia a
             "fixed effect' for induatry j; and u ia a classicAl
             disturbance. t is 1982 for auxiliary eatabliahmenta,
             and ia 1981 for production eatabliahmenta. All equations
             included a complete set of 4-digit SIC industry duy
             variables. Nuxsbera in parentbeaea are t - statistics.
                               34



                            TABLE 5

              Differences
                        in Mean Log Employment
          (Total, Production, and Nonproduction)
       in Year t+k between production establishments
             Changing and not changing owners
                     between t-l and t



      Total                      Production-       Nonproducti on-
      employment


        -.069
                                 p,jff)
                                    worker

                                        —.082
                                                    worker

                                                        .012
        (3.68)                          (4.24)         (1.95)
        —.072                           —.086           .013
        (4,11)                          (4.79)         (2.45)
        —.072                           -   .082        .010
        (4.41)                          (4.95)         (1.97)
t-2     -.103                           -   116         .017
        (6.89)                          (7.61)         (3.62)
t-1     -.119                           -.133           .012
        (8.03)                          (8.81)         (2.61)

        —.132                           —.153           .012
        (9.48)                          (10.73)        (2.66)

        —.131                           —.145           .012
        (8.67)                          (9.33)         (2.39)

        -.120                           -.131           .009
        (7.28)                          (7.78)         (1.76)

t+3     —.118                           —.125           .011
        (6.72)                          (6.69)         (1.88)

t+4     -.124                           —.126           .015
        (6.54)                          (5.97)         (2.38)
                                     35



                                  TABLE    6

                   Ratio of Central-office Employment to
                   Total Firm Employment by Size of Firm

                                                                      Proportion
                       Ratio of                Ratio of               of firms
         Mean          total central—          Administrative         owning at
         total         office employment       and managerial         least o'o
         firm          to total firm           employment to total    auxiliary
Size     emploe.p                                                     establishment
Claas*
                      Weighted    Unweighted   Weighted
 0           44         0.5%         5.0%         0.2%      5.2%          3%
 1          150         2.1          2.8          0.6       1.2
 2          284            44        4.7          1.5       1.6          23
 3          458            2.8       4.0          1.1       1.6          24
 4          666            3.8       4.4          1.5       1.6          34
 5         1029            6.5       6.6          2.0       2.3          50
 6         1670            6.0       7.5          2.2       2.6          60
 7         3147            7.1       8.5          2.9       3.1          69
 8         7317         10.0        10.4          3.6       3.7          84
 9        36163         11.3        11.1          3.8       3,8          91




           were ranked and grouped into 10 size classes on the basis of total
     firm employment. There are about 278 firma in each size class.
                                    REFEkENCES


                                                                      Caus'es
Auoc2a:h. Alan 3. 0988), "Introduction," in
                                                         Univ ci Chicaeo
     ancConsvjnce5, Alan Auerbacb (ed.) (Chicago:
     Press)

Becmenn,  Martin 3. (1977), "Management Production Functiona cad the
     Theory    d
               the Firm," Journal ofEconomcThepiy 14, 1l8

Blair Margaret (1988). 'An Empirical Test of the Ccnnet:on Between Free
     Cash Flow and Takeovei Waves, Unpub. paper, Brookings Insttotion,
     December.

                                                         of Firm
Brown, Charles, and Nedoff, James L. 1988), ''(ac Impact
     Acquisitionc on Labor," in
                   Alan Auerbach (ed.) (Chicago:  University of
     Cbcsgo      Press),   9-25.

Bunne, Timothy; Roberts, Mark J.; and Samueiscn, Larry (1988), "The
     Growth and Failure of Manufacturing Plants," unpub. paper,
     Pennsylvania State University, January

                 (1988), "Coent" on Brown and Medoff, in Corpprate
Farber, Henry S. Causes and Conne uences, Alan Auerbach (ed.)
     Chicago:       University of Chicago Press).
                                                    Firm Size and Firm
Hall, Bronwyn H. (1987), "The Relationship Between
     Growth in the  US Manufacturing Sector," Journal of anduatrial
     Economics Xfl11, 583-606.

                 (1988), "Thc Effect of Takeover Activity
                                                              n
                                                            Coopt rate
     Research and Development," in cR2E!teTakeOve5!.LiP(4An and
                   Alan Auerbach (ed.) (Chicago: University of
     Chicago Press), 9—25.
                                                  New York Timea.
 Icabn, Carl C. (1989), "The Case for Takeovers,"
      Jan. 29, Section 6, p. 34.

                                    of Value in Management Buyouta,'
 Kapran, Steven N. (1988), "Sources
      unpub. doctoral dissertation, Harvard University.
                                                                     2,
 Kravis, Henry (1989), "Greed Real]y Turns Me Off," Fortune, January
      69—71.

 Licbtenberg, Frank (1988), "Estimation of the Internal Adjustment Costa
                                                           of Economics
      Model Using Longitudinal Establishment Data," Review
      and Statistics, August, 421-430.

 ________________   (1989), "Issues in Measuring Industrial R&D," Research
      Policy, forthcoming.

                       and Siegel, Donald (1987), "Productivity and
                                         37




          in Ownership of ManufacturIng Plants
     Changes
                                                             kinsPaer
    conomicAct1Vit, 643—673.
                                                   Maximization and the
Shleifer, Andre, and Vishny, Robert (1988), 'Value             7-20
     Acqcisi.-sOn Process,"    alofECOflOmicPer3B.Mt1!5 2,
                                       Growth and Development," in
Starbuck, W.H (1964), "Organizational
     Handbook of Organizations, J.G. March (ea ) (Chicago: Rand McNally).

The Economist (1989),   'A   work—out for Corporate America," January   7,

     55-56.

                                              Hlo    ent and Earnings Vol. 27
U.S. Bureau of Labor StatistiCS (1980),
     No. 6, June.

U.S. Bureau of the Census (1986),
                                     (Washington:    U.S. Government Printing
     Office).

___________       (198),     1982 Census of
     2-S-1      (Part 1), General   Sua       (Washington:   U.S. Government
     Printing Office).
