                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           SOCIAL CONFLICT AND POPULIST POLICIES IN LATIN AMERICA




                              Jeffrey D. Sachs




                           Working Paper No. 2897




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 March 1989




This paper was prepared for the conference on "Markets, Institutions, and
Cooperations: Labour Relations and Economic Performance," Venice, October
1988. I have benefitted from conversations with Felipe Larrain and Luiz
Carlos Bresser Pereira. I also thank Rodrigo Vegara for very able research
assistance. The paper will be published in R. Brunetta and C. Dell'Aringa
(eds.), Labour Relations and Economic Performance, MacMillan Press, 1989.
This paper is part of NBER's research program in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #2897
                                         March 1989


           SOCIAL CONFLICT AND POPULIST POLICIES IN LATIN AMERICA


                                  ABSTRACT




     The central hypothesis of this paper is that high income inequality in

Latin America contributes to intense political pressures for macroeconomic

policies to raise the incomes of lower income groups, which in turn

contributes to bad policy choices and weak economic performance. The paper

looks in detail at one common type of policy failure: the populist policy

cycle. This particular type of Latin American policymaking, characterized by

overly expansionary macroeconomic policies which lead to high inflation and

severe balance of payments crises, has been repeated so often, and with such

common characteristics, that it plainly reveals the linkages from social

conflict to poor economic performance.




                                         Jeffrey Sachs
                                         Department of Economics
                                         Harvard University
                                         Littauer 11-14
                                         Cambridge, MA 02138
  Social Conflict and Populist Policies in Latin America



I. Introduction

     One of the great themes of Ezio Tarentelli's research was that

social conflict can be a major impediment to successful economic

performance.    He recognized that the industrial economies differed

markedly in their mechanisms for resolving social conflicts, particularly

in the institutions for regulating the distribution of income between

labor and capital. These differences, Tarantelli pointed out, could help

to account for the differing success of the various European economies in

adjusting to the adverse shocks of the l970s.

     Tarantelli was one of the first to recognize that the neocorporatist

institutions of Northern Europe provided a particularly successful mode

of moderating social conflict, that allowed the Northern European

economies to absorb the shocks of the l9lOs without a major rise in

unemployment.   Taratelli's insights have been supported in a number of

later studies, including those by Bruno and myself (1985), Mccallum

(1983), Calmfors and Driffill (1988), and othersJ

     This paper is about the Latin American economies, almost all of

which demonstrate a continuing inability to moderate social conflict, in

stark contrast to the corporatist economies of Northern Europe. In the

corporatist welfare states, labor militancy is low, and a broad-based



     1 As mentioned in Bruno and Sachs (1985, p. 222), "Tarantelli's work
was a major stimulus to our own investigation of this topic".
I first benefitted from Tarantelli's research in an unpublished paper on
"The Economics of Neocorporatism", 1981, which was an early draft of the
be ginni


                                     2
 consensus exists on the distribution of income and the redistributjve

 role of the public sector.      In Latin America, by contrast, bitter
 economic conflict is one of the central phenomena of economic life. In

Argentina, for example, there has Just occurred the 12th general strike

during the Presidency of Raul Alfonsin, and like many of the others, this

one was marked by widespread mobilization, deep political rancor, and

violence. Economic policymaking in Latin America remains a battleground

of conflicting interests of class, sectors, regions, and ethnic groups.

It is not by accident that one of the most highly regarded studies of

Argentina is titled Economic Policvmakint in a Conflict Society.2 This

title could apply equally well throughout most of Latin America.

     Because of the salience of distributional issues in Latin America,

leading Latin American economists have long specialized in dissecting the

distributional implications of macroeconomic policies, and have often

made such distributional analysis the cornerstone of their theorizing.

Examples include Carlos F. Diaz-Alejandro's (1965) celebrated analysis of

"contractionary devaluation", based on the idea that devaluation reduces

real wages, and thereby transfers income from low-saving workers to high-

saving landowners; Albert Hirschmans (1971) remarkable essay on the

political bases of the import-substitution strategy; and the highly

influential "dependency theory of Cardoso and Falleto (1979) among
others.

     The bitterness of class and sectoral conflicts throughout Latin

America almost surely reflect the extreme inequalities of income


     2The study is It.D. Mallon and J.V. Sourrouille, Economic
Policymakina in a Conflict Society: the Arzentina Case. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard Universi


                                    3
                      Quintiles
                lowest    highest   Ratio   Rescheduler

                            Other

Egypt             4.6      48.4     10.52       no
Hungary          10.0      34.0      3.40       no
India             4.7      53.1     11.30       no
Israel            8.0      39.0      4.88       no
Ivory Coast       2.4      61.4     25.58       yes
Kenya             2.6      60.4     23.23       no
Mauritius         4.0      60.5     15.13       no
Morocco           4.0      49.0     12,25       yes
Portugal          5.2      49.1      9.44       no
Spain             6.0      45.5      7.58       no
Sri Lanka         6.9      44.9      6.51       no
Tunisia           6.0      42.0      7.00       no
Turkey            2.9      60.6     20.90       yes
Yugoslavia        6.6      41.4      6.27       yes

Average           5.3      49.2     11.7        29%

Overa].l
  average        4.8       51.7     14.1        43%



Definitions   and source

Rescheduler: Countries which are reschedulers rescheduled their
     foreign debt owed to commercial lenders between 1982 and 1987.
     Source: World Bank (198Th, 1986).

Income Distribution Data: Data is originally from surveys of
     hous_holds, yielding estimates of the country-wide size
     distribution of income by household. The surveys were
     generally taken in the late l960s or early 1970s.




Source: Taken from Berg and Sachs (1988). See that essay for further
details on primary sources.
          Table 1: Income Distribution and Debt Rescheduling
                       middle- income countries



                          Income Distribution

                    Quintiles
               lowest    highest     Ratio   Rescheduler

                             Latin America


                4.4       50.3       11.43        yes
Argentina
Brazil          2.0       66.6       33.30        yes
Chile           4.5       51.3       11.40        yes
Colombia        2.8       59.4       21.21        no
Costa Rica      3.3       54.8       16.61        yes
Ecuador         1.8       72.0       40.00        yes
Mexico          4.2       63.2       15.05        yes
Panama          2.0       61.8       30.99        yes
Peru            1.9       61.0       32.11        yes
                4.2       50.0       11.90        no
Trin&Tob
                4.4       47.5       10.80        yes
Uruguay
Venezuela       3.0       54.0       18.00        yes

                3.2       57.7       21.1         83%
Average



                         East Asia

                7.0       39.0        5.57        no
China
                6.0       49.0        8.17        no
Hong Kong                                         no
Indonesia       6.6       49.4        7.48
Korea           6.5       45.2        6.95        no
                3.5       56.0       16.00        no
Malaysia
                 3.9      53.0       13.59        yes
Philippines
                6.5       49.2        7.57        no
Singapore                                         no
Taiwan          8.8       37.2        4.23
                 5.6      49.8        8.89        no
Thailand

                 6.0      47.5        8.7         11%
Average
throughout the region.     As shown in the first column of Table 1, the

income inequalities in Latin America tend to be much larger than in other

regions in the world.3      The difference is particularly marked with

respect to East Asia, which has an unusually low degree of income

inequality in comparison with the rest of the developing world.        As

discussed below, we also can note in the second column of the table that

countries with high income inequality were especially prone to suffer a

debt crisis in the 1980s (as indicated by the need to reschedule their

external debt payments).

     Many of Latin America's economic ills seem to be rooted in the

intense conflicts prompted by the extremes of income inequality, just as

East Asia's economic successes seem to be tied to the social stability

engendered by the greater income equality. in Latin America, necessary

devaluations are frequently delayed because of their adverse impact on

real wages in favor of rents earned on land and primary commodities.

Trade policies remain excessively inward oriented in many parts of the

region in part because of the presumption that outward orientation

reduces urban wages at the expense of profits of exporters, who include

wealthy landowners and producers of primary commodities.           Fiscal

austerity is often rejected, even in highly inflationary circumstances,

because of the fear that the austerity will provoke widespread unrest.

Whether these concerns are realistic or not, they form much of the basis

for widespread opposition in Latin America to the "orthodox" recipes for

adjustment to macroeconomic disequilibria.



       This remains true after controlling for per capita income.      See
Berg and Sachs



                                      4
      The paper looks in some detail at one common type of policy failure

in Latin America: the populist policy cycle.    Carlos F. Diaz-Alejandro

provided a brillant and succinct account of economic populism in a 1981

essay on "Latin American Stabilization Plans", that is very much in line

with the findings of this paper. This particular type of Latin American

policymaking, characterized by overly expansionary macroeconomic policies

which lead to high inflation and severe balance of payments crises, has

been repeated so often, and with such common characteristics, that it

plainly reveals the linkages from social conflict to poor economic

performance.4 Economic populism helps to explain the fact that in 1988,

no less than four countries (Argentina, Brazil, Nicaragua, and Peru) in

Latin America had inflation rates of several hundred percent or more,

while in the rest of the world there was not a single dase of triple-

digit inflation.5     Four other Latin American countries had inflation

rates between 50 and 100 percent: Ecuador, Mexico, Dominican Republic,

and Uruguay. Of course, external factors also contributed importantly to




       Note that the term "populism" has several meanings, both in the
economic and the political sphere. I will not be much concerned here
with the concept of populism in its various political usages, but mainly
with regard to the management of the macroeconomy.        Of course, as
explained below, a crucial point in understanding economic populism is a
proper understanding of the political base and political objectives of
populist leaders

       The countries were Argentina, with inflation of 372.0 percent for
1988 over 1987; Brazil, 816.1 percent; Nicaragua, 7778.4 percent; and
Peru, 1307.1 percent. Data are from ECLAC (1988), Table 5, p. 21. Data
are November to November, except for Nicaragua which are September to
September.   Mexico had triple digit inflation in December 1987 over
December 1986, of 159.2 percent, but that rate came down to 70.5 percent
for




                                       5
Latin America's current crisis.6

    The paper is highly critical of the populist approach, and provides

considerable historical evidence that populist experiments tend to end in

economic and political disaster. But the paper should not be read as an

indictment of the aims of the populist leaders (e.g. a more equal

distribution of income in societies with extreme income inequality), but

of the specific

macroeconomic strategies used to try to achieve the aims. Neither is it

an endorsement of the extreme forms of "orthodoxy" that often follow the

collapse of a populist experiment (e.g. in Pinochet's Chile, after the

fall of Allende in 1973). The swings from populism to extreme orthodoxy,

more than anything else, prove the failure of Latin America to have found

a basic consensus, and middle way, in political, social, and economic

terms.   Note, finally, that economic populism (at least as the term is

used in this study), has been adopted by governments representing a wide

range of the political spectrum, and has not been the exclusive province

of the left or right.   Governments of the right (as in the case of the

Brazilian military in 1979-80) have employed populist economic tactics of

the same style as employed by left-wing governments (such as in Chile

under President Allende). Also, "revolutionary" governments, such as in

the case of the Sandinistas in Nicaragua, often follow in their

macroeconomic tactics a fairly traditional populist mode.


     6 Much of the reason for high inflation and internal instability
results from the vast overhang of external debt. The reasons for this
debt accumulation are complex, but include both domestic factors
(including populist policies which are at the focus of analysis in this
paper) and external shocks.               The   external   factors   include:
extraordinarily high world interest rates throughout the 1980s; the
sudden cutoff of external finance




                                      6
II. Distributional Conflict and Macroeconomic Policies

       The central hypothesis of this paper is that high income inequality

in Latin America contributes to intense political pressures for
macroeconomic policies to raise the incomes of lower income groups,

which in turn contributes to bad policy choices and weak economic

performance. The chain of causation from inequality to economic policy

to economic performance is, of course, highly complex and variable across

time and countries.     It is also difficult to prove. Before turning to

the central example of populist policies, it is useful first to examine

some circumstantial evidence.

       In a recent paper, Andrew Berg and I (1988) looked for structural

characteristics of middle-income developing countries that helped to

account for which countries succumbed to a debt crisis in the 1980s and

which ones did not.      The paper developed a cross-country statistical

model of debt rescheduling, which linked the probability that a

particular country rescheduled its debts in the 1980s to several

structural characteristics of the country, including the extent of income

inequality (as measured in Table 1). Our most striking finding was that

countries wih high income inequality had a significantly greater

liklihood, ceteris Darthus. of having rescheduled their debts than did

countries with low income inequality.7


        Other variables that helped to account for the cross-country
pattern of debt reschedulings were: (1) the nature of trade policy (more
outward-oriented economies were less likely to have rescheduled); (2) the
importance of agriculture in the economy (countries with a large share of
agriculture in CNP were less likely to have rescheduled); and (3) per
capita income (wealthier countries were less likely to have succumbed to
debt




                                     7
    We attribute the correlation between high income inequality and debt

rescheduling to the nature of political management in economies with

extreme inequalities of income.      Berg and I listed several reasons why

countries with extreme income inequality might be prone to excessive

foreign borrowing. We suggested, among other reasons, that high income

inequality:

     raises the pressures for overly expansionary redistributive
     bugetary policies;

     enhances the power of economic elites to resist taxation
     needed to balance the budget;

     contributes to direct, destabilizing labor militancy;

     decreases   the political support for export-promotion
     measures, which tend to threaten urban real wages in the
     short run.

     It is probably true as well that high social conflict, rooted in

high income inequality, contributes in many countries to weak political

institutions and a rapid turnover of governments. Moreover, governments

with a brief expected tenure, representing particular constituencies, may

find it attractive to maximize the current income of those constituencies

by running down the country's future purchasing power (e.g. by depleting

the international reserves).          Alesina and Tabellini (1981) have

demonstrated this point in a formal theoretical setting.

     The debt crisis of the l980s is only the most recent case in which

the latin American countries have displayed a special proneness to large

budget deficits that produce high inflations and balance of payments

crises. There are numerous cases in Latin America where governments have

raoidlv and siznificantlv increased budget deficits in order to meet

various distributional goals.        I term these extreme cases 'populist"




                                       8
episodes.     In all of these experiments, governments have explicitly

argued that the policies are necessary to correct glaring inequities in

the income distribution, and to raise the living standards of the poor.

Much of the temptation of such policies (despite the fact that they

generally fail to achieve their goals except in the very short term)

relates to the factors just outlined: high pressures for increased living

standards of the lower income groups; short tenure of governments;

inability to tax elites in order to cover social spending; etc.

     There is also a particular structural characteristic of many Latin

American economies that increases the populist temptation. Because of

the sharp sector division in many Latin American countries between a

labor-intensive nontradeables sector and a primary resource-intensive

export sector, monetary and fiscal expansions can raise urban real wages

markedly in the short run, as well as profits in the nontradeable sector,

at the expense of the wealthy primary-resource owners. In the context of

the deep and on-going distributional battle between these groups,

expansionary policies are thus particularly attractive in the short run

for governments based on an urban, working-class constituency.

     Before turning to a macroeconomic framework for understanding

economic populism, it is worthwhile to note some of the historical roots

of these policies.     As described by a large number of studies in

political science and economic history, Latin American politics underwent

an enormous change in the l920s and l930s with the rise of extensive

urbanization,8    After a long history in Latin America of elite-based



     8For an excellent series of articles on the politics and
history   of Latin A




                                    9
politics centered on a rural landowning class, a new wave of urban-based

political leaders emerged, drawing their support on a multi-class base of

the urban proletariat, urban government employees of a growing public

sector, and the marginalized urban population (i.e. the informal sector).

In political terms, "populism" signifies these urban, multiclass
movements, which at least initially were headed by a charismatic leader

who arrives to power through electoral competition with the support of

the newly enfranchised urban proletariat. As stressed by Drake (1982),

the leaders of the new populist movements came to power promising the

"immediate psychic and material gratification of the needs of society's

underdogs." (p. 218)

     As summarized Conniff (1982) and Drake (1982), the early populist

movements, such as in Argentina under Juan Peron and in Brazil under

Cetulio Vargas, shared many basic characteristics, including: the urban,

multiclass base; the accession to power through electoral competition

based on an extension of suffrage to the urban working class population;

the charasmatic leadership; and the focus on state activism to

incorporate workers "in a process of accelerated industrialization

through ameliorative redistributive measures" (Drake, 1982, p. 218).

     Interestingly, these populist leaders and their successors generally

relied more on distributive policies rather than redistributive policies,

i.e. they looked for ways of raising the incomes of the bottom part of

the income distribution without resorting to explicit taxation or

confiscation of property of the upper classes.    Sometimes, this neglect

of taxation of the upper incomes was the result of the temperment of the

populist leader and his followers, and sometimes it resulted simply from




                                    10
the fact that the populist leader lacked the political power to implement

and enforce new forms of progressive taxation.



A macroeconomic framework for economic populism

     Consider the following macroeconomic model, which is spelled out in

more detail in Sachs (1989). Suppose, as is typical of Latin America (at

least as a crude simplification), that the economy has two major sectors:

an export sector based in primary commodities and a nontradeable sector

of services and manufactures (where many manufacturers survive behind a

protectionist barrier).     The nontradeables sector is heavily labor

intensive relative to the export sector.    Aside from labor inputs, the

nontradeables sector also relies heavily on imported intermediate inputs

in the production process. In the export sector, there is an important

fixed factor of production (e.g. land in the Argentine Pampas) whose

ownership is highly concentrated among wealthy households. It is assumed

that the export sector also uses some of the nontradeable good (e.g.

transport) in the production process.

     Assume fixed exchange rates in the short run, and capital controls

on private outflows.   The exchange rate is fixed by the central bank as

long as the central bank has foreign exchange reserves available for that

purpose. When the central bank runs out of reserves, the exchange rate

collapses and there is a shift to floating rates. During the time that

the nominal exchange rate is fixed, the domestic currency price of

commodity exports, as well as the price of imported inputs for the

nontradeable sector are both fixed, under the assumption of purchasing

power parity (PPP) and a given world price for these goods.      When the




                                    11
exchange rate eventually depreciates, after the loss of reserves and a

balance of payments crisis, the domestic prices of the tradeable goods

rise in equiproportion to the exchange rate depreciation. Now consider a

monetary expansion (for simplicity, assume that the money growth is

increased on a sustained basis in order to finance a higher level of real

government transfers or subsidies to the private sector). With capital

controls in place, the money expansion raises real money balances, lowers

domestic interest rates and expands demand. Because the exchange rate is

fixed, the domestic price of the import and export goods remains

unchanged.       The rise in domestic demand pushes up the demand for

nontradeable goods and that in turn leads to a rise in demand for labor

used in the nontradeable sector. The rise in labor demand pushes up the

nominal wage.       Higher wage costs in turn push up the price of

nontradeables.

     Under reasonable assumptions, the nominal wage will tend to rise by

a greater proportion than the increase in the nontradeables price, since

the nontradables price is a markup over both wage costs and imported

input prices, and the latter do not increase. The nominal wage therefore

rises relative to the price of nontradeables, imports, and exports. We

can therefore safely conclude that the expansion leads to an increase in

real consumntion wnes, defined as the ratio of nominal wages to the

price of consumption goods.9 To put the same result another way, real


     9 In the model in Sachs (1989), consumption is assumed to
fall exclusively on nontradeables. All production of exportables
goes abroad, and all imports are used as intermediate inputs in
nontradeables production.   The specific assumptions about the
consumption basket should obviously be varied by country.     In
Argentina. the primary commodity exportable (mainly grains and
meat) i




                                    12
wages rise as the real exchange rate appreciates (where the real exchange

rate is defined as the ratio of tradeable goods prices to nontradeable

goods prices, and an appreciation signifies a ffl   in   the relative price

of tradeables).

     Several other phenomena will accompany the real exchange rate

appreciation.     The price of exports will fall relative to the price of

nontradeables.      To the extent that the export sector uses the

nontradeable good as an input, the real appreciation will lead to a

profit squeeze in the export sector, and to a decline in export

production. This export decline will accompany a rise in import demand

for the input to nontradeable production, leading to an overall trade

deficit.   Note that in some countries (especially Argentina, which

exports food), export goods are also important consumption goods.        In

this case, the rise in the wage relative to the export good is another

reason to to expect a rise in the real consumption wage.

     If this were the end of the story (as most populist leaders want to

believe!), there would be a happy ending to the expansion. Real wages

and nontradeable output go up.       If household labor supply rises in

response to higher real wages, so too does overall employment. Profits

earned in the export sector would go down, but since the ownership of

resources in the export sector is highly concentrated among upper income

groups, the political ramifications of the profit squeeze would be

slight, or even favorable, for a government based on urban wage

labourers. The problem, however, is the trade deficit that accompanies

the expansion.     That must be financed by a loss of foreign exchange

reserves (or equivalently, a growing foreign debt, if foreign creditors




                                     13
are willing to make new loans).        And eventually, the reserves or the

borrowing capacity will run dry.

     The overall expansion may continue until a balance of payments

crisis hits, when the economy runs out of the foreign reserves and

borrowing capacity needed to continue to peg the exchange rate. At that

moment, the nominal exchange rate depreciates sharply, by enough to

create a real deDreciation that lowers real wages, restores export

profitability, and reduces internal demand by reducing the level of real

money balances and thus tightening credit once again.        The real wage

gains of the expansion phase are eliminated. The real depreciation must

be large enough to bring the economy back immediately into trade balance,

since there is no more external financing available to run trade

deficits. Under realistic circumstances, in fact, the real depreciation

must be greater than the initial real appreciation, since in the

expansion phase the economy has lost the income of its initial stock of

foreign exchange (which is now depleted), and has probably lost capacity

in the export sector, due to decapitalization in that sector.           By

extension, the fall of the real wage on the way down must almost surely

be greater than the initial real wage boost.

     If the initial budgetary expansion which started the process is not

reversed at the time of the balance of payments crisis, the economy will

be left with an expansionary monetary policy under floating exchange

rates. The results will be a sustained rise in inflation.       In effect,

after the exchange rate collapse, the budget deficit is financed by the

inflation tax under floating exchange rates, rather than by running down

reserves under fixed exchange rates.




                                   14
     It should be noted that populist governments in the collapsing phase

of the cycle tend to improvise to try to forestall a reversal of the

initial gains.     Instead of allowing a discrete devaluation of the

currency, for example, at the moment that reserves dry up. they may

implement exchange controls to ration the scarce foreign exchange. This

leads to a black-market premium on foreign exchange, that tends to raise

the domestic price of importables (which are paid for, on the margin,

with black-market dollars) relative to exports (which must be remitted to

the central bank at the official rate).      The short-term result is a

further anti-export bias, and the incentive for export underinvoicing and

smuggling.   Eventually these distortions prompt an official devaluation

and a reunification of the exchange rate for current account
transactions.    Governments almost always flirt as well with wage and

price controls in the final stages of the populist cycle, in order to try

(unsuccessfully) to prevent the collapse of real wages.      As with the

exchange controls, the price controls simply lead to black markets,

hidden price premia and shortages, and eventually to an elimination of

the controls after the distortions become unbearable. They may even turn

to more extreme measures, such as the nationalization of the banks in

Mexico in 1982 and in Peru in 1987.

     Note that it is the environment of unresolved social conflict that

spurs this kind of populist policy cycle. In practice, there are always

voices of opposition to excessive domestic expansion, who warn correctly

that the benefits are likely to be short lived because of the balance of

payments constraint.   It seems to be the ureent Dolitical Dressure for

real wage increases that pushes the policymakers in favor of an otherwise


                                      15
risky, indeed imprudent, strategy. Moreover, the expansionary policy is

attractive only when the interests of the nontradeables sector
politically dominate the interests of the tradeables sector, and when

there is no basic social norm      for   the distributive shares between these

two sectors.   In other words, there needs to be a fairly stark battle

over distributive shares between sectors to make the policy attractive,

and the advocates of the nontradeables sectors must have political

control.

     Countries with a diversified export sector or a politically

important import-competing sector (one that is not fully protected by

trade barriers), are likely to have political constituencies that would

fiercely oppose the real appreciation.        The agricultural sector is many

East Asian countries, for example, is based on millions of smallholders,

whose sheer number give them political power.           As suggested in Sachs

(1985), this difference with Latin America, where the agricultural sector

is seen to be in the hands of a rural "oligarchy". may explain the

greater political opposition to currency overvaluation in East Asia, and

the overall greater resistance to populist measures.



Historical episodes of Latin American economic populism

     The populist cycle in Latin America has been often repeated, always

with disastrous effects.        The theme of this section is that the

mechanisms of expansion and collapse in the several cases have been so

similar as to justify a clear common description of these experiences.

To demonstrate the point, we focus on four historical episodes: (1)

Argentina. 1946-49, under   Juan   Peron; (2) Chile, 1971-73, under Salvador



                                         16
Allende; (3) Brazil, 1985-1988. under    Jose   Sarney; and   (4)   Peru, 1985-88,

under   Alan   Carcia. There are many additional cases that could have been

included, such as Bolivia, 1982-85, under Reman          Sites      Suazo; Brazil,

1962-64, under Joao Coulart;         Chile, 1952-55, under Carlos Ibanez;

Mexico, 1979-82, under Lopez Portillo; and Nicaragua, 1980-87, under the

Sandinista government.'0

        I will now provide a brief historical overview of the four central

experiences considered in the paper, and then demonstrate quantitatively

the commonality of these episodes.



(1) Argentina. 1946-49

        Juan Peron began his rise to power in the 1943 military coup, which

toppled the conservative regime which had been in power since the

military coup of 1930.       The old regime, centered on the conservative,

landed interests in agriculture, was replaced by a nationalist and

illiberal movement with the goal of rapid industrialization.                 Peron

served first as a labor advisor to the new government, then successively

as Labor Secretary, Minister of War, and Vice-President, before winning a

resounding election as President in 1946. Peron cultivated the political

base of the urban workers as his stepping-stone to the Presidency. As

Labor Secretary he pressed for a dramatic extension of social security

benefits, collective bargaining, a system of wage bonuses, and increases


        10 The Sandinista experiment is often interpreted as a
distinct, revolutionary experiment.      In my view, such an
interpretation exaggerates the novelty of the Sandinista policy
direction, which is firmly rooted in the Latin American populist
tradition.  Note that by 1987, the combination of populist
initiatives and the heavy wartime burden contributed to an
inflation rate of about 11,000
in the minimum wage.        The main labor confederation, the COT, grew

enormously in strength, and supported Peron's bid for the Presidency.

     Peron's economic policies during 1946-49 virtually define the

mechanics of urban-based populist policies. Monetary and fiscal spending

were highly expansionary.     The exchange rate was maintained at a fixed

nominal rate, which became highly overvalued in real PPP terms.         Real

wages rose both because of the expansion, and also because of direct

government backing of the negotiations of the COT. Trade policies were

highly protectionist, with the intent of building a domestic industrial

base behind tariff walls.       The redistributive goals were explicit,

including both the aim of raising the urban wage and of squeezing the

former agricultural oligarchy for the benefit of the ascendant urban

sector.    The share of wage income in CNP grew from 38.7 percent in 1946

to 45.7 percent just three years later in 1949. Real wages grew by 62

percent in these three years.

     The end of the boom became evident as early as 1948, when

agricultural production began to drop, and foreign reserve holding

dwindled (falling from $1.11 billion in 1946 to just $258 million in

1948). Inflation accelerated and CNP fell by 4.5 percent in 1949.

     In 1952, when Peron finally turned to a more orthodox strategy, he

was candid about the social and political motivations of his original

program.    In a speech to a workers delegation, cited by Mallon and

Sourrouille (1975, p.12), Peron stated:

     The lusticialista ti.e. Peronist] economy asserts that the
     production of the economy should first satisfy the needs of
     its inhabitants and only export the surplus; the surplus,
     nothing more. With this theory the boys here, of course, eat
     more every day and consume more, so that the surplus is
     smaller.  But these poor guys have been submerged for fifty


                                     18
    years; for this reason I have let them spend and eat and
    waste everything they wanted to for five years . .   . but   now
    we undoubtedly must begin to reorder things so as not to
    waste any more.


In the event, Peron had little time for such reordering, since he was

ousted in a coup in 1955.



(2) Chile, 1971-73
     Salvador Allende, like Peron, came to power on a base of urban

workers. Allende received a slight plurality of the vote (36 percent) in

the iio presidential election, and was voted into office on the basis of

that plurarlity after the electoral decision reverted to the Chilean

Congress.   Allende's program was expansionist and redistributive in the

same mold as Peron's, though there were also formal Socialist goals (e.g.

widespread nationalisation, and extensive land reform) motivating the

program.    The Popular Unity government identified three major problems

with the Chilean economy: (I) the concentration of ownership of the means

of production; (2) the dependence of the economy on foreign markets; and

(3) the unequal distribution of income.

     In the first year of the government, the fiscal policy turned highly

expansionary, with the budget deficit rising from 2.7 percent of GNP in

1970 to 10.7 percent in 1971. By the fourth quarter of 1971, the rate of

credit expansion to the public sector exceeded 300 percent at an annual

rate. GNP growth boomed (9 percent in 1971. compared with 2.1 percent in

1970), and real wages grew by an astounding 17 percent in 1971!        The

share of labor income in CNP rose in one year from 52.3 percent in 1970

to 61.7 percent in 1971.


                                   19
    The crash phase came fast, however, even faster than in Argentina.

By 1972, GNP growth turned negative, and inflation jumped   to 163 percent.

International reserves collapsed. leading to the implementation of a

system of tight exchange controls, with 15 different exchange rates (with

a ratio from top to bottom of 60 to I).      By 1973, GNP growth was -5.6

percent, with inflation averaging 500 percent for the year. Allende was

overthrown in a military coup in September 1973.




(3) Brazil, 1985-88

     After 21 years of military rule, the military ceded power to a

civilian president elected by an electoral college, whose members had

been chosen by election in 1982. Because of the death of the President-

elect, Tancredo Neves, on the eve of his inauguration, Vice-President-

elect Jose Sarney became President.       Sarney was truly an accidental

President. He had been selected as Vice-President by Tancredo to assuage

the military, as Sarney had long been a member of the conservative party

that had supported the previous military regime.        Sarney now headed

Tancredo Neves'       government, which was supported by a broad-based

progressive opposition party, the PMDB, which had opposed the military

rule.      Popular demands ran high at the time of democratisation,

particularly after two decades of military rule that had suppressed

worker rights, and after four years of austerity in the midst of the

Latin American debt crisis.

        In early 1986, Sarney endorsed the goals of the P14DB in backing a

 "heterodox" stabilization program, called the Cruzado Plan. Whatever the

original intentions of the program with regard to fiscal and monetary


                                     20
instruments, the Plan was implemented in a highly populistic fashion,

with significant real wage increases, an overvalued currency, and a large

budget deficit. As in the Argentine and Chilean cases,   the early outturn

of the program was outstanding: rapid growth, higher real wages,   and low

inflation.   The pro-worker rhetoric of the regime increased markedly as

the Cruzado Plan achieved its early successes.

     The Cruzado Plan collapsed very fast, no doubt because of the highly

unfavorable initial conditions, especially the very high inherited

external debt. The Brazilian trade surplus shrunk from a monthly average

of about $1 billion in 1985 to a deficit of $326 million in the last

quarter of 1986.    As the reserve situation deteriorated, the exchange

rate had to be devalued sharply in late 1986, which led to an explosion

of inflation, and a reversal of the real wage increases and real CDP

growth that had been achieved at the outset of the program.

     By 1987, a new finance minister, Luiz Carlos Bresser Pereira,

attempted to shift policy towards stabilization through a reduction in

the budget deficit (see Bresser Pereira, l988a, for details). President

Sarney, in the midst of a political battle to maintain power for as long

as possible under a new constitution then in prepartion, failed to back

his Minister, and bowed instead to the continuing populist pressures that

were widely supported in the Congress. Moreover, as Bresser has written,

real stabilization would require a social pact, but:

     I always have been very skeptical about a social pact in
     Brazil, because first you need a political pact -- a broad
     agreement between the main political forces in teh country
     regarding, besides wages, social reforms. (p. 28)

By the fall of 1988, and the accession of yet another finance minister,

the prospects for Brazil to avoid a hyperinflation still hang in the



                                    21
balance, with inflation during the summer months running at a 1000

percent annual rate.



(4) Peru1 1985-68

     After 12 years of military rule, Pen reverted to civilian rule with

the election of President Fernando Belaunde in 1980. The Belaunde

government vacillated between the conventional austerity çj
liberalization   policies favored by the IME, and "developmentalist"

policies (involving heavy expenditure on public works) favored by the

President.     In 1983, adverse weather conditions combined with heavy

external debt payments and internal macroeconomic imbalances to produce a

remarkable 12 percent decline in GM?. combined with domestic inflation of

125 percent.        By the end of Belaunde's term in 1985, inflation was

running at an annual rate of over 150 percent, and real wages had

declined by about 40 percent between 1980 and 1985.

     Alan Garcia cane to office in July 1985. intent on slowing inflation

while reviving real wages and growth.     The President's APRA party had a

long populist tradition, and had previously been kept out of the

Presidency by the military fearing the APRA's populist tendencies.

Garcia began with a policy based on: (I) a unilateral partial suspension

of debt-servicing payments, limited to 10 percent of export earnings; (2)

a modest devaluation and increase in public sector prices, followed by an

exchange rate and price freeze; (3) a large increase in public sector

wages, with the stated goal of raising internal demand.

     Under this policy mix, the economy boomed in 1986, with GD? growing

by 8.6 percent, and real wages growing an astounding 26.7 percent in the


                                     22
year. The public sector deficit went from 4.4 percent of GDP in 1985 to

7.9 percent of GDP in 1986.     Under the restraint of a fixed nominal

exchange rate, domestic inflation slowed markedly, from 158 percent per

year in 1985 to only 63 percent in 1986.      As might be expected, the

President's personal popularity soared, reaching an approval rating of

more than 90 percent in 1986. As is typically true of such programs,   the

only telltale signs of trouble were on the external front.      The trade

balance went from a surplus of $1,172 million in 1985 to a deficit of $65

million in 1986. The real exchange rate appreciated markedly.

        In 1981, the financial aspects of the situation deteriorated

further, with inflation approximately doubling relative to 1986. back up

to a level of 114.5 percent for the year. The public deficit widened (to

over 10 percent of GDP); the trade baian".e became more negative ($460

million deficit); and the real exchange rate appreciated even more.

Nonetheless, growth of real wages and real GDP remained high for the

year.

        By 1988, the foreign exchange reserves were depleted, and the

situation fell into total collapse. Real CDP is widely forecast to be -4

percent for year. while inflation might top 1000 percent. In the month

of September 1988 alone, prices rose by approximately 117 percent! The

President's popularity plummeted to a 16 percent approval rating in the

fall of 1988, and the press reported rumours of Garcia's offer to his

cabinet to resign.



Common features of the historical episodes

        A major theme of this paper is that the populist episodes have a



                                     23
common economic and political dynamic, despite the fact that they take

place in very different countries and even in different decades. We have

noted several common factors. On the political side, the experiences all

involve the accession to power of an urban-based government, intent on

raising - -   sharply   and quickly - -   the    living standards of the urban

workers.      In three of the four cases (Argentina, Brazil, and Peru, but

not Chile), the new government took power after a long conservative

interlude, so that social pressures were highly pent-up. On the economic

side, all of the programs were characterized by: an early phase of

rapidly rising GNP and real wages, with fairly stable prices; and a late

phase of falling GNP and real wages, with explosive inflation.

     The turning point comes with the collapse of the fixed exchange

rate, at the time that the government runs out of foreign reserves and

access to new foreign credits.      Indeed, the length of the upswing phase

is almost wholly a function of the foreign exchange reserves on hand for

the government. In the case of Argentina under Peron, the wartime trade

surpluses of Argentina meant that Peron inherited an enormous stockpile

of reserves, so that his program could continue for years without grave

collapse. In Chile, Allende had a more modest initial reserve position.

In Peru, Garcia created the part of the needed reserves by a policy of

unilateral debt servicing suspension.           In Brazil, the Cruzado Plan was

especially short lived, since it was entered into in the midst of a

serious external debt crisis, and since Brazil did not choose to emulate

Garcia by suspending debt servicing during the Plan (interestingly,

Brazil waited to suspend debt servicing until after the collapse of the

program, at a time of much more limited international bargaining power


                                          24
and less internal political cohesion).

     Figures 1-6 provide a striking visual confirmation of many of these

common attributes (the basic data and sources are given in the data

appendix). In these figures. we superimpose the experiences of the four

episodes, dating them according to the start of the populist policy

measures.     Figure 1 shows the CDP growth. In all cases, growth starts

high, and turns negative in year 4. Note that the l9B8 growth rates for

Brazil and Peru are forecasts taken front the financial press as of

September 1988.       In Argentina, Chile, and Peru, growth actually

accelerates from year 1 to 2, then slows in year 3, and turns negative   in


year four.     In the Argentine, Chilean, and Peruvian cases, the downturn

in the fourth year was very sharp, with GD? falling by more than 4

percent.

     The second figure shows the inflation experience, which once again

looks similar across the cases.       In all four countries, the populist

episode begins with a slowdown of inflation, which seems to come about

because of the fixity of the nominal exchange rate during each episode.

By year 3, the inflation begins to accelerate, especially sharply   in the

case of Brazil (where the Cruzado Plan collapsed with remarkable

quickness).     Remarkably, by year four in Brazil, Chile, and Peru, the

 inflation has reached several hundred percent. In Argentina under Peron,

 inflation reached levels (just over 30 percent) that were higli by

 comparison with the price stability in Argentina in the late l930s and

 early l940s, but very low in comparison with later years. Peron started

 with in an economy with very low inflationary expectations and a large

 inherited stock of international reserves.


                                         25
        0'
                                      cc.
        IC!
                         C
                         =
                         .r.




        rC
               .11       —




                                       Ci



                                              I?             A,+ -7
                                                           _•_/
                                                            '• //       /
                                               j—
                                              1/
                                              f__
                                                   .—•••
                                                           .1


                                       •/ //7
                                    -'-1    / // /
                                                          7,       •i




                     •,__—' ,/- /' •,/
                     I
                               //
                                                                            -
                                                               •




I
    o



               o 0 C 'I'
          Fm                          (N      0
                                                      I        • I'         C
                                                      I            I



                               a6uq3 uaDaad
          "I
          •1




                   Li
                              c-i            ri

                                                           t       -T




     CL
     0                                                                   I-
                                                                         C
w                                                                        a'
1-   0
     —
-- -I
   C
U- —
     C
                                                                   c'1




                               0         0        0    0       0
          o
          0    0
               0
                        0
                        0      0         0        0
                                                  C4
                                                       0
                                                       —
          N    C        U)



                             aôuetj3 jUa3Jif
                   Figure   3


                    Real Waqes


     30
                                                          46—19
                                           H Argentina
     20

                                              Chile   711—73

     I0


0,
C)    0
C
ID                                         H Penj
-c
0,
a,
U,
3:   -10
C
L                                          L1 Erazi I—P J 55-87
     -20


      30



     -40
           I   2                   3   4


                            year
                     ligure   4



      Index   of Expyolurne/Index of   GDP



100
                                                 H Argentina 46-49
95

90                                                  Chile 70-73

85

 80
                                                    Peru 65-67

 75

 70                                                 Orezfl 85-87

 65

 60

 55

 50
               2                  3          4


                       year
                 Fiqure    S



          Itil.PesrveS/I   t•r•ir:uI:irt.:;




                                                                       111.1
2,0


1.6


                                                        11111'?        7




 1.4


 1.2                                                    I.!,n_lI           •ii ,/
                                                    j
 tO

                                                         i:;—.   i.!   I
 0.6


 06



  c' .2
                                              I_I



  0.0



                     ycer
                        Figure   6


                REAL EXCHANGE RATE NON
                (a"erege 01 each perioc)
     I 20

                                               El Argentne
      l0
                                                  Chile 70-Aug 73

     100


                                                  Peru 85-67
xC
•0    90
C


                                                  5razil 65-67
      60



       70



       60
            I       2                 3    4


                            veer
     Figure 3 focuses on a crucial target of the populist policies: the

real wage. The chart shows the percentage change in the wage each year

of the policy.      Real wage growth is strong at the beginning of the

program, through the first two years. and then slows down in the third

year, and finally collapses as the balance of payments crisis hits the

economy.     In Chile in 1973, real wages fell by 32 percent; in Pen in

1988, real wages fell by 34.5 percent; and in Brazil in 1988, real wages

in Rio de Janeiro fell by 12.8 percent, following a decline of 16 percent

in 1987.11

     Figures 4 through 6 demonstrate the Achilles' heel of all of the

experiments: the external sector,   As shown in Figure 4, export volumes

fall relative to CNP in all of the countries, and in Figure 4 we see that

the nrio of international reserves to imports plummets in the second

year of the program in each of the countries. One major reason for this

collapse is shown in Figure 5: the steady and significant appreciation of

the real exchange rate, where the real exchange rate is defined in this

figure as the nominal exchange rate vis-a-vis the dollar, divided by the

ratio of the consumer price index of the home country to the consumer

price index of the U.S. In all of the countries the real exchange rate

appreciates sharply in the course of the program, by as much as 25 to 30

percent in real terms by the third and fourth years. We have already

noted that this appreciation helps to explain the initial rise in the



     The 1988 data for Peru, and the 1987 and 1988 data for Rio
de Janeiro are from CEPAL (1988). The 1988 data are provisional.
Note that in Brazil, there is a big discrepancy between the sharp
fall of real wages in Rio de Janeiro, and the much more moderate
decline in Sao Paolo (where wages fell only by about 2 percent
between



                                    26
real wage, as well as the decline in net exports and international

reserves.



III. Conclusions and Extensions

        A great many of Latin America's economic problems       in the l980s are
    -


due to external factors. World real interest rates reached unexpected

and unprecedented levels in the 1980s, resulting in an enormous drain of

resources from Latin American debtor countries to the creditor world.

Commodities prices for Latin America's leading exports collapsed, often

falling in real terms to the lowest levels in half a century or more.

And in many countries, fragile democratic governments had to try to pick

of the pieces from the rubble --       in    human, political, and economic terms

-   - left   by earlier military regimes.

        Nonetheless, Latin America cannot fully escape the responsibility

for the current crisis.         The debt crisis has hit hardest in countries

with a long tradition of fiscal laxity. In many cases, that laxity has

hit shocking proportions, particularly when governments have used drastic

fiscal expansions in order to try to solve deep-seated problems of

economic inequality and poverty. We have seen in this paper the evidence

that these populist measures tend to collapse in a remarkable burst of

inflation and falling real wages, at the moment when the fiscal expansion

hits the balance of payments constraint.

        We have suggested that the impulse for populist measures follows

from several factors, including: an enviroment of deep economic conflict,

rooted in a highly unequal distribution of income; political instability,

leading to governments with short expected tenure and equally short time




                                        27
horizons; and a deep perceived cleavage in sectoral interests, with the

urban working class sharply opposed to the exporters of primary
commodities.

    And yet, a major puzzle remains.      The populist episodes we have

reviewed ended in collapse, sometimes even in tragedy. Peron was forced

into exile, leaving a weakened economy and a society both politicized and

deeply divided; Allende died in a military coup that destroyed democracy

in Chile for the next fifteen years; Sarney and Carcia now preside over

failed regimes, each now facing the real danger of a hyperinflation and

economic collapse.    Why did these leaders opt for such a dangerous

strategy? At least Brazil and Peru should have had the benefit of the

lessons of the other two experiences.

     P'rhaps the most accurate, and also simplest, answer is that these

leaders, and even more their followers, did not understand the riskiness

of the course that they selected. Populist policies look remarkably good

at the beginning of the populist cycle.        It is only the hopeless

pessimist that raises doubts in the midst of a boom that causes real

wages to rise sharply while keeping inflation under control (or even

cutting inflation, as in Brazil and Peru)! Presidents Peron, Sarney, and

Garcia reached remarkable levels of popularity in the early stages of

their programs. The problem of falling foreign exchange reserves looks

like a technical nuisance at this stage. Something will come up, each of

the leader reasoned: new loans, a cut in world interest rates, a surgeof

exports (deus cx machinai, even a debt moratorium or exchange controls if

necessary. After all, what is a little inconvenience in foreign trade if

the benefits are a real wage boom and rapid growth?!




                                    28
    In truth, the situation may be difficult even when the leader

understands the difficulties, if his followers (in congress, in the

unions, and on the streets) do not. The pressures for redistribution may

be too much to resist, if the congress is pushing hard for more spending,

and siding with important constituencies towards that end.     In Brazil,

the finance ministers in 1987 and 1988 understood well the dangers of the

fiscal expansion, but were powerless to resist a President that in turn

was bowing to populist pressures in the Brazilian Congress.

     The lack of perspective is not limited to politicians.       Various

schools of "structuralist" thought in economics continue to advocate

measures along populist lines. There is no better evidence of this than

the self-congratulatory volume El Peru Heterodoxo: Un Modelo Economico

(D. Carbonetto, ed.), published in 1987 by the technical analysts- that

designed the ill-fated Peruvian program. Just on the eve of the collapse

of the program (as liquid foreign exchange reserves were finally

depleted), the book appeared, with the following pronouncement.

     At the moment of sending this book to print we close the
     first year and a half of the application of the reactivation
     policies in Peru.   The [economic] data obtained corroborate
     on the whole the thesis that it is possible to reactivate an
     economy (when one has excess capacity) and at the same time
     to reduce the level of inflation.

     In this year and a half, Pen reduced its inflation from 250
     percent annual to around 65 percent annually, and raised its
     GNP by more than 8 percent per year.

     Nonetheless, the same success obtained in this process of
     reactivation open unknowns which could be called the second
     stage of development of the Peruvian economic model.     These
     unknowns refer to the extent of savings-investment and of
     exports capacity of the Peruvian economy in the immediate
     future.    (p. 16, translation mine).

Unfortunately, the authors failed to recognize that the failure of the




                                      29
second stage (to develop adequate savings and exports) is the logical

result of the "success" of the first stage.       Sadly, by September 1988,

Peruvian exports had collapsed and the economy had entered into a

hyperinflation! As of september 1988, the government was attempting to

make an emergency turn towards fiscal stabilization.

     This  problem of understanding is undoubtedly complicated by the
absence of adequate "institutional memory" in most of the governments in
Latin   America.     With every change of government there is a complete

overhaul in public-sector personnel, extending far down into the

bureacracy.        In modern Japan, by contrast, one man per ministry is

subject to change when the government changes - -      the   minister himself

(all other positions are based on internal promotion within the

mini.i:ries)!      The result in latin America is the absence of normal

bureaucratic restraint in the design of major initiatives. The President

and his immediate advisors can launch a fundamental change in direction,

subject of course to his maintaining office.

     In closing, it is important to stress a point of view also expressed

at the beginning.        The political and moral impulses underlying the

populist policies are understandable and indeed often noble. The income

distribution in Latin America is a reason for moral concern and a

provocation to action.       Moroever, many actions of populist governments

(such as the debt moratoria of Peru and Brazil in the 1980s, or the

"heterodox" shocks that attempted to control inertial inflation), may be

meritorious even though they are highly controversial and a part of an




                                      30
otherwise ill-designed program.'2

     Finally, the populist excesses do not prove the merit of extreme

orthodox policies that often follow the populist collapse.       Too many

opponents of populism dismiss real problems over income distribution, and

are content to balance budgets without concern for the distributional

consequences.   The failures of Latin American populism should prompt a

search for a middle path, rather than being read as an endorsement of

unfettered orthodoxy.

     This paper has naturally raised more questions than it has answered.

Do the social and political factors described in the paper not only

explain the Latin American temptation towards populism, but also the

relative absence of populist policies in East Asia?       Do the "pacted

democracies" of Colombia and Venezuela orovide a model for achieving

political stability in other countries in the region, and do the

experiences of those two countries support the hypothesis that political

stability contributes to fiscal responsibility?       What are the most

effective ways for Latin America to address the long-standing crisis in

income inequality, and at the same time to encourage price stability.

private investment and accumulation?      These great issues provide an

agenda for future study of the political economy of the region, an agenda

that would have benefitted greatly from the attention and insights of

Ezio Tarantelli.


     12 Alan Garcia's declaration in 1985 that Peru needed debt
relief, and that the choice for Peru was "debt or democracy", was
accurate. Given the collapsed state of the Peruvian economy and
society as of 1985, the possiblity of servicing debt on the terms
of the international community was negligible. Thus, the debt
moratorium need not be dismissed as wrong simply because it was
accompa



                                    31
L.. _.                                         .0 J                       .)J                                   P .... j                                               .       ).              J          .W                                2)          1
      YEAR                       'GDP         growth Peel Wages                                   Infletion(CPQjPeserves/                                    - Quantum Index_1uentumIndex Peel Excberq
                                 I       -                                               ....J.                                                                   ?P.1pJ!!.p/G PtLndcx Rate Irdex
I
                       -                                                                                                      .1                                                                                                                 00         I
                                                                                                                 .. .s io
                       1946              -              83%                - —
                                                                                57%                                 177%                                 190                    1000'                          1000                              1000
                       J947!                           138%                    SQ%                         -:       135%                                 028                     824,                 770                                        1013'
                       1948                                I                   236%                                                                      017                                                   1797                               958
                                                               1%                                          --       133%                  -                        -                69l
                                                                                                                    .)                                   P:.!I                                                              7
                                                                    i                                                         I
                                                                                                                                                                                -                                       -
            Itreprnent;                      Buenos Aires change                         instof living (jeer evere)                                                                        :                       ..                   -   - -:
                                                                                                                                                     -
                             I           :                                                  :r:. ::                                       -
i.(!).LLcL4c                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -.   .1

      !p.y13ic,:1!1e                          !dL!.11Y,..!.92P:                               L                              .J               ..               I

      (V               t! 1!J.crM..Ls!,y!.t!Lth                                                                                                          Acg'fl                                                                 .1
                                                                   y !229.&c                          1F1!prJ..pfJ%&                                 dentUSA               -    -        .....L.._             -                                        J
..I
                           ._._j..._..._.....                                                                                 I                                                 —    .                .
                                                                                                                                                                                           _•j__•
            ....                         —                                 ....—   —..                              —
                                                                                                                              I            —
                                                                                                                                                                                               II                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                               I
I
                                             ..                         p_L_•.c                                               I                                                                                                                  —          i
                             -           - 1)                       I       1.?)                  -         .1.P             .J                (X                                                         (.L..             .1          (2.)_
                                     P1!p.v                                                   I!x!t!.!c.cmj.!5                                                 iR!1!fltrn           ndaX Iquent urn            dtx                      spc
            ..,                                                                                                               IJ.!!!F9ri'                                                                 PP       !x               R!t !.!!.!
                                                                                             .ji!c.:Oe
                                                                    .1                                                                                         11970.100                            1970.100                        1970.100                1



                   -   1970                   _j1%j                                02                               349'                                 O4t                        ioao:                      I000                   --         1000
                   .J.22J                                                                                                              --                0.!..!]
        -              .19??                                                                          --        1634%1                                   010j                              I              -    58,                                852
                                                           12%jlDi%                                                                                                                                            86.9                                   1.7
                                         JtII%                                                                                                           QP9J                       87i
                                                  ..                                                                          L               ....       —                                     I
       As of August                                                                                                                                                                  -                                      -
                                                                                                                                                                                               :                                      ::
                                                       —       -    .1                        L                               I..-._                                                                                            .                       j
                                                                                                      ..        -                                                                                                               .
                                                           c..,tp!Q_q!.c                                                      I..                              .
                                                                    I                                                         j.._                   -..-                                                                       .
                       ()JC L.!nd                                                                                        -         ..--....-......-..-
 L
                                                           !ie !,atqt.cn!le[
                                     I                               i                                                         L                               L                               I                                L                           I
                    -                                                           -       -     -       1
                                                                                                                          -
                                                  PtRU                                                                                                                                                          I

                          (I)         _i                                       _(3)                                 (4)            —f           (5)                     (6)                       (7)
                                                         _(2)          _.
 .L... 'PLg.                      tL !.!. Wa9!t..IL!                                1!.Qft(c!!1]!SY!                               .             exjfluenturn ndexPee Exchang
                                                                                                               9!1?                 .   .xJLPPfmd.exiimp/GDPindexiRatenq!x
                                                                           [ia!     :)
                                              I                                                       I                                 1985—100               1985—100                     1965—100
                                                                                                                                                      ioo.o!                   100.0,             100.O
         1986                  8.5%                          26.7%                          62.9%i                        0.55                         91.41                   127.01,                     67.51.

           !.                                       .                                                                     9)2                                                  .LV.1                        2.91
  .LQ(b_.th!                                                                                                                                                           .•P                             I
                                      --                      —            -
(a}Pre1im1narjfiçures                                             —-                                  I                                     -                  - -                    -
                                  .                      -                      -                                                                                  -               ..•.-




                                                  ....             -                                                                                                   ...-
(?2J.PJA      .1..                                                                      ...                                   ..                                                           .1


(1I&                 p.9stSA              d         QL.....                                                    ......

                                                                           t
    ..                  ...     ...._..       I                        .....                          4


                                                                                                      I
                                      JPBLZJLL                                          -                      -
         ..                   (LL..J                    _fl_.4                                        j                                         (5
                                                                                                                                                urn    de
                                                                                                                                                               jP.Srn SJ$!e
                          .               ...cce                                                                                                               imp(GDP index
                                             RS.rsL.i                                                                                   ,ic.-         oo              Qo                        J!.- 00
           §5                                 I              ...21                                                                                                                                         PP:9j,
         1986                   8.2%I                            8.1%                       63,5%i                                                     75.61                   1   0641.                   91.51
                                                                                                                          0.411
                                                             JA!                                                -         9:1?.!                                               !..P
                               :.LQ                                            --           OOO%J                       At                                               fli
                ---.                               ..:±kZ                                             ..L......
çePreum                                                                                 -

                                —                                                                                       --—
                I                                                                                                                       I
                                                             —                                    —       .1                                                   .
                                                                                    —                                                   .                                                          -
                                                             -                                            I                                                    L
 :..mn::.c:cI:II:.Ex.:::.:7z::;Iv1A                                                                            .L::.       i::                          1111:::
            j
                                        1945              —     1946       I947         1948              1949         1)50           1Q51    1°E2      195?   1954   USS
Nlonev(N1l) growth'                    203%                    308%       212%         343%              277%          254%          21 3%   138% 240%         163% l76
Ifiscel Deficit
             (%oIGDP) I                 ne                     na         na           na                ne            I   5%'        05%    —01%  08%          25% 20%
'Endofertoendor9eer                    —             I
SourceDin Aiejerxiro C -
                                                         CHILE
                  -
                                                                l97O                    1972              1973:
                                                                           1971;
                          -           - l969
MoneyN11) growth'                      35 2%i                  66 2&     113 4%I      151 8%'           362   9%
risc.! Deficit (%ofGDD)                 04%'                    27%       10           130%'             247%
                                                                                            .   .
                                                                     2
Source:centrel Bank of Chile                                                                        i

                              I
                                                         PERU
                          -
                              1         19841                   1985                    19871988-EM
                                                                           19861
                  —           j                                                  I—

                                  .
1o                                    1!.;Q                ?.B:           PiTh              ça
Fiscal Deficit                          8                   4 4%i          7 9%I       109%               9
                                                           -                                                  0%
                  (%of CDP) 1                                                                                      —
           .—     —           1.
                                                O%i
                                                                    •1
                                                                                 i                                                                I

                                                 -
Source ApoyosAand Nit

                              I
                      —                                  BRAZIl.
                              .1.          ..
                                                                                            987                                          .


I'loney(N1l)                  :       201       9%                       3038% 53% (a)
                growth"                                  - 3043%
      11.'J !iPP.9i.                             J
  ..JA91.11'
           -                                                   ?.L1! 5%               n.e
                                                .6%
                                                                                                                                                  ...
     9gj.ps      -                                                               .

(e)_As   of June                      December-December
(b                            1
                          91!fl!!!1              ftba!,4!.JP!i.rpflE N,QP4\r1!.!1g. P                          2142.             j       .
                            List of References


Alesina, A. and C. Tabellini (1987). 'External Debt, Capital Flight, and
Political Risk", unpublished, mimeo, Harvard University

Berg, A. and J. Sachs (1988), "The Debt Crisis: Structural Explanations
of Country Performance", NEER Workina Paper No. 2607, June, and
forthcoming in Journal of Development Economics, 1989

Bresser Pereira, L.C. (1988), "The Two Brazilian Price Freezes", address
to the seminar Run-Away Inflation: Austerity at What Cost?: Argentina.
Brazil. and Israel, School of International and Public Affairs, Columbia
University, March 25

Bresser Pereira, L.C. (1988), "The 1987 Approach for the Negotiation of
the Brazilian External Debt", paper presented to the Annual World Bank
Seminar on Imolementine Economic Reform: Management and Institutional
Factors, April 5

Bruno, M. and Sachs, J. (1985). Economics of Worldwide Stpgflation.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press

Calmfors, L. and J. Driff ill (1988). "Bargaining structure, corporatism,
and macroeconomic Performance", Economic"olicv, No. 6, April

Carbonetto, D. (1987)   El Peru Heterodoxo: Un Modelo Economico.    Lima:
Instituto Nacional de Planificacion

Cardoso, F. H. and     E. Faletto (1979). Dependency and Development in
Latin America.    Translated by Marjory M. Urquidi.    Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press

Conliff, M. L. (1982). "Introduction: Toward a Comparative Definition of
Populism", in M. L. Conliff (ed.), Latin American Populism in Comparative
Perspective. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press

Conliff, M. L.   (ed.) (1982). Latin American Populism in Comparative
Perspective. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press

Diaz-Alejandro, C. F. (1965). Exchange-Rate Devaluation in a
Industrialized Economy: The Experience of Argentina. 1955-61. Cambridge.
Mass.: M.I.T. Press

Diaz-Alejandro, C. F. (1970).    Essays on the Economic History of the
Argentine Republic. New Haven: Yale University Press

Diaz-Alejandro, C. F. (1981). "Southern Cone Stabilization Programs," In
11. R. Cline and S. Weintraub (eds.), Economic Stabilization in Developing
Countries, Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.



                                    32
Drake, P. W. (1982). "Conclusion: Requiem for Populism?", in M. L.
Conliff (ed.), Latin American Populism in Comparative Perspective.
Albuquerque:University of New Mexico Press

Economic Commission of Latin America and the Carribbean (ECLAC).
"Balance Preliminar de Ia Economia Latinoamericana", 1988, and various
years for data in Figures 1-6.

Hirschman, A. (1971). "The Political Economy of Import-Substitution
Industrialization in Latin America.' In A Bias for Hone, edited by A.
Hirschman. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

Mallon, R. and J. V. Sourrouille (1975). Economic Policvma1cin in a
Conflict Society: the Argentine Case.  Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.

McCallum, J. (1983) "Inflation and Social Consensus in the Seventies."
Economic Journal, 93 (December)1 784-805.

Sachs, J. (1985), "External Debt and Macroeconomic Performance in Latin
America and East Asia," BrookinEs Paners on Economic Activity, vol. 2,
pp. 523-573

Sachs, J. (1989), "A Simple Macroeconomic Model of Populist Dynamics",
mimeo, Harvard University

Skidmore, T. E. (1988). The Politics of Military Rule in Brazil. 1964-
j. Oxford: Oxford University Press

Tarantelli, E. (1986) Economia del Lavoro. Torino: U.T.E.T.




                                   33
