                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  MARKET VALUE VS. FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING
                       MEASURES OF NATIONAL SAVING




                            David F. Bradford




                          Working Paper No. 2906




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 MassachusettS Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                March 1989




This is a revision of a paper prepared for an NBER Conference on Saving,
January 6-7, 1988, Maui, Hawaii. I would like to thank Alan AuerbaCh,
William Beaver, Michael Boskin, John Campbell, Angus Deaton, Bronwyn Hall,
Robert Hall, Alan Huber, James Poterba, Robert Shiller, John Shoven, Scott
Smart, Frederick Yohn, Jr., and participants in the Maui conference for
helpful discussions of various aspects of this research, and Kathleen Much
for editorial advice. This paper was completed while I was a Fellow at the
Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences. I am grateful for
 financial support provided by Princeton University; the John M. Olin Program
 for the Study of Economic Organization and Public Policy, Princeton
University; National Science Foundation #BNS87-00864; the Alfred P. Sloan
 Foundation; and the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper is part
                                                                     those of
 of NBER's research program in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are
 the author not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #2906
                                         March 1989


      MARKET VALUE VS. FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING MEASURES OF NATIONAL SAVING


                                  ABSTRACT



      Although National Income and Product Account (NIPA) saving

measures, and especially NIPA saving rates, are widely used in both

scholarly and journalistic treatments, they are seriously defective as

representations of the variables derived from economic analysis, either

for measuring economic performance or as elements of the explanation for

consumption behavior. The cost-based value of a restricted class of

assets recorded in the national income and product accounts is a version

of the financial accounting for the tangible assets of a business firm.

Economic analysis calls instead for the current asset market value of

business enterprises (and their equivalents) as the measure of wealth,

and the annual change in that value as the measure of saving. National

Balance Sheet data on wealth at asset market value presented in this

paper show that NIPA saving measures are not good proxies for market

value measures. The picture of recent national saving experience that

emerges from market value data is quite different. Various conceptual

and data quality issues are discussed.




                                         David F. Bradford
                                         Center for Advanced Study
                                         202 Junipero Serra Blvd.
                                         Stanford, CA 94305
   MARKET VALUE VS. FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING MEASURES OF NATIONAL SAVING

                           David F. Bradford



                              Introduction

      This essay is a venture into veil-trodden terrain: the definition

of saving. Because so many others have thought about the same issues,

probably nothing I say here has not been said before by someone else.

J. R. Hicks (1946) mapped the territory in a particularly well-known

theoretical treatment. More recently, Auerbach (1984), Boskin (1986,

1988), Eisner (1980, 1988), Goldsmith (1982), Peek (1986), Ruggles and

Ruggles (1981), and Shoven (1984) have discussed many of the points

raised here in connection with empirical explorations of saving and

wealth. In his presidential address to the American Economic

Association, Eisner (forthcoming) included the main theses argued here

in a broadside indictment of the divergence between measurement and

theory to be found in economics. This paper differs, perhaps, in degree

of emphasis of two propositions. The minor theme is that saving should

be defined by reference to the underlying concept of wealth to which the

saving is an increment. The major theme is that the most useful wealth

concept is the market value of assets, not thecost-based measure of

capital implied by the use of national income and product account (NIPA)

saving. Whereas NIPA investment measures tell us something about the

margin of productive additions to the stock of wealth in a particular

form, the (definitionally equal) saving measures are neither those that
                                    2




the microeconontic theory of consumption explains nor those appropriate

to assess national economic performance.

      Inspection of a sample of the extensive literature commenting on

and analyzing national saving has surprised me by the diversity of

positions, often implicit, on these issues. It appears that the

macroeconomists are truer to microeconomic principles than are many of

those who approach the subject from a public finance perspective. The

fact that so much research is carried out making use of statistical

measures of saving that seem to me to bear so little relationship to

economic theory suggests there is a place for a review of fundamentals

and display of some basic data related to them.

Income. Saving, and Wealth

      Beginning students are taught that saving is a residual, what is

left from personal income after deducting consumption and taxes, or

after deducting from aggregate income consumption by households and

governments. But saving is also conceived of as an addition to wealth,

and it is not always recognized that the three ideas - -   consumption,

income, and wealth --   are not independent. Defining any two determines
the definition of the third. The Schanz-Haig-Siaons (SHS) conception of

income familiar to public finance takes the ideas of consumption and

wealth as fundamental and defines income as the sum of consumption and

the change in wealth during an accounting period. The basic notion of

wealth, in turn, is the market value of a household's (or household
                                       3




aggregate's) stock of claims on goods and services in the future.1 This

is the approach to saving taken by the microeconomic theory of household

behavior.

       Most commentary on and analysis of national saving, by contrast,

start with a NIPA definition of income. To make life confusing, the

term "income" in the national income account context is attached to

factor payments, and makes distinctions between taxes regarded as

falling on factor payments and those that do not (indirect business

taxes). It is doubtful that there is an economically meaningful

distinction between taxes that bear on factor payments and those that do

not. We can cut through the problem if, for the concept of income in

the SHS sense, we read "product" in the national accounting sense.

         Which of the three notions -•     product,   consumption, and wealth - -

is   fundamental in the case of national income accounting is not

immediately obvious. As is well known, national income accounts involve

two conceptions of product, gross and net. Gross national product, "the

market value of the goods and services produced by labor and property

supplied by residents of the United States,"2 and consumption, personal

and governmental, can reasonably be described as the fundamental ideas.

Together (by subtraction) they define gross investment and saving. To

 reach                     investment, and        saving, it is necessary to
             product,



    For discussions of the SHS income concept, see Bradford (1986) or
 Institute for Fiscal Studies (1978).

 2 us• Department       of Commerce (1986).
                                   4




subtract an allowance for the using up of the reproducible capital

stock, a wealth notion. Here, then, it is the wealth and consumption

ideas that are fundamental: We can think of net product (income) as

definitionally equal to the sum of consumption (personal and

governmental) and the change in the reproducible capital stock owned by

U.S. residents.

NIPA Saving and Financial Accounting

      In its treatment of business investment and its yield, the NIPA

net income concept can be loosely characterized as a consolidation of

the account books of business firms. This is not to suggest that the

NIPA accountants actually aggregate the income statements and balance

sheets of firms. It is rather to emphasize that investment (and

therefore saving) in the national income and product accounts consists

of acquisitions of tangible property and is, furthermore, cost-based,

constructed from historical data on expenditures for machines,

structures, and inventories. Increments in the value of intangible

property and (what may be the same thing) revaluations of tangible

property arising from its location within going businesses are excluded

from the NIPA income and saving concepts. Net saving in the national

income and product accounts constitutes the change in the stock of

reproducible business capital.3 The NIPA capital data can be thought of



   For this purpose, owner-occupiers can be thought of as in the
business of providing housing services. Other household-owned and
-employed capital (consumer durables) is excluded from the NIPA
investment and capital concepts, but that is not my main concern here.
                                   5




as the figures financial accountants would present if they used the NIPA

depreciation conventions and adjusted their historical cost-based

entries on tangible assets (including inventories) annualiy to what they

would be had historical prices been instead at current levels.

      The main difference between the two conceptions of wealth

corresponds roughly to the difference between financial accounting for

the net worth of business firms, on the one hand, and the market

valuation of those firms, on the other ("roughly" because financial

accounts include intangible assets acquired by purchase from another

firm). The difference is sometiiiies summed up as that between

recognition or not of "capital gains," but this description hides as

much as it reveals. The market value of the equity of a firm may differ

from the "book" value of its tangible property for many reasons,

including changes in the supply price of the capital items in question

 (for which national income accounting makes a correction), changes in

discount rates, and changes in the beliefs about the future upon which

market valuation of assets depends -   - all   of these give rise to capital

gains in the popular sense of the term. But the two values also may

differ because of the genuinely stochastic character of the returns on

 investment and the conservative quality of business accounts, which

 result in little or no tracking of the accumulation of intangible

 capital and of such assets as proven oil reserves.
                                     6




EmDirical Relevance: A First Look

      Available   data suggest that the difference in definition

corresponds to a significant difference in aggregate wealth measures.

Table 1 shows estimates of the net worth of nonfinancial corporate

business in the United States (including corporate farms) and of the

market value of the equity claims on those firms.    The figures are

derived from the Balance Sheets for the U.S. Economy (hereafter,

National Balance Sheets) prepared by the Board of Governors of the

Federal Reserve System (1984). Net worth consists of the difference

between assets and liabilities on the account books, after various

adjustments. Assets in this case include reproducible assets at

replacement cost (i.e., after adjusting valuation based on historical

cost for changes in the acquisition prices of the same assets), land at

market value, and direct investment abroad by U.S. firms. Liabilities

include all the usual sorts of debt (at book value), profit taxes

payable, and foreign direct investment in the United States. I would

emphasize that in its treatment of fixed investment the net worth in

Table 1 is essentially the concept implicit in NIPA accounting for

saving. The market value of equity is essentially that appropriate for

the SHS saving concept, which, in turn, is the concept MexplainedN by

microeconomic theories of saving behavior.



   To derive the aggregate accounting net worth of the corporate sector.
I have added the net worth of corporate farms (line 46 of the Sector
Balance Sheet for the Nonfinancial Business Sector) to the nonfarui,
nonfinancial total (line 43).
                                   7




      It is evident from Table I that the market value of equity and the

net worth on firms' books are very different.   The column titled "Market

Value/Net Worth Ratio" shows the ratio of the market value of the equity

claims to the consolidated nonfinancial corporate sector to the

consolidated financial accounting measure of net worth, i.e., the sum of

tangible and financial assets (including direct investment abroad) less

the sum of debt claims (at book value), profit taxes payable, and

foreign direct investment in the United States.     Since 1948 this ratio

has varied over a remarkable range, with a high of 110.1 percent at the

end of 1968 and a low of 36.7 percent at the end of 1978.

      With this sort of divergence, one would expect very different

behavior of income and saving measures based on accounting and market

values of wealth. How different is suggested by the column of Table 1

headed "Net Worth less Market to GNP," which shows the ratio of the

difference between the accounting and market value measures as a ratio

to the GNP. According to Table 1, changing from NIPA accounting to

market value measures of saving in the form of nonfinancial corporate

 equity claims would result in changes in estimated aggregate income

 ranging between an increase of over 7 percent and a decrease of over 62

 percent, with a substantial decrease on average.     (This comparison is

 simply to emphasize the potential significance of the difference in

 points of view under discussion in the present paper.     Since there may

 be offsetting changes in other elements of national wealth, an aggregate

 income measure that accounted for all saving at market value might not
                                        8




differ as much from the NIPA aggregate.) Figures 1 and 2 make the

points graphically.
      It seems clear that the basic objective of the National Balance

Sheets, to measure wealth at market value, is the one appropriate for

discussions of saving. Nevertheless, economists widely accept and use

for this purpose the NIPA saving data. Distinguished examples (and I

make no claim to a systematic review of the literature) include Blades

and Sturm (1982), Boskin and Lau (1988), Campbell (1987), Lipsey and

Kravis (1987), most of the contributors to Lipsey and Tice

(forthcoming), Poterba (1987), and Summers (1985).

      In at least some of these instances, lack of market value wealth

data is taken to justify resort to NIPA concepts, and some analysts (for

example Auerbach, 1984; Boskin, 1986, 1988; Poterba and Summers, 1987)

have noted the potential role for the market value data provided in the

National Balance Sheets. Summers and Carroll (1987) explicitly analyze

aggregate saving in the National Balance Sheet sense (although they do

not regard it as preferable to the NIPA measure). Noting that

"[n]ational income account (NIA) data provid, notoriously poor proxies

for the economic concepts of saving and investment," Obstfeld (1986, p.

82) explores some of the biases that may result from the use of NIPA

data in comparing saving and investment behavior of countries. Some

macroeconoinists --   for   example, Hall (1978, 1988) and Campbell and

Deaton (1988) -- go out of their way to avoid measuring saving. Hall,

in particular, has argued that income aggregates are misplaced in
                                       9




macroeconomics; focus   should   instead be on aggregate consumption and

labor earnings. Granting some such exceptions in the literature, I

think it is fair to say that there is wide acceptance of NIPA saving

measures.

      In this paper I argue that wealth and consumption are both

important variables in economic models and important measures of

economic performance, that income should be viewed as a derivative

concept in this connection, and that the appropriate concept of wealth

is measured at asset market value. We should use NIPA saving measures

only to the extent that they serve as reasonable proxies for the market

value measures. (This is not to suggest that the corresponding

investment concepts are not useful in the analysis of production.)

Although it is ultimately a statistical question whether the NIPA saving

measures are reasonable proxies, the evidence from the National Balance

Sheets leads me to doubt it.

      In the next part of the paper I review the relationship between

the two notions of wealth (and therefore of saving): market value of

assets and financial accounting net worth. I then take up objections to

the use of market value wealth. The fourth section presents time series

data on the behavior of national saving in the United States economy,

and the fifth raises, without solving, some significant problems with

the National Balance Sheet data as measures of market value.

      Much attention has been paid in recent years to the saving

performance of U.S. residents, which has been generally judged
                                        10




disappointing. My contention that the NIPA saving aggregates and ratios

of NIPA saving to NIPA income measures are poor indicators upon which to

base conclusions is neither inherently in favor of this assessment nor

opposed to it. One may still be dissatisfied with the U.S. saving

record when it is looked at in the framework suggested by microeconomic

theory. The sixth section presents some observations on this issue.

                               Concerts of Wealth

Market Value of Assets

      The SItS notion of income underlying the base of an income tax (or

at least generally accepted by academic commentators as the Droper base

of an income tax) is the sum     of   the change in the wealth and the

consumption of the taxpaying unit,      be   it an individual or a family.

Consumption and wealth are the primitive concepts, which need to be

given operational substance to produce a tax system. Although the

general ideas seem obvious enough, both pose difficult problems of

definition at the margin. Within limits, the standard to which the

operational definitions refer in a tax policy context is essentially

normative - -   one   starts with a notion of ability to pay and designs the

income measure to implement it. (The limits relate to the

substitutability of different forms of wealth in taxpayer portfolios.)

      In Untangling the Income Tax (Bradford 1986) I suggested that

usual arguments justifying the SHS income concept as a tax base imply a

definition of a person's wealth as "the maximum amount of present

consumption he could finance currently by selling or otherwise
                                   11




committing all of his assets" (p. 22). If this definition is accepted,

the operational focus shifts to the identification of "assets" and

quantifying the opportunities of "selling or otherwise committing" them.

Examples of significant but hard to quantify assets are human capital

(the present value of a person's future earning power) and the

discounted value of inheritances. Interestingly, these two are also

examples of assets that are difficult to sell or "otherwise commit."

Proponents of S}(S income taxation normally exclude both human capital

and the value of great expectations from the wealth component of the

definition of income.

      Experience with tax administration gives us numerous examples of

the fact that it is the market value of wealth, rather than its

accounting value, that figures in individual behavior.   If tax on

accruing market value (capital gains) is deferred, taxpayers will

concentrate their portfolios in assets that generate accruing value,

rather than cash income. If accounting measures of depreciation are

different from actually accruing changes in value of assets, taxpayers

respond in well known ways.

      A simple two-period model of person's intertemporal budget

constraint will help clarify the role and nature of wealth in the

analysis of behavior, in this case the explanation of consumption

levels. For the purpose, we can imagine a world in which there is just

one consumption good and in which labor is supplied jnelastically, with

no welfare significance. We conceive of people as born into this world
                                       12




with inherited resources (to be specified), working one unit of time

during the first period to earn the wage w1 (measured in consumption

units), consuming an amount C1, and applying any excess of the wage over

consumption to purchase assets. In the second period, the person also

works one unit of time to earn the wage w2, and consumes that amount

plus the results of liquidating the assets. The problem is to choose an

amount of first-period consumption and a portfolio of assets.

      In the most basic model, there is no uncertainty (so no

information problem). The second-period wage is known    and   there is a

single asset available, which we may think of as a discount bond paying

one unit of consumption in period two. The going price for the asset is

     The person is born holding B1 units of the bond, and in the course

of period 1 chooses the number of units of the asset to buy (or sell) so

as to carry B2 units into period 2. Two equations (1) and (2) define

the lifetime budget constraint.



                                  —
      (1)           C1 + B2p2         V1 + B1p2


      (2)                  C2 — B2+w2


      The intermediate asset position, B2, can be eliminated between (1)

and (2) to yield a single lifetime budget constraint (3).



                                  —
      (3)           C1 + C2p2         w1 + w2p2 + 81p2
                                      13




The right hand side of equation (3), w1 + w2p2 + B1p2, is the market

value of "opening wealth" (including human capital). We see from (3)

that in this simple world we can specify the person's opportunity set

completely with two numbers, opening wealth and p2, the price of claims

on period-two consumption (or the interest rate). To specify the

opportunity set without capitalizing labor services, we need four

numbers, 61p2, v1, w2, and p2: opening nonhuman wealth, wages in the

two periods, and the interest rate.

      This simple formulation reminds us that if we are looking forward

from a point in time and want to explain consumption levels, wealth is a

needed piece of information. It also demonstrates that it is not the

only piece of information we need to explain consumption or, a related

problem, to assess a person's welfare, even under the simple, perfect

market conditions of the model. In general, information about prices is

needed --   here,   wages and the interest rate; in a aultiperiod setting,

wages, relative prices of goods, and a term structure of interest rates.

By inspection of condition (3) we see that in the simple model the

welfare of the individual is increasing in opening wealth including

human capital and decreasing in the price of future consumption (i.e.,

increasing in the interest rate). But even in this case, when human

capital is excluded, although welfare is still increasing in opening

wealth, the effect of an increase in the interest rate on the assessment
                                                                       2.
is indeterminate and hinges on the taste for consumption in period
                                         14




Simply put, a high interest rate is bad for someone who wants to borrow

against tomorrow's earnings to consume more today.5

      Initial   nonhuman   wealth   is a given, a parameter, in the model

described above; wealth along the way (initial wealth augmented by

saving) is chosen, endogenous. A complete model would explain initial

wealth, too, so it would drop out of the analysis. Wealth would return

as an explanatory variable, though, with the introduction of

uncertainty. Then the wealth along the way is the result of the

individual person's choice and luck, so second-period consumption would

depend upon the market performance of the portfolio. The same would be

true for the aggregate of individuals.

      The model reminds us that to predict the level of consumption we

need to take into account the market value of nonhuman wealth, the

interest rate, and current and future wages. In a stochastic setting

the distribution of future wages could be correlated with the value of

nonhuman wealth, marketed and unmarketed. In particular, one might

expect workers observing prosperity (high market value of wealth) to

raise their forecasts of future wages. If we take into account that

lifetime labor supply is chosen along with consumption levels, it is far




   The importance of intertemporal prices (interest rates) is often
overlooked in assessments of welfare. Summers (1983) develops a cost-
of-living series corrected for interest rate changes, applicable to a
person with a given amount of wealth (and no anticipated earnings).
                                      15




from clear what sort of consumption behavior one ought to expect to see

associated with movements in the market value of wealth.6

     With enough simplifying assumptions. though, one can derive from

the general approach outlined above the conclusion that a person's

current consumption will be a function of his forecasted labor earnings

and current wealth, .g.,

                  C — aEt[wt+iLt+i] + bW,
where a and b are constants, E is the expectation conditional on

information at time t,   and   W is the (stochastic) market value of

nonhuman wealth.7 Such a model will generate a time path of consumption

and wealth, and hence of saving, defined as the change in wealth. The

point to emphasize here is that such regularity as the models do lead us

to look for is in the relationship among consumption, labor earnings,

and wealth at market value.

Net Worth as an Accounting Idea

      We can capture in a crude way the role for financial accounting in

the simple model of behavior by adding an explicit real asset, say a

certain number of machines, M1, as another element of endowment. In the

typical financial accounting context, there is no readily observable

market for fixed capital. Assume, therefore, that the machines are



6 For examples of more refined intertemporal models see Campbell and
Deaton (1988), Ingersoll (1987, Ch. 11), Merton (1971, 1973).

   For a classic -example of such a model, see Ando and Modigliani
(1963). For recent examples, see Blinder and Deaton (1985), Deaton
(1987), Hall (1978, 1988).
                                         16




inalienable (i.e., they cannot be sold). The number of machines is

tracked by the financial accounts. A machine generates output O       in

period two.    (O   would be stochastic in a realistic model.) Then the
budget constraint is expressed by equations (4) and (5); the single-

constraint version that eliminates the financial assets carried over is

expressed by (6).



                                     — V1 +
      (4)               C1 +   Bp2


      (5)                       C2 — w2+OM1+B2


      (6)               C1 +   Cp    —
                                         w1
                                              + w2p2 + B1p2 + OM1p2



It is evident from (6) that in a world of certainty, with unlimited

borrowing and lending of the financial asset, the only use of the

financial accounting information is to provide a basis for estimating

what the market value of the machines would be (OM1p2). If one knows

the market value of the machines, the accounting information is

superfluous.

      Complicating the model by introducing an explicit treatment of

uncertainty and asymmetries of information does not suggest a further

role for financial accounting information. With complete Arrow-Debreu

contingent claim markets, the market value of wealth continues to define

the position of the budget constraint. Owing to the increased number of
                                  17




prices, ambiguities about the signs of derivatives multiply in welfare

comparisons or positive predictions of the effect of changes in

parameters on consumption or labor supply.   Missing markets,

asymmetries, liquidity constraints, and the like render budget sets

nonlinear and reduce the information contained in any single parameter,

such as initial wealth, of the individual's problem.   Nevertheless,

there does not appear to be a general role for accounting information

except as the basis for estimating implicit market values.

      The function of financial accounting for a business firm is not to

duplicate market valuation. A clear statement of this point is

presented in an official pronouncement of the Financial Accounting

Standards Board: "Financial accounting is not designed to measure

directly the value of a business enterprise, but the information it

provides may be helpful to those who wish to estimate its value"

 (Financial Accounting Standards Board, 1978, as excerpted in Gibson and

Frishkoff, 1986, p. 19). Financial accounting for asset value and

market value converge where there is an actual transaction that renders

 the market value objectively measurable. Between transactions,
                                                             amortization,
 accounting rules prescribe transformations (depreciation,

 etc.) of the original market value data to describe the stock of assets

 involved.

       It is tempting, and I think even usual among economists, to

 attribute to the accounting measure of net worth (appropriately

 corrected to some sort of replacement cost basis) the status of a kind
                                  18




of "permanent income" measure, a stationary point in the noisy world of

asset revaluations. I am not aware, however, of any empirical evidence

in support of this characterization of accounting net worth in relation

to the valuation of firms (nor of the related characterization of

accounting depreciation)

      There are really two reasons we should expect accounting values to

differ from market values of firms. First, accounting practices clearly

lay no claim to tracking the market values of those assets that are

carried on the books. Thus, for example, the depreciated accounting

value of fixed investment neither is, nor claims to be, a stand-in for

market value for the assets involved.9 Intangible assets acquired by

purchase are generally amortized according to formula.1° Depreciation

or amortization deductions or retirements from the stock of assets,

based on the amounts paid for the assets, are needed to account for the

fact that some systematic effect can be expected with the passage of

time. These allowances are, to be sure, based on experience with the

physical or otherwise determined useful lives of similar assets in the

past, but to serve their purpose they must be formally prescribed in

accounting rules. They do not refer to assessments of current market

value in the context of the firm, which may deviate up or down from the

path implied by accounting rules of thumb.


8 See 'eaver and Ryan (1985).

   See Gibson and Frishkoff (1986, p. 44).

10 See Gibson and Frishkoff (1986, p. 46).
                                  19




      Second, important intangible assets created by the activities of a

firm (i.e., not bought from another firm), are typically not carried on

the balance sheet at all. As is well known, research and development

and advertising outlays are expensed currently. Successful efforts do

not generate assets on the books unless there is an actual transaction,

such as a sale of patent rights. The value of a firm that discovered

the laser or the transistor and could appropriate the resulting value

would surely jump in market value. Its accounting net worth, however,

would not change. The same is true for an economy under NIPA capital

accounting practices. Since the inventor of a new idea may have

difficulty capturing the rents, there is a better basis for excluding

the value increase from company books than for excluding it from a

national aggregation. Technological and market surprises of many kinds
                                                            of a new oil
(oil price shocks, technological breakthroughs, discovery

field) are excluded from company books and from NIPA income and capital

accounts. Observation of the histories of firms such as computer,

automobile, and pharmaceutical companies make clear that large movements

in value are associated with the success or failure of ideas (including

marketing) and organizational innovations. Such value changes are
                                                    stochastic, and
clearly of great quantitative significance, quite

weakly, if at all, related to investment in fixed capital.

       In short, the accounting net worth of the firm is a measure of

 some of its past inputs. It represents the solution to an intractable

 statistical problem: how to aggregate information about financial
                                   20




commitments through time embodied in property of one sort or another.

It is not a shortcoming of accounting net worth that it does not

perfectly match the valuation of the firm by those making use of

accounting information. Accounting data are designed to inform, rather

than duplicate, market evaluation.11

NIPA Saving and Investment

      Gross investment in the national income and product accounts is

the sum of net exports of goods and services (as emphasized by Eisner

(1989), a measure of the accumulation of claims on foreigners, not a

measure of the change in market value of net claims on foreigners),

business expenditures on fixed investment (structures, including

residential structures, and producers' durable equipment), and the

change in business inventories. If we think of gross national product

as a flow of physical goods and current services, we can think of gross

investment as the portion of that flow devoted to adding to the stock of

wealth. This may be an interesting measure; it is arguably the

appropriate horizontal axis on a marginal efficiency of investment

schedule.   (This is not the place to develop the point, but it may be

that a market value aggregate belongs in a production function for SHS

income. When a firm purchases a piece of real estate for a "revalued"

price, presumably it expects to obtain as much extra value of output as

it does when it constructs a new building for the same amount.)



11 See Foster (1986) for a survey of the accounting literature on the
information content of financial statements.
                                     21




      It is a further issue whether there is a useful aggregate, called

the capital stock, that can be sensibly employed in a production

function.12 The idea that there is such an aggregate that generates a

flow of productive services underlies the capital stock figures complied

by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Although value data provide the

starting point, like GNP itself, the capital stock is conceived of as a

physical quantity. The depreciation estimates ("capital consumption

allowances with capital consumption adjustment") in the national income

and product accounts are intended to capture the loss over time in the

current productive service flow potential embodied in the accumulation

of fixed investment. Other things equal, we might expect the profitable

investment opportunities to increase with increases in depreciation

allowances, which would signal the need for "replacement" investment.

If this model captures the essence of the flow of investment

opportunities, it is net investment, not gross, that belongs on the

horizontal axis of a marginal efficiency of investment schedule.

      NIPA depreciation allowances are not intended to represent the

decline in market value of the assets in question, and would not do so

even if there were no measurement problems except under very special

assumptions about the time path of discount rates and about the way

productive capacity of the assets declines over time. (Basically, what

is required is constancy of discount rates and exponential decay of




12
     For an overview see Brown   (1980).
                                  22




productivity.13) The actual rules used in constructing the depreciation

allowances are rooted in studies of retirement and other measures of

physical life.14
      "Economic depreciation" is defined to be the decline in market

value of a piece of equipment or a structure between the beginning and

end of the accounting period. As it happens, Hulten and Wykoff (1981)

have concluded that the U.S. Department of Commerce capital consumption

estimates are reasonably similar to the average historically experienced

economic depreciation for a subset of assets for which there is an

active second-hand market. It is difficult to know, however, how

relevant such ex post data on a subset of assets are to the forward-

looking market valuation of the bolted-down assets of business firms. A

striking implication of the data in Table 1 and Figures 1 and 2, taken

at face value, is that the NIPA capital consumption allowances for the

nonfinancial corporate sector differed sharply and unsystematically from

economic depreciation over the 1948-1987 period.15 (I take up below

some of the reasons one might not take the figures at face value.)




13 See the clear discussion in Hulten and Wykoff (1981).

14 See U.S. Department of Commerce (1987); also Musgrave (1983, January
1986, August 1986).
15  Using National Balance Sheet data, Bulow and Summers (1984) have
emphasized this point in their discussion of the failure of income tax
rules to recognize wealth changes in the form of asset revaluations.
They suggest that the ex ante depreciation allowances for tax purposes
should be increased to compensate the investor for the risk of asset
revaluations that are unrecognized by the tax rules.
                                   23




        Objections to the Use of Market Value Measures of Saving

      Various objections are sometimes raised to the use   of   asset market

value data, rather than NIPA measures, in analyzing saving.

      1. Asset markets are too volatile. They register paper gains and

losses, not the steady accumulation of real things.

      To a degree that seems often unappreciated, the determinants of

wealth are psychological. We need only be reminded of Ponzi schemes and

tulip manias, not to mention stock market crashes, to bring home how

dependent asset values are upon beliefs about the future.       The modern

literature on the rationality of expectations and the efficiency of

pricing in asset markets has emphasized in a refined way the unpleasant

difficulty of rooting asset values in "fundamentals."

      Asset valuation is also inherently dependent upon the structure of

information. I like to illustrate this dependence with the case of a

building that is destined to be destroyed by a meteor on a certain date.

As long as no one knows when and where the meteor will strike, the

building has the same value as others like it. At the moment the

astronomers make public a prediction, the building loses value (to a

degree dependent on the distance into the future of the catastrophic

event and on the confidence the public places in astronomers'

forecasts). It is clear that the owner of the structure suffers a fall

 in wealth at the point the information is revealed, and presumably we

would say that "society" suffers the same fall in wealth, even though in
                                   24




a sense nothing is changed by the knowledge that causes the loss in

value. The meteor was going to crash into the building in any case.16

     An interesting intermediate case arises if the information about

the future is revealed only to the owner of the building. (The

analogous situation is not unusual -   - it   gives rise to the "lemons"

problem.) If he keeps the matter a secret and sells the structure, he

suffers no loss, nor is there any observable private or social loss

until the meteor strikes.

      As the examples suggest, the market value of assets has a kind of

ephemeral quality that may, for example, lead to doubts about the

efficacy of capital markets as institutions of resource allocation.17

Unfortunately, the ephemeral quality of market assessments of value does

not alter the role implied for them in economic theory. Real risk and

uncertainty about the future are apparent facts of life, which cannot be

avoided by focussing on inputs that can be measured with relative

precision. The purpose of asset measures produced by financial

accountants is to assist in the estimation of market values. The usual

argument applies that the market price will incorporate whatever

information the accounting data contain. There is, presumptively, no



16 James Poterba has reminded me that, quite apart from discounting,
the aggregate market value of wealth may not fall by the full prior
value of the doomed building when the meteor news arrives. The
aggregate value will depend upon the general equilibrium response of all
asset prices, even if the asset in question is a tiny part of the
aggregate stock. Bradford (1978) illustrates the point.

17 See Stiglitz (1972, 1979).
                                  25




money to be made by betting on accounting net worth against the

market.18

      2. Asset market value changes incorporate price effects. What we

need are real saving and wealth stock concepts that are independent of

discount rates and other relative asset value changes.

      Various examples suggest the importance of taking into account

price effects, especially in using wealth measures to draw conclusions

about welfare. One of the most important is the effect of changes in

the discount rate. At any moment the stock of claims to future goods

and services is heterogeneous with respect to the time and contingencies

under which the claims pay off. When the prices of future consumption

claims change, so does the value of an unchanged stock of assets.    In

his discussion of the concept of income, Hicks (1946) favored a wealth

measure that would be unchanged if the steady-state level of consumption

did not change.

      The increasing site value of land that we might expect to

                                                         When the value of
accompany population growth provides another example.

all houses (including mine) increases, I may be no better off, in spite

of my higher wealth, because I have to live somewhere. A third example

 is suggested by John Shoven: Discovery of a new technology that made



18 Summers (1986) has emphasized how difficult it may be to establish
the "rationality" of asset markets, i.e., to tell whether one can make
money by selling short when prices are too high by some internal
standard. But presumably those who would use NIPA saving figures rather
than asset market values are not talking about small, hardto-deteCt,
 effects.
                                  26




computers of enormous power virtually costless and instantaneously

producible would render the existing stock of computers valueless (while

we're at it, assume that all software transfers costlessly to the new

machines).

      These are index number problems of the classic sort.19 A

financial accounting measure of saving appears attractive in the

particular instances because they seem to call for no change in the real

wealth measure in the face of actual changes in market value. (I have

not actually tried to sort out whether a real wealth measure would not

change in the examples.) But this is surely fortuitous. Dealing with

the index number problem requires transforming market value data, and it

is only by chance that financial accounts may sometimes give the right

answer.

      The discount rate change problem is a particularly important one.

When we assess performance, it would make sense to look at both wealth

and discount rate data. There is no basis, however, for presuming that

financial accounting measures of wealth perform adequately as indices of

real wealth.

      3. There are no reliable data on market value of wealth;

therefore, we have to use the NIPA saving measures.

      There may be problems with existing data on market values,

although very extensive and accurate data are available on assets such



19 Pollak (1975) has worked out the index number theory applicable to
an intertemporal setting.
                                  27




as corporate equities. The National Balance Sheet data seem to me an

underexploited resource. Furthermore, as in other contexts, an

objection such as this one should be grounds for devoting efforts to

improving the data and to establishing the adequacy of the proxies we

use if direct measurements are not at hand.

               Time Series Data on Wealth at Market Value

      Figures derived from the National Balance Sheets cast doubt on the

adequacy of NIPA saving measures as a proxy for changes in the market

value of assets. Table 2 shows the time series of various wealth

aggregates. The nominal dollar figures have been reduced to common

units using the implicit GNP deflator (taking the average of fourth- and

first-quarter values to approximate the year-end figure corresponding to

the balance sheet observations). The aggregate net worth of households

includes the market valuation of corporate shares and of land. The

National Balance Sheets value fixed investment owned directly (in

unincorporated businesses and in the form of owner-occupied housing and

consumer durables) at replacement cost (using the NIPA data).20




 20 The figures for household net worth (sector basis) included in this
                                   deal with an error discovered in the
paper incorporate an adjustment to
course of this work by Frederick 0. Yohn, Jr., of the flow of funds
section of the Federal Reserve Board. In the published series,
household claims on noncorporate private financial institutions have
been omitted from household net worth. I have added the "approximate
share of noncorporate companies" in the net worth of the private
financial institution sector (line 50 in the Sector Balance Sheet of
                                                           sector net
Private Financial Institutions) to the published household
worth.
                                   28




      The column titled "Government Net Worth" in Table 2 is simply the

aggregate debt of local, state, and federal governments held by the

public (of course, it is a negative number). Government debt is,

directly or indirectly, included on the asset side of household balance

sheets: to avoid double counting, the column headed "Aggregate Wealth at

Market" sums the household and government net worth to produce an

aggregate wealth measure. Notice that no attempt at all has been made

to evaluate the real asset position of goverTunents.21

      The difference in aggregate wealth from one year to the next gives

us Aggregate Saving in Table 2. Given what we know about the volatility

of the stock and real property markets, we should expect significant

volatility in the wealth and saving measures, and we find it. Figure 3

displays the wealth time series graphically, and Figure 4 shows the

saving series, normalized by dividing by GNP. For comparison, as

described numerically in Table 3, Figure 4 also displays the ratio of

net national saving to GNP, derived from the national income and product

accounts. As we might expect, the market value measure is much more

variable than the NIPA measure. The measure based on the National

Balance Sheets oscillates over a range from a low of almost -15 percent

to a high of almost 25 percent of GNP. The NIPA measure drifts from a

high of 10 percent in 1949 to a low of 2 percent in 1987. The two

series are very different.



21
    Boskin, Robinson, and Huber (1987) and Eisner (1986) have developed
government real asset series.
                                   29




      Fluctuations in market value are not all that accounts for the

difference between the two measures. n particular, the National

Balance Sheet concept includes the stock of consumer durables in wealth.

The National Balance Sheets include estimates of the "consolidated net

assets" of the United States, consisting of the sum of reproducible

assets (including consumer durables), land at market value, U.S. gold

and SDRs, and certain claims on foreigners.22 Subtracting government

debt and excluding land from this total and taking the difference from

year to year gives us a saving figure purged of market revaluations. It

consists mostly of reproducible assets: residential structures,

nonresidential plant and equipment, inventories, and consumer durables.

It thus differs from NIPA net national saving mainly in inclusion of

consumer durables, and, in avoiding the inclusion of market

revaluations, it is conceptually directly comparable to NIPA saving.

Indeed, the figures are taken from the Bureau of Economic Analysis

tangible wealth tabulations. To emphasize that this hybrid series is

derived from financial accounting data (although it is far from the

historical-cost book values on firms' balance sheets), I refer to it as

"'Book' less Land" in Figure 5.   (Figure 5 simply adds the new series to

Figure 4.)

22
    Perhaps because it is not clear how one would allocate accounting
values, the National Balance Sheet "total consolidated net assets" of
the United States excludes U.S. holdings of foreign equities and makes
no deduction for foreign holdings of U.S. equities (other than via
direct investment). The household sector net worth does include
holdings of foreign equities. The two wealth concepts are thus not
quite parallel.
                                   30




      Although the resulting series is smoother than that of aggregate

wealth, significant differences from NIPA national saving remain.

Exploration of the reasons for the remaining differences would be a side

excursion from my principal line of argument. The evidence from the

National Balance Sheet data clearly supports the conclusion that

financial accounting saving misses significant amounts of the value

change that is revealed in asset markets.

          Caveats on the National Balance Sheet Wealth Figures

       Several problems with the National Balance Sheet data should be

recognized:

       1. The market value of equity incorporates the capitalized value

of certain variations in tax liabilities that are not balanced by

offsetting measured asset values. An instance is the "trapped equity"

problem.23 Corporate payouts in the form of dividends are subject to

tax at the shareholder level, and shareholders ought to discount this

tax in bidding for shares. A considerable (and inconclusive) literature

now exists developing the technical ins and outs of the tax and

securities law and practice in relation to the trapped equity argument.

To the extent that dividend taxes are discounted in the price of equity,

the value of a corporation's shares will be below the market value of

the assets owned by the firm.

      Another instance is the value of tax liabilities accrued by

corporations via such tax rules as accelerated depreciation. An

23
     See Auerbach (1979, l983b), Bradford (1981).
                                   31




increase in such accruals ought to lower the value of corporate
           24
equities

      A possible third instance is the tax consequence of changing

corporate financial structure. The tax system has set up incentives,

which have varied through time, bearing on the choice between debt and

equity. One view of the current intense leveraged buyout activity in

the United States is that it is strongly motivated by such tax

considerations, and the gradual realization of the private profit (at

the expense of public revenue) to be made by financial restructuring

accounts for some of the bidding up of equity prices.

      There is, in all of these instances, a balancing asset "owned" by

the public through the public's "ownership" of the government, which we

might describe as accrued tax liability. Unfortunately, however, we

cannot observe the value of this asset in the market, and so the

empirical problem does not go away with aggregation across sectors.

      2. Anticipated tax claims are also important in assessing pension

reserve assets, which are viewed as belonging to households.

Presumably, the great bulk of these claims is subject to income taxation

upon distribution. When household and government financial claims are

netted in reaching a national wealth figure, this problem goes away.

      3. As Auerbach (1984) has emphasized, unfunded pension

liabilities of corporations represent unmeasured assets of the



24 Auerbach (l983a, forthcoming) and Auerbach and Hines (1987) show
that the capitalized value effects of tax law changes can be large.
                                    32




households that are presumably offset by an effect on measured corporate

equity value in the market. This component of wealth is missed in the

National Balance Sheets.

        4. Debt is carried on the National Balance Sheets at book value.

Corporate debt liabilities are thus incorrectly valued. Correcting for

inflation, of course, is relatively easy. But there is also a

divergence between book and market value in current dollars that varies

through time. Tax incentives plus simple changes in the nominal

discount rates result in such divergences. Furthermore, the leveraged

buyout wave may be responsible for a systematic divergence between book

and market valuation of debt. The large premiums paid for equity claims

in corporate takeovers are sometimes explained by the implied

expropriation of the interests of bondholders. The value of the bonds

of RJR Nabisco is said to have fallen by 20 percent as a consequence of

the successful takeover of the firm in a leveraged buyout in December

1988.

        It might be thought that the misstatement of the value of bonds as

liabilities on the books of corporations would be balanced by their

misstatement as assets in the hands of the public in an aggregation

across sectors. This would be so if the aggregation were in terms of

financial accounting concepts. But our aggregation to national saving

will sum the market values of equity with the book value of debt. To

correct for this problem will require gathering data on the market value
                                      33




of bonds. (Brainard, Shoven, and Weiss (1980) have developed such

estimates for the debt of a large population of U.S. corporations.)

         5.   I have mentioned above the likelihood that some of the recent

increase in equity value has come at the expense of bondholders and of

the government (through lost tax revenues otherwise expected). Shleifer

and Summers (1987) have suggested that other stakeholders" n

corporations have also lost wealth in the wave of corporate

acquisitions. We would probably describe the wealth effects on

noncorporate, nonbondholder stakeholders as impacts on human capital;

the effects are in any case presumably not reflected in asset market

data.

         6. The National Balance Sheets present no estimates of the market

value of businesses owned directly by households. The data in Table 1

show a large and variable divergence between book and market values of

property owned by corporations. There is no obvious reason there should

not be a similar degree of divergence in the valuation of non-corporate

firms.

         7. The Flow of Funds staff expresses reservations about the

adequacy of the estimated market value of land, which is built up using

ratios of assessed to market values from real estate tax administration

reported in five-yearly censuses of governments. I have no independent

basis for evaluating these reservations. (Corporate holdings are

presumably captured in equity values, but corporations own a small

fraction of U.S. land.)
                                    34




                The Savin2 Performance of the United States

      It is usual to assess aggregate saving behavior by reference to

saving "rates," ratios of saving to aggregate income. Although dividing

the aggregate saving by a national income measure is a natural method of

normalizing for the size of the economy, one should be cautious in

drawing conclusions about economic performance from trends in, or

comparisons across countries of, such ratios. Savings rates thus

defined do not obviously relate to the objective of assessing the level

of aggregate consumption against a standard either of consistency with

past behavior or of prudence with respect to future welfare. For these

purposes, measures of wealth per capita are called for, or, more

generally, measures of the wealth of various subgroups in the

population.25

      Table 4 displays wealth per capita data for the United States,

where wealth is interpreted in the National Balance Sheet sense of

household net worth (at market value) minus government debt. Saving per

capita is simply the first difference of wealth per capita, and thus

incorporates population growth. Figure 6 displays the saving series

expressed as the year-to-year growth of wealth per capita ("Growth in

Wealth per Capita" in Table 4). Because wealth is a stochastic

variable, a particular year's experience conveys limited information.




25
    Kotlikoff (1984, 1986, 1988) has emphasized a similar point with
respect to assessment of the national debt.
                                  35




      It is not clear what one should regard as either a normal or a

ugood rate of increase in wealth per capita. If productivity were

stationary we would probably expect wealth per capita to be constant,

and welfare considerations would also presumably prescribe constancy.

In general, both predicted and optimal accumulation would be related to

technological progress and demographic structure. As shown in Figure 6,

there appears to be a long-term declining trend to the rate of growth of

real wealth per capita. Interestingly, the performance of the most

recent three years is on or slightly above trend.

      For those looking for good news (bearing in mind the caveats

mentioned above about the use of wealth as a measure of welfare), Figure

7 displays the trend in real wealth per capita. The picture shows that,

on average, since 1948 U.S. residents have been adding to the stock of
                                                                        to
wealth per capita about $700 (1987 price level) per year. According

Figure 7, the current level of wealth per capita is just a bit above its

long-term trend.

                               Conclusion

      Although the NIPA saving measures, and especially NIPA saving

rates, are widely used in both scholarly and journalistic treatments,

their shortcomings as representations of the saving concepts derived

from economic analysis should not be controversial among economists.

Saving is the change in a stock of wealth. NIPA saving describes the

change in a cost-based measure of some past resource commitments.

Households, individually and in the aggregate, measure their situations
                                     36




instead by reference to a forward-looking assessment of the success or

failure of those and other resource commitments. These assessments find

expression in the capital markets valuation of enterprises, broadly

conceived. The annual   change   in that value is the measure of saving.

      Whatever their usefulness as measures of a certain class of

inputs, the NIPA saving and wealth measures are not good proxies for the

market-expressed assessments of results. The National Balance Sheets

present the conceptually appropriate measures of national wealth and

saving. It is clear, though, that much needs to be done to improve the

quality of the statistics and to refine their interpretation.
                                      37


Table 1. "Book" Net Worth and Market Values of U.S. Nonfinancial
             Corporate Business, Year End, 1948 - 1987

         Net Worth of US Market Value        Market Value/ Net Worth
        Nonfinancial Corp. of Corporate        Net Worth  less Market
 Year       Business         Equities           Ratio       to GNP

                       $   millions                        percent....

 1948        209,615                83,862         40.0           48.1
 1949        219,672                92,205         42.0           49.0
 1950        244,190               116,647         47.8           44.2
 1951        269,211               138,250         51.4           39.3
 1952        28507l                149,941         52.6           38.4
 1953       300,142                144,776         48.2           41.8
 1954       315,117                216,033         68.6           26.6
 1955       342,531                269,173         78.6           18.1
 1956       378,078                289,169         76.5           20.8
 1957       403,297                242,470         60.].          35.7
 1958       419,289                342,082         81.6           16.9
 1959       439,972                361,299         82.1           15.9
 1960       448,422                354,114         79.0           18.3
 1961       461,733                428,294         92.8            6.3
 1962       475,580                389,171         81.8           15.0
 1963       489,970                456,076         93.1            5.6
 1964       513,321                509,516         99.3            0.6
 1965       543,746                553,720        101.8           -1.4
 1966       583,906                504,223         86.4           10.3
 1967       621,655                651,678        104.8           -3.7
 1968       668,880                736,506        110.1           -7.6
 1969       729,963                646,230         88.5            8.7
 1970       784,634                648,492         82.6           13.4
 1971       856,111                758,897         88.6            8.8
 1972       934,346                855,233         91.5            6.5
 1973     1,048,013                678,436         64.7           27.2
 1974     1,337,118                499,098         37.3           56.9
 1975     1,491,060                684,337         45.9           50.5
 1976     1,647,452                787,807         47.8           48.2
 1977     1,817,268                748,002         41.2           53.7
 1978     2,107,859                773,143         36.7           59.3
 1979     2,419,386                933,373         38.6           59.2
 1980     2,780,531              1,293,116         46.5           54.4
 1981     3,109,641              1,214,845         39.1           62.1
 1982     3,230,025              1,382,773         42.8           58.3
 1983     3,327,399              1,638,730         49.2           49.6
 1984     3,447,798              1,617,733         46.9           48.5
 1985     3,503,026              2,022,648         57.7           36.9
 1986     3,560,138              2,332,629         65.5           28.9
 1987     3,657,167              2,331,322         63.7           29.3

Sources: See Text. Based on Board of Governors of the Federal
           Reserve System
                                   38




 Table 2. Household Net Worth and Aggregate Wealth, 1948-1987

        Net Worth      Gov't       Aggregate                Aggregate
         of U.S.        Net         Wealth      Aggregate    Saving
                                                 Saving      to GNP

                     .$ millions   1982                      percent

1948    3,487,654     -857,494     2,630,160
1949    3,671,501     -889,339     2,782,162     152,002
1950    3,883,883     -819,665     3,064,218     282,056
1951    4,189,833     -790,067     3,399,766     335,548
1952    4,287,324     -795,849     3,491,475      91,709
1953    4,377,281     -825,250     3,552,031      60,556
1954                   -840,255    3,847,644     295,613         20.9
        4,687,899
1955    4,938,926      -814,882    4,124,044     276,400
1956     5,075,169     -780,335    4,294,834     170,791         11.2
1957     4,984,653     -770,061    4,214,592     -80,242
1958     5,427,604     -806,349    4,621,255     406,663
1959     5,571,610     -809,815    4,761,795     140,541
1960                   -808,103    4,872,539     110,744          6.7
         5,680,642
1961     6,086,197     -824,849     5,261,347    388,808
1962     5,928,471     -832,285     5,096,186   -165,161
1963     6,274,049     -833,201     5,440,848    344,662         18.4
1964     6,576,652     -837,694     5,738,958    298,110         15.1
1965     6,871,566     -823,076     6,048,490    309,532         14.8
1966     6,833,612     -806,728     6,026,885    -21,605
1967     7,370,297     -831,246     6,539,050    512,166         22.5
1968     7,827,453     -825,822     7,001,631    462,581
1969     7,493,648     -790,676     6,702,972   -298,659         -12.3
1970     7,432,952     -790,358     6,642,595    -60,377     .    -2.5
1971     7,752,823     -817,570     6,935,254    292,659          11.8
1972     8,190,783     -815,700     7,375,083    439,829          16.9
1973     7,889,046     -758,254     7,130,791   -244,291          -8.9
1974     7,457,661     -712,663     6,744,998   -385,793         -14.1
1975     7,830,318     -794,411     7,035,907    290,909          10.8
1976     8,348,919     -834,194     7,514,726    478,819          16.9
1977     8,642,746     -837,706     7,805,040    290,315           9.8
1978     9,111,741     -816,502     8,295,239    490,198          15.7
1979     9,631,709     -784,075     8,847,635     552,396         17.3
1980    10,046,585     -790,784     9,255,800    408,166          12.8
 1981   10,064,616     -812,292     9,252,323      -3,477         -0.1
1982    10,061,786     -925,358     9,136,427   -115,896          -3.7
1983    10,544,681   -1,067,194     9,477,487     341,060         10.4
 1984   10,731,277   -1,188,518     9,542,759      65,272          1.9
 1985   11,372,752   -1,328,645    10,044,108     501,349         13.9
 1986   11,907,562   -1,473,725    10,433,837     389,729         10.5
 1987   12,257,233   -1,596,916    10,660,317     226,480          5.9

Sources: See text. Based on Board of Governors of the Federal
          Reserve System; U.S. Commerce Dept.
                             39


    Table 3. Net National Saving in the U.S.,
                   NIPA Basis, 1948-1987
                   ratio to GNP (percent)

                           Capital
                Gross    Consumption     Net
     Year       Saving   Allowances    Saving

     1948        19.4        7.8        11.6
     1949        14.0        8.4         5.6
     1950        18.2        8.2        10.0
     1951        17.6        8.2         9.4
     1952        14.9        8.3         6.6
     1953        13.7        8.3         5.4
     1954        13.9        8.7         5.1
     1955        16.9        8.5         8.4
     1956        18.1        8.9         9.2
     1957        17.1        9.1         8.0
     1958        14.1        9.4         4.8
     1959        16.2        9.0         7.2
     1960        16.3        9.0         7.3
     1961        15.5        9.0         6.5
     1962        15.9        8.6         7.3
     1963        16.3        8.5         7.8
     1964        16.7        8.3         8.4
     1965        17.5        8.1         9.4
     1966        16.9        8.0         8.8
     1967        15.9        8.3         7.6
     1968        15.6        8.3         7.4
     1969        16.5        8.4         8.0
     1970        15.2        8.7         6.5
     1971        15.6        8.8         6.7
     1972        16.5        8.9         7.7
     1973        18.5        8.7         9.8
     1974        16.8        9.3         7.5
     1975        14.9       10.1         4.8
     1976        15.9       10.1         5.8
     1977        16.9       10.1         6.7
     1978        18.2       10.2         7.9
     1979        18.3       10.6         7.7
     1980        16.3       11.1         5.2
     1981        17.1       11.4         5.7
     1982        14.1       12.1         2.0
     1983        13.6       11.6         2.0
     1984        15.1       11.0         4.1
     1985        13.3       10.9         2.4
     1986        12.7       10.8         1.9
     1987        12.4       10.6         1.8

Sources:    1948-1984, Economic Report of the
            President, Feb. 1988; 1985-1987,
            Survey of Current Business, July 1988
                             40


    Table 4. Per Capita Wealth and Saving at
                 Market Value, 1948-1987

               Wealth       Saving
                per          per          Wealth
     Year      Capita       Capita      per Capita



      1948     17,937
      1949     18,649           711        4.0
      1950     20,123        1,475         7.9
      1951     21,951        1,828         9.1
      1952     22,161           209        1.0
      1953     22,175             14       0.1
      1954     23,601        1,427         6.4
      1955     24,854        1,253         5.3
      1956     25,428            574       2.3
      1957     24,506          -922       -3.6
      1958     26,425        1,919         7.8
      1959     26,777            352       1.3
      1960     26,969            192       0.7
      1961     28,642        1,673         6.2
      1962     27,320       -1,323        -4.6
      1963     28,751        1,431         5.2
      1964     29,908        1,157         4.0
      1965     31,129        1,221         4.1
      1966     30,662          -467       -1.5
      1967     32,907        2,245         7.3
      1968     34,885        1,978         6.0
      1969     33,072       -1,813        -5.2
      1970     32,395          -678       -2.0
      1971     33,397        1,002         3.1
      1972     35,137        1,740         5.2
      1973     33,650       -1,487        -4.2
      1974      31,540      -2,110        -6.3
       1975     32,578       1,038         3.3
       1976     34,466       1,888         5.8
       1977     35,439           973       2.8
       1978     37,268       1,829         5.2
       1979     39,313        2,045        5.5
       1980     40,639        1,326        3.4
       1981     40,203          -436      -1.1
       1982     39,293          -910      -2.3
       1983     40,364        1,071        2.7
       1984     40,265          -100      -0.2
       1985     41,977        1,712        4.3
       1986     43,184        1,208        2.9
       1987     43,705            521      1.2

Sources: See text. Based on Board of Governors of
    the Federal Reserve Systexn; U.S. Commerce Dept.
                           Perc ent


        LJ       U'   C)
                                 0        0   -.
                                                   0
        0    0   0    0    0          0   0   0

  U'
  0                                                     C

                                                        CD
  U,



                                                        C
                                                        C
                                                        CD
  0'
  0                                                     0
  C,
  N)

  C,
                                                        C
                                                       ID
                                                       ri
  C,
  C'
— C'
   C'
                                                       -o
   0
   N)




                                                        C
                                                        0
                                                       D
   C'
   0
                                                        z
                  "Book"          —   Market Value            of Corp.            Equity
                                               1948—1987
       70
       60
       50
za-    40
0
'4.-
0
       30
0
4-.
C
a)
U
 a)    20
a-
        10
        0
       —10
             48   50   52   54   56 58   60 62 64   66   68   70   72   74   76   78 80   82   84   86
                                                Figure 2
       Household & Aggregate Wealth, 1948—87
                                         Ratio to GNP
3.6

3.5

3.4

3.3

3.2

3.1

  3

2.9

2.8

2.7

2.6

2.5

2.4

2.3
      48 50 52   54   56    58   60 62    64   66        68    70   72   74   76   78   80 82   84 86

                                            Figure 3
        [1   Household NW                           4-        Aggregate Wealth
                 Market Value and NIPA Saving, 1949—87
                                              Ratio to CNP
      30
       25
      20
       15
4-,
 C     10
U
L
U-     5
       0
      —5
      —10
      —15
            49   51   53 55 57 59   61   63    65   67     69   71   73   75    77    79   81   83 85 87
                                                Figure 4
                           0   Market Value                           +        NIPA
                Comparison of Saving Measures,                                          194987
                                                       Ratio to GNP
         30
         25
         20
          15
C
          10
Q)
U
I)
11        5
          0
         —5
         —10
         —15
               49   51   53   55   57   59   61   63    65   67     69   71   73   75   77   79   81   83 85 87
                                                         Figure 5
     0    Market Value                                  "Book" less Land                                0   NPA
                                                                 —        Gov't Debt/Cap
          Growth in Household NW
                                                  1949—1987
     10
     9
     8
      7
      6
      5
      4
      3
C
      2
U
L
I)    1
      0
     —1
     —2
     —3
     —4
     —5
     —6
     —7
          49   51   53   55   57   59   61   63    65   67    69     71    73   75   77   79   81   83   85   87
                                                   Figure 6
                                                   +     Trend
               Household Net Worth less Gov't Debt
                                    1982 dollars per capita
     44
     42
     40
     38
     36
     34
(0
C
     30
0
C
I—
     26
     24
     22
     20
     18
     16
          48 50 52   54 56   58   60 62   64   66   68   70 72   74   76   78 80   82   84 86
                                           Figure 7
                                           +    Trend
                                    48




                                REFERENCES

      Adams, F. Gerald and Susan M. Wachter, eds., Savings and Capital

Formation, Lexington, MA: Lexington nooks, 1986.

      Ando, Albert, and Franco Modigliani, "The 'Life-Cycle' Hypothesis

of Saving: Aggregate Implications and Tests," American Economic Review,

(LIII) May 1963, pp. 55-84.

      Auerbach, Alan J., "Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital,"

Quarterly Journal of Economics, (XCIII) 1979, pp. 433 ff.

      Auerbach, Alan J., "Corporate Taxation in the U.S." Brookings

Papers on Economic Activity, (1983:2) 1983a.

      Auerbach, Alan J., "Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy, and the

Cost of Capital," Journal of Economic Literature, (XXI) 1983b, pp. 905-

40.

      Auerbach, Alan J., "Saving in the U.S.: Some Conceptual Issues,"

in Patric Hendershott, ed., The Level and Composition of Household

Saving, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, 1984.

      Auerbach, Alan J., "Tax Reform and Adjustment Costs: The Impact

on Investment and Market Value," International Economic Review,

 forthcoming.

      Auerbach, Alan J., and James R. Hines, Jr., "Anticipated Tax

Changes and the Timing of Investment," in Martin Feldstein, ed., Th

 Effects   of Taxation on Capital Accumulation, Chicago: University of

 Chicago Press, 1987.
                                    49




        Beaver, William H., and Stephen Ryan, "Do Statement Thirty-Three

Earnings Explain Stock Prices?" Financial Analysts Journal, (LXI-5)

Sept. -Oct. 1985, pp. 66-71.
        Bernanke, Ben S., and John Y. Campbell, "Is There a Corporate Debt

Crisis?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1988:2, pp. 83-125.

        Blades, Derek V., and Peter Sturm, "The Concept and Measurement of

Savings: The United States and Other Industrialized Countries," in

Saving and Government Policy, Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston,

1982.

        Blinder, Alan S., and Angus S. Deaton, "The Time Series

Consumption Function Revisited," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,

(1985:2), pp. 465-511.

        Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Balance Sheets

for the U.S. Economy 1948-87, Washington, DC, October 1988.

        Boskin, Michael J., "Theoretical Issues in the Measurement,

Evaluation and Interpretation of Postwar U.S. Saving," in F. Gerald.

Adams and Susan M. Wachter, eds., 1986, pp. 11-43.

        Boskin, Michael J., and Lawrence J. Lau, "An Analysis of Postwar

U.S. Consumption and Saving," mimeo, Stanford, CA: Center for Economic

Policy Research, August 1988.

        Boskin, Michael J., "Issues in the Measurement and Interpretation

of Saving and Wealth," NBER Working Paper 2633, Cambridge, MA: National

Bureau of Economic Research, June 1988; forthcoming in Lipsey and Tice,

eds.
                                      50




       Boskin, Michael J., Marc S. Robinson, and Alan M. Huber,

"Government Saving, Capital Formation and Wealth in the United States,

1947-1985," NBER Working Paper 2352, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of

Economic Research, August 1987.

       Bradford, David F., "Factor Prices May Be Constant But Factor

Returns Are Not," Economics Letters, (I) 1978, pp. 199-203.

       Bradford, David F., "The Incidence and Allocational Effects of a

Tax on Corporate Distributions," Journal of Public Economics (XV) 1981,

pp. 1-22.

       Bradford, David F., Untangling the Income Tax, Cambridge, MA:

Harvard University Press, April 1986.

       Brainard, William C., John B. Shoven, and Laurence Weiss,

"Financial Valuation of the Return to Capital," Brookins Papers on

Economic Activity (2), 1980, pp. 453-511.

       Breeden, Douglas T., "An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with

Stochastic Consumption and Investment Opportunities," Journal of

Financial Economics, (VII) September 1979, pp. 265-96.

       Brown,   Murray,   "The Measurement of Capital Aggregates: A

Postreswitching Problem," in Dan Usher, ed., The Measurement of Capital,

Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1980, pp. 377-420.

       Bulow, Jeremy I., and Lawrence H. Summers, "The Taxation of Risky

Assets," Journal of Political Economy, (XCII-1) February 1984, pp. 20-

 38.
                                    51




        Campbell, John, "Does Saving Anticipate Declining Labor Income,"

Econometrica, (LV-6) November 1987, pp. 1249-73.

        Campbell, John, and Angus Deaton, "Why   is   Consumption So Smooth?"

Princeton, NJ: Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton University, mimeo,

January 1988.

        Deaton, Angus, "Consumers' Expenditure," in John Eatwell, Murray

Milgate, and Peter Newman, eds., The New Palrave: A Dictionary of

Economics, NY: The Stockton Press, 1987, Vol. 1, pp. 592-604.

        Eisner, Robert, Capital Gains and Income: "Real Changes in the

Value of Capital in the United States, 1946-77," in Dan Usher, ed., Th

Measurement of Catital, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1980, pp.

175-344.

        Eisner, Robert, How Real is the Federal Deficit?, New York: The

Free Press, 1986

        Eisner, Robert, "Extended Accounts for National Income and

Product, Journal of Economic Literature, (XXVI) December 1988, pp. 1611-

1684.

        Eisner, Robert, "Divergences of Measurement and Theory and Some

Implications for Economic Policy," American Economic Review,

forthcoming.

        Eisner, Robert, and Paul J. Pieper, "The World's Greatest Debtor

Nation," Department of Economics, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL

60208, January 13, 1989.
                                     52




      Financial Accounting Standards Board, "Objectives of Financial

Reporting by Business Enterprises," FASB Statement of Financial

Accounting Concepts No. 1, Stamford, CT: FASB, 1978.

      Foster, George, Financial Statement Analysis, 2nd ed., Englewood

Ciffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1986.

      Gibson, Charles H., and Patricia A. Frishkoff, Financial Statement

Analysis, 3rd ed., Boston, MA: Kent Publishing Co., 1986.

      Goldsmith, Raymond W., The National Balance Sheet of the United

States. 1953-1980, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1982

      Hall, Robert E. "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-

Permanent Income Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Political

Economy, (LXXXVI) December 1978, pp. 971-87.

      Hall, Robert E. "Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption,"

Journal of Political Economy, (XCVI-2) 1988, pp. 339-357.

      Hendershott, Patric H., ed., The Level and Composition of

Household Saving, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, 1985.

      Hicks, John R., Value and Capital, 2nd ed., Oxford: The Clarendon

Press, 1946.

      Hulten, Charles R., and Frank C. Wykoff, "The Measurement of

Economic Depreciation," in Charles R. Hulten, ed., Depreciation.

Inflation and the Taxation of Income from Capital, Washington, DC: The

Urban Institute, 1981, pp. 81-125.

      Ingersoll, Jonathan E., Theory of Financial Decision Making,

Totowa, NJ: Rowman & Littlefield, 1987.
                                  53




      Institute for Fiscal Studies, The Structure and Reform of Direct

Taxation: the Report of a Committee Chaired by Professor J.E. Meade,

London: George Allen & Unwin, 1978.

      Kotlikoff, Laurence J., "Taxation and Savings: A Neoclassical

Perspective," Journal of Economic Literature, (XXII) December 1984, pp.

1576-1629.

      Kotlikoff, Laurence J., "Deficit Delusion," The Public Interest,

(84) Summer 1986, PP. 53-65.

      Kotlikoff, Laurence J., "The Deficit Is Not a Well-Defined Measure

of Fiscal Policy," Science, (CCXLI) August 1988, pp. 791-795.

      Lipsey, Robert E., and Irving B. Kravis, "Is the U.S. a

Spendthrift Nation?" NBER Working Paper No. 2274, Cambridge, MA:

National Bureau of Economic Research, June 1987.

      Lipsey, Robert E., and H. S. Tice, eds., The Measurement of

Saving. Investment and Wealth, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,

forthcoming.

      Merton, Robert C., "Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a

Continuous-Time Model," Journal of Economic Theory, (111-4) December

1971, pp. 373-413.

      Merton, Robert C., "An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model,"

Econometrica, (XLI-5) September 1973, pp. 867-887.

      Musgrave, John C., "Fixed Reproducible Wealth in the United

States, 1972-82," Survey of Current Business, (LXIII-8) August 1983.
                                    54




      Musgrave, John C., "Fixed Reproducible Tangible Wealth in the

United States, 1972-82, Revised Estimates" Survey of Current Business,

(LXVI-1) January 1986, pp. 51-75.

      Musgrave, John C., "Fixed Reproducible Tangible Wealth in the

United States, 1982-85," Survey of Current Business, (LXVI-8) August

1986, pp. 36-39.

      Peek, Joe, "Household Wealth Composition: The Impact of Capital

Gains," New England Economic Review, Nov./Dec. 1986, pp. 26-39.

      Pollak, Robert A., "The Intertemporal Cost of Living Index,"

Annals of Economic and Social Measurement, (IV-l) Winter 1975, pp. 179-

95.

      Poterba, James M., "Tax Policy and Corporate Savings," Brookings

Papers on Economic Activity, (2) December 1987, pp. 455-503.

      Poterba, James M., and Lawrence H. Summers, "Recent U.S. Evidence

on Budget Deficits and National Savings," NBER Working Paper No. 2144,

Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, February 1987.

      Ruggles, Richard and Nancy Ruggles, "Integrated Economic Accounts

for the United States, 1947-1980," Institute for Social and Policy

Studies Working Paper No. 84, New Haven: Yale University, October 1981.

      Shleifer, Andrei, and Lawrence H. Summers, "Breach of Trust in

Hostile Takeovers," NBER Working Paper 2342, Cambridge, MA: National

Bureau of Economic Research, August 1987.
                                    55




      Shoven, John B., "Saving in the U.S. Economy," in Michael L. and

Susan M. Wachter, eds., Removing Obstacles to Economic Growth,

Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1984, pp. 187-223.

      Stiglitz, Joseph E., "On the Optimality of the Stock Market

Allocation of Investment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, February

1972, pp. 25-60.

      Stiglitz, Joseph E., "The   Inefficiency   of the Stock Market

Equilibrium," mimeo, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University, April 1979.

      Summers, Lawrence H., "Observations on the Indexation of Old Age

Pensions," in Zvi Bodie and John B. Shoven, eds., Financial Aspects of

the U.S. Pension System, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983,

pp. 231-51, 257-58.

      Summers, Lawrence H., "Issues in National Savings Policy," NBER

Working Paper 1710, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research,

August 1985.

      Summers, Lawrence H., "Does the Stock Market Rationally Reflect

Fundamental Values?" Journal of Finance, (XLI-3) July 1986, pp. 591-601.

      Summers, Lawrence H., and Chris Carroll, "Why is U.S. National

Saving So Low?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Washington, DC:

The Brookings Institution, 1987:2, pp. 607-635.

      U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, fl

National   Income and Product Accounts of the United States. 1929-82,

Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, September 1986.
                                  56




     U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, Fixed

Reproducible Tangible Wealth in the United States. 1925-85, Washington,

DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, June 1987.

      West, Kenneth, "The Insensitivity of Consumption to News About

Income," Journal of Monetary Economics, (XXI) 1988, pp. 17-33.
