                          NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        TERMS OF TRADE DISTURBANCES, REAL EXCHANGE RATES AND WELFARE:
          THE ROLE OF CAPITAL CONTROLS AND LABOR MARKET DISTORTIONS




                              Sebastian   Edwards

                               Jonathan Os try




                           Working Paper No. 2907




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 March 1989




This paper was started when Edwards was a visiting scholar at the Fund during
the summer of 1988. We thank many Fund colleagues for helpful discussions
and comments. We are grateful to Miguel Savastano for his detailed comments.
Edwards gratefully acknowledges financial support from the NSF, and from
UCLA's Academic Senate. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NEER Working Paper #2907
                                        March 1989


     TERMS OF TRADE DISTURBANCES, REAL EXCHANGE RATES AND WELFARE:
       THE ROLE OF CAPITAL CONTROLS AND LABOR MARKET DISTORTIONS


                                ABSTRACT




      Many arguments that have been advanced in favor of maintaining

 capital control within the EEC have not paid sufficient attention to the

 welfare consequences of this type of market intervention. Our paper

 provides a simple, optimizing framework in which the welfare consequences

 of capital controls can be assessed.

      Two main issues are considered. First, how do capital controls

 affect the adjustment of macroeconomic variables to real disturbances?

 Second, what is the nature of second best arguments for ma.ntaining

 capital controls given that certain distortions will remain after the

 European single market is in place in 1992?




Sebastian Edwards                         Jonathan D. Ostry
Department of Economics                   Research Department
University of California, Los Angeles     International Monetary Fund
                                          Washington, DC 20431
Los Angeles, CA 90024
I. Introduction



     The relaxation of remaining restrictions on international asset trade

scheduled to take place in the EEC countries by 1992 has generated renewed

interest both among researchers and policymakers as to the likely

consequences of such liberalization. One issue that has figured

prominently in the policy debate concerns how certain macroeconomic

variables of interest are likely to respond to foreign disturbances in

economies with and without capital controls. This paper presents a simple

choice-theoretic framework in which the interaction of exogenous

disturbances with capital controls can be assessed.

     Many important issues surrounding the European single market program

can only be addressed within the context of explicitly monetary models.

These include, for example, the relationship between government revenue

from the inflation tax (seignorage) and financial integration, and the

relationship among the exchange rate mechanism (ERN), monetary policy

credibility, and the dismantling of capital controls. Other issues of

concern to the European countries seem less tied to purely monetary

considerations, and can therefore be analyzed within the context of real

models. Such issues may include, e.g., how (the lack of) fiscal

harmonization affects the location of production facilities within Europe.

or the relationships among various distortions that exist in many European

countries, the process of relaxing capital controls, and the welfare

effects of exogenous real disturbances. While monetary considerations may

also impact upon these questions, researchers have found that useful

insights can nevertheless be obtained by using purely real models, and
                                              -2-


thereby abstracting from monetary considerations which are taken to be of

secondary importance. Further, it should also be noted that some European

countries (notably Britain, Greece, Spain ),,/ and Portugal)--while

participating in the single market program- -are not, for the moment,

members of the EMS. It follows, therefore, that for such countries, the

costs and benefits of Project 1992 may be addressed in models that do not

explicitly incorporate the exchange rate bands that govern monetary policy

within the EMS.

        The present paper employs a real, optimizing model to consider two

issues which may be of interest to the European countries participating in

the single-market program, whether or not they are members of the EMS.

First, how will relaxing remaining controls on the movement of financial

capital V       within   Europe affect an economy's response to exogenous real

disturbances taken, for the purposes of this paper, to be terms of trade

shocks? Second, is there any reason to believe that the process of

financial integration will exacerbate other, pre-existing distortions- -

notably       in the labor market- -   that   are unlikely to be removed within the

time frame of the single market program? We feel that both the issue of

the effects of terms of trade shifts- -experienced by many European

countries in recent years, and labor market rigidities--also prevalent in

many of these countries- -may be affected by the process of financial




  J,/    The authorities of Spain have indicated their intention to join the
EMS     in   the course of 1989.
  21 For the purposes of this paper, capital controls will be modelled as
taxes on international borrowing. An alternative way of modelling such
controls would be to consider a quota on borrowing (see, e.g., Greenwood
and Kimbrough (1985)).
                                  -3-


integration, and that such effects can be analyzed in models whose main

focus is not the purely monetary aspects of these issues.

     One advantage of employing an optimizing model over traditional

reduced form models (see, e.g., Argy and Porter (1972) and Flood and

Marion (1982)) is that it permits a meaningful discussion of normative

issues. Capital controls introduce a distortion into the economy which

can only be justified on welfare grounds to the extent that the welfare

cost associated with the introduction of the distortion is smaller than

the welfare gain that can be achieved through the capital control's effect

in reducing other distortions in the economy. This is an important point

because policymakers frequently justify the imposition or maintenance of

capital controls without clearly specifying the nature of the distortion

that the capital control is designed to offset.

     That capital controls introduce a distortion into the economy has

important implications for the economy's response to exogenous

disturbances. In particular, the welfare cost associated with a given

shock will depend on whether the disturbance magnifies or mitigates the

intertemporal consumption distortion created by the capital control.

This point is illustrated in the paper with reference to terms of trade

disturbances experienced by a small country. Shocks that limit

consumption opportunities in periods when these are already restricted

because of capital controls will generate an additional welfare Cost

relative to the case of free intertemporal trade. This distortion

magnification effect makes it possible that terms of trade changes will

generate "perverse" effects on welfare (e.g., an improvement in the ternis

of trade which always increases potential welfare under free trade may
                                   -4-


actually be immiserizing in an economy with capital controls). Of course,

the effect of the terms of trade disturbance on welfare has important

consequences for the response of other macroeconomic variables such as the

real exchange rate and current account balance.

     In addition to the direct interaction between capital controls and

exogenous disturbances, we argue that an additional important component

of the welfare cost of disturbances stems from the endogenous response of

the real exchange rate to such disturbances ,J. When nontradable goods

are present in the model, movements in real exchange rates induced by

various disturbances will in general interact with the existing capital

controls in affecting domestic variables. The reason is essentially that

capital controls distort the allocation of consumption over time by

driving a wedge between the domestic and foreign returns to saving. Real

exchange rate movements, through their effects on domestic real

(consumption based) rates of interest 2/, are an additional determinant of

the intertemporal allocation of consumption. The welfare effects of

macroeconomic disturbances will therefore depend in part on whether the

real exchange rate movements they induce magnify or mitigate the existing

distortion created by the capital control.

     An additional, issue raised in the paper is the extent to whLch

capital controls may be welfare-increasing in the presence of other

distortions. One possible distortion that can be easily modeled in our


  1/ In this respect, our model differs from previous choice-theoretic
models of capital controls--e.g., Adams and Greenwood (1985) and Greenwood
and Kimbrough (1985)--jn which the role of the real exchange rate is not
considered.
  21 On the consumption rate of interest, see, e.g., Dornbusch (1983),
Svensson and Razin (1983), and Frenicel and Razin (1987).
                                  -5-


set-up and that does not seem to conflict with the proposed

liberalizations scheduled to take place by 1992, is an economy-wide

minimum wage that generates unemployment J.   Taxes or subsidies on

international borrowing 2/ may be optimal (in a second best sense) in our

set-up because, by distorting the intertemporal pattern of demand,

capital controls alter the time path of the equilibrium real exchange

rate and, hence, real wages and aggregate employment. We find that, in

the absence of real exchange rate effects, capital controls can never

increase welfare for a small country with labor market distortions.

     The paper is organized as follows. Section II presents a real,

intertemporal, perfect foresight model of a small open economy with

optimizing consumers and producers, in which there are capital controls.

This economy produces and consumes three goods in each period:

Importables, exportables and nontradables. The equilibrium conditions are

then used to solve for the response of real exchange rates, welfare, and

the current account balance to various macroeconomic disturbances,

including terms of trade shocks (Section III). We compare the adjustment

of these variables to the case without capital controls. Section IV

extends the benchmark model to the case in which there is an economy-wide

minimum wage and unemployment. This section also computes the optimal tax



  J,/ But see also Section V in which the introduction of trade
distortions is briefly discussed. Even though remaining restrictions on
intra-European trade are scheduled to be removed by 1992, distortions
caused by non-optimal commercial policies followed by Europe as a whole
may still be relevant.
  2/ We model capital controls as a tax on international borrowing. An
alternative way of modelling capital controls is to assume a borrowing
ceiling (see, e.g., Adams and Greenwood (1985)).
                                  -6-


(subsidy) on international capital flows. Section V presents some

possible extensions and the main conclusions.



II. The Model



     This section develops a real, general equilibrium, small country

model which is used to analyze the way in which capital controls affect

the adjustment of welfare, real exchange rates and the current account to

terms of trade shocks. The exposition is based on Edwards (1987,

1989a,b,c), Ostry (1988a,b) and Edwards and Ostry (1989) and represents an

extension to the basic model of Svensson and Razin (1983).

     Consider the case of a small country that produces and consumes three

goods--importables (M), exportables (X), and nontradables (N). There are

two periods--the present (period 1) and the future (period 2)--and

producers and consumers are assumed to have perfect foresight. Consumers

maximize an intertemporal utility function subject to a lifetime budget

constraint which states that the present value of expenditure not exceed

lifetime wealth. From the point of view of the economy as a whole ,   this
constraint is equivalent to the condition that, over the lifetime of the

economy (namely during periods 1 and 2), the discounted sum of the trade

account balances is zero

     There are a large number of identical producers and perfect

competition prevails in goods markets. Firms are assumed to maximize




  .J We are assuming that there is no historical debt commitment so that
initial current and trade account balances are identical.
                                  -7


profits subject to existing technology and availability of factors of

production.

     In addition to consumers and producers, there is a government that

imposes capital controls in the form of a tax on international borrowing.

The tax creates a wedge between the exogenous world rate of interest, r*,

and the internal cost of borrowing. .   It   is assumed that the revenue

from the capital control is redistributed back to consumers in a lump sum

fashion. There are no other taxes and no government spending on goods or

services.

     Preferences are assumed to be weakly time separable, i.e., the

intertemporal welfare function, W'(CN, c(, c, CN, CM, CX), may be written

as W(u(cN, CM, cx), U(CN, CM, Cxfl. Lower case letters refer to period 1

variables while upper case letters refer to their period 2 counterparts.

Thus, period 1 subutility is denoted by u and period 2 subutility is

denoted by U. Similarly, C, CM, CX (CN, CM, CX) represent period 1 (2)

consumption levels of goods N, M, and X, respectively. We assume that u

and U are homothetic. This allows us to view the consumer's optimization

problem as taking place in two stages. In the first stage, the consumer

minimizes within-period spending in order to achieve a given level of

subutility. The resulting first stage expenditure function may be written

as the product of an exact price index, w for period 1 and U for period 2,

and the corresponding level of subutility or real spending. The exact

price indexes or unit expenditure functions depend on the temporal

relative prices, p and q (P and Q), where p is the relative price of

importables and q the relative price of nontradables in period 1 (period

2). Exportables are taken as numeraire so that p (P) is the period 1 (2)
                                          -8-


terms of trade and q (Q)       is   the period 1 (2) exportables real exchange

rate J.

     In    the second stage, the discounted sum of present and future

spending is minimized subject to the attainment of a given level of

utility, V. This yields the overall intertemporal expenditure function:



     E —    E(ir(l,p,q),   6fl(l,P,Q,); W),                                  (1)




where 8 is the domestic discount factor equal to (1 + Y'.            Note that

the internal discount factor appearing in equation (1) differs from the

world discount factor, 6* (— (1 + r*)l), because of the capital control.

Finally, recall that, among the properties of the expenditure function, is

that the partial derivative of E(.) with respect to one of the prices, p.

q, P, Q,    yields   the Hicksian (compensated) demand for the corresponding

good, CM, c, CM, CN.

    In each period, firms choose output supplies that maximize total

profits. In the absence of investment, firms' decisions are completely

specified by two revenue functions, one corresponding to each period. The

revenue functions give the maximum value of output obtainable from the

production of the three goods, given the factor supplies, technology and.




  JJ In general, there are as many possible measures of the real exchange
rates as tradable goods. In the set up presented here, there is the
exportables real exchange rate, l/q (l/Q), and the importables real
exchange rate, p/q (P/Q). In what follows, we deal only with the former
definition although it is easy to compute the response of alternative
measures of the real exchange rate, such as the importables measure, or
the consumption based measure, which is a weighted average of the
importables and exportables measures, within our framework.
                                   -9-


prices. We denote the period 1 revenue function by r and the period 2

revenue function by R, viz.:



      r —   r(l,   p, q; v)



      R —   R(l,   F, Q;   V),


where v (V) represents a vector of factor supplies in period 1 (2) jJ.            We


assume that the dimension of v (V) exceeds two    so    that factor price

equalization does not prevail in either period. Note also that among the

properties of the revenue functions is that the supply functions of the

goods are given by the partial derivative of the revenue function with

respect to the good's price, e.g., rp denotes the supply of iniportables in

period 1, while Rt, denotes the supply of nontrad.ables in period 2.

      Equilibrium is fully characterized by the following system of three

equations:



      r(l,p.q;v) + 8R(1,P,Q;V) + bNCA —   E(w(l,p.q),    6ff(l,P,Q,); W)    (2)




                                                                            (3)
      Eqrq

                                                                            (4)




  /   As is usual in these models, factors are assumed to be
intersectorally, though not internationally, mobile.
                                    - 10   -




where b — 6* - 6 and NCA is the noninterest current account or trade

balance in period 2. Equation (2) is the intertemporal budget constraint

and states that the present value of lifetime expenditures, E, is equal to

the present value of income. Income in turn consists of the present value

of current and future GDP, r + 6R, and transfer payments received from the

government. These in turn correspond to the rebated revenues from the tax

on international borrowing. To see this, recall that the tax rate is

equal to the difference between the domestic and world rates of interest,

  -   r*.   The tax base is equal to the current account (— trade account)

balance in period 1, which must equal minus the present value of the trade

balance in period 2. Thus, revenue accruing to the government in period 2

equals the product of the tax rate and the tax base, the present value of

which is easily seen to be bNCA.

        Equations (3) and (4) are the market clearing conditions for

nontradable goods in periods 1 and 2, respectively.

        The endogenous variables in equations (2) -   (4)   are the level of

welfare, W, and the current and future relative price of nontradables, q

and Q. The exogenous variables are the factor supplies in each period, v

and V, the present and future terms of trade, p nd P, the world discount

factor, 5*, and the tax on international borrowing, b. Solutions for

these variables determine the level of the current account balance in

period 1, ca, where



        ca — r(l, p, q; v) -                                                   (5)




where        represents the value of expenditure in period 1.
                                    - 11   -




III.   Terms of Trade Disturbances in the Presence of Caoital Controls



       In this section, we consider the effects of exogenous terms of trade

disturbances on welfare, real exchange rates, and the current account

balance in an economy that restricts foreign borrowing below the optimal

level through the use of capital controls. The results are compared with

the case in which the country follows optimal (welfare-maximizing)

policies, which, in the absence of additional distortions, involves

setting the tax on international borrowing equal to zero. In Section IV,

however, we consider the case in which an optimal policy may require a

nonzero tax     on international borrowing. This result emerges because a
(constrained) welfare maximum in the presence of an initial distortion

(assumed to be in the labor market) does not necessarily require

unrestricted access to the international credit market.



111.1 Welfare Effects



       A temporary change in the terms of trade affects welfare as follows:

        — (E                                                                  (6)
             +bUEj) ((Eprp)bnEup(bnEII,rfrq) -(brI6EImflQ)).


In the absence of capital controls, b —        0.   and equation (6) reduces to:


         dW —
                -E-l   (Epr) < 0.


This is of course the usual     result   in which a temporary deterioration in
                                     12 -




the terms of trade reduces welfare in proportion to the volume of period 1
imports at initial terms of trade 2J.

     Equation (6) reveals that in the presence of capital controls, there
are three additional channels through which a terms    of   trade disturbance

affects welfare ./.   First,   there is an intertemporal substitution effect

(-bflE11irrp) which is negative in terms of its impact on welfare. The

intuition is simply that the temporary rise in the relative price of

imports raises the cost of current in terms of future consumption, i.e.,

raises the consumption rate of interest (or equivalently lowers the

consumption based discount factor, 611/w). As a result, consumers will

substitute consumption intertemporally, consuming less in period I.

However, due to the tax on international borrowing (b > 0), consumption in

period 1 is already below its optimal free trade level. Therefore, the

terms of trade shock magnifies an initial distortion and there is an

additional reduction in welfare due to the interaction of the terms of

trade disturbance with the existing capital control.

     In a model without nontradable goods, the direct import revaluation

effect (first term in the numerator of equation (6)) and the

intertemporal substitution effect (second term) are the only channels

through which a terms of trade disturbance affects welfare in the presence

of a capital control. However, once a nontradables sector is introduced


  j,/ It is straightforward to show that in the case of a permanent
deterioration in the terms of trade, the welfare loss is proportional to
the present value of imports in both periods.
  2/ Note also that, in the presence of capital controls, the
denominator, which represents the marginal cost of utility, has the
additional term, bUEpj. This additional term is positive for b > 0 and
vanishes if b — 0.
                                      - 13   -




into   the model, it is necessary to incorporate the endogenous response of

real exchange rates to the terms of trade shock and the feedback of these

real exchange rate changes to the level of welfare. Real exchange rate

responses are captured in the last two terms in equation (6) /.

       Consider   the third term, -bflErI,irq dq/dp, which is negative if there

is a real appreciation in period 1 (dq/dp >      0),   and conversely in the case

of a real depreciation. An increase in q raises the consumption rate of

interest (CR1) which induces substitution of aggregate real spending from

period 1 to period 2. Since period 1 (2) consumption is already too low

(high) relative to the optimum, the movement in the period 1 real exchange

rate magnifies the existing distortion created by the capital control and

thereby contributes to a further decline in welfare. If, on the other

hand, the deterioration in the terms of trade is associated with a real

depreciation in period 1, the CR1 falls, agents consume more in period 1

relative to period 2, and the movement in the real exchange rate favors an

improvement in the level of welfare.

       The final term in equation (10), bfl&EITQ dojdp, captures the effect

of the future real exchange rate. In general, even though the terms of

trade disturbance is confined to period 1, the real exchange rate will

respond in period 2 as well, even though no "fundamental" changes in that

period. A real appreciation in period 2 (dQ/dp > 0) favors an improvement

in the level of welfare whereas a real depreciation in the future favors a



 J    In the absence of distortions, real exchange rate changes do not
affect welfare. The reason is simply that nontradable goods are neither
in excess demand nor supply so that, from the point of view of the economy
as a whole, there can be no aggregate welfare effects due to changes in
their relative price.
                                      - 14   -




reduction   in the level of welfare. The intuition is the same as the one

just presented: A real appreciation (depreciation) in period 2 lowers

(raises) the CR1, inducing agents to substitute current (future) for

future (current) consumption, and thereby reducing (magnifying) the

distortion created by the capital control.

     It is useful to notice that if the initial equilibrium is stationary

so that w —   II,   then the real exchange rate effects reduce to




     (bflEn,irq)(


This formulation emphasizes the fact that a key determinant of the effect

of a terms of trade disturbance on welfare is whether the real exchange

rate over- or undershoots its new long run equilibrium value. In the case

of equilibrium overshooting, dq/dp > IdQ/dpl, and the real exchange rate

contributes to a further decline in welfare as a result of the terms of

trade shock. Conversely, in the case of equilibrium undershooting,

 dq/dp < IdQ/dpl, and the endogenous response of the real exchange rate
favors an improvement in welfare.

     Finally, it is worth mentioning that, whereas in the absence of

capital controls, a terms of trade deterioration (improvement) i always

welfare-reducing (increasing), this may not be the case once capital

controls are present. Equation (10) reveals that factors which favor the

immiserization outcome as a result of a terms of trade improvement are an

initial equilibrium close to the autarky equilibrium, a large expenditure

share of nontradables relative to tradable goods, and equilibrium

undershooting of the real exchange rate.
                                     - 15   -




     This   perverse outcome of a terms of trade improvement being welfare-

reducing (the immiserization case) can also occur in the case of an

anticipated future disturbance. Moreover, in this case, the result does

not hinge on the behavior of the real exchange rate. To see this, suppose

agents expect an improvement in the terms of trade in period 2, i.e., dP <

0.   In this case, the change in welfare is given by:




        —                                                                 (7)
                                                         (bfl6EpnflQ))




An anticipated future terms of trade improvement unambiguously raises

welfare if b —   0,   the magnitude being governed by the volume of period 2

imports at initial terms of trade (first term in equation (7)). However,

when capital controls are present, agents cannot smooth their consumption

path by the optimal amount (i.e., they increase consumption in period 1 by

a smaller amount than is optimal given the increase in lifetime

resources), and are forced to consume more in period 2 (the period in

which the terms of trade change takes place) than would be the case under

free trade. Because the increase in period 2 consumption magnifies the

existing distortion created by the capital control (second term in

equation (7)), the anticipatei future improvement in the terms of trade

may actually cause actual welfare to decrease even though, in the absence

of capital controls, potential welfare unambiguously increases. Finally,

the last two terms in equation (7) represent the real exchange rate

effects which may contribute to a welfare gain or loss, depending on

whether they lower or raise the consumption rate of interest.
                                             - 16   -




111.2 The Real Exchange Rate


     Equation (6) in the previous section is not a reduced form since the

real exchange rate is an endogenous variable, the solution for which is

obtained by solving simultaneously the system of equations (2)-(1i), which

yields:


          —   -l
                    [(E-r)+bflE11,1irp] (EqQJIQEflw+lrqEirw(RQQEQQ)]

                 +bIIEImflQ (   (rqp - Eqp ) flQEjti+EpQWqEW I
                                                                                  (8)
                 +[Ew+bflEflw][(rqpEqp)(RQQEQQ)EpQEqQ])

          —
                    ((E-r)+bliEp] t(rqq-Eqq)1lQEmJ+EqQwqErw]
                   bflEnwxq L   (rqp-Eqp)UQEuu+EwqEww]
                                                                                  (9)
                   -(E+bIIEW) [(rqq-Eqq)Epq-EqQ(rqpEqp)))



where     < 0.     In general, the expressions in equations (8) and (9) cannot

be signed so that a temporary deterioration in the terms of trade may

cause either a real appreciation or depreciation of the real exchange

rate in periods 1 and 2.             Further, notice that even though the terms of

trade shock is temporary, part of the adjustment in the real exchange rate

occurs in period 2, when there is no change in any "fundamental." In the

absence of capital controls, b —             0,   and there are three main channels

through which a temporary terms of trade change affects the real exchange

rate. Consider equation (8). First, there is the welfare effect, (5                     -

                                          whose magnitude depends on the volume of
rp)EEqQ1IQEnwqEw(R-E)I,
imports at initial terms of trade, and which favors a real depreciation.

Second, there is the direct substitution effect, (rqp.Eqp)(RQQE) which
                                     - 17   -




has an ambiguous effect on q because the sign of Eqp is itself ambiguous

,J. This reflects a conflict between intrateniporal substitution, which

favors a real appreciation (depreciation) in the substitutes (complements)

case, and intertemporal substitution which always favors a real

depreciation because the rise in p raises the CR1. Third, there is an

indirect intertemporal substitution effect, EWEQEqQ which arises

because the rise in the CR1 shifts demand toward period 2, and thereby

requires a rise in Q to clear the period 2 nontradables sector. The rise

in Q generates a fall in the CR1 and thereby favors a real appreciation

today (a rise in q) 2].

      In addition to these effects, the presence of capital controls

creates some additional channels through which a terms     of   trade

disturbance affects the real exchange rate. First, because the rise in p

magnifies the initial distortion created by the capital control (by

raising the CR1), there is an additional reduction in welfare (equal to

bI1En, as explained in equation (6)). This additional welfare loss

reduces demand for current period nontradables and therefore favors a fall

in q (a real depreciation). This explains the expression, (bUEn)

EEqQflQEI1W +   qE,iw(RQQE)]. in    equation (8).

      Second, the rise in p has a further impact on the CR1 via its effect

on the future demand for nontradables and hence the real exchange rate in

period 2. Specifically, if the intertemporal substitution effect

(EpQrqEww >     0) is small relative to the intratemporal substitution effect

  11' Eqp — E,wqp + w        where     E
                                      < 0 and Wqp   0.
  2] The intra- and ?ntertemporal elasticities are multiplied by the
marginal Cost of utility, which is equal to E if b — 0, but becomes E +
bflEpj,   for b '   0.
                                  - 18   -




                    0) so that the expression, E(rqp-Eqp)IIEnw+EPQwqE,w1 is
((rqp-Eqp)IIQEITW
negative, the rise in p will create excess supply for future nontradables

relative to current nontradables, the elimination of which will require a

fall in Q (relative to q), and hence an additional increase in the CR1.

This further rise in the CR1 magnifies the existing distortion created by

the capital control, lowering welfare (by the amount bIIEmIflQ) and hence

favoring a real depreciation in period 1 (a fall in q). Conversely, if

the intertemporal elasticity is large relative to the intrateniporal

elasticity, the rise in Q necessary to restore market clearing in the

period 2 nontradables sector confers a welfare gain and thereby raises

demand for nontradables today. In this case, the expression on the second

line of equation (8) favors a real appreciation in period I (a rise in q).

Finally notice that if b — 0, the expression on the second line of

equation (8) vanishes completely: The reason is simply that when there

are no distortions in the economy, changes in the real exchange rate, Q,

have no aggregate welfare effect (since nontradable goods are neither in

excess demand nor in excess supply domestically). However, changes in Q

do affect welfare when b > 0 because they magnify (if dQ < 0) or mitigate

(dQ >   0) an initial distortion. Finally, the interpretation of the
various expressions in equation (9) is completely analogous to the one

just given for equation (8).



111.3 The Current Account



      Using equations (5) and (6), it can be verified that the response of

the current account to a temporary terms of trade shock is given by:
                                        - 19   -




          — .(Ep.rp) - rEWp       -                -        -                      (10)
                                                                rE,tnhIQ


The first two    terms   in equation (10) represent effects that would be

present in models without nontradable goods or capital controls (e.g.,

Svensson and Razin (1983)) while the last three terms depend both on the

presence of nontradables and capital controls (as discussed in the

previous two    subsections)
     The expression, (E.rp),          is the   import revaluation effect and is

negative in terms of its impact on the current account. The amount

originally imported has become more expensive and, as a result, the

current account deteriorates. The basic intuition has to do with

consuwotion-smopthinz: Because the loss in real income due to the terms

of trade deterioration is temporary, agents will spread this loss Out over

time by borrowing in the international capital market (i.e. ,              by running a
current account deficit). The second term, - lrEw,rlrp. is a direct

intertemporal substitution effect and is positive. The rise in p makes

current consumption more expensive (i.e., raises the CR1) and causes

agents to substitute spending from period 1 to period 2. This

cpnsunmtion-ti1tin motive improves the current account. Note that the

consumption-smoothing and consumption-tilting motives are always opposite

in sign so that a temporary deterioration in the terms of trade has an

ambiguous effect on the current account .11.


 ),J It  can be shown (see Frenkel and Razin (1987) or Ostry (1988)) that
the current account will actually improve if the intertemporal elasticity
of substitution exceeds the ratio of imports to consumption of importables
at initial terms of trade.
                                          - 20


         The third term in equation (10) is the welfare effect. We have

already seen (section 3.1) that, in the absence of capital controls, dW/dp

<   0.    In this case, therefore, the welfare effect contributes to an

improvement in the current account. However, we cannot ignore the

possibility that, when capital controls are present, a terms of trade

shock could be immiserizing, so that dW/dp >         0.   In this case, the welfare

effect would contribute to a deterioration in the current account.

         Finally, the last two terms in equation (10) represent indirect

intertemporal substitution effects caused by real exchange rate changes.

Accordingly, a real appreciation in period 1 raises the CR1 and renders

the third term in equation (10) positive. This is because the higher CR1

increases saving and thereby improves the current account. In contrast, a

rise in Q lowers the CR1 and renders the fourth term negative. The lower

CR1 encourages spending in period 1 and therefore favors a worsening in

the current account position. Notice that if the initial equilibrium is

stationary, so that       —   II,   then the impact of the real exchange rate on

the current account depends only on whether there is equilibrium under- or

overshooting. In the former case, the CR1 falls and the real exchange

rate favors a worsening of the current account, and conversely. Finally,

note that the behavior of the real exchange rate differs in models with

and without capital controls, as indicated in section 3.2.



IV. Labor Market Distortions. CaDital Controls, and Terms of Trade Shocks



         The model derived above assumes that capital controls are the only

distortion in the economy. In a number of countries, however, capital
                                  - 21   -




controls   coexist with other rigidities. In particular in many of the EEC

countries the labor market is severely distorted. Consequently, in this

section we extend the model to take this fact into account. More

specifically, we assume that there is an economy-wide minimum wage that is

initially set above the market clearing real wage. In order to simplify

the analysis we assume that this minimum wage is expressed in terms of the

numeraire.

     The nature of the initial labor market equilibrium is captured by

Figure 1, in which the horizontal axis measures total labor available in

the economy, and the vertical axis depicts the wage rate in terms of

exportables. Demand for labor by the tradable goods sectors (L'r) is

equal to the horizontal sum of the demand for labor by the exportables

sector (Lx), and the demand for labor by the importables sector (LM).

Demand for labor by the nontradable sector is given by the LN schedule.

If there is a minimum wage rate equal to , unemployment will result. The

amount of labor demanded by the nontradables sector is determined by point

A and is equal to the distance           the amount of labor demanded by the M

sector is given by distance         and that demanded by the X sector is

equal to LjL?. Initial unemployment is, then, given by the distance

(I4L) 1/.

     In    terms of our model the existence of the minimum wage is captured

by the use of restricted revenue functions (Neary (1985)):




  L/ If we assume that capital is sector specific, the full employment
equilibrium real wage will be given by e in Figure 1. If, however, we
allow the flexible price factors to be mobile across sectors, the labor
demand schedules will shift once w is removed. See the discussion below.
                            — 22   —




                            Figure     1



           The Initial Equilibrium in the Labor Market




w    LT=(LM+Lx                                           w




w                                                        w


we                                                       i've




0T                                 U'       TI
                     1'
                                    - 23   -




     (w,p,q;k) —    max   {s+qs+Ps) -      2)   for   period 1, and
                    Sri



     (W,P,Q;K) —    max ((Sx+QSN+PSM) - WL)     for period 2,
                    S,L
where sj (Sj), i — X, M, N, refer to output of exportables, importables,

and nontradables, respectively, in period 1 (2), and Ic (K) refers to the

vector of non-labor (flexible-price) inputs in period 1 (2). Now the

nontradable market equilibrium conditions need to be replaced by:

          —Eq                                                           (11)
      q

     RQ —                                                               (12)
            EQ

     An important question is whether the minimum wage prevails in both

periods or in only one of them. Svensson (1984) has argued that a

realistic assumption is to consider that the labor market is distorted in

period    1 (the short run) but that full employment prevails in the long run

(period   2). In what follows, we will analyze both the general case with

the minimum wage prevailing in both periods, as well as the case with

period 1 labor distortions only.



IV.1 The Ovtimal Dezree of Caoital Controls



     Naturally, once we introduce a second distortion we enter the world

of the second best and there is no reason why, as in Section 3, a zero tax

on capital mobility will be optimal. The purpose of this subsection is to

investigate the way in which the intertemporal distortion on capital

mobility interacts with the distortion in labor markets. In particular we
                                  - 24   -




ask whether the existence of a labor market distortion provides (second
best) welfare grounds for imposing capital controls.

     In its simplest form our question can be posed as follows: what will

be the welfare effects of increasing the extent of capital controls (i.e.,

raising the tax on international borrowing) if the labor market is

distorted? In order to capture the essentials of this exercise we start

with the simplest case in which the minimum wage prevails only in the

first period, and where the initial tax on foreign borrowing is equal to

zero. This means that Figure 1 captures the conditions prevailing in the

labor market in period 1, and that initially the intertemporal allocation

of expenditures is undistorted.

     The imposition of a small tax on foreign borrowing- .   that   is a

reduction of 6 below     -will tilt the intertemporal allocation of

expenditure towards the future. A proportion of the reduced expenditure

in period 1 will come from lower expenditure on nontradables in that

period. This will result in a decline in q (a real depreciation in period

1) and, thus, will generate a reduction in the demand for labor in the

nontradables sector in that period. Since employment in that period was

initially 'too low," the imposition of a tax on foreign borrowing will

tend to magnify that distortion, generating a negative welfare effect.

The story, however, does not end here, since the decline in the relative

price of nontradables will trigger a reallocation of the flexible-price

factors from the N sector to the X and M sectors. Depending on the

relative labor intensities across sectors this reallocation effect may

result in a net reduction or a net increase in aggregate employment. If

we assume that the tradables sectors (exportables and importables) are
                                   - 25   -




a group, less labor intensive than the N sector, the factor reallocation
effect will amplify the real exchange rate effect and, as a consequence of

the lowering of 6, total unemployment in period 1 will increase. As a

result, in this case, the net effect of the imposition of a (small) tax on

foreign borrowing has been welfare reducing; the existence of unemployment

and (real) wage rate rigidity in period 1 provides no justification for

capital controls.

     A direct consequence of the previous analysis is that in an economy

characterized by (a) a minimum wage in terms of X in period 1 only, (b) no

initial distortions on capital flows (b —     0),   and (c) nontradables being

more labor intensive than tradables as a group, a small subsidy on foreign

borrowing will be welfare-improving. The intuition is straightforward:

the minimum wage has resulted in a lower than optimal level of employment

in period 1. The subsidy on foreign borrowing will tilt expenditure

towards period 1; part of this extra expenditure will fall on nontradables

driving their price up and thus generating an increase in employment in

that period. Moreover, since we assume no initial tax (or subsidy) on

borrowing, the small subsidy will not generate a first order welfare

effect. The effect of this small subsidy on foreign borrowing on the

labor market is captured in Figure 2, where the shift of Lt. to L is the

result of the real exchange rate effect of a higher 6, and the shift of

Lt to Lt and of Li to i4 are the consequences of the reallocation of the

cooperative factors. Given our assumptions regarding labor intensities

the net effect on employment of this reallocation is positive.

     Formally, the welfare effect of this small subsidy on borrowing, or

small increase in 6, is given by
                           — 26   —




                          Figure 2

    The Effect of a Small Subsidy to Foreign Borrowing on
                    Aggregate Employment



                                                            w




w                                                           w
                                                27 -




    d6     W         1
                          1    ()
                              qd6'                                                      (13




where j   is   the       derivative   of the period 1 (constrained) revenue function

with respect to 1, and is positive ,/;                       is the derivative of the
                                                        1q
employment function with respect to the relative price of nontradables and

under our assumptions on labor intensities is positive; finally, (dq/dS)

is the real exchange rate effect of relaxing capital controls and is also

positive J. A crucial characteristic of equation (13) is that all the

action comes through the effect of the change in 6 on the real exchange

rate. This underscores the importance of inorporating nontradable goods

in discussions of linkages between capital controls and labor market

distortions,

     The preceding discussion has established that under certain

conditions it may be optimal (in a second best sense) to impose a subsidy

on foreign borrowing J. In the more general setting, however, this need

not be the case. The optimal level of the tax (subsidy) on foreign

borrowing is obtained from a generalized version of equation (13).                      After

simple manipulations we find that the change in welfare resulting                   from a

higher S is given by:


                                        -
          (E+bIIE.) — -bfl2E22              bUE211.Wq   ()

  ,J Since j             is
                  evaluated at the actual level of employment, it is equal
to the minimum wage w.
  21 See Edwards (1989a).
  ,/ A similar result is obtained in Rodrik (1987) although the channels
through which it operates, the conditions under which it holds, as well as
the structure of the model are quite different from what is presented
                                                                    -
here.
                                            - 28   -




                                              —          d              d
                        -
                            bflE2flflQ   d8 + rjlq      d6 +   &
                                                                   RLLQ d8'       (14)



where     2q —   rlq/ril.   L —    -j/jj 1/,           and r2q R are Rybczinski type

terms that summarize relative factor intensities. If, as was assumed

above, nontradables are more labor intensive than tradables as a group,

r2q > 0, R1j > 0 and, consequently 2q > 0 and 1. >                 0.
      The intuition behind equation (14) is simple. The first three terms

have a "b" attached to them and capture the effects of a higher 6 on the

intertemporal allocation of expenditure. For instance, the first term,

-bfl2E22 is positive; the reason is that due to the existence of a positive

initial b, expenditure in period 1 is "too low". A higher 8 will result

in   an   increase in period 1 expenditure, moving it towards the optimal

level. The second and third terms capture indirect expenditure terms that

operate via the effects of changes in 6 on the equilibrium real exchange

rates. Their interpretation is similar to that of the first term. The

last two terms in equation (14) are the employment effects. They state

that to the extent that lowering the tax (raising 8) generates an

appreciation of the real exchange rate, there will be positive employment

(and hence welfare) effects.

        From equation (14), one can compute the optimal tax (subsidy) on

foreign borrowing, b*, viz.:




  .2J These expressions are obtained by totally differentiating the labor
market equilibrium condition rj (l,p,q,1(q,p,w)) — w (see Neary (1985)
and Edwards (l989b)).
                                  - 29    -




    b*_
               2 (+6*PL
                     LQ
                i q 'db'
                        (           'db                                   (i

          -fl2E22+ flE2Wq () +   IIE22UQ ()


which can be positive or negative jj. Notice that, as before, the real

exchange rate plays a crucial role in the sense that b* — 0 if the real

exchange rate responses are equal to zero (as in models without

nontradables). It can be shown that, around b*, an increase in b will

result in a real depreciation in period 1 (i.e., dq/db < 0), and a real

appreciation in period 2 (i.e., d0jdb > 0). From this equation it is easy

to establish the conditions required for b* to be positive 2/.



IV.2 Terms of Trade Disturbances and Welfare in an Economy
       With Cavjtal Controls and Labor Market Distortions



     The analysis in section 4.1 illustrated the way in which the

intertemporal distortion on foreign borrowing interacts with labor market

distortions stemming from the existence of an economy-wide minimum wage.

We now turn to the subject of Section 3, and examine the response    of

welfare, and the current account (section 4.3), to terms of trade

disturbances. Since the effects are, in many respects, similar to those

discussed in Section 3, the analysis that follows is rather brief.




  jJ Note that the real exchange rate responses in equation (15) are
evaluated around b*, so that small changes in b do not affect welfare (to
first order).
  21 Obviously, the fact the b* > 0 does not mean that a tax on foreign
borrowing will be the pDtimal way to deal with labor market distortions.
                                      - 30   -




      From equation (2) and the definition of the restricted revenue

functions, we obtain the following expression for the change in welfare as

a result of a temporary (current) terms of trade shock:



                                                   -
         —
                             (-(E.)    •bflE111r       bUE,rfq()
                                                                   -
                                                                       bUE2IIQ()
               +                      +                                            (16)
                         + j2q ()         8*LL ()]).


      The main qualitative difference between equation (16) and the

corresponding equation for an economy with full employment (equation (6))

is the presence of the three terms,

                            +
              + rjtq ()         8*LQ (n)).


that capture       the effect on current period aggregate employment of the

terms of trade disturbance L'.        The sign of this employment effect cannot

be determined a orion and, as pointed out above, will depend on factor

intensities, and on the way the       real   exchange rate reacts to changes in p.



  j/ In addition to employment effects, other (quantitative) differences
between_equations (6) and (16) are: First, the import revaluation effect,
     -
       rp). is evaluated usirg the derivative of the constrained rather
than the unconstrained revenue function. Neary (1985) has shown that
under fixed factor prices the following relation exists between restricted
and unrestricted revenue functions:

      r —    r[p,q,l(p,q,))     -



fro period 1, and similarly for period 2.   Second, the real exchange rate
responses, dq/dp and dojdp, now embody additional welfare effects caused
by changes in current and future employment. Since these additional
effects represent a rather straightforward extension to the discussion of
section 3.2, they are not considered in any detail here.
                                            - 31   -




It can also be verified that, as in the case without labor market
rigidities, a terms of trade improvement can be immiserizing. In this

case, the result depends not only on magnifying the intertemporal

distortion created by the capital control, but also on the terms of trade

induced changes in current and future employment.

       If there are no restrictions to capital movements, b — 0, and

equation (16) reduces to:



             — E1   ((Er) +        r1   +
                                            rjiq () + 6RLLQ()).

It can be seen that, even in the absence of a tax on international

borrowing, a deterioration in the terms of trade can result in an increase

in welfare. This would be the case, for example, if the initial period I

equilibrium is near the autarky equilibrium (i.e., (E,-)              0), and the

terms   of trade shock increases the net present value of aggregate

employment.



IV.3     The Current Account



        In the case with capital controls and labor market distortions the

current account response to a temporary terms of trade disturbance will be

given by:



              — -(E   -   ) - wE w - wE       w ()
                                        ww q dp
                                                       - wE
                                                          wu Q
                                                              JI ()
                                                                 dp
        dp          p p        ww p


                               ()
                      +1Lp iq dp                                               (17)
                                    - 32    -




The first four terms of the RBS   of   equation (17) are the same as those

obtained in the absence of labor market distortions, and their intuition

was discussed in Section 3. The only caveat is that now we are dealing

with restricted revenue functions and that the real exchange rate

responses, (dq/dp) and (dQjdp), are evaluated for the case with a minimum

wage. The last two terms in the R}IS       of   equation (17) capture the

employment effects of the terms of trade shock. If the terms of trade

deterioration reduces employment in period 1, the expression,

       + 1q dq/dp), will be negative. Since lower employment in period 1
means reduced income in that period, the current account, which is income

minus expenditure, will deteriorate. In fact, this employment effect on

income is the only substantial difference between the case with and

without labor market distortions.



V.    Extensions and Conc1udin Remarks



      The model developed above provides a very general framework for

analyzing the role of capital market distortions. Our analysis has

deliberately focused on a few simple cases. It is easy, however, to

introduce a number of interesting extensions.



V.1 Investment



      The first obvious extension involves introducing investment. The

role of capital controls on investment decisions is straightforward and,

thus, was excluded from the previous discussion. Consider first the case
                                        - 33   -




without   a labor market distortion. Then the intertemporal budget

constraint is given by:



     r(l,p,q;k,1,t) + 8R(1,P,Q;k+I(6,Q),L,T) +bNCA

            -   I(6,Q)   — E(,r(1,p,q),61I(1,P,Q),W)                                (18)




where k is the inherited capital stock; K —            k   + I(.) is the period 2

capital stock (assuming no depreciation); I(.) is the investment function,

and t (T) refer to non-labor or capital factors of production (e.g.,

natural resources) in period 1 (2). The equilibrium condition for

investment is that the discounted value of period 2's marginal product of

capital is equal to the price of the capital good. If, for simplicity, we

assume that the capital good corresponds to the numeraire we have that,                 in


equilibrium,
           — 1.                                                                     (19)



     By differentiating equations (18) and (19), we can determine how
 different disturbances will affect welfare in an economy with investment.

Naturally, changes in the extent of capital controls given by changes                  in

 6 will have a direct impact on investment. There will also be additional

 indirect effects stemming from the real exchange rate changes generated by

 the relaxation of the extent of capital controls.

      Things are more complicated, however, if we assume              that the labor

 market is also distorted. Suppose, for example, that the production

 technology is constant returns to scale. Then, as pointed out by Svensson

 (1984), because investment and future employment are jointly determined,

                                                                     with the discount
 any given minimum wage in period 2 may be incompatible
                                    - 34    -




factor   imposed by the tax on international borrowing. There are two ways

to get around this problem. The first is to assume that the minimum wage

is restricted to period 1; the second is to assume, as in Svensson (1984,

p. 664) that the period 2 production function is strictly concave.



V.2 ImDort Tariffs



     A second extension refers might       involve   incorporating trade

distortions in the form of import tariffs. In this case the domestic

price of imports will differ from the world price by the extent of the

tariff. In addition, we have to make some assumption regarding the use of

tariff proceeds. If, as in traditional trade theory, we assume that these

revenues are handed back to consumers in a lump sum         fashion,   we have to

add the following term to the RRS   of     equation (2):



     t(E-r)    +




where t (T) is the period 1 (2) (specific) tariff rate.

     As in the previous cases, changes in the real exchange rate provide

important additional channels affecting the response of welfare and the

current account to various disturbances (including tariff changes). For

an analysis of the effects of commercial policies on the vector of

equilibrium real exchange rates, see Edwards (1987a,b, l989b) and Ostry

(1988a,b).
                                      - 35


V.3   Summary



      In this   paper,   we have developed an intertemporal, optimizing,

perfect foresight, real model of a small open economy to investigate

several aspects of capital controls. In particular, we were interested in

analyzing formally how the presence of capital controls (in the form of a

tax on international borrowing) alters the way in which the economy is

affected by terms of trade shocks. Additionally, we examined possible

interactions between intertemporal distortions in the form      of   a tax on

international borrowing, and labor market rigidities. Our purpose here

was to determine the "optimal" (second best) degree of capital controls,

and to inquire as to the ways in which the presence of an economy-wide

minimum wage will modifies the results obtained for terms of trade shocks

in the absence of such rigidities.

      Although the analysis presented in this paper is highly abstract, it

has some important implications for the current debate on the possible

effects of capital market liberalization to be undertaken in 1992 by the

EEC countries within the Context of the EMS. In that regard, then, in

deriving the model we focused on an abstract economy that captures some of

the most salient features of the EEC countries, abstracting from other

complications such as the existence of trade distortions and capital

accumulation. An advantage of our approach is that by focusing on a real

fully optimizing model, we can abstract from the purely financial effects

of capital controls, concentrating instead on the important welfare

consequences of different policies and disturbances.

      The main conclusions of our paper may be summarized as follows:
                                   - 36   -




     1.     In the presence of capital controls, terms of trade disturbances

may have a perverse effect on welfare.        That is, a terms of trade

deterioration (improvement) may be welfare-improving (immiserizing). The

reason is that, under certain conditions, a deterioration (improvement) in

the terms of trade will induce interteuiporal substitution of expenditures

towards (away from) its optimal (undistorted) level, thereby mitigating

(magnifying) the existing distortion created by the capital control.

Naturally, the overall effect on welfare requires that we compare this

distortion-mitigation (magnification) effect with the usual (import

revaluation and intertemporal substitution) effects associated with

changes in the terms of trade that are present even in the absence of

capital controls.

     2.     The way in which terms of trade disturbances affect welfare and

the current account in an economy with capital controls will depend on the

behavior of real exchange rates. The reason is that the path of the real

exchange rate is a key determinant of agents intertemporal consumption

decision. Since it is through distorting saving and investment decisions

that capital controls affect welfare and the current account, it should

not be surprising that the interaction of real exchange rate changes with

existing capital market distortions will be an important component in the

overall response of the real economy to terms of trade shifts.

     3.     It is not possible to know a priori whether a terms of trade

deterioration will result in an equilibrium real exchange rate

appreciation or depreciation. This indeterminacy is at the heart of the

possibility of obtaining unorthodox results in economies with capital

controls.
                                       - 37   -




    4.         In the presence of capital controls it is possible that a

temporary terms      of   trade disturbance will result in a current account

improvement. However, the conditions required for this result are

different from those that generate such a result in economies without

capital controls. This is because the welfare effect associated with the

terms    of   trade disturbance depends on the presence of capital controls.

        5.     The interaction between the tax on foreign borrowing and the

labor market distortion arises exclusively through the response of the

equilibrium real exchange rate. If the real exchange rate does not change

when the tax on borrowing is altered, the employment level will remain

unchanged.

        6.     There is no presumption that, in the presence of a labor market

distortion in the form of economy-wide minimum wages, the optimal tax on

foreign       borrowing will be positive.
        7.      Under some plausible assumptions--the labor market is distorted

in period 1 only, and there is no initial tax        on   borrowing- -the optimal

(second best) intervention in the capital market consists of a subsidv to

foreign       borrowing. This result suggests that, by concentrating on

monetary and financial effects, previous studies of capital          controls may

have missed some important welfare consequences of this type of market

intervention.

        8.      The presence of labor market distortions creates additional

channels through which terms of trade disturbances affect welfare and the

current account, namely employment effects. Whether terms of trade

disturbances will result in higher or lower employment will depend on

factors intensities, as well as on the response of the real exchange rate.
                                 - 38   -




The possibility of obtaining unorthodox welfare effects depends in this

case on the response of employment to changes in the terms of trade.
                                 - 39


                               REFERENCES



Adams, C., and J. Greenwood, "Dual Exchange Rate Systems and Capital
     Controls: An Investigation," Journal of International Economics,
     Vol. 18 (1985), pp. 43-63.

Aizenman, J., "On the Complementarity of Commercial Policy, Capital
     Controls, and Inflation Tax," Canadian Journal of Economics,
     Vol. 19, No. 1 (February 1986), pp. 114-33.

Argy, V., and M. Porter, "The Forward Exchange Market and the Effects
     of Domestic and External Disturbances Under Alternative Exchange
     Rate Systems," Staff PaDers, International Monetary Fund
     (Washington), Vol. 19 (November 1972), pp. 502-28.

Dixit, Avinash K., and Victor Norman, Theory of International Trade: A
     Dual. General Eauilibrium A1,Droach (Cambridge: Cambridge University
     Press, 1980).

Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Real Interest Rates, Home Goods, and Optimal External
     Borrowing," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 91 (February 1983),
     pp. 141-53.

Edwards, Sebastian, "Tariffs, Terms of Trade, and the Real Exchange Rate
     in an Intertemporal Optimizing Model of the Current Account," Working
     Paper, No. 2175 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of
     Economic Research, March 1987).

_____ Real Exchange Rates. Devaluation and Adjustment (Cambridge,
     Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1989a).

____ "Tariffs,   Capital Controls and the Equilibrium Real Exchange Rate,"
     Canadian Journal of Economics, (forthcoming, 1989b).

       "Temporary Terms of Trade Disturbances, the Real Exchange Rate, and
     the Current Account," Economica, (forthcoming, 1989c).

_____  and Jonathan D. Ostry, "Anticipated Protectionist Policies, Real
     Exchange Rates and the Current Account," Revised version of NEER
     Working Paper No. 2214, February 1989.

Flood, Robert P., and Nancy Peregrim Marion, "The Transmission of
     Disturbances Under Alternative Exchange Rate Regimes with Optimal
     Indexing," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 96 (1982), pp. 41-66.

Frenkel, Jacob A., and Assaf Razin, "The Limited Viability of Dual
     Exchange Rate Regimes," Working Paper, No. 1902 (Cambridge,
     Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research, April 1986).
                                 - 40


Frenkel, Jacob A., and Assaf Razin, Fiscal Policies and the World Economy:
     An Intertenmoral Avroach (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1987)

Giavazzi, Francesco and Alberta Giovannini, Limitinz Exchange Rate
     Flexibility: The Eurooean Monetary System (manuscript, 1988a).

Giovannini, Alberto, "International Capital Mobility and Tax Avoidance"
     (unpublished manuscript, 1988b).

Greenwood, Jeremy and Kent P. Kimbrough, "Capital Controls and Fiscal
     Policy in the World Economy," Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 18,
     No. 4 (November 1985), PP. 743-65.

Harberger, Arnold C., "Currency Depreciation, Income and the Balance of
     Trade," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 58, No. 1 (February 1950),
     pp. 47-60.

Laursen, Svend and Lloyd A. Metzler, "Flexible Exchange Rates and the
     Theory of Employment," Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 32,
     No. 4 (November 1950), pp. 281-99.

Neary, J. Peter, "International Factor Mobility, Minimum Wage Rates, and
     Factor Price Equalization: A Synthesis," Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, Vol. 100, No. 3 (August 1985), pp. 551-70.

_____and Frances Ruane, "International Capital Mobility, Shadow Prices,
     and the Cost of Protection," International Economic Review, Vol. 29,
     No. 4 (November 1988), pp. 571-85.

Ostry, Jonathan D., "Intertemporal Optimizing Models of Small and Large
     Open Economies with Nontradable Goods," Ph.D. Dissertation,
     University of Chicago (August l988a).

_____  "The Balance of Trade, Terms of Trade and Real Exchange Rate: An
     Intertemporal Optimizing Framework," Staff Pai,ers, International
     Monetary Fund (Washington, December 1988b).

Rodrik, Dani, "Trade and Capital Account Liberalization in a Keynesian
     Economy," Journal of International Economics 23, no. 1/2 (August
     1987), pp. 113-130.

Svensson, Lars E.0., "Oil Prices, Welfare, and the Trade Balance,"
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 99, No. 4 (November 1984),
     pp. 649-72.

_____and Assaf Razin, "The Terms of Trade and the Current Account:
     The Harberger-Laursen-Metzler Effect," Journal of Political Economy,
     Vol. 91, No. 1 (February 1983), pp. 97-125.
                                - 41   -




Van Wijnbergen, Sweder, "Tariffs, Employment and the Current Account:
     Real Wage Resistance and the Macroeconomics of Protectionism."
     International Economic Review 28, no. 3 (October, 1987): 691-706.
</ref_section>
