                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             OPENNESS, OUTWARD ORIENTATION, TRADE LIBERALIZATION
              AND ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES




                              Sebastian Edwards




                            Working Paper No. 2908




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 March 1989




This paper is part of a project on "Trade Regimes and Development" being
carried out at the CECPT division of the World Bank. I have benefjtted from
comments by Bela Ealassa, Vjnod Thomas, Jim de Melo, Mohsjn Khan, John
Pencavel, Peter Montiel, John Nash, Ricardo Faini, Ramon Lopez, Gene Grossman
and the participants of the CECPT Trade seminar at the World Bank. I am also
grateful to Guillermo Calvo and Ed Learner for helpful discussions, and to
Miguel Savastano for very helpful assistance. This paper is part of NBER's
research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                      NBER Working Paper #2908
                                      March 1989


          OPENNESS, OUTWARD ORIENTATION, TRADE LIBERALIZATION
           AND ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES


                                ABSTRACT




     This paper deals with the role of trade regimes in determining economic

performance and growth in the developing countries. The policy and empiri-

cal literatures on trade orientation and economic growth are critically

reviewed; it is argued that a key limitation of these works has been the

inability to create measures of trade orientation that are:   (i) objective;

(ii) continuous and (iii) comparable across countries. A growth model

that relates trade orientation to the ability to absorb technological

progress from the rest of the world is developed for the case of a small

country. The model is tested using a new index of trade orientation that is

free from the limitations described above. The results obtained using a

cross country data set provide strong support to the hypothesis that, with

other things given, countries with a less distorted external sector grow

faster than those countries with a more distorted external sector. The new

theories of economic growth are also discussed, and their usefulness for

analyzing the relation between trade orientation and growth in the develop-

ing countries is assessed.




                                       Sebastian Edwards
                                       Department of Economics
                                       UCLA
                                       Los Angeles, CA 90024-1477
                                           1



I. Introduction

     There is by now agreement among a large proportion of the economics

profession that countries that have relied on "outward oriented" development

strategies have done better over the medium and longer run than those

countries that have adopted "inward looking" strategies. Recently, and to

the surprise of many, even ECLA/CEPAL - -      not   exactly known for its endorse-

ment of outward policies -    - has   recognized that the excesses of import

substitution have been very costly for Latin America; some of its senior

staff members have recommended that in the future export promotion should

play a more central role in Latin American development policies (see Bianchi

et al. 1987).

     There seems to be relatively less agreement, however, on whether "trade

liberalization" packages have played an important role in the performance of

the outward oriented economies. For example, in a recent paper presented at

the World Bank-IMF Conference on adjustment with growth, Sachs (1987) ques-

tioned the idea that trade liberalizations are indeed a required component

of successful outward oriented strategies. Making reference to the

experiences of the East-Asian countries -- Japan, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan,

and Hong Kong -    - Sachs argues that these countries' success was to a large

extent due to an active role of government in promoting exports in an

environment where imports had not yet been fully liberalized, and where

macroeconomic (and especially fiscal) equilibrium was fostered (see also

Sachs, 1988).

     Whether one agrees with Sachs depends on how outward orientation,

export promotion and trade liberalization are defined. In fact,, in order to

have a meaningful discussion about the role of trade regimes and commercial

policies it   is   crucial to know exactly what we mean by each of these terms.
                                     2




Unfortunately this doesn't seem to happen anymore. Somehow in the midst of

the policy debate of the last few years we seem to have lost our control

over language and what for some is a "liberalized economy" for others is a

"nonliberalized" economy; for some "outward oriented" means a certain thing,

while for others it means a different one.

     There is little doubt that the policy discussion on trade regimes has

become highly ideologized. Perhaps the best example of the current confus-

ing state of affairs is that the case of South Korea is now considered an

example of the validity of different (almost opposing) views regarding

commercial policy. For some (i.e., World Bank 1987) Korea is the best

example of an outward oriented liberalized economy, while for others

(Collins and Park 1988, Sachs 1987) Korea is a prime example that in order

for a small developing economy to grow (very) fast it should avoid an abrupt

liberalization. Certainly, either one of these camps is not right in its

assessment, or the participants of the debate are giving a different meaning

to the same terms.

     Recently, we have witnessed a shift in the meaning of "liberalization".

In the more traditional policy literature of the l960s and 1970s trade

liberalization was defined in a very general way; what economists usually

meant was      relaxation of trade and exchange controls. In fact, in the

by now classical NBER study on trade regimes directed by Bhagwati (1978) and

Krueger (1978) a liberalization episode was defined as a more extensive use

of the price mechanism that would reduce the anti-export bias of the trade

regime. In her review article on the problems of liberalization presented

at the World Bank conference on the dynamics of liberalization, Krueger

(1986) reaffirmed this general definition and argued that even a (real)

devaluation in the presence of QRs constituted a liberalization episode.
                                       3




These are indeed very mild definitions of liberalization. In fact today

very few people will raise an eyebrow about them. However, more recently,

and in some quarters "trade liberalization" has acquired a more drastic

connotation, meaning an elimination of QRs coupled with a severe reduction

of import tariffs to a uniform level of around 10 percent. Moreover, the

term "economic liberalization" has, in many ways, become synonymous of free

market oriented policies with minimum or no government intervention at any

level. In a way it has become synonymous of "laissez faire".

     The difference between the "old" and "new" definitions of trade

liberalization is, to a large extent, one of degree or intensity. A devalu-

ation in the presence of QRs, or the replacement of QRs by (quasi)

equivalent tariffs is a mild form of liberalization. However, the reduction

of tariffs (with no QRs) to a uniform 10% or, for that matter, the complete

elimination of tariffs is a very drastic liberalization. In order to clear-

ly understand the different issues involved in policy discussions it is,

then, crucial to specify the jjtensitv of liberalization we are referring

to. Unfortunately this is not always done these days. As a result of the

ideologization of the policy debate, more and more people are discussing

these issues as if they were either "black" or "white", with no room for

different shades of grey in between.

     However, an increasing number of authors have recently begun to

recognize these problems. For instance in an interesting paper on the

experience of the East Asian nations, Bradford and Branson (1987) say:

     Part of the controversy undoubtedly derives from the use of
     loosely fashioned phrases which sound like dichotomous typologies
     when in fact more rigorous specifications of meaning would reveal
     that they define different points along a spectrum of policy
     regimes rather than stark alternatives.                  (page 17)
                                     4



     Bhagwati (1986) has also recognized the need to sharpen the debate by

clearly defining the key terms. He says:

     What exactly is meant by an export promoting trade strategy?
     Unless we are clear on that critical question, we cannot properly
     debate the merits of the strategy and its alternatives.
     Clarification of the question is therefore important, especially
     as everyday usage of this phrase echoes many different notions
     that are wholly unrelated,                                (page 11)

     Richard Cooper (198?) has referred to the dangers of the debate on

trade regimes becoming excessively ideological. He argues that the

imprecision of language is at the very heart of this danger. Since his view

captures in a very clear way the shortcominga of the debate, it is worth-

while quoting at some length from him:

     [Ljabels may become slogans. Words such as "liberalization" and
     "privatization" and "adjustment and growth" may become slogans
     used by both proponents and opponents of particular courses of
     action. If this happens, the debate can occur without sufficient
     refinements and therefore without being really joined. (page 516)

Regarding the intensity of liberalization Cooper says:

     [Ejconomics ... has continuous gradations and therefore gives rise
     to both subtle distinctions and to the possibilities for
     compromise. That is especially true of such terma as
     "liberalization" ...                                     (page 516)
And more importantly:

     [IJt is necessary to distinguish between different types of
     liberalization to make clear that liberalization can be viewed as
     a process rather than a state and to disassociate liberalization
     from laissez-faire.                                      (page 518)

     The purpose of this paper is to analyze at a broad level the question

of the relation between trade orientation, liberalization and economic

performance avoiding the ideological overtones that have plagued so much of

the recent literature, In particular, this paper tries to synthesize the

discussion by establishing some general organizing principles. In doing

this, the literature on the subject is analyzed. While emphasis is placed
                                      5




mainly on the empirical evidence, the new -- and quite exciting --

theoretical   literature on growth is briefly reviewed. Also, I present new

evidence on the relation between trade regimes and economic performance.

The novelty of this empirical analysis is that, contrary to the existing

literature, it uses an objective index of trade intervention.

     The paper is organized in the following way. Section II deals with

policy literature on trade regimes. Here the literature is reviewed and it

is pointed Out that, at some time, the notion of a continuum of regimes was

replaced by a dichotomized view. It is strongly argued that in order to make

progress in the policy discussion it is very important that we return to the

original notion of a continuum of regimes. Also in this section the increas-

ingly controversial concept of "liberalization" is discussed. Section III

reviews (some of) the empirical literature on trade orientation and economic

performance in developing countries. Here the question is what do we know

about this relationship, if anything. The approach taken focuses on

scrutinizing the methodology used by different studies. Section IV reviews

the new theoretical literature on growth, and discusses what these papers

have to offer to the debate on the relation between trade policy and growth.

Section V presents some preliminary new evidence on the relationship between

trade orientation and economic performance. The empirical analysis presented

here tries to overcome two important limitations of previous studies:

(1) the lack of an objective (as opposed to subjective) and continuous

indicator of the extent of distortions of a trade regime; and (2) the

difficulty in comparing any indicator of this kind across countries.

Finally, the paper closes with a summary and with a brief discussion on

directions for future research.
                                         6




II. The Policy Literature on Trade Regimes: A Review

       The abundant policy literature on trade regimes and economic

performance has mainly focused on two issues:       (a) defining alternative

trade regimes; and (b) determining the relationship between trade regimes

and growth. In this section I provide a general and selective review of

this literature, focusing on these two questions. I also discuss briefly

the different measures of "protection" that have been used in studies on

trade reforms.


11.1 Definine a Trade Reaime

       The purpose of this subsection is to discuss alternative definitions of

trade regimes that have been used in the literature. A particularly

important objective of the section is to illustrate the way in which the

meaning of "liberalization" has changed in the last few years.

       Little, Scitovsky and Scott (1970) and Balassa (1971) are the

pioneering modern studies on trade orientation and economic performance.

These influential works discussed the characteristics of two broadly defined

trade regimes - -   import   substitution and export promotion -   - and   dealt with

some important issues related to the transitional period from one regime to

another. No effort was made in these studies, however, to provide a

detailed tsxonomy of trade regimes.

       In the classic NEER study directed by Krueger (1978) and Bhagwati

(1978) we find for the first time a systematic development of concepts that

allow a more or less formal classification of trade regimes. In this study

two key concepts were introduced into the discussion:       (1) the degree of

kiaa   of   the trade regime; and (2) the nremiuzs that is created by the

existence of quantitative restrictions (QR5) in the importables market.
                                             7




    The "bias" of the trade regime is defined as the ratio of the exchange

rate effectively received by exporters (EERx) to the exchange rate effect-

ively paid by importers (EERQ. If this ratio is lower than one it is said

that the trade regime is biased againat exports. More specifically the

effective exchange rate for exports is calculated as the nominal exchange

rate applied to exports (Ex) corrected by export subsidies s and other

incentives to exports

               EER —
                  x Ex(l+s+r).
On the other hand, the effective exchange rate for imports is defined as the

nominal exchange rate applicable to imports EM corrected by the average

(effective) import tariff (t), other import surcharges (n) and the prem-

ium associated to the existence of quantitative restrictions (P):2


               EERx —   E1(l+t+n+P).
Naturally, if there are unified nominal exchange rates for commercial

transactions then Ex —          — E.   The degree of bias of the trade regime is
                           EM

given by:

                     EER        E (l+s+r)
               B —         —                                                   (1)
                               EM(l+t+n+P)

     Two points are worth making at this point. First, this definition of

bias is based on averate incentives. We can thus have a country that

protects some sectors but that still, on average, does not exhibit an anti-

export bias (B < 1). Second, this definition of bias implicitly allows for


     1Nsturally, if exports are taxed, s and/or r will be negative.

     2Krueger's (1978) definition is slightly different. We have decided to
use the definition corresponding to Bhagwati's (1986) reinterpretation of
Krueger because it facilitates the discussion.
                                         8




a continuum of regimes; B cen be high, low, somewhat high or relatively

low. Even though for analytical purposes we can (and should) define

threshold values for B --       B — one being the more natural threshold -     - this
approach is not based on a dichotomized view of trade regimes.

     In order to evaluate the effect of trade policies the Krueger-Bhagwati

study combined the concept of ki       with   the definition of five phases in the

evolution of trade regimes. Phase I is characterized by across-the-board

imposition of quantitative controls, usually associated to a balance of pay-

ments crisis. During Phase II the control system becomes more complex and

discriminatory, increasing the anti-export bias of the regime. Phase 3 is

the beginning of the liberalization process and is characterized by the

implementation of a (nominal) devaluation and relaxation of some QRs.

During Phase 4 further steps towards replacing quotas by tariffs are

implemented. In Phase 5 the economy has become fully liberalized: current

account transactions are fully convertible and QRs are not used any longer.

     In a much needed synthetic paper Jagdish Bhagwati (1986) makes an

effort to further clarify the definition of trade regimes, using the

framework developed by him and Krueger in the NBER study. According to

Bhagwati it is useful to distinguish between three basic trade strategies:

1. Imoort Substitution XIS) Stratezy: Bias C 1

2. ExDort Promotion (EP) Stratezv: Bias           1

3. Ultra ExDort Promotion Stratesv: Bias > 1.

     Three points are worth noting. First, within the tradition of the NBER

study there still is room for a continuum of regimes. We can face a mild IS

strategy -- where   B is slightly below 1 -      - or   we can have a regime heavily

oriented towards IS --   with   a bias index well below one. Second, Bhagwati

has chosen to label the neutral regime (8 = 1)           "export promotion".
                                       9




Naturally if B       1 there is no bias against exports, but there isn't

either a bias in favor of exports as the label EP usually implies. Third,

and perhaps more importantly, neither of these regimes is necessarily

related to a "hands off" or "laissez-faire" strategy. In fact an EP

strategy can be achieved with a highly interventionist government that, on

average does not distort the ratio (l+s+r)/(l+r+n+P). Moreover, an ultra

export promoting strategy, where B > 1, may require significant government

intervention. As discussed below, this fact has recently prompted some

experts to make an additional distinction between a neutral trade regime and

a liberal trade regime.

     It was argued in Section I that the notion of "trade liberalization"

has changed significantly in the last decade. In the original NBER study

liberalization was defined in a very general way as a more extensive use of

the price mechanism. Anne Krueger has, in fact, maintained that position

throughout the years.3 At the specific operational level, in the synthesis

volume of the NBEE. project Krueger defined trade liberalization as a reduc-

tion in the premium resulting from the use of QRs. There is no mention of

zero or even very low tariffs. In fact, it must be noticed that according

to this definition we can have a "liberalized" economy with very high

tariffs. This, indeed, is a possibility that Krueger recognizes:

     Inspection of the definitions of bias and liberalization shows
     that there is no necessary reason, at least in theory, for a
     connection between the two. A resime could be fully liberalized
     and vet emolov exceedingly himh tariffs in order to encourage
     inmort substitution. The regime would then be liberalized and
     highly biased.                      (1978, p. 89, emphasis added)

     This definition of liberalization is indeed very different to the way

in which the concept has been used (as synonymous with free trade) in the


     3
         Krueger (1978, 1981, 1984).
                                         10



last few years.

       An important implication of Krueger's definition is that a devaluation

in the presence of QRs constitutes a step towards liberalization. The

reason, of course, is that if there are QRs a devaluation will reduce the

premium obtained by those that have an access to the quota.

       On the other hand, as noted before, the definition of an unbiased or

neutral trade regime (B = 1)        does not preclude in any way an active role

for the government. We can attain a B          1 either with high levels of s,

t, r, n, and P or with no government intervention in international

trade.4 This has recently prompted a number of authors to make a distinc-

tion between a neutral trade regime (B = 1)        and a liberal regime where

there is almost no government intervention. According to this view

governments should not only aim at reducing the anti-export bias

-   - and   definitely should not try to promote exports via intervention -   - but
should try to implement a liberal strategy.5

       Lal and Rajapatirana (1987) are, perhaps the clearest representatives

of the new liberal view regarding trade regimes. They reject government

intervention both to protect imports and to promote exports:

       Of course, exoort oromotion can be as inefficient and chaotic as
       orotection .... The liberal position on trade and growth (which we
       support) is different. As a first step it entails a neutral trade
       regime.                                   (p. 208, emphasis added)

And they go on to say:

       The case for a liberal trade regime ... becomes part of the
       general case for markets against mandarins .   .. . [IJf
                                                            one accepts
       the need for restraints on the natural and often irrational


     1'Notice that until now we haven't said anything about other sectors
such as the labor market, the capital market or the capital account. Some
of the issues that arise when we look at many markets are addressed below.

       5See, for example, World Bank (1987), Lal and Rajapatirana (1987).
                                        11



     dirigisme of mandarins in most developing countries, then the
     adoption of a liberal trade regime ... becomes an important means
     to this end.                                             (p. 209)

     Naturally, according to this view liberalization is different from the

milder and more specific notion employed by Krueger. For the advocates of

liberal regimes, liberalization is (almost) synonymous with free trade and

"laissez faire". Although Lal and Rajapatirana recognize that "it is

important to distinguish between the decree and pattern of protection"

(p. 197,   emphasis   added), their analysis still has a distinctive

dichotomized flavor.

     Criticizing some of the implications of this "liberal" view, Jeffrey

Sachs, Rudiger Dornbusch and other prominent researchers have recently

argued against "liberalization" in the developing countries. For example,

commenting on the links between liberalization and the resolution of the

debt crisis Sachs (1987) notes:

     The current focus on liberalization is distracting attention from
     the more urgent needs of the debtor countries. . .. [T]he attempts
     to stimulate exports at all costs through trade liberalizations or
     aggressive depreciations of the exchange rate can often undermine
     a stabilization program and thus postpone a resolution of the debt
     crisis"                                                    (p. 294)

And later he says:

     [E]xport orientation can be pursued without an across-the-board
     import liberalization and can be fostered by an activist
     government.                                   (1987, pp. 322-3)

     It is clear that Sachs is not using the term liberalization in the

traditional Krueger sense. He is not even allowing for the possibility of

different degrees of liberalization. It would seem fair to say that forhim

liberalization has become an all-or-nothing event, where if you opt for it
                                       12



the government has to completely relinquish its role.6


     The Need for a Continuum

     Recently, Bradford and Branson (1987) and Edwards (1988) have argued

that in order to rescue the policy debate from its current overly

ideologized overtones it is necessary to think, once again, of trade regimes

as a continuum.

     Table 1 contains the typology suggested by Bradford and Branson (1987).

They argue that outward and inward orientation are very general categories

that serve to denote whether the policy emphasis is put on the domestic

markets or on international trade. Thus they are placed in the middle of

the continuum. They then use the terms              and closed economies to cap-

ture the degree of openness of a country. In their analysis these concepts

are not necessarily the result of policies but rather "endogenous economic

outcomes". An economy can be closed --       that   is, total trade (imports plus

exports) does not exceed 5% - -   either   because its resource endowment is

similar to the world's endowment or because of trade impediments. An

economy is one with a neutral trade regime and a large share of trade in

GDP. Notice that there are various categories of open economy, depending on

the role of policies in other sectors. Towards the closed economy end of

the spectrum the authors place innort substitution (IS). This is a regime

that deliberately discriminates against imports that compete with domestic-

ally produced goods. Again the authors distinguish between different shades

of IS. On the other extreme of the spectrum Bradford and Branson have

placed different types of exoort Dromotion. This regime is characterized



     6However, in a recent paper Sachs (1988) criticizes "significant"
liberalizations. Still, he does not make an explicit distinction between
the effects of different types of liberalization programs.
                                           13




                                         TABLE 1

                          Definition of Trade Regimes:

                          The Bradford-Branson Continuum




Autarky        No trade                                             Dirigisme

               "Delinking"
               Self-reliance
Closed         Exports and imports less than 5% as a share of GDP
Economy
Import         (a) Discriminates against all imports through
Substitution       controls: EERm > EERx
               (b) Selective discrimination
               (c) Mild and limited applications ("left wing
                   deviations")
Inward         Priority given to the domestic economy               Markets
Orientation
Outward        Priority given to exports                            Markets
Orientation
Trade          Exports 15% or more as a share of GDP
Economy
Open Economy Internal liberalization EERx — EERm
               (a) tradable goods
               (b) (a) +    nontradable     goods
               (c) (a) +    (b)   -   macroeconomic variables
Export         (a) Uniform subsidies for all exports:
promotion          EERx > EERm
                (b) Selective subsidies:
                   Industrial policy
                   Import substitution
                    ("right wing deviations")                        Dirigisme


NOTE: EERx and EERm are the real effective exchange rates for exports and
       imports, respectively.

Source: Bradford and Branson (1987, p. 16).
                                     14



by active government intervention aimed at boosting export performance.

     Although not complete, this taxonomy is very useful. One of the

missing elements, however, refers to placing the "liberal regime" a la Lal

and Rajapatirana within this spectrum. This type of regime should be placed

in between the onen economy and exnort tromotion categories of the table.

     In general, there is little doubt that considering a trade regime as a

continuum rather than as a dichotomy will greatly improve the quality of the

debate. However, while it is not difficult to define such a continuum at an

analytical level, it is quite hard to find empirical counterparts to these

concepts. As will be argued in detail in Section III, one of the main

limitations of the existing empirical evidence on the relation between trade

regimes and economic performance has been precisely its inability to design

and construct adequate indexes of trade orientation. Ideally, such indexes

should satisfy the following three criteria: (a) Objectivity. It is

necessary that the index used to classify a country's trade regime (or to

locate it within the spectrum) is based on relatively objective criteria and

not on subjective preconceptions brought in by the researchers.7 (b) Cont-

inuity. The ideal index should allow for different shades of grey in

between the extreme regimes. We would like to be able to determine whether

or not small movements in either direction in the trade orientation spectrum

will affect economic performance. (c) Comparability. The index should be

useful for cross-country comparisons.

     Unfortunately, gigantic data limitations have precluded researchers to

construct indexes of regimes that satisfy these three characteristics. In

Section IV of this paper, however, an attempt is made to capture the effects


     7The main problem with the subjective approach rests on how to classify
the countries in the first place. Where should Korea or Brazil be placed?
                                      15



of the inclusion of two indexes that satisfy (some of) these requirements on

a regression that explains the economic performance of a group of developing

countries.


11.3 A Diaression on Liberalization. Effective Protection and Domestic
      Resource Costs

      Most of the indicators commonly employed to characterize the trade

regime prevailing in a particular country -   - such   as the bias index B - -

reflect,   at best, the averaze level of protection given to two broadly

defined sectors of the economy. However, almost every country protects

different sectors at different rates. In particular, final goods usually

have different tariffs and QRs than capital goods and intermediate inputs.

A number of authors have indeed recognized that having information on both

the average level and the complete structure of protection are important.

As a result, most studies on trade liberalization -     - including   the Bhagwati-

Krueger (1978), the Balassa (1982) and the Krueger (1983) projects -- have

tried to compute Effective Rates of Protection (ERPs) and Domestic Resource

Costs indexes (DRCs) to measure more accurately the way in which input-

output relations affect the extent of "true" protection granted to a

particular sector of the economy.

      The concept of effective protection was pioneered by Corden (1966),

Balassa (1965) and Johnson (1965) and tries to capture in a single indicator

the rate of protection granted to value added in a given industry.8 During

the 1960s and early 1970s the literature on measurement and implications of


      8The rate of effective protection to industry j is defined as r            —

                 where VA is domestic value added, and VA* is "world
(VA-VA)/VA
value added taken to be a proxy of the most efficient way of producing j.
Assuming a linear relation between inputs and outputs - where a4 denotes
an input-output coefficient -- the ERP for industry j   can be rewitten as:
  —
      (tjEaijti)/(laij)       where t is the tariff on input i.
                                     16




ERPs developed extensively and a number of studies computed ERPs for large

groups of countries.9

     In spite of the efforts made by a number of experts to generalize the

applicability of ERPs and DRCs, both concepts have important limitations

within a general equilibrium framework. Perhaps the most serious problem is

that in a world with more than two final goods ERPs give no information on

the way in which resources will be reallocated in the case of changes in the

tariff structure. This limitation of ERPs has led a number of experts to

argue that the concept of effective rate of protection should be abandoned

altogether (see for example Dixit and Norman 1980 and Dixit 1986; Bhagwati

and Srinivasan 1983 provide a fairly detailed discussion on the properties

and limitations of ERPs and DCRs; see Balassa and Schydlowsky on the

relation between Efls and DRCs).

     Although both ERPs and DRCs are much more limited than what it once was

thought, they do provide some valuable information; abandoning them would be

clearly an overreaction. More specifically, ERPs and DCRs give us informa-

tion on the extent of inefficiency "society", or perhaps more accurately the

"government", is willing to grant a particular sector)° Even though this

is a much more modest role than that assigned to these indicators in the

past, it is a particularly important one in political economy studies of

trade policy. What is critically important, however, is to be aware of the

limitations of these concepts.




     9See, for example the studies directed by Balassa (1971, 1982).

     10The reason for this interpretation follows directly from the
definition of ERP4 as the percentage deviation of domestic unit value
added from world (and efficiently produced) unit value added in industry j.
                                      17




     An important implication of the shortcomings of ERPs   and   DRCs is that

traditional policy recommendations based on these concepts should be

reanalyzed to verify if they still hold under fully specified general

equilibrium frameworks. For instance, one recommendation that does not

survive in a general equilibrium setting is the "uniform tariff" proposal.

Generally speaking, in equilibrium models with intermediate inputs,

government budget constraints and other realistic features a uniform tariff

structure will be optimal only by mere coincidence.11


III. The E.irica1 Evidence        Trade Reies and Economic Perfpr.ance
      in   DeveloDina Countries
     The purpose of this section is to critically review the empirical

evidence provided by the literature on policy orientation and economic

performance. Most studies in this area have asked a variant of the

following question: "What does the empirical evidence say regarding the

relationship between trade orientation, exports and economic growth?"13 In

reviewing this literature it is convenient to classify the different

contributions in four broad and related categories:




     11There may be, however, some practical reason to advocate a uniform
tariff. One such reason considered by Harberger (1984) is that only if
there are uniform tariffs (and subsidies on exportable inputs) we can
for sure the ERPs structure; they will all be equal. What is not clear,
however, is why we should worry about the structure of ERP5! A more
convincing reason for advocating a uniform tariff stems from the political
economy of protection.

         am grateful to Miguel Savastano for his assistance in preparing
this section.

     13Most of these studies have been characterized by a lack of rigorous
theoretical underpinnings. Naturally, the most important contributors to
this literature are perfectly aware of its lack of theoretical base. See,
for example, Krueger (1983, p. 42).
                                     18




(a) Multicountry studies (primarily syntheses volumes of large-scale

     projects);

(b) Studies that investigate specifically the relation between exports and

     output growth;

(c) Studies based on the Kravis (1970) decomposition method that try to

     determine the relative contribution of external demand, competitiveness

     and diversification factors in the evolution of a country's exports;

     and

(d) Studies that compare the Beckscher-Ohlin predictions regarding the

     factors composition of trade with the actual trade patterns.

     Table 2 lists 17 recent empirical studies classified in these four

groups.

     As pointed out, a coon problem faced by all these studies consists of

the lack of an appropriate indicator of "trade orientation". Any attempt to

relate trade regimes and growth requires data on either how a trade regime

evolves through time in a particular country, or data that can be compared

across countries)4 This, of course, is not an easy task. For exsmple, the

recent Choksi, Michaely and Papagergiou (1986) project at the World Bank

constructed time series of a subiective index of trade liberalization for 19

developing countries. These indexes, however, were not comparable across

countries and, thus, could not be used to investigate empirically whether

different degrees of trade liberalization can explfln cross country

differences in economic performance. In the Krueger-Bhagwati project, on

the other hand, the researchers faced difficulties in constructing a series

of the Bias (B) index discussed in the previous section. The reason, of

     14
       Balassa (1985, 1988) derived a trade orientation index as the
percentage difference between the ac6tual and predicted per capita exports.
                                       19




                                     TABLE 2

        Classification   of Selected Empirical Studies on Trade Regimes


Grout A: Summary   Results   of Multicountrv Prolects on Trade Reaimes

                                                              No. of
                                                             Countries Period
1) Balassa, B.
     (1971)

2) Krueger, A. Liberalization Attemots and Conseau-             10        1950-72
    (1978)              1st Synthesis volume of NBER
                project on "Trade Regimes and Economic
                   Development".

3) Bhagwati, J. Anatomy and Consequences of Exchanae            10        1950-72
    (1978)       Control Reaimes, 2nd Synthesis volume
                 of NBER project on "Trade Regimes and
                 Economic Development".

4) Balassa, B. Development Stratesies and Economic              11        1960-73
    (1982)      Performance, Synthesis of World Bank
                Project on "Development Strategies in
                   Semi-Industrial Economies".

4a) Balassa, B. "Exports and Economic Growth: Further           11        1966-73
    (1978)      Evidence," Journal of Development
                   Economics.

5) World Bank      World Development Report, summarizes         41        1963-73
     (1987)        preliminary results of World Bank project              1973-85
                   on "Timing and Sequencing of Trade Liber-
                   alization Reforms".

Grout B: Studies Measurins Contribution of Exports to Growth in LDCs in a
          Neoclassical Production Function-Type Framework

6) Tyler, V.       "Growth and Export Expansion in              55        1966-77
     (1981)        Developing Countries," Journal of                  -
                   Development Economics.

7)   Feder, G.     "On Exports and Economic Growth," Journal     19      1964-73
     (1983)        of Development Economics.                     31 (2 groups)

8) Kavoussi, R. "Export Expansion and Economic Growth:           73       1960-73
    (1984)       Further Empirical Evidence," Journal of
                 Deve1oment Economics.

9) Ram, R.         "Exports and Economic Growth: Some            73       1960-70
     (1985)        Additional Evidence," Economic Deve1o-                 1970-77
                        and Cultural Chanze.
                                     20



Table 2 (continued
                                                             No. of
                                                            Countries Period

10) Balassa, B.      "Exports, Policy Choices and Economic 43         1973-79
    (1985)           Growth in Developing Countries After
                     the 1973 Oil Shock," Journal of
                     DeveloDment Economics.
11) Balassa, B.      "The Newly Industrialized Developing     12      1973-78
    (1981)           Economies After the Oil Crisis,"
                     Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv.
12) Jung, W. &       "Exports, Growth and Causality in        37      1950-81
    Marshall, P.     Developing Countries," Journal of
    (1985)           Develooment Economics.
13) Mutchinson, M.   "Exports and Growth in Developing        34      1950-81
    and Singh, N.    Economies: Identifying Externality
    (1987)           Effects," tJCSB Working Papers.


Grouo C: Studies Using Kravis (1970) "Decomvosition Method" to Analyze
          Exnort Performance in LDCs

14) Love, J.         "External Market Conditions, Compe-       27     1950-78
    (1984)           titivenees and Diversification in LDCs
                     Exports," Journal of Develooment Econ.
15) Kavoussi, R.     "International Trade and Economic         52     1967-73
    (1985)           Development: Recent Experience of                1973-77
                     Developing Countries," Journal of
                     DeveloDinE Areas.
16) Singer, H. and   "Trade Policy and Growth of Develop-      52     1967-73
    Gray, P. (1988) ing Countries: Some New Data,"             61     1977-83
                     World Dave lonment.


Groun D: Studies Usina Heckscher-Ohlin Framework to Analyze Pattern of
          Trade and Factor Productivity

17) Krueger, A.      Trade and Emvlovment in Develooinz        12     1960-75
    (1983)           Countries, Synthesis volume of NBER
                     project on "Alternative Trade Strateg-
                     ies and Employment.
18) Havrylyshyn, 0. "The Direction of Developing Country       45     1963-78
    (1985)           Trade: Empirical Evidence,"
                     Journal of Develonment Economics.
                                          21



course, had to do with the problems involved in computing the premium

associated to QRs, as veil as with the absence of reliable data on import

tariffs.

     Researchers have developed two types of strategies to deal with this

problem. (a) Some, as the Krueger-Bhagwati study, the World Bank (1987)

and Choski et al. (1988), have resorted to the construction of subjective

indexes of trade orientation)5 (b) Another group of researchers have

chosen to decompose the question of the effects of trade orientation on

economic performance into two stages. The first stage basically amounts to

assuznina -   - without   testing rigorously - -   that   a more liberalized regime

will encourage exports via a reduction of the antiexport bias.16 At the

second stage, then, the researcher usually tests whether higher exports (or

a more rapid growth in exports) have indeed been associated with a higher

rate of output growth (l4ichaely 1977, Balassa 1978, 1982).

     Multicountrv Studies

        The Krueger-Bhagwati NBER    project   dealt with 10 countries -   - Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Egypt, Ghana, India, Israel, Philippines, South Korea and

Turkey - -   during   the period 1950-1972. Detailed data on a number of

variables, including ERPs and DRCs were used to classify each country at a

particular moment in time in one of the Phases previously defined in the




     15The subjectivity of the indexes employed in the Krueger-Bhagwati -
study is, however, rooted on some objective indicators. In particular, as
mentioned below, in the empirical analysis Krueger tries to control for the
different degrees of distortions prevailing in each country.

              course the difficulty in computing B is at the heart of them
assumina that this relation between B and exports holds.
                                        22



project.17 Three groups were then formed: (i) countries that seemed to

have progressed steadily from phases I to IV (Brazil, Israel, South Korea);

(ii) countries that cycled back and forward between phases II and IV

(Chile, Colombia, Ghana, and the Philippines); and (iii) countries that

remained in Phase II for long periods (India, Turkey, and Egypt).

     Using the wealth of information generated in the ten country studies

Krueger (1978) and Bhagwati (1978) attempted to determine whether, on

average, the relaxation of the anti-export bias had affected exports and the

overall economic performance. We will review first Krueger's synthesis of

this project. An important finding is that devaluations -      - that   is, the

movement from Phase II to Phase III -   - generally   resulted in important reduc-

tions in the premium on import licenses and, thus, in a lover anti-export

bias. She also investigated the extent to which changes in the trade

orientation of a country contributed to an expansion of exports and whether

this phase movement implied some costs in terms of output growth. From a

regression analysis Krueger then found that while the real effective exchange

rate played a significant role in determining exports, the dummy variables

included to control for the different liberalization phases were not

significant. With respect to real output she found that on average, higher

exports were associated with higher GNP, with no significant costs being

related to the transition towards a more liberalized trade regime. Perhaps

Krueger's most important conclusion from this monumental cross-country study

was that in order to attain a sustainable growth in exports (and, thus, GNP)


     17Recall from Section II that the phases were defined as follows:   (I)
systematic imposition of across-the-board QRs; (II) control system becomes
more discriminatory with strong antiexport bias; (III) devaluation and
relaxation of some QRs;   (IV) continued liberalization, with greater
emphasis on the price mechanism than on QRs;   (V) fully liberalized and
convertible regime, no QRs remain.
                                        23




it is very important to make a credible commitment to maintain a high (i.e.,

depreciated) real effective exchange rate for exports.18

     On the other hand, in his synthesis volume, Bhagwati (1978) analyzed in

detail the static and dynamic gains from trade liberalization. He argued

that the pra-reform data on ERPe and DRCs clearly suggest that liberaliza-

tion in these countries generated important static gains in the form of

efficiency improvements. He also confirms Krueger's finding that biased

regimes negatively affect exports growth and that these are generally

responsive to price incentives. However, regarding the dynamic gains of a

change in trade orientation, however, he found no evidence linking a smaller

bias to either technological superiority or to higher savings ratios.

     Balassa (1978, 1982) summarizes a large World Bank project that focused

on 11 countries --   Argentina,   Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Israel, Yugo-

slavia, India, South Korea, Singapore and Taiwan --     for   the period 1960-73.

He establishes a fourfold classification according to the timing and extent

of the export promotion policies adopted by each country. He then evaluates

the effectiveness of these policies using the two-step methodology described

above. First Balassa analyzed whether export incentives fostered exports

growth and, in the second stage, he investigated the effects of an expansion

of exports on output growth. In the first stage of the analysis Balassa

makes use of two proxies for quantifying export incentives: the rate of

growth of manufacturing exports and the change in the export output ratio in

manufacturing. He found that these variables were consistently higher in

those countries that followed sustained export promotion policies. In the



           then argues that the best way to make sure that high RER will be
maintained is by supplementing liberalization with increased foreign
borrowing and a crawling peg.
                                     24



second stage of the analysis Balassa employed simple rank coefficients and

cross country regressions. His main finding was that outward orientation,

represented by a high growth rate of exports, had positive effects on output

growth. Although it was backed by individual country studies Balassa's

synthetic piece had some limitations that, in fact, have been present in

most of the subsequent literature. Some of these limitations refer to the

arbitrary definition of export incentives, the lack of a role for real

exchange rates in the explanation of export performance and the inability to

deal convincingly with causality issues.

     The recent World Bank project directed by Choksi, Michaely and

Papageorgiou is another ambitious multicountry study that has analyzed in

great detail the liberalization experiences of 19 countries since World War

II. Since this project has not been completed, it is not possible yet to

discuss all its findings. However, some preliminary results have provided

important information regarding the dynamics of trade liberalization. For

example, Michaely (1988) reports that in only one of 36 liberalization

episodes the trade reform resulted in an increase in the aggregate rate of

unemployment. This indeed is a striking result that suggests that trade

reforms do not have, even in the short run, a negative effect on output and

employment. Also, this study confirms previous findings that indicate that

consistently higher real exchange rates that support a liberalization

process result in faster output growth. In addition to the generalized

measurement problem, this study seems to have some limitations related to

the lack of firm theoretical basis, as well as to uneven empirical investi-

gations across countries.19 The World Develooment Reoort (1987) presents


     l9i say that it "seems" to have these limitations, because the final
report has not yet been released.
                                    25



some preliminary results obtained in this project, suggesting that countries

with a more liberal trade regime have outperformed the more inward oriented

economies in the last 25 years.

     Exports and Output Growth

     A number of studies focused their attention on the relationship between

exports expansion (see, in particular Balassa 1978, 1982) project and

related work by Michaely (1977). This literature has focused on testing the

robustness of the findings that indicate a positive effect of exports on

growth. This has been mainly done by controlling for the effects of addi-

tional variables, extending the sample of countries, and improving on the

measurement of the variables employed. It also provided a (weak) theoret-

ical base to the empirical work on this area by postulating that exports

should be considered as an additional factor of production in the aggregate

neoclassical-type production function of an open economy. The rationale for

adding exports as another factor is based on possible positive externalities

and technological diffusion effects they generated by more rapid exports.

In this sense, most of these studies derived their estimated reduced forms

from an augmented neoclassical production function such as:

               Y —   f(K,L,X)

where Y is the level of output,2° K is the capital stock (the growth of

which was usually proxied by the level of investment, I), L is the labor

force and X are exports.

     Table 3 provides a detailed summary of four representative articles of

this growing literature. The table shows the sample and period covered by


          account for the fact that exports are a component of GNP these
measures of output usually referred to the non-export GNP, i.e., GNP - total
exports.
                                         26



                                      TABLE 3

          Summary of Results of Studies Relating Exports Growth

                             To Output Growth (Group R)



                                       Araued Imorovement     Estimated Equation

Tyler     -55 middle income          -Less restrictive         —+                       + fl2t +
(1981)   LDCs. Eliminating           sample of countries.
         those with income per
         capita (Y/N) < 300.
                                     No selection bias
                                     with respect to
                                                               +fl3
          -Period: 1960-77           Balassa' s studies.

Feder
(1983)
         -2 samples of LDCs
         1) 19 middle income
                                     -Distinguishes theor-
                                     etically and empiric-
                                                               —
                                                                       pl"          +
                                                                                         2t. +
         countries                   ally between: factor                                        (1)
         2) 31 middle income         productivity differ-
         + low income                ential and external-      —                    +            +
         countries                   ity effects of EP
                                     policies in a 2-sector    + Y3             X/Y      +
                                     model (export and non-
                                     export sectors).          + 74                              (2)

Kavoussi -73 low and middle          -Examine whether the      - fi +                   + fi2t +
(1984)   income LDCs,    charac-     positive correlation
         terized by whether          between       and t       + 32                              (1)
                      $360 and       also   holds for low     'p—ao      +a+at+ 1            2
         excluding oil               income countries.         +       a3   +                    (2)
         exporters.                                           (X       — share of manu-
          -Period 1960-78.                                    factured X5 on


                                                                                l"
                                                              total exports).

Ram      -73 LDCs, low and           -Avoid selection              —o +                   +            +
(1985)   middle income dist-         bias.
         inguished by                -Test for absence of          +        + 4D         (low

         (Y/N)77      $300           simultaneity bias.       income dunmy).
         -2 subperiods: 1960-
         70, 1970-77.
                                         27



Table 3 (continued)

Study                       Recul ta                        Other Tests

Tyler            — 0.57   for the whole sample.   Pearson and Spearman rank cor-
(1981)     Drops to         — 0.055 when 6 OPEC   relations between t      and
           countries are excluded.                a) manufacturing output
                                                  b) domestic investment
                                                  c)     growth rate
                                                  d) manufactured XS growth rate
                                                  (all were positive and
                                                  significant).

Feder      1)         0.4 and significant,        Performs regression of (1) for
(1983)     introduction of exports as             17 developed countries and
           explanatory variable increased         found that 73 was significant
           the                                    but      wasn't, i.e., product-
           2) 14 0.13 statistically               ivity benefits of export expan-
           significant in both samples.           sion were exhausted in those
           Evidence of substantial prod-          countries.
           uctivity differentials in addi-
           tion to the usual externalities
           effect.

Kavoussi   1)      > 0 and significant for        Spearinan rank correlations
(1984)     the whole sample and for both          between     and GP for
           subsamples. But was twice as           a) The whole sample (positive
           large for the middle-income            and significant).
           than for the low-income                b) The 2 subsamples (higher
           countries.                             for the middle income than for
           2)      is not significant for         the low income group).
           the sample as a whole.                 c) The sample excluding
           For the middle-income group:           countries where X > 44%
                                                                   m
           03 < 0 not significant                 (reduce the significance of
           04 > 0 significant.                    the middle income group).
           For low income groups: opposite
           results.

Ram              > 0 and significant in all       -White's test is performed to
(1985)     the regressions.                       check for homoskedasticity of
                  larger in the second            disturbances and simultaneity
           and lower for the low-income           bias (favorable result).
           countries.
                                         28



each study, their distinctive features with respect to previous works, the

functional form postulated, the econometric results obtained and the

statistical procedures employed to test their hypotheses. As can be seen

the main concern of these studies has been to analyze the magnitude,

significance and sensitivity of the parameter associated with exports growth.

In general a large and significant value for this coefficient has been found.

This has been interpreted as supportive evidence in favor of the benefits of

export-promoting policies. A secondary concern of this line of research has

been to determine whether the positive relation between exports and output

growth is robust to the inclusion of low-income LDCs in the regression

sample; the results in this respect, however, have not been conclusive.

     A major shortcoming of these empirical findings is the fact that they

are obtained without controlling for the actual trade orientation (bias) of
                                          21
the countries included in the sample.          Furthermore, these studies tend to

derive policy recommendations without having tested the effectiveness of

(some of) the policy instruments they advocate to use. In this sense, then,

the results obtained by them should be considered, as Bhagwati (1986) points

out, as only a very indirect evidence in favor of the adoption of export

promoting policies.

     Another criticism to these studies has been focused on the issue of

causality. The empirical findings obtained from standard regression

techniques do not permit us to determine whether the growth of exports

"cause" the growth of output -   - as   these studies claim -   - or   if the



     2l recent papers by Balassa (1981, 1985) have tried to overcome this
deficiency by including policy related indicators as explanatory variables
in the regression. However, the variables chosen as proxies for the trade
orientation of the regime raise some doubts regarding the relevance of the
results.
                                     29




causality runs in the opposite direction -   - as   has been claimed, for

instance, by Findlay (1984). Some recent empirical works have addressed

this issue by applying Granger "causality" tests to the relation between

exports and output.22 Table 4 summarizes the methodology and results of two

of these works. As can be seen the evidence reported in these papers is

quite mixed; the causality from exports to output is accepted only for a

small number of countries, and in the majority of cases the hypothesis of

two-way causality Cannot be rejected. These results seem to confirm the

need for a more detailed and careful specification of the link between trade

orientation, exports growth and economic performance.

     Studies Based on Kravis' "Decomoosition Method" and on the
     Oblin Framework

     The general issue of the effects of alternative trade regimes on the

evolution of exports and on the overall economic performance of LDCs has

been addressed rather differently by the studies of group C in Table 2. The

objective of these studies has been to identify the relative importance of

the different factors that explain the rate of growth of exports in develop-

ing countries. In particular, these papers have followed the methodology

established by Kravis (1970) and have assumed that the evolution of exports

of a given country is determined by three factors: i) the evolution of

external demand; ii) the change in the degree of competitiveness (measured

as the change in the country's world market share); and iii) the change in

the degree of export diversification (proxied by the share of non-tradition-

al exports in total exports). While the first of these determinants is



     22There is, of course, a great deal of controversy on the real meaning
of "causality" and on the significance of the Cranger-type tests. See, for
example, Learner (1985). Notice, also, that Sections 3 and 4 of Balassa
(1985) are not subject to the causality criticism.
                                          30




                                        TABLE   4
             "Causality" Tests on the Effects of Exports on Growth



               Sanmie/Period   ___________________________________

Jung &         37 LDCs for     Granger "causality" tests and F-tests for the
Marshall       the period      signs of coefficients in:
(1985)         1950-1981
                                    —                  +                     +
                                                            Eb
                                    —                  +
                                    Etci st-i Ed X1 +
                               (Box-Pierce Q to test for autocorrelation)
                               -Lag length generally restricted to 2.




                                        i
Hutchinson     34 LDCs for     Granger "causality" tests and F-tests to
& Singh        the period      capture export externality effects in:
(1987)         1950-1985
                                    —                + Eb&-              +   Ec +
                                t
                                    —Zdi st-i +Ee.fj                     +EfS t-S +vt
                                                            .1     t-i
                               where:       fi —    (t-2)        non-export sector growth
                                            St —    I/Y,          change on Investment/GOP
                                                                  ratio.


                                                                                    (continued)
                                            31



Table 4 (continued')

              Interoretation of Outcome

Jung         ,,,jj.....     and        Ibn       4 countries classified as EP
 &                                               5 countries classified as ERG
Marshall     2 - 2              > 0     EP       3 countries classified as ICE
(1985)                                           2 countries classified as GRE
              (export promoted growth)           -22 countries couldn't be
                                                 properly classified.
              2 • 2       z64 >   0     ICE      Including countries always
                                                 characterized as EP examples like
              (internally generated X )          South Korea, Taiwan, Brazil.

              t-.2 z6<o                 ERG

              (export     reducing growth)

              k-pt a<o                  GRE

              (growth reducing exports)
              If 2<—>t or                not
              significant, no interpreta-
              tion is given,

Hutchinson    J,j.....    and         fln    -10 countries (mainly primary
     &                                       producing) showed evidence of
Singh         2 • ft z8 > 0 Export exter- positive export externalities.
(1987)                        nalities       -3 countries showed evidence of
              ft • 2 Ea > 0   Growth exter- growth externalities.
                              nalities       -3 countries showed evidence of
              X — ft E8 C 0 Negative         negative externalities.
                     or       externalities 18 countries couldn't be classi-
              ft -' 2   E C 0                fied, including Brazil and South
                                                 Korea.
                                     32




taken as exogenous for the developing countries, the last two are usually

interpreted as being the result of domestic trade orientation policies.

     The empirical analysis of these studies has consisted, basically, on

computing correlation coefficients between the value of exports and the

three explanatory factors for a particular group of countries in a given

period. Depending on the size and significance of these coefficients the

studies have determined whether the observed rate of growth of exports can

be considered primarily a result of the adoption of export-promoting

policies or of the conditions prevailing in the world market. Overall, the

results obtained by these studies are not fully conclusive. The relative

Importance of domestic as opposed to external factors seems to be very

sensitive to the group of countries selected and to the period chosen for

the estimation. In general, though, it appears that, as would have been

expected, the exports performance of LDCs is strongly dependent, but not

deterministically so, on the existence of favorable conditions in the world

market. It is not clear, however, what practical and new implications can

be derived from this finding; especially since the link between the

rompetitiveneas and diversification factors and the changes in the trade

regime appears to be extremely indirect and weak.

     An alternative methodology for investigating the consequences of a

change in the trade regime of LOGs has been used by the studies of group 0

in Table 2. TakIng the Heckscher-Ohlin model as a benchmark, these two

works performed different tests that confirmed that the factors content of

exports of developing countries is consistent with these countries' factors

endowment. Having determined that LOGs exports are relatively labor intens-

ive, these studies relate the actual distortions in factors markets (Krueger

1983) and in the pattern of trade across regions (Havrylyshyn 1985) with an
                                       33



excessive anti-export bias. Thus they emphasize on the potential gains in

terms of efficiency, employment and exports growth of the adoption of a more

outward oriented trade regime. However, despite their sound theoretical

base, these studies' empirical analysis is somewhat incomplete. In

particular, the fact that they do not provide an adequate and comparable

measure of the degree of distortions created by the trade regimes prevailing

in the countries analyzed undermines their policy recommendation.

Sumniarv

      The evidence discussed here - - plus a number of other contributions not

included   because of space considerations -   - provides   a broad picture in

support of the joint hypotheses that domestic policies affect exports and

that exports expansion has been associated with more sustained output growth.

It is indeed very difficult to dismiss the massiveness of these results. It

is   fair to say then, that a firmly established empirical finding, is that a

greater participation in international trade helps growth. However, from a

policy perspective this is not an overly helpful finding, since it does not

add too much to the current debate on openness, laissez faire, export promo-

tion and trade liberalization. We would be hard pressed to say which set of

policies would better achieve an efficient process of integration into the

world economy or to give precise prescriptions on what is the "optimum"

degree of openness. Two    basic   problems remain unsolved in this regard. The

first is the lack of clear theoretical underpinnings that would support these

empirical results. The second refers to the repeatedly mentioned measurn1ent

problem. Further development in this line of research would require, at

least, the use of an appropriate index of trade orientation in attempts to

explain cross-country differences in economic performance.
                                        34



IV. Recent Theoretical Developments on the Relation Between Trade and Growth

        As pointed out in Section III the traditional policy and empirical

literature on trade and growth have not been based on firm theoretical

grounds. In fact, as Helpman (1988, p. 3) has recently pointed out "current

theory is not suitable to deal in a satisfactory way with these alternative

views [on the relation between trade policy and growth]".23

        The most serious problem of traditional growth theory --    that   is, of

Solow's neoclassical growth model and its many variants --     is   that in

equilibrium (i.e., in the steady state) the rate of growth of output is

independent of policy related parameters. This means that two identical

countries that only differ with respect to their vectors of policies will

still grow, in equilibrium, at the same xafl. An additional and well-known

property of these models is that the equilibrium rate of growth of an

economy is independent of its savings rate. Thus, if two otherwise

identical countries have different savings ratios, they will still grow at

the same rate in the steady state. The model predicts, however, that they

uill have different equilibrium levels of income per capita.

        These limitations of traditional growth models can be illustrated with

a simple aggregate production function. Let Y be total output, F( )              be
a ccnstant returns to scale production function, K the capital stock, L

the labor force and A a parameter that represents "technology". Further,

let's assume that technological progress is of the "labor augmenting"
        24
type.        Aggregate output is then determined in the following way:


     23Findlay (1984) and Smith (1984) provide excellent surveys on the
relation between growth and trade. They don't deal, however, with the role
of domestic commercial policy; their main interest is, in fact, to explain
how growth will affect trade patterns.

        245ee Dixit (1976).
                                          35




                      —
                          F(K,LA)                                                 (3)


Denoting the rate of growth of output by g, the rate of growth of the

labor force by n, and (net) investment by I, we have:

                           I
                                +n+   A
                   g —

which is the equation that has been used extensively in accounting empirical
studies of the determinants of growth. These studies have found that, on

average, technological progress accounts for between 1/2 and 1/3 of real

growth in the developing countries. The presence of the investment ratio in

equation (4) suggests that a higher level of investment will be translated

into a higher rate of output growth. This, however, is            an equilibrium

situation. In the steady state the output capital ratio should be constant

and equation (4) collapses to:

                               A
                   g —    n+   ()
In   many ways this expression is disappointing, since it     states   that the

equilibrium rate of growth is determined by the sum      of   two exogenous van-

ables --   the    rate of growth of the labor force and the rate of technological

progress. Furthermore, this setting not only predicts that the equilibrium

rate of growth of an economy will be completely independent of policy

measures, but also that the rates of output growth will converge across
             25
countries.

      As a consequence of the recently renewed interest in growth theory, a

number of authors have tried to devise simple models that are free of some

of the limitations of the Solow-type framework. Lucas (1988) provides a


               last statement assumes, of course, that countries face the same
exogenously determined n and (A/A).
                                     36




good survey of the analytical issues involved in this line of research and

suggests that the explicit introduction of human capital accumulation in a

two-good open economy model can indeed explain the nonconvergence of rates

of growth across countries. Becker and Barro (1988), on the other hand,

have looked at the economics of population in order to understand the

determinants of the rate of growth of the labor force and output.


Increasing REturns to Scale and Endoenous Technoloical Proaress

     In general, the recent efforts to construct more satisfactory theories

of growth have focused on relaxing two key assumptions of the neoclassical

model:   (1) the constant returns to scale technology; and (2) the exogen-

eity of technological progress. The first assumption has been replaced by

the introduction of increasing returns to scale. Work in this area has been

pioneered by Rouier (l986a,b, 1988), who has suggested a number of growth

models with economies of scale that are either exogenous or endogenous to

the firm.26 Although in both settings the presence of increasing returns

makes it possible to generate an equilibrium situation with noncorivergent

rates of growth across countries, the models with internal economies of

scale provide a more appealing explanation. These models use an Ethier

(1982)-type production function which has the property that a greater degree

of specialization in the productive process increases efficiency. This

pioneer work does not deal directly, however, with the question of the

relation between trade policy and growth.

     With respect to the endogenous technological progress, Melpman and

Grossman (1988) have recently build an elegant two-country model that

emphasizes the role of R&D in the growth process. This model assumes the


     26Allyn Young (1928) was an early proponent of explanations of growth
based on increasing returns.
                                     37



existence of differentiated intermediate inputs produced by oligopolistic

firms, and of country-specific final goods. Investment in R&D allows each

country to produce "blueprints" for new intermediate inputs. The production

function for final goods is, as in Romer (1988), of the Ethier (1982)

variety, where total factor productivity is enhanced by an increase in the

variety of intermediate inputs. In this framework, investment in R&D is

translated into "acquired" comparative advantages. If there are cross-

country differences in the efficiency with which R&D takes place, relative

to efficiency in manufacturing, the model generates very rich dynamics. For

example, if changes in commercial policy reallocate spending towards the

final commodity produced by the country with comparative advantage in R&D,

the equilibrium world rate of growth will decline. An important feature of

this model is that in the steady state both countries grow at the same

(equilibrium) rate.

     oldrin and Scheinkman (1988) have developed a simple two-countries,

two final goods model that is able to generate different rates of growth

across countries. In this model there are infinite intermediate inputs, and

each country is subject to an economy wide learning-by-doing process      la

Arrow (1962). It is further assumed that the efficiency of learning-by-

doing depends on the distribution of the labor force across sectors; the

higher the proportion of workers employed in the modern (high technology)

sector, the more efficient will be the learning-by-doing. As a result of

this assumption the externality will affect the dynamics of comparative

advantage.

     Krugman (1988) has also focused on endogenous technological progress

and has developed a model based on Schumpeterian premises, where firms

undertake innovations based on expected future monopoly rents. The model
                                       38



considers a three period economy with N goods produced per period, and one

factor of production --   labor.   In period 1 firms have to decide whether to

invest in improving the production process. If they do, they obtain monop-

oly rents in period 2; in period 3, however, the new technology becomes

common knowledge and the monopoly rents disappear. A crucially important

feature of this model is that the existence of monopoly rents imply a

tradeoff between static welfare losses (i.e. ,   the traditional triangles) and

dynamic innovative gains. For our purposes, however, the moat interesting

result is that "the presence of endogenous technological development

increases the gains from international integration." Recent work by

Shleifer (1986) and Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny (1988) also make uae of the

Schumpeterian framework to develop interesting models of growth. In

particular, this latter paper exploits the existence of multiple equilibria

to give formal underpinnings to Rosenstein-Rodan's (1961) "big-push"

hypothesis. Once again, however, these models do iot deal with the narrower

question of the relation between trade policy and growth.

     There is little doubt that these new developments in growth theory have

opened up a highly promising area of inquiry that will help answer a number

of questions that could not be tackled satisfactorily by the traditional

approach.27 However, although many of these authors refer to their research

as dealing with fundamental development issues, most of these papers have

been derived with the structures of the advanced countries in mind. For

instance, the models of endogenous growth focus on the determinants of the

rate at which innovations are created, rather than on the rate at which

existing innovations are absorbed. While, undoubtedly, the development of


     27Other important papers include Rebelo (1987), Kohn and Marion (1987),
Barro (1988), and Jones and Manuelli (1988).
                                     39




new inventions should be central in any attempt to explain the historical

patterns of growth in today's mature economies, the question of the rate of

absorption of technology is the more important one for the developing

countries. A second problem with this line of research is that very little

effort has been made to provide empirical support for these theories. As

Krugman (1988) has recently indicated, 'the priority is really not how to

construct cleverer models, but how to build a bridge to reality" (p. 29).


V. New Evidence on the Relation Between Trade Realme and Economic
    Perfortiance

     The purpose of this section is to present new tests and   evidence on the

relation between trade regimes and economic performance. These tests differ

from previous work in two respects. First, an attempt has been made to find

an index of trade regime orientation that, at least partially, satisfies the

three requirements discussed in Sections II and III: (i) objectivity;

(ii) continuity; and (iii) comparability. Second, for the first time (at

least to my knowledge) an attempt is made to test the liberal trade regime

hypothesis. In effect, we make use of an index of trade intervention that

penalizes equally the presence of import taxes and export subsidies. The

section starts with the presentation of a minimal model on the relation

between trade orientation and growth. As most of the literature reviewed in

Section IV, the model emphasizes the role of technological innovations.

However, contrary to that literature we focus on the rate of absorotign of

technological advances.


V.1 Trade Orientation, the Absprotion of Technoloaical Prparess and Growth

     In this subsection a minimal model on the relation between trade

orientation and growth is derived. This model provides the basis for the

cross-country empirical results reported below, and differs from the works
                                       40



discussed in Section IV in two respects. First, it concentrates on out of

steady state situations and, second, it assumes that the country of interest

is a small developing country that faces given prices and, more important

for our purposes, is inserted in a world where innovations take place in the

advanced countries. That is, our economy faces exogenous technological

progress; the key question, then, is how fast, and how efficiently it

absorbs this technological progress.

     Of course, the idea of focusing on out of steady state situations when

attempting to explain growth is not new. For instance, Corden (1971)

follows this approach in his two-stage production model of trade and justif-

ies it by stating that: "It may be uninteresting to describe a state which

is many years ahead and which may indeed never be reached      [F]ocusing on

a theoretical ultimate state is thus purely an expositional device .   . . [A]
concern only with steady states would have obscured significant aspects of

the trade and growth process" (p. 219). Moreover, Lucas (1988) has recently

recognized that one possible way of overcoming some of the limitations of

the traditional growth theory is, indeed, to explore the characteristics of

out-of-steady state situations.28

     Our model is based on an important insight developed by W. Arthur Lewis

in his monumental work Theory of Economic Growth. In this study Lewis

argues that those developing countries that are more integrated to the rest

of the world will have an advantage in absorbing technological innovations

generated in the advanced nations. In Lewis' words: "New ideas will be

accepted more rapidly in those societies where people are accustomed to


     28He says: "Off steady state behavior would open up some new
possibilities, possibly bringing the theory into better conformity with
observation ..." (p. 14). However, he then goes on to say: I do not view
this route at all promising".
                                              41



change .   . . [A)   country which is isolated is ... by contrast unlikely to

absorb new ideas quickly .        ." (1955,   p. 178).

     There are a number of ways in which Lewis' insight can be formalized at

the microeconomic level. One possibility is to postulate a "learning-by-

looking" process of the type proposed by Findlay (197?).29 According to

that framework the mere association with newer commodities and technologies

increases the efficiency with which innovations are absorbed. In this

section, however, I will not try to provide the microfoundations of this

absorption process, but I will derive a simple aggregative that captures

Lewis' insight regarding the connection between trade orientation and

growth.30 The model itself is a simple adaptation of the Nelson-Phelps

(1965) study on the relation between human capital and growth.

     Let's start with an aggregace production function of the form assumed

in equation (3) (which is reproduced here for convenience):

                        —
                            F(K,LA)                                             (6)


from where we have already shown that the rate of growth of real output can

be expressed as:


                     g —    n() + cn +                                          (7)


(where the notation used in Section IV has been maintained).

     Contrary to traditional growth models we will consider the rate of

technological change as endogenous. More specifically, we will assume that


     29A 1984 study by Dalham, Ross-Larson and Westphal provide
microeconomic empirical support to this general view. Rodrick (1988)
develops optimizing models that yield to opposite results.

     30The formulation of such a micro model would have to be based on some
of the new and rich literature on North-South trade.
                                                 42



in every period the change in the technology parameter A is proportional

to the difference between the technological level achieved by "the" world

economy, W, and the degree of technological process in the domestic

country:


                  A—9(w-A); 0<9l                                            (8)


where 9 is a parameter that measures the speed at which technological

progress generated in the rest of the world is absorbed by the domestic

country.31 Lewis' effect is captured by assuming that 9 is a function of

the country's trade orientation. In particular, let r be a continuous

index of a country's trade regime whose value achieves a minimum under free-

trade (laissez-faire) and increases as the extent of trade intervention

grows.32 In such a case the relation between 9 and r will be given by:

                  9 —       9(t); 9'(•)   < 0.                              (9)


     Then, if it is assumed that the stock of world's technological

knowledge, W grows at the rate w:

                        —
                                                                          (10)


it is easy to show that the trajectory of the domestic stock of technology

will be given by:




     31An alternative would be to assume that the 9 index determines the
proportion of innovations that is actually absorbed. An undesirable
characteristics of this formulation, however, is that the gap between the
domestic and "world" stocks of knowledge would grow unboundedly.

     32Lewis is not clear on whether he considers openness as the key
determinant of the rate of absorption of innovations, or whether the crucial
variable is how distorted the external sector is. This, of course, is
related to the debate on export-promotion vs. liberal regimes. In this
model we interpret r as a measure of distortions. Whether this is
appropriate is, of course, an empirical question.
                                               43




                  At — (A0   -     i   W0)e
                                              9t
                                                   + (.jL_)W0et                   (11)


The steady state of this model, then, is characterized by three important

properties. First, in the steady state the stock of domestic knowledge will

be


                  A —        W0et                                                 (12)



Second, the steady State will imply the existence of an equilibrium

technological gap (C):


                  G—--—
                    A
                                                                                  (13)



which, in turn,    will   depend positively on the degree of trade intervention:

3G/3r > 0.

     Third, the equilibrium level of domestic knowledge, A, will be

negatively affected by increases in the trade orientation index:


                  aA
                  —— e             We     <0                                      (14)
                  or                8
                          (4.,)2
This means that a country with a higher degree of trade intervention will

have a lower equilibrium level of technological knowledge, and a larger

technological gap, than an otherwise identical economy. This fact is

depicted in Figure 1 where the two s schedules represent different rates

of growth of A; i.e., p — A/A — 8[(W-A)/A].                  p(rL) is the A/A schedule

corresponding to a low value of the intervention index, while p(rH) cor-

responds to a high value of r            and, consequently, to a larger equilibrium

technological gap. This result not only has implications for the levels of

output in the steady state but also suggests that as an economy goes through

a trade liberalization (lowering r), it will grow faster than an otherwise
                                          44



identical economy that maintains its degree of intervention. On the other

hand, the out of ateady state effects of changes in              r on the actual rate

of accumulation of knowledge is:


                  —   (j) 9' <   0                                                 (15)



Thia expression states that, for a given gap (W-A/A), a higher d&gree of

trade intervention r will reduce the rate of growth of knowledge accuinuls-

tion in the domestic country. In terms of our growth equation (7) this

implies that after taking into account the contributions of capital

accumulation and labor force growth, and after controlling for the techno-

logical gap, a higher degree of trada intervention will reduce the rate of

growth during the transition towards a more regulated regime. The empirical

analysis presented below makes wide use of this result.

     A difficulty with the empirical application of this model, however, is

that the relation between the technological gap and the 9 coefficient is

nonlinear. To overcome this problem, in the empirical analysis we have

mainly concentrated on a linear specification that allows us to isolate the

role of trade intervention. Equation (16) provides the linear specification

that captures this out of steady state property of the model:

                  —                  +         +        +
                      n'(1) + En         rrj       cG       ej
                                                                                    (16)



where gj is the growth rate of real output in country j ,              n   is the rate

of growth of the labor force in country j, r is a trade intervention index

in country j,         is the technological gap in that country, and ej is an

error term. The interest of our empirical study is to determine whether the

coefficient of r is indeed negative as suggested by the model. A serious

difficulty in implementing this equation, however, refers to finding an
                  c4)




4'—                '4
      P76UR.E L
                                           45



adequate index of trade orientation. The subsection that follows deals with

this issue.


V.2 An Index of Trade Intervention

     There is little, if any, hope that researchers will ever be able to

construct the jj index of trade intervention that will capture all the

subtleties of reality. Empirical research, then, has to proceed on the

basis of finding proxies for this ideal index. If better, more reliable,

and lass controversial proxies to this index are developed, the quality of

chat research will tend to improve.

     In a recent paper on openness Edward Learner (1987) has used a large

cross country data set to compute patterns of trade according to comparative

advantage. He then takes "[t)he difference between the 'predicted' and

actual trade intensity ratios .   . . as   an indicator of trade barriers" (p. 7).

In this paper we use these intervention indexes as a proxy for the extent of

trade intervention.

     Learner uses a traditional HeckscherOh1in general equilibrium model of

trade as his theoretical framework. "Predicted" comparative advantage trade

ratios are computed using a regression analysis that considers three goods

aggregates and seven factor of production. Learner then defines a rate of

              which "measures the extent to which trade is distorted by poi-

icy, positively or negatively" (p. 26). For every country this intervention

index is defined as the ratio of the sum of the absolute value of the

residuals from the regression to GNP.33




     33Leamer also constructs an alternative intervention index where the
denominator is the sum of the absolute value of predicted net trade. In
private communication, however, Leamer has argued that for the purpose at
hand using GNP as the denominator is more reasonable.
                                     46



     The Learner index has a number of attractive features. First it is, as

far as any index can possibly be, objective. No attempt whatsoever has been

made a priori to classify the countries' trade regimes. A debatable point,

of course, is whether the three goods, seven factors empirical model used to

predict trade is adequate to capture comparative advantage. In this

respect, recent massive empirical evidence provided by Learner (1984) himself

indeed indicates that this is a reasonable model. The second attractive

feature of this index is that it reflects all types of trade interventions,

independently of whether they are export promoting or import substituting.

In that regard, the export promoting activities of a number of countries

will be reflected in a very high intervention index. As a consequence of

this property, this index can be useful to test the "liberal trade regime"

hypothesis. A third desirable property of this index is that it is

comparable across countries.

     However, the index has some limitations. First, it has been computed

for only one year (1982). It is not possible, then, to analyze the evolu-

tion through time of the degree of trade intervention for any particular

country. Second, the index is only as good as is the model used to predict

"comparative advantage trade".

     Another important variable of the model derived above is the

technological gap. Obviously, however, there are no direct measures of this

gap. In this study a measure of the level of education achievement was used

as a proxy for it. The specific variable was defined as the percentage of

people enrolled in secondary schools as a fraction of each age group. An

advantage of this proxy is that it focuses on labor augmenting technological

progress, which is the type of technological knowledge captured by the

model. Additionally, this variable is available for all countries for 1982
                                         47



and for all but two in l97O. When other proxies for the gap were used --

such as income per cspits - -   the   results obtained were not altered in any

significant way.

V.3 Trade Restrictions and Cross Country Differences in Growth: Some New
     Evidence

     The question we want to address is whether there is a relation between

trade regimes and the rate of growth of output in the developing countries.

More specifically we want to know if differences in trade orientation help

to explain the observed differences in economic performance across

countries. Ideally, an analysis on this type should capture the evolution

of the relevant variables during several years, however, our index of trade

orientation c is only available for one year (1982). This problem was

tackled in the following way. First, it was assumed that r captured the

cross-country differences in trade orientation for a period longer than

1982. Regressions were then estimated using that index together with 1970-

82 averages for output growth, the investment ratio, labor force growth and

the level of educational attainment. These data were obtained from

Development Retort 1984. Since the assumption that the intervention index

applies to the whole l97D-82 period is not fully satisfactory, regressions

were also estimated for the year 1982 only.35 In this case, the data on

labor force and education still came from the World Development Report 1984,

while those for growth and investment ratios were obtained from the IMFs


     34Alternatively one could use the Harbison-Myers index, that include
enrollment rates in higher education. A limitation of this index, however,
is that it is a flow index only.

     35Notice, however, that what is required is that the distribution of
the r's across countries captured by the 1982 index reflects its behavior
along the whole period and not that the absolute values of the index are
maintained.
                                         48



International Financial Statistica.

     Given the likely presence of heteroskedasticity in cross-country

regressions of this type, equation (10) was estimated using a weighted

regression procedure, where each country's income per capita was used as the

weight. The results obtained are reported in Table 5. As can be seen from

equations (14.1) and (14.2), the coefficients of the investment ratio and of

the rate of growth of the labor force have the expected signs and are signi-

ficant in every regression. More importantly for our purposes, the

coefficients of the intervention index were always negative and highly

significant. These results provide evidence supporting the hypothesis that

higher trade intervention affects negatively economic performance. In equa-

tions (15.3) and (15.4) we have included the product of the intervention

index and the technological gap as an independent variable. This was done

because equation (15) suggested a nonlinear relation between growth and

trade intervention is nonlinear. As before the results support our

hypothesis.

     An interesting question refers to whether the relation between growth

and trade intervention is strictly linear or if we can detect some non-

linearities. When a        term was incorporated the following result was

obtained using weighted regressions:

               g — -1.742    +   0.286    (I,'Y). +    1.489 n. -   0.039 C.
                                               -
                      (-0.972) (6.353)                (3.556) -   (-1.641)
                  -    3.758   + 0.520                      Period: 1970-82
                      (l•982)i   (0.536)                         N: 28
                                                                R2: 0.706


     As can be seen, the coefficient of the intervention index is negative

and that of its square is positive. This last coefficient, however, is not

significant.
                                        49




                                    TABLE 5

             Growth and Trade Orientation in Developing Countries:

                              Weighted Regressions



                                Eq. (14.1) Eq. (14.2) Eq. (14.3) Eq. (14,4)

Period                           (1960-82)      (1982)    (1960-82)    (1982)

Constant                           -1.924       -7.935      -4.225      -9.661
                                  (-1.111)     (-2.575)    (-2.780)    (-3.768)

Investment Ratio                    0.280        0.323       0.302      0.343
                                   (6.533)      (4.506)     (5.755)     (4.277)

Labor Force Growth                  1.461        1.992       1.496       1.916
                                   (3.573)      (2.966)     (4.369)     (3.142)

                                   -0.037       -0.020       -           -
Technology Gap
                                  (-1.611)     (-0.575)

Trade Intervention                 -2.697       -3.137       -           -
                                  (-3.766)     (-2.491)

Trade Intervention                  -            -          -0.065      -0.052
Tech. Gap                                                  (-3.336)    (-2.169)

N                                       28*          30          28*         30


R2                                  0.702        0.503       0.656       0.473



*
    The 1960-82 regressions exclude Ethioia and Portugal because there are no
    data on early educational achievements. The countries included in the
    regressions are listed in the Appendix.

Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. R2 is the coefficient of
determination.
                                     50




     It was also investigated whether the relation between trade regime and

economic performance was dependent on the stage of development. Helleiner

(19--), among other authors, has argued that the hypothesized positive rela-

tion between openness and performance does not apply to very poor countries.

According to this view only after a certain threshold of development is

reached, outward orientation and export growth will have a positive impact

on real income growth. In order to investigate this possibility, a new

explanatory variable (INTPC) was added to equation (16). This is an inter-

active term constructed as the product of the intervention index and the

level of income per capita. The following result was obtained in this case:

          g. —    -1.629 + 0.269 (I/Y) +   1.465 n -    0.038 C. -      2.828    r.
                 (-0.784) (4.332)          (3.507)     (-1.600) -     (-3.227)
             +   0.005 INTPC                                 Period: 1970-82
                 (0.270)                                            N: 28
                                                                    R2: 0.703

     Consistent with Helleiner's hypothesis the coefficient of INTPC is

positive; however, it is not significant. The coefficient of the interven-

tion index itself, on the other hand, remains significantly negative.36

     In general, the regression analysis reported above provides support for

the hypothesis that there exists a negative relationship between the degree

of restrictions on international trade and economic performance in the

developing countries. In all regressions the coefficient of the index on

trade impediments was negative and statistically significant. These regres-

sions indicate that after taking into account the roles of capital

accumulation, growth in the labor force, and technological gap, countries

with higher degrees of trade intervention tend to grow, on average, slower


            the nonlinearity and the Helleiner hypotheses were jointly
tested for the year 1982 only, very similar results were obtained.
                                     51



than countries with lower trade restrictions.

     Finally, it is important to notice that in the regressions reported in

Table 5, as well as in the different variations of them, the F2 was

considerably high for a cross country analysis. Those values for the

coefficient of determination suggest that our model, that combines elements

cf the production function approach with the trade orientation literature,

is capable of explaining approximately one half of the cross country

variation in real growth.


VI. Concluding Remarks

     This paper has discuased a number of important issues related to the

literature on the relation between trade orientation and economic perform-

ance in the developing countries. It wae argued that a major shortcoming of

the current policy debate is its increasingly dichotomized and ideologized

tone. In the last few years not only have positions become more rigid, hut

also we have witnessed an increasing confusion on what the key concepts,

such as liberalization, outward orientation and so on, exactly mean.

     Three main conceptual shortcomings were detected in the current debate.

First, the notion of s continuum of trade regimes (which was present in the

early works) has been lost. Second, "liberalization" is no longer under-

stood as a process that can have different intensities. And third, s number

of authors have confused liberalization with laissez faire. This last

problem has resulted in people advocating what, at least to some (including

myself), seem to be contradictory positions, such as favoring openness and

outward orientation at the same time as opposing "liberalization".
                                          52



    Definins Trade Reeimes and Liberalization

    There is no doubt that the only way to put order back into the debate

is to start by clearly defining the different concepts involved. In that

regard Bradford and Branson's recent taxonomy of trade regimes, discussed in

Section II, is a useful beginning. This taxonomy has a number of attractive

features. First, it contemplates a continuum of trade regimes. Second, it

places two dirigiste regimes at the extremes. And third, it recognizes

explicitly that a neutral trade regime -       - characterized by   a bias ratio

equal to one --   is   different from laissez-faire.

     Undoubtedly the debate will be enriched if the concept of

liberalization is used as referring to a process that can have different

intensities. In that regard a definition close to that of the original

Krueger-Bhagwati NBER     project   is possibly the most useful one:

Liberalization is a yrocess that makes treater use of the price System.

makina the trade resime more trarisDarent and brinains domestic prices closer

to world prices. This is a rather vague definition of liberalization, but

the choice of it has been completely deliberate. This is because the vague-

ness disappears as soon as we provide two key pieces of information:

(1) the initial trade regime, and (2) the actual intensity of the

liberalization process. In terms of the Bradford-Branson taxonomy an

economy would be undertaking a liberalization process whenever it moves from

either extreme towards the laissez faire position.

     Trade Reaimes and Economic Performance

     Thus far we have discussed the definition of trade regimes and of

liberalization. But, is there a relation between how liberalized a trade

regime is (i.e. , how close it is to laissez faire) and economic performance?

Is there an "optimal" trade regime? If so, is that "optimal" regime
                                     53



independent of the country's specific chsracteristics? These of course, are

the key policy questions. Their answer has both a theoretical and an

empirical dimension.

     A well known, and disturbing property of trsditional neoclassical

growth models is that changes in policy affect only the steady state jçj

of income per capita, and do not affect the equilibrium rate of growth of

output. Although applied development economists have always been aware of

this feature of the model they have continued using it in their empirical

investigations, trying to determine whether there has been a sustained

relation between trade (and other) policies and growth. The theoretical

basis of these empirical analyses have usually been less than rigorous.

     Recently, however, we have witnessed a renewed interest in growth

theory. A number of authors have tried to develop equilibrium models that

are able to capture some of the more salient stylized facts of actual growth

processes: First, rates of growth don't seem to converge across countries

as the traditional theory suggests. Second, policy packages do seem to make

a difference. Some of the important contributions to this literature were

reviewed in Section IV. It was argued that an important shortcoming of

these models is that they take the economic structure of the large mature

economies as a starting point.

     In the mesntime, and as the theoretical underpinnings are revised and

greatly improved, the policy debate continues. In Section III the empirical

literature on the relation between trade regimes and economic performance was

selectively reviewed. Although this literature has provided a persuasive

general case supporting the hypothesis that there is a relation between

policy measures, export expansion and output growth, it has two major limita-

tions. First, it lacks a firm theoretical basis. Second, it provides
                                     54



indirect tests that don't shed much light on the issue of trade regimes. The

problem is mainly one of measurement. These studies have not been able to

construct a convincing objective and continuous index of trade intervention.

     In Section V we derived a modified neoclassical growth model and

presented new cross section results that do use an index of intervention

that satisfies most of the requirements discussed in Sections II and III.

The model is based on Arthur Lewis' proposition that a more open economy and

less distorted trade regime will result in a faster rate of absorption of

technological progress originating in the advanced countries. The model is

very simple and uses an aggregative neoclassical framework to analyze the

Out of steady state relation between trade intervention and growth. The

empirical analysis used a 30 country cross section data set. The results

obtained provided strong support for the model indicating that, after con-

trolling for the relevant variables, a higher degree of trade intervention

will imply a decline in the rate of growth of output.

     Although these results are very encouraging, there are a number of

unresolved issues that should be tackled by future research. First, more

detailed micromodels of the process of technology absorption should be

explored. Second, the search for an even better index of intervention

should continue.
              55




           TABLE A.1

Countries Included in Regression

     Analysis of Section V



      Bangladesh
      Ethiopia
      Pakistan
      Sri Lanka

      Turkey
      Dominican Republic
      Ecuador
      Indonesia
      Philippines
      Nicaragua
      Colombia
       Egypt
       Cameroon
       Thailand
       El Salvador
       Peru
       Morocco
       Ivory Coast
       Costa Rica

       Brazil
       Yugoslavia
       Israel
       Greece
       Argentina
       Panama
       Malaysia
       Portugal
       Trinidad-Tobago
       Hong Kong
       Singapore
                                       56




                                 REFERENCES



Arrow, K. (1962), "The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing," Review
    of Economic Studies, 29: 155-73.

Balassa, B. (1965), "Tariff Protection in Industrial Countries: An
   Evaluation," Journal of Political Economy, 73: 573-94.

           (1971), The Structure of Protection in Develooin Countries,
   Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

            (1978), "Export Incentives and Export Performance in Developing
   Economies," Weltwirtschaft].jches Archiv, 114: 24-61.

_________ (1981), "The Newly Industrialized Developing Economies After the
   Oil Crisis," Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 117: 142.94.

           (ed.) (1982), "Development Strategies and Economic performance,"
   in Development Strategies in Semi-Industrialized Economies, London:
   Oxford University Press.

           (1985), "Exports, Policy Choices and Economic Growth in
   Developing Countries After the 1973 Oil Shock," Journal of Development
   Economics, 18: 23-35.

           (1988), Chanairta Trade Patterns: An Econometric Investigap
   (Amsterdam: North-Holland).

_________ and D. Schydlowsky (1972), "Domestic Resource Cost and Effective
   Protection Once Again," Journal of Political Economy: 63-69.

Barro, R. (1988), "Government Spending in a Simple Model of Endogenous
   Growth," unpublished ms. Harvard University, May.

Becker, G. and R. Barro (1988), "A Reformulation of the Economic Theory of
   Fertility," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103: 1-25.

Bhagwati, J. (1978), Anatomy end Consequences of Exchanze Control Regimes,
   Cambridge, MA: Ballinger Publishing Co. for NBER.

            (1986), "Export Promoting Strategy: Issues and Evidence," World
   Bank Discussion Paper UPERS7, October.

_________ and T. Srinivasan (1983), Lectures on International Trade,
   Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Bianchi, A., et al. (1987), "The Adjustment Process in Latin America, 1981-
   1986," in V. Corbo, M. Goldstein and N. Khan (eds.) Growth-Oriented
   Adlustment Programs, Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund and
   World Bank.
                                    57




Boldrin, M. and J. Scheinkman (1988), "Learning-By-Doing, International
   Trade and Growth: A Note," Working Paper #462, UCLA Dept. of Economics.

Bradford, C. and W. Branson (1987), Trade and Structural Change in Pacific
         Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER.
Collins, S. and W. Park (1988), "External Debt and Macroeconomic Performance
   in South Korea," NBER Working Paper #2596.

Cooper, R. (1987), "Round Table Discussion," in V. Corbo, M. Goldstein and
   M. Khan (eds.) Growth-Oriented Adjustment Proerams, Washington, DC:
   International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.

Corden, W. (1966), "The Structure of a Tariff System and the Effective
   Protection Rate," Journal of Political Economy, 74: 221-37.

_________ (1971), "The Effects of Trade on the Rate of Growth," in J.
   Bhagwati (ed.), Trade. Balance of Payments and Growth: Essays in Honor
   of Charles P. Kindlebereer, Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Dalham, C.B., Ross-Larson, Rand L. Westphal (1984) "Managing Technological
   Development: Lerssons From the Newly Industrialized Countries," World
   Bank Staff working Paper #717.

Dixit, A. (1976), The Theory of Equilibrium Growth, New Delhi: Oxford
   University Press.

_________ (1986), "Tax Policy in Open Economies," in A. Auerbach and M.
   Feldstein (eds.) Handbook of Public Economics, Amsterdam: North-Holland.

_________ and V. Norman (1980), Theory of International Trade, Cambridge
   University Press.

 Edwards, 5. (1988), "Structural Adjustment Policies in Highly Indebted
    Countries," in J. Sachs (ed.) The Developinz Countries' Debt Crisis,
    Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

 Ethier, W. (1982), "National and International Returns to Scale in the
    Modern Theory of International Trade," American Economic Review, 72:
    389-405.

 Feder, C. (1983), "On Exports and Economic Growth," Journal of Development
    Economics, 12: 59-74.

 Findlay, R. (1984), "Growth and Development in Trade Models," in R. Jones
    and P. Kenen (eds.) Handbook of International Economics Vol. I,
    Amsterdam: North-Holland.

 G. Grossman and E. Helpman (1988), "Comparative Advantage and Long Run
    Growth," unpublished ms., August.

 Harberger, A. (ed.) (1984), "Economic Policy and Economic Growth," in World
    Economic Growth, San Francisco: Institute for Contemporary Studies.
                                    58




Havrylyshyn, 0. (1985), "The Direction of Developing Country Trade:
   Empirical Evidence," Journal of Development Economics, 19: 255-81.

Helpman, E. (1988), "Growth, Technological Progress and Trade," NBER Working
   Paper #2592.

Hutchinson, M. and N. Singh (1987), "Exports and Economic Growth in
   Developing Countries: Identifying Externality Effects," UCSB Working
   Paper, March.

Johnson, H. (1965), "The Theory of Tariff Structure with Special Reference
   to World Trade and Development," in Trade and Development, Geneva:
   Institute of International Studies.

Jones, L. and R. Manuelli (1988), "A Model of Optimal Equilibrium Growth,"
   unpublished ms., Northwestern University, April.

Jung, W. and P. Marshall (1985), "Exports, Growth and Causality in
   Developing Countries," Journal of Development Economics, 18: 1-12.

Kavoussi, R. (1984), "Export Expansion and Economic Growth: Further
   Empirical Evidence," Journal of Development Economics, 14: 241-50.

_________ (1985), "International Trade and Economic Development: Recent
   Experience of Developing Countries," Journal of Developina Areas, 19:
   379-92.

Kohn, M. and N. Marion (1987), "The Implications of Knowledge-Based Growth
   for the Optimality of Open Capita]. Markets," unpublished ms.

Kravis, I. (1970), "Trade as a Handmaiden of Growth: Similarities Between
   the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries," Economic Journal, 80: 850-72.

Krueger, A. (1978), Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Develooment:
   Liberalization Attemots and Consequences, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger
   Publishing Co. for NBER.

_________ (1981), "Interaction Between Inflation and Trade Regime
   Objectives in Stabilization Programs," in W. Cline and S. Weintraub
   (eds.) Economic Stabilization in Develooing Countries, Washington, DC:
   Brookings Institution.

_________ (1983), Trade and Enmlovment in Develonina Countries: Synthesis
   and Conclusions, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

_________ (1984), "Problems of Liberalization," in A. Harberger (ed.)
   Economic Growth, San Francisco: Institute for Contemporary Studies.

_________ (1986), "Problems of Liberalization," in A. Choski and D.
   Papageorgious (eds.) Economic Liberalization in Develooin Countries,
   Oxford: Blackwell.
                                     59




Kruginan, P. (1988), "Endogenous Innovations, International Trade and
   Growth," paper presented at the SUM-Buffalo Conference on "The Problem
   of Development", May.

Lal, D. and S. Ra.japatirana (1987), "Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic
   Growth in Developing Countries," World Bank Research Observer, 2:
   189-218.

Learner, E. (1984), Sources of International Comparative Advantaae,
   Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

            (1985), "Vector Autoregressions for Causal Inference?" Carnegie
   Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 22: 255-304.

_________ (1987), "Measures of Openness," Working Paper #447, UCLA Dept. of
   Economics.

Lewis, A. (1955), The Theory of Economic Growth, London: Allen & Unwin.

Little, I., T. Scitovsky and N. Scott (1970), Industry and Trade in Some
   Deve1opjri Countries, London: Oxford University Press.

Love, J. (1984), "External Market Conditions, Competitiveness and
   Diversification in LDC5 Exports," Journal of Development Economics, 16.

Lucas, R. (1988), "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal of
   Monetary Economics, 22: 3-42.

Michaely, N. (1977), "Exports and Growth: An Empirical Investigation,"
   Journal of Development Economics, 1: 49-53.

            (1988), "Trade Liberalization Policies: Lessons of Experience,"
   paper presented at the Conference "For a New Policy Towards Foreign
   Trade," Brazil, April.

Murphy, K., A. Schleifer and R. Vishny (1988), "Industrialization and the
   'Big Push'," unpublished ms., Graduate School of Business, University of
   Chicago.

Nelson, R. and E. Phelps (1965), "Investment in Humans, Technological
   Diffusion, and Economic Growth," American Economic Review, 55: 69-75.

Ram, R. (1985), "Exports and Economic Growth: Some Additional Evidence,"
   Economic Develonment and Cultural change, 33: 415-25.

Rebelo, S. (1987), "Long Run Policy An1ysis and Long Run Growth,"
   unpublished ms,, University of Rochester, March.

Rodrik, D. (1988), "Closing the Technology Gap: Does Trade Liberalization
   Really Help?" NBER Working Paper #2654.

Romer, P. (l986a), "Increasing Returns and Long Run Growth," Journal of
   Political Ecpnoy, 94: 1002-37.
                                     60




_________  (l986b), "Increasing Returns, Specialization and External
   Economies: Growth as Described by Allyn Young," Rochester Center for
   Economic Research, Working Paper #64.

_________ (1988), "Endogenous Technological Change," paper presented at the
   SUNY-Buffalo Conference on "The Problem of Development," May.

Rosenstein-Rodan, P. (1961), "Notes on the Theory of the 'Big Push'," in H.
   Ellis and H. Wallick (eds.) Economic Develooment for Latin America, New
  York: St. Martin's Press.

Sachs, J. (1987), "Trade and Exchange Rate Policies in Growth-Oriented
   Adjustment Programs," in V. Corbo, M. Goldstein and M. Ithan (eds.)
   Growth-Oriented Adjustment Proarams, Washington, DC: International
   Monetary Fund and the World Bank.

_________ (1988), "Conditionality, Debt Relief and the Developing
   Countries' Debt Crisis," NBER Working Paper #2644.

Schleifer, A. (1986), "Implementation Cycles," Journal of Political Economy,
   94: 1163-90.

Singer, H. and P. Gray (1988), "Trade Policy and Growth of Developing
   Countries: Some New Data," World Development, 16.

Smith, M.A. (1984), "Capital Theory and Trade Theory," in R. Jones and P.
   Kenen (eds.), Handbook of International Economics, Vol. I, Amsterdam:
   North-Holland.

Tyler, W. (1981), "Growth and Export Expansion in Developing Countries,"
   Journal of Development Economics, 9: 121-30.

World Bank (1987), World Develonment Reoort, London: Oxford University
   Press.

Young, A. (1928), "Increasing Returns and Economic Progress," Economic
   Journal, 38: 527-42.
