                         NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         ENDOGENOUS PRODUCT CYCLES




                              Gene M. Grossman

                              Elhanan Helprnan




                          Working Paper No. 2913




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 March 1989




We are grateful to Paul Krugman for several helpful suggestions and to the
National Science Foundation and the Institute for Advanced Studies at the
Hebrew University of Jerusalem for providing financial support. This paper
is part of NBER's research program in International Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #2913
                                        March 1989


                          ENDOGENOUS PRODUCT CYCLES


                                   ABSTRACT




     We construct a model of the product cycle featuring endogenous innovation
and endogenous technology transfer. Competitive entrepreneurs in the North
expend resources to bring out new products whenever expected present
discounted value of future oligopoly profits exceeds current product
developuent costs. Each Northern oligopolist continuously faces the risk that
its product will be copied by a Southern imitator, at which time its profit
stream will come to an end. In the South, competitive entrepreneurs may
devote resources to learning the production processes that have been developed
in the North. There too, costs (of reverse engineering) must be covered by a
stream of operating profits. We study the determinants of the long-run rate
of growth of the world economy, and the long-run rate of technological
diffusion. We also provide an analysis of the effects of exogenous events and
of public policy on relative wage rates in the two regions.




Gene M. Grossman                        Elhanan Helpman
Woodrow Wilson School                   Department of Economics
Princeton University                    Tel Aviv University
Princeton, NJ 08544                     Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv 69978
                                        ISRAEL
I.   Introduction

     The product cycle features prominently in trade between the Northern

developed countries and the Southern newly-industrializing countries. In his

seminal article on the subject, Vernon (1966) described the "life cycle" of a

typical manufactured product. Development and initial manufacturing of new

products takes place in the North, he argued, because R&D capabilities are

well developed there and because proximity to large, high-income markets

facilitates the innovation process. After a while, the production methods

become more standardized. Then, technology transfer or imitation by Southern

firms takes place, whereupon the bulk of production migrates to the South to

capitalize on the relatively cheap labor there. Interregional trade in

manufactured goods involves exchange of the latest, innovative goods, produced

only in the North, for older, more established goods, produced predominantly

or entirely in the South.

     The first attempt at formal modeling of this phenomenon was carried out

by Krugman (1979). He posited an exogenous rate, g (our notation), of

introduction of new products in the North, and an exogenous rate, p,   of
technology transfer to the South. By hypothesis, then, the total number of

products known to the world evolves according to n/n — g, while the number of

products that the South is able to produce evolves according to n5 —

where nH is the number of products in which the North temporarily maintains

exclusive productive capacity. These exogenous processes ensure the existence

of a steady state in which the share of Northern products in the total number

of products, aN — nH/n, is equal to g/(g-I-p). Adding some economic structure

to the model, Krugman finds a positive relationship between the relative wage

paid to Northern labor (wN/ws) and i/g, and an inverse relationship between

the relative wage and the relative size of the Northern labor force.
                                        2

     Kruginan's work has since been extended by Dollar (1986) and Jensen and

Thursby (1986, 1987). Dollar maintains Krugman's assumption of an exogenous

rate of product innovation, but relates the rate of technology transfer to the

North-South terms of trade, albeit in an entirely ad hoc manner. Jensen and

Thursby (1986) attempt to capture the resource costs of product development

and technology transfer and the decision processes that determine these

expenditures, but they assume that all innovation is carried out by a single,

monopolist entrepreneur in the North, and that the allocation of resources to

reverse engineering in the South is made by a social planner. Their later

(1987) paper does allow for a fixed number (perhaps greater than one) of

innovators in the North, but reverts to the assumption of an exogenous rate of

Southern imitation. Moreover, their analysis in both papers is partial

equilibrium in nature, inasmuch as they take the interest rate as givenJ

     In this paper, we build upon our earlier work on product development and

international trade (1988, l989a) to construct a model of the product cycle

featuring endogenous innovation and endogenous technology transfer. In our

model, competitive entrepreneurs in the North expend resources to bring out

new products whenever the expected present discounted value of future

oligopoly profits exceeds current product development costs. Each Northern

oligopolist continuously faces the risk that its product will be copied by a

Southern imitator, at which time its profit stream will come to an end. Thus,

the length of the initial phase in the life cycle for each product (i.e., when

production occurs in the North) is a random variable. In the South,


     1 A recent paper by Segerstrow et.al (1987) does provide, in a somewhat
different framework, a more satisfactory depiction of the competitive process
leading to the introduction of "improved" products, but they also assume that
technology transfer is automatic and costless, and occurs after a fixed,
exogenous period of time.
                                          3

competitive entrepreneurs may devote resources to learning the production

processes that have been developed in the North. There too, costs (of reverse

engineering) must be covered by a future stream of operating profits. In all

this, interest rates are determined endogenously so as to equate savings and

investment.

     Our approach enables us to discuss the determinants of the long-run rate

of growth of the world economy and the long-run rate of technological

diffusion. We find steady-state values for g and , and relate these to

underlying structural characteristics of the world economy (the sizes of the

two trading blocs, the productivities of resources in their various uses, and

the nature of demand for the differentiated manufactured goods), and to the

commercial and industrial policies enacted by the two governments. Also, we

provide an analysis of the effects of exogenous events and of public policy on

relative wage rates in the two regions, and find that Krugman's (1979) results

derived for the case of g and i exogenous may in fact be misleading. For

example, when we allow for the changes in the steady-state rates of innovation

and imitation that are induced by variations in the two labor forces, we find

that the direction of movement in relative wages in the steady state is

exactly the opposite of that predicted by Krugman.

     The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. We develop our model

of the product cycle in the next section. In Section III, we solve for the

steady-state equilibrium and discuss its dependence on structural features of

the world economy. We devote Section IV to policy analysis, considering there

the long-run effects of subsidies to innovation in the North, of subsidies to

reverse engineering (or learning) in the South, and of trade policies in both

regions.      The concluding section contains a summary of our findings.
                                                 4

II. A Model of the Product Cycle

       We study a world economy comprising two countries or regions, denoted by

"North" and "South". The regions differ only in their abilities to innovate.

The North enjoys absolute (and comparative) advantage in developing new

products and bringing them to market. Indeed, for much of the paper we shall

assume that Southern productivity in product innovation is sufficiently low

that the South performs none of this activity in the trading equilibrium.

       We consider a world of symmetrically differentiated products. There

exists a continuum of potential goods that are desirable to consumers, but

only a subset of these (of finite measure) are produced at any point in time.

Before any product can be manufactured and sold to consumers resources must be

devoted to "developing" the product; that is, the good must be designed, the

production techniques perfected, etc.

       All consumers worldwide share identical preferences for the differ-

entiated products. Each consumer seeks to maximize the time-separable

intertemporal utility function



 (1)        Ut —   fet)log[u(r)]dr,

where p is the subjective discount rate and u(.) is the instantaneous sub-

utility function given by


                                1/cr
(2)        u(r) —                          0 < a < 1
                    [fx(w)dw]          *




In (2), x(c) is consumption of differentiated product     and n (a function of

r) is the (measure of the) number of varieties available on the market.
                                          5

      The representative consumer maximizes (1) subject to an intertemporal

budget constraint



(3)        je_tflE(r)dr Je           1)_R(t).JY(r)dr + A(t)


where R(t) is the cumulative interest factor from time 0 to t        that the
consumer   faces on the local capital market, E(r) and Y(r) are his spending and

factor income at time r, respectively, and A(t) represents the value of his

asset holdings at t.    Our results concerning the steady state do not hinge on

whether capital is traded internationally or not; but for ease of exposition

we shall assume in what follows that all agents face the same interest rate.

      As is well known (see, for example, Grossman and Helpinan (1988)), the

solution to the intertemporal maximization problem requires




(4)



while (2) implies an instantaneous demand for variety w given by



(5)        x(w) —      p(wY      E
                    fp(w') du'


where p(w) is the price of variety     and c —   11(1-a) >    1 is the (constant)

elasticity of substitution between any two varieties.

      Consumers use their savings to acquire riskless bonds and/or a portfolio

of shares in profit-making firms. As we shall see, the profits of Northern

firms are random variables. But all risks are firm specific, so that the

consumer-investor can earn a sure return by holding a portfolio consisting of
                                           6

a continuum of such firms. Then arbitrage ensures that, in equilibrium, the

return to such a diversified portfolio of Northern firms equals the riskiess

interest rate, which in turn equals the (certain) return on a share of any

Southern firm.

     The production sector comprises two distinct activities. Before a

producer can begin to manufacture any variety, she must learn the production

technique specific to that variety. If the product is a new one (i.e., not

previously available in the marketplace), then this learning represents

innovation, If, instead, the product already exists on the market, then the

learning represents imitation. In either event, the learning activity

requires an expenditure of resources by the entrepreneur (presumably more for

innovation than for imitation), with productivity parameters that vary by

region. After the production technique has been learned by the entrepreneur,

she can manufacture the product according to a constant-returns-to-scale

production function.

     We suppose that there is a single, primary input, which we call labor.

Consider first the manufacturing activity. Production of any variety of

consumer good in either country requires a units of labor per unit of output.

Hence, marginal cost for any good produced in country i is         where w is

the wage there, for i —   S   (South) and N (North). At any point in time, the

set of available products and the number of entrepreneurs of each nationality

able to produce every product is given. The producers behave as Bertrand

competitors, taking the prices of other firms' products and the level of

aggregate spending as fixed. They maximize profits by setting marginal

revenue equal to marginal cost, as usual.

     A Northern producer with proprietary know-how concerning the production
                                          7

technique for some particular variety faces, according to (5) and our

assumptions about market structure, a demand curve with constant elasticity

equal to -c. Such a firm maximizes instantaneous profits by charging a fixed

mark-up over marginal costs, implying a price p that satisfies



(6)        ap —     wa

The resulting instantaneous profits are



(7)        ,r,   — (l-a)pNxN



where XN is the equilibrium output level, calculated using (5),   If two

Northern firms were to be capable of producing the same variety (one having

imitated the innovation of the other), then as Bertrand competitors with a

homogeneous product they would each set a price equal to marginal cost and

earn zero profits. It follows, therefore, that no Northern entrepreneur could

recoup the fixed costs of imitation, and so none of this activity will take

place in the North.

      We suppose that the equilibrium wage rate in the South is below that of

the North.2 We rule out the possibility that a Southern firm will have

exclusive production capability for some varieties by assuming that the

productivity of Northern entrepreneurs as innovators far exceeds that of

Southern entrepreneurs. This implies that all innovation occurs in the North,

and that all knowledge acquisition in the South takes the form of imitation.


     2 We will see that this assumption is consistent with the conditions for
a steady-state equilibrium for a wide range of parameter values.
                                                 8


If two Southern firms have copied the same variety of consumer good, these two

will set prices equal to their marginal costs and earn zero profits. So the

second of the imitators could never justify bearing the cost of reverse

engineering. It follows that the only case to consider for Southern manu-

facturers is one where a single Southern firm (imitator) competes with a

single Northern firm (innovator) in the market for some particular variety.

       Two outcomes may result in this competition, depending on the size of the

gap between Northern and Southern wages. If the gap is large,      the Southern

firm can charge its monopoly price without paying any regard to competition

from the Northern innovator. This price for Southern products prevails when-

ever w5a/a (the monopoly price) falls short of the marginal cost of Northern

production,             or when w awN. We shall refer to this as the wide-gaD

         If   relative wages in the South are somewhat higher, then a Southern

firm charging its monopoly price would be undercut by its Northern rival. In

this narrow-a case the Southern firm prices just below the marginal cost of

the Northern producer and thereby captures the entire market. Thus, we have



(8a)          Ps — wsax/a              if w


(8b)          Ps —                     if w

The instantaneous profits of a Southern firm are



(9a)             — (l-a)p5x5           if w


(9b)          irs —   (l-WS/WN)psXs    if   ws       awN
                                        9

where x is the firm's level of sales in equilibrium (calculated from (5)).

Notice that, in either case, the Southern firm uses its cost advantage to

capture the entire sub-market and the Northern firm makes no further sales

once its variety has been copied abroad. This feature of the model captures

the migration of production from North to South, as first described by Vernon

(1966).

     We turn next to the learning activities. As in Romer (1988) and Grossman

and }ielpman (l989a,b), we assume that the resources devoted to industrial

research generate two sorts of outputs. First, when an entrepreneur hires

labor for purposes of innovation or imitation she derives an appropriable

output in the form of a "blueprint" for production of a particular variety.

This blueprint is the "entry ticket" into the oligopolistic competition in the

final-goods sector and carries the reward of the associated stream of

oligopoly profits. At the same time, the development activity (in the North)

and the imitation activity (in the South) create non-appropriable, by-product

benefits in the form of additions to general knowledge. Knowledge here

includes scientific information, as well as some forms of engineering data

with widespread applicability, that is generated in the course of developing

or copying some particular product, and that contributes to the productivity

of later learning efforts. We shall assume here that the stocks of industrial

knowledge are specific to the countries in which the knowledge was created

(but see footnote 3 below).

     Consider now the imitation activity in the South. A Southern

entrepreneur chooses at random one of the existing and not-previously-imitated

Northern products to copy. In order to learn the production process, the

entrepreneur must devote a1/K5 units of labor to the task, where a1 is a fixed
                                            10

productivity parameter ("1" for imitation) and K5 is the stock of disembodied

knowledge capital in the South. We take the stock of knowledge to be

proportional to cumulative experience in the learning sector in the South, and

choose units so that K5 — n5, where n5 is the number of varieties that

Southern firms have imitated in the past. Under this specification,3



(10)       n5 — n5L1/a1,



where L1 represents total labor employed in reverse engineering in the South.

       Entry into imitation is assumed free, and can be financed either by a

bond issue or an equity offering. If this activity were to offer a pure

profit at any point in time, then incipient entry by entrepreneurs would

generate excess demand for Southern labor. It follows therefore, that in an

equilibrium with some labor devoted to imitation in the South, the present

value of Southern profits from manufacturing must just equal the cost of entry

into the final-goods sector via reverse engineering, or



                               —
           j'e_)_tfw5(r)dr         w5(t)a1/n5(t)




         Some   alternative specifications may be equally plausible. First,
productivity in imitation might depend on both imitation experience and on
knowledge accumulated in the North. This specification would apply if
information disseminated internationally, and if the knowledge generated in
the course of innovation were also helpful to imitators. Then the labor input
coefficient in imitation would be a1/(n5,n). If, instead, productivity in
imitation were enhanced by the existence of a greater number of products
subject to copying, the input coefficient would be aI/(nS,nN). Either of
these specifications generates a steady-state equilibrium with properties
similar to the one we describe, provided that 4(S) and S() are assumed to be
homogenous of degree one in their arguments. We will note instances where the
alternative formulations yield different results in later footnotes.
                                          11

Differentiating this break-even condition with respect to t, we find




(11)         ___       n)
               S +I—1--—I—R.
             w5a1/n5w s)
                       ,,




       Equation (11) expresses a no-arbitrage condition, equating the sum of the

instantaneous profit rate (first term on the left-hand side) and the capital

gain (second term on the left-hand side) to the instantaneous rate of

interest. The capital-gain term reflects the fact that the value of a

Southern firm equals the present cost of imitation, and so varies positively

with the wage rate and negatively with productivity in the learning activity.

       A potential Northern innovator faces a similar, though somewhat more

complex decision problem. The development of a new product in the North

requires aD/KN units of labor, where aD is another productivity parameter ("D"

for development) and KN represents the level of scientific and engineering

know-how in the North. We assume that each development project contributes a

similar amount to the stock of knowledge in the North, so that KN is propor-

tional to cumulative experience in innovation, n. We choose units so that

KN —   n.   Then the measure of the set of available products grows according to



(12)         n — nL/aD



where L is the aggregate amount of labor hired by entrepreneurs for purposes

of innovation.

       A Northern innovator who brings- out a new product at time t faces

thereafter a positive probability that her product will be selected by some

Southern entrepreneur for imitation. If the product is copied at time T, the
                                            12

innovator's stream of monopoly profits ends then. In that event, the

innovator earns, in total, a sum whose present discounted value at t is




              fl(t,T) —   fe1t,rN(r)dr
       At   the   time of development of some particular product, the date T at

which imitation of that product will occur is a random variable. However, as

we noted above, shareholders of the firm can diversify away this product-

specific risk by holding a portfolio of Northern shares. The individual firm

therefore maximizes its stock market value by maximizing the exDected present

discounted value of the stream of monopoly profits less innovation costs. We

will assume that Northern agents have rational expectations. Letting F(t,T)

denote the cumulative distribution function for T for a product developed at t

(i.e., the probability that monopoly power will be lost to a Southern imitator

before time T), we can write the expected present value of profits for a time-

t innovator as



              V(t) —   ffl(t,T)FT(t,T)dT

Since we allow free entry by Northern entrepreneurs into product development,

a positive rate of innovation implies



(13)          V(t) — wM(t)aD/n(t)



       The evolution of imitation activity in the South after time t determines

the distribution of the terminal date T for a product developed at t. Since
                                                   13

Southern entrepreneurs choose their target products at random, each existing

Northern monopoly faces the same chance of being imitated. So the hazard rate

of F(t,T), which is given by FT/(l-F), is equal to the instantaneous rate of

imitation, (T) — nS(T)/nN(T).               This in turn implies



                                   5T   a
 (14)        F(t,T) — 1    -   e



Using (14), and the definitions of V(t) and fl(t,T), we calculate



(15)         V —   -+     (R +



Now, differentiating (13) with respect to t,             and   using (15), we find



(16)
             wNa/n1w)n)'
        Equation   (16) expresses a no-arbitrage relationship similar to (11).       It

equates the sum of the instantaneous profit rate of a Northern firm (first

term on the left-hand side) and the capital gain (second term on the left-hand

side) to the risk-adjusted interest rate. The capital gain here is the

increase in the value of the firm, which equals the rate of increase in

Northern wages minus the rate of productivity growth in the innovation

activity. The risk premium is just equal to the rate of imitation, because

this we have shown is the conditional density for the event that the firm

suffers a total loss in earnings potential.

        We complete our description of the equilibrium by appending the two

labor-market clearing conditions. In each country, labor is employed in both
                                        14

manufacturing and learning activities. Letting            denote the aggregate

output of final products in Country i, i—N,S, and L denote the exogenous

labor supply there, we equate labor supply and demand in each country in the

following equations:



(17)        (a1/n5)ns +   aXs —   L

(18)        (aD/n)n + aXXN — L1



       The equations that we have derived in this section fully determine the

evolution of the world economy from any initial conditions (i.e., numbers of

goods produced in the North and South), provided that we choose an initial

level of spending, E(O), consistent with long-run convergence to a steady

state. We proceed now to examine the steady-state properties of our model.



III. Determinants of Imitation and Innovation in the Long Run

       In the steady state, the number of products grows at constant rate g, and

Southern firms imitate at constant rate .     We   are interested in the

determinants of these long-run rates of innovation and imitation. We are also

concerned with growth of log u(r), since this measures instantaneous utility

in our model. But it is easy to show that d[log u(r)]/dt —      (1-a)g/a,   so the

factors that affect the long-run rate of innovation similarly influence the

steady-state growth in utility.4


       This claim can be verified using (2), once we recognize that the shares
of Northern and Southern products in the total number of varieties are
constant in the steady state, and that consumption of each variety falls at a
rate equal to the rate of growth in the number of products (so that aggregate
output in each country is constant).
                                          15

       We begin by normalizing nominal prices so that WN —    n.   With this choice

of numeraire, all prices and wages grow at the common rate g in the steady

state, as does nominal spending E. Then (4) implies



(19)        R—g+p

       In the steady state, the share of Northern products in the total number

of varieties, 0N —     na/n, is constant, and is equal to g/(g+). Using this
fact, and substituting (6), (7) and (19) into the no-arbitrage condition (16),

we find



(20)         (l-a)SXX.d —




Now we combine (18) and (20) to derive



             (l-a)(h -g)
                            g '    p



where hN — Lu/aD is the "effective" Northern labor force measured in terms of

productivity in innovation.

       Equation (21) expresses a steady-state relationship between g and j.      We


depict this relationship by the curve NN in Figure l. The curve shows

combinations of steady-state rates of innovation and imitation that are

consistent with labor-market clearing in the North and a profit rate there

equal to the risk-adjusted interest rate. Its positive slope can be

understood as follows. A ceterus Daribus increase in the rate of innovation


          This figure was suggested to us by Paul Krugmari.
                                         16

lowers the profit rate per variety for two reasons. First, an increase in g

draws resources out of manufacturing into the learning sector, thereby

decreasing aggregate output of final goods in the North, and hence the sales

base over which mark-up profits are earned. Second, an increase in g raises

the share of Northern products in the total number of varieties, and thus

lowers the output per Northern firm for a given n and XN. At the same time,

an increase in the rate of innovation raises the interest rate, ceterus

paribus.   So an increase in g opens a positive gap between the risk-adjusted

interest rate and the profit rate. An increase in the rate of imitation is

needed, then, to restore equality between the two. The increase in       raises

the risk-premium, thereby exacerbating the disequilibrium, but it also raises

the profit rate. As can be seen from (21), the effect on the profit rate (the

left-hand side) dominates. The effect of j. on the Northern profit rate stems

from the implied reduction in      and thus the increase in sales for each

Northern firm at given n and XN.

     To derive a second relationship between g and j,   we must bring in the

equilibrium conditions for the South. The nature of this second relationship

varies according to the size of the gap between Northern and Southern wages.

We take up the wide-gap and narrow-gap cases in turn, discussing in each

instance the determinants of (steady-state) g and p.



     A.    The Wide-GaD Case

     Recall that, when wS/wN < a, the Southern imitator of a particular

variety charges its monopoly price without regard to competition from the

original Northern developer of that variety. In this case, we substitute

(8a), (9a) and (19) into the no-arbitrage condition for Southern firms, (11),
                                             17

which gives



(22)        (1-a)axX5 —     aa1(g   +   p)


Now we use the labor-market clearing condition for the South, (17), to

substitute for X5 in (22). Recognizing that the number of Southern products

n5 grows at rate g in the steady state, we have



(23)        g —   (l-a)hs


where hsLs/a1 represents the effective labor force of the South measured in

units of productivity at imitation.

       We represent equation (23) by the horizontal line SS in Figure 1. The

steady-state rates of innovation and imitation for the wide-gap case are given

by the intersection of the curves SS and NN in the figure.6 Of course, at

this intersection point we must have w5           aw   for the wide-gap case to apply.

(More on this point below.)

       We note first the effects of international trade on steady-state growth

in the two regions. The North's autarky rate of growth is found at the

intersection of the NN curve and the horizontal axis, where —O. Since the

curve NN is everywhere upward sloping, the North grows faster in the steady

state of a wide-gap trading equilibrium than it does in the absence of trade

with the South. Southern imitation enables a release of resources from the


     6 If the SS curve lies everywhere above the NN curve in the figure, then
the narrow-gap case, rather than the wide-gap case, must apply. If the SS
curve lies everywhere below NN, then there can be no steady-state with a
positive rate of imitation in the South. Instead, the South will imitate for
a while, then produce a fixed set of goods.
                                       18

Northern manufacturing sector for redeployment in product development. This

reallocation of resources is mediated by an increase in the profit rate, which

results when, at given n, a smaller number of Northern firms share the total

market for Northern products.

     The growth rate for the South in autarky is determined by (23), after we

replace a1 in that equation with the parameter reflecting Southern

productivity in innovation, say aDS. Since aDs > a1, it follows that the

South too grows faster with trade than without. There are two sources of this

faster growth. First, imitation of Northern goods saves resources relative to

the development of new products from scratch. Second, the incentive to

undertake the learning activity in the South is strengthened by the presence

of Northern demand for Southern products, which raises the profit rate.

     In the steady state of a wide-gap trading equilibrium, the growth rate is

proximately determined by economic forces in the South. An increase in either

the North's labor force or in its productivity at innovation shifts the NN

curve upward. This suppresses the rate of Southern imitation and hence the

steady-state share of products manufactured by the South, but has no effect on

the steady-state growth rate.7 The explanation for this lies in the

determination of a Southern firm's profit rate, which in the steady state must

equal g+p. Consider a shock in the North that alters the derived demand for

Southern labor, hence the equilibrium relative wage w5/w. Since Southern

prices in the wide-gap case are a fixed mark-up over production costs there,



     '
         If
          Southern productivity at imitation were influenced by either the
number of products in the North, or by the stock of knowledge capital there
(as described in footnote 3), then shocks in the North would have an effect on
the steady-state growth rate. In these cases, the SS curve slopes downward
(provided that () and   ()   are homogenous of degree one), so that expansion
of the North's effective labor force accelerates steady-state growth.
                                         19

the change in WS/WN alters profits per variety and the cost of imitation

equiproportionately. The shock in the North also may change the fraction of

products manufactured in the South. But given aggregate Southern output of

manufactures X, a change in n8 affects similarly the profits of a given

variety and productivity in imitation. So, by either channel, the net effect

on the profit       in   the South is nil. It follows that the initial values of

g and ; continue to satisfy the conditions for a steady-state equilibrium.

      An improvement in productivity at manufacturing, a, has no effect on SS,

hence no effect on the steady-state values of p or g. But an expansion of

effective labor in the South, precipitated either by an increase in L5 or a

decline in a1, causes the SS curve to shift upward and generates an increase

in the steady-state rates of imitation and innovation. The impact effect

entails a rise in the rate of imitation. In the North, this raises the risk

premium for product development, but also boosts profits for each surviving

monopoly, as output per Northern brand expands. As we mentioned before, the

latter effect dominates, so innovation responds positively.

      We close our discussion of the wide-gap case by considering the

determination of relative wages. We evaluate (5) at the equilibrium prices

given in (6) and (8a), and then take the ratio of outputs per variety in the

North and South, to derive




()
 24        (W5)    X,1(l-a)




Substituting for XN/XS using (20) and (22), and noting c —    g/(g+p),   we find



 25a)      IWS)
           -j
                   aD ,u
                               + p
                                            20

We note that the right-hand side of (24) is increasing in p and declining in g

and in g/p.

        An expansion of the labor force in the North alters the right-hand side

of (25a) only via its effect on p.     We   see, therefore, that this shock causes

wilwN to fall. A larger labor force in the South, on the other hand, implies

acceleration of both innovation and imitation, but a fall in the ratio of g to

p (the slope of a ray from the origin to E falls as we move up along a given

NN curve), hence a larger value of wS/wN. We conclude that the relative wage

of the South moves inversely with the relative size of the North.

        The response of relative wages to the productivity parameters is similar.

An improvement in productivity in Northern innovation slows the steady-state

rate of imitation, and also has a direct negative effect on the right-hand

side of (25a), so the relative wage of the South falls in response. An

improvement in Southern productivity in imitation raises p, depresses g/p, and

directly increases the right-hand side of (25a), and so causes wS/wN to rise.

        Our results concerning relative-wage effects stand in stark contrast to

those of Krugman (1979), who took p and g to be exogenous. The sources of the

difference can be seen in the equation




 (25b                —   (L-ag)    p
              !WNJ       (L-a1g)


derived by substituting (17) and (18) and ci.,    —
                                                      g/(g+p) into (24). Here, when
p and g are taken as parameters, L and L5 have the effects on relative wages

predicted by Krugman. These effects derive from the relative pricing of final

goods, if we assume, as Krugman does, that all extra resources are devoted to

manufacturing. But (25b) points to two ways in which the sizes of the labor
                                           21

forces affect relative wages that are missing from Krugman's analysis. First,

when learning requires resources, changes in g alter the derived demand for

labor in the learning sector, hence the residual available for manufacturing.

Second, changes in outputs per firm caused by an expansion of either labor

force necessitate a reallocation of resources between manufacturing and

learning in each country in order to preserve the equality between the profit

rate in the South and the risk-adjusted profit rate in the North.



       B.   The Narrow-GaD Case

       In Figure 2 we have reproduced the NN curve (equation (21)), which

continues to apply. We find a second relationship between the steady-state

values of and g for the narrow-gap case by first substituting the

equilibrium prices in (6) and (8b) into (5), then taking the ratio of

aggregate outputs in the North and South, and finally using the result

together with the market-clearing conditions, (17) and (18), to derive



'26'          —     (h-g)
                  a1(h8g)g

       We plot the combinations of g and     that satisfy (26) as the curve XX in

Figure 2. This curve describes combinations of the rates of growth and

imitation that are consistent with simultaneous clearing of the labor markets

and product markets in each country.       It is easy to show that the XX curve

slopes upward, once we recall that h5 > hN is required for the existence of a

steady-state equilibrium with a positive rate of imitation in the South.8 We


     8 See the argument in footnote 6 above. A necessary and sufficient
condition for the SS curve to lie above the intersection of the NN curve with
the vertical axis is h5 > hN. This condition also is necessary for w >
                                         22

prove in the appendix that the XX curve must be steeper than the NN curve at

any point of intersection, so the two curves can intersect at most once.

Moreover, since the XX curve asymptotes to h5 as z grows large, while the NN

curve asymptotes to (l-a)hN, they must intersect exactly once. This

intersection (at Q) represents the unique narrow-gap equilibrium, provided

that the relative wage associated with that point satisfies w/w5 a.9

     An increase in h5, caused either by an increase in L5 or a decline in a1,

shifts the XX curve to the right (not shown), while leaving the NN curve

unaffected. So the rates of growth and imitation are faster in the steady

state of a narrow-gap equilibrium the larger is the effective labor force of

the South. An increase in the effective labor force of the North, on the

other hand, causes both curves to shift to the left, as depicted by the broken

lines in the figure. It is easy to show that the leftward shift of the NN

curve must be larger at the initial g, so the new steady state results at a

point such as Q')° Clearly the growth rate is larger at Q' than at Q, so the

long-run rate of innovation now varies positively with the effective size of

the North. Since the XX curve shifts upward by more than the NN curve at the




(see (27) and note that g >   (l-a)hH-ap),    as required for the narrow gap case.

       Using equation (27) below, we find that the condition on the relative
wage corresponds to g < (l-a)h3-ap at point Q. But this implies that point Q
must lie below the SS curve of Figure 1. We conclude that the wide-gap case
applies whenever Q lies above the SS curve, and that the narrow-gap case
applies when Q lies below this curve, Hence, the steady-state equilibrium
with positive innovation and imitation, when it exists, must be unique.

     10 The XX shifts to the left by /(h-g). Using (21), which applies at
the initial equilibrium, this distance equals (l-a)(g+p)s/ag(g+i+p). The
leftward shift of the NN curve is given by (l-a)(g+)2/agp, which is larger.
                                              23

initial value of ,      the   rate of imitation must be smaller at Q   than at Q.i]

Thus, the long-run rate of imitation is inversely related to the effective

size of the North.

       What are the effects of trade on the growth rate in each region? As

before, the fact that the North must grow faster with trade than in autarky is

immediate. The North's autarky rate of steady-state growth is once again

given by the intersection of the NN curve and the vertical axis. Since the NN

curve slopes upward, trade accelerates growth in the North, and for the same

reasons as were discussed above.

       If the South's rate of steady-state growth under autarky, given by

  — (l-a)LS/aDS   -
                      ap,   falls short of that in the North (surely the most

plausible case), then trade clearly speeds growth for the South as well, since

both regions grow at the same rate in the steady state of a trading

equilibrium. ut if the South grows faster under autarky than the North, then

trade might slow growth in the South. Combining the South's labor-market

clearing condition, (17), and its no-arbitrage condition, (11), after

substituting for w and Ps in the latter from (8b) and (9b), we find

for the narrow-gap trading equilibrium that



(27)        g — (l-wS/wN)hS    -
                                   (WS/WN)P




Since wS/wN >   a, we could have g > g if the input requirements for product
development in the South were only slightly larger than those for imitation.

More plausibly, a1 << aDS, in which case g >


        From (21) and (26) we compute that the XX curve shifts up at the
initial value of by [h5/g - (h-g)/(h5-g)], while the NN curve shifts up
by [h/g + g/(l-a)j]'. Clearly, the shift in XX is larger.
                                       24

     We can use equation (27) to explore the effects of variations in economic

structure on relative wages in a narrow-gap equilibrium. An expansion of the

effective labor force in the North, for example, raises g, so by (27) it

increases the relative wage of the North. And total differentiation of (27),

together with (21) and (26), allows us to establish that the relative wage of

the South is greater, the larger is the effective labor supply there. These

results are, of course, qualitatively the same as those for the wide-gap case.



IV. Trade and Industrial Policies

     Nations often contemplate the use of various policies in order to speed

their growth, slow the rate of loss of markets to foreign competitor

countries, etc. We can use our model of the product cycle to study the

effects of these policies on long-run rates of growth and imitation, and on

relative wages in the steady state. In this section, we shall consider

subsidies to the learning activity and protective trade policies in each

region. We limit our analysis here to positive issues; a complete welfare

analysis for a small country with an economic structure similar to the one

described here is carried out in Grossman and Helpman (1989b).

     Let .X, i—S,N, be the fraction of learning costs borne by entrepreneurs

in country i after subsidies have been applied, so that l-X is the subsidy

rate. We assume that subsidies are financed by lump-sum taxes. Since

Ricardian neutrality applies in our model, we need not specify the inter-

temporal pattern of the tax collections, so long as the present value of the

government's cash flow is zero.

     The presence of subsidies to learning alters the no-arbitrage conditions

for each country, hence the curves that determine the steady-state
                                          25

equilibrium. Specifically, we need to multiply the right-hand side of (21) by

A.,, while (23) becomes



          (l-a+aA5)g —    (l-a)b3   aAp


The XX curve, (26), is not affected.
     In a wide-gap equilibrium, a subsidy to innovation in the North shifts

the NN curve to the left, while leaving the SS curve unchanged. This policy

reduces the long-run rate of imitation and boosts the steady-state share of

varieties produced in the North, but has no effect on the long-run growth

rate. Using a modified version of (25a), it is easy to see that the Northern

government's intervention raises the relative wage of its laborers in the

steady state.

     A subsidy to imitation or to technology adaptation in the South shifts

the SS curve of the wide-gap case upward. The growth rate and the imitation

rate rise, as does the share of varieties produced in the South. Like an

improvement in productivity in imitation, this serves to raise the South's

relative wage in the long run. The positive effect on the growth rate should

be well understood by now. Although the speeding of the product cycle

directly reduces the profitability of product development, this effect is more

than offset by the expansion of sales for Northern products that survive. So

the incentive to innovate is strengthened by faster imitation in the South.

     The effects of these industrial policies in the narrow-gap case are

easily derived. A subsidy to imitation shifts neither the NN nor the XX

curve, and serves only to alter relative wages. As before, the relative wage
                                         26

of the South rises when its government subsidizes learning.12 An R&D     subsidy
in the North causes the NN curve to shift up, and the equilibrium to move

along a fixed XX curve. The growth rate and the rate of imitation (hence the

average time to loss of competitiveness) both increase. The subsidy also

serves to increase the relative wage of the North in the long run.

     We turn now to trade policy. For the wide-gap case, the analysis is

quite simple. An ad valorem tariff or export subsidy imposed by either

country does not affect the elasticity of demand perceived by producers of any

nationality. Therefore, it does not affect the prices charged by them. The

profit rates do not change with trade policy, nor do the no-arbitrage

conditions. Of course, the labor-market-clearing conditions, (17) and (18),

continue to apply. It follows that trade policies in either country do not

affect the NN or the SS of the wide-gap case, and therefore they do not alter

the steady-state rates of innovation or imitation.

     The conclusion for the narrow-gap case turns out the same, though the

reasoning is more subtle. We must distinguish now between the prices charged

by Southern manufacturers in the two different markets. Let T, i—S,N, be one

plus the ad valorem tariff rate imposed by the government in country i, and

let Psj be the price charged by a Southern firm for sales in country j.13 In

order to capture its home market, a Southern firm must undercut the delivered

price of its Northern rival, so     —   wNaXTS.   Similarly, the Southern firm

must set a price in the Northern market so that the tariff-inclusive consumer

price falls below the unit cost of the Northern producer; i.e., PSN — wNaX/TN.


     12 The equation for the relative wage w—w5/w that replaces (27) when
subsidies to learning are present is: (l-w)h5 - .Xpw — (l-w+wA1)g.

     13 We focus here on tariffs, though the conclusion for export subsidies
is the same.
                                          27

The Northern monopolists continue to price as before, since the trade barriers

do not alter the demand elasticities perceived by them.

       We substitute consumer prices (producer prices augmented by any

applicable tariffs) into (5), and use        to represent aggregate spending by

residents of country i, to find the sales by each firm in each market. Then

we form the profit rate for a Northern firm and equate it to the steady-state

risk-adjusted interest rate, whence



            (1-a)                     —g +     +p
(28)
                    (g÷+() ($)

where e — Es/n.      We also substitute for aggregate Northern and Southern

manufacturing output in (17) and (18), to derive




                    [g÷ic][eM4] L
(29)        a.g +              —



                                     —
(30)        a1g +
                    [gic)(eK-4fl
       Equations (28)-(30) determine the steady-state values of g, , and z —

e+e5/T5.    These steady-state values are invariant to the level of T5 or TK.

We conclude that trade policies cannot be used by either region to alter the

steady-state rate of growth in a narrow-gap equilibrium.       Nor can these

policies be used to speed up or slow down the average length of the initial

phase of the product cycle.

       We should note that our finding that trade policy does not affect long-

run growth would not survive in a modified version of our model. In

particular, the introduction of a second production sector in each country
                                       28

would suffice to open a channel by which trade policy could influence steady-

state growth. If, for example, we were to adopt an economic structure like

that in Grossman and Helpinan (1989a), where all differentiated products are

intermediate goods and are combined with labor to produce a final output in

each country, then trade policy would affect growth in the steady state. In

such a three-activity economy, trade policy alters the allocation of resources

between the joint activity of developing and producing differentiated products

and that of producing final goods. However, the nature of this effect on

resource allocation is rather complex and so lies beyond the scope of the

present paper.



V.   Conclusions

     The product cycle describes an ever-evolving pattern of inter-regional

trade. Goods are developed in the North and initially produced there. Later

on in the life of an individual product the location of production migrates to

the South, and the North comes to import the very same items that formerly it

exported. In this paper, we have developed a model of this dynamic process in

which the average length of the cycle and the speed with which new products

are introduced to the market are both determined endogenously. We have used

our model to study the determinants of the long-run rates of imitation and

innovation, and the long-run distribution of labor income.

     As in previous studies of technology-driven growth (e.g., Romer (1988),

Grossman and Helpman (1989a)), we found that the size of the resource base and

the productivity of resources in the learning activities are important

determinants of the steady-state growth rate. Steady-state growth is faster

the larger is the resource base of the South, and the more productive are its
                                       29

resources in learning the production processes for products originally

developed in the North. This is perhaps surprising, because faster imitation

by the South means on average a shorter period over which a Northern

entrepreneur can earn monopoly profits. But profits during the monopoly phase

are higher when a smaller number of Northern producers compete for resources

in the manufacturing sector. We found the latter effect to dominate, so

faster imitation by the South ultimately strengthens the incentive to innovate

in the North.

     Steady-state growth also is faster when the North is larger or its

resources are more productive in product development, provided that the gap

between wages in the North and South is not too large (what we have called the

"narrow-gap case"). An increase in the size of the effective labor force in

the North always slows the rate of imitation (hence the average length of the

first stage of the product cycle) and reduces the steady-state share of

varieties produced in the South. An increase in the effective labor force in

the South has just the opposite effect on the imitation rate and on product

shares in the long run.

     Perhaps surprisingly, we find that the relative wage in the North rises

when the effective size of the North expands in relation to the effective size

of the South, This result, which is the opposite of that derived by Kruginan

(1979) in his product-cycle model with exogenous rates of innovation and

imitation, stems ultimately from the increasing-returns nature of the

technologies for production of goods and knowledge.

     In comparing the product-cycle equilibrium to one with autarky in each

region, we find that international trade always leads to faster growth in the

North in the long run. The migration of some production to the South frees
                                        30

resources for use in the product development sector in the North. In the

steady-state equilibrium with trade, the North firms have greater incentive to

undertake R&D than in autarky, because each earns a higher profit rate, albeit

for a shorter period of time. The South too grows faster with trade than

without, except in the unlikely event that its autarky growth rate is faster

than that of the North, and the resources required there for developing new

products from scratch only slightly exceed the requirements for copying a

product previously developed in the North.

     We studied the long-run effects of two sorts of policy instruments.

Subsidization of the learning activities (innovation in the North or imitation

in the South) tends to boost the long-run rate of growth. The only exception

to this occurs for subsidies to imitation when the North-South wage gap is

small, in which case the growth effect is nil. Industrial policy of this sort

always increases the relative wage of workers in the policy-active country.

     Trade policies in either the North or the South have no effect on the

long-run rates of growth and imitation in our model. These policies serve

only to alter relative wages and the steady-state levels of real spending in

the two regions. This finding, which is perhaps reminiscent of similar

results that apply in neoclassical models of growth, relies strongly on the

two-sector structure of our regional economies. If, instead, we were to allow

a second manufacturing activity in each country in a manner that preserved the

existence of a steady state, then trade policy would indeed play a role in

determining the long-run growth rate.
                                                  31

                                               APPENDIX

        We prove in this appendix that, at any intersection of the NN curve

defined by equation (21) and the XX curve defined by equation (26), the NN

curve must be the steeper of the two. This proof is central to our

demonstration that if there exists a steady-state equilibrium with positive

innovation and imitation, it must be unique.

        From (21), we solve for p in terms of g along the NN curve, and write



                          g(g-g)
 (Al)        P(g) —
                      (1-a)h-g

where g —    (l-a)h-ap.            Similarly, from (26) we obtain



 (A2)        (g)                           g



which defines p in terms of g along the XX curve. From these we compute the

slopes




 (A3)             —   +   gt
                                    (1a)h-g
                               (g-g.)((1-a)h-g]

                                   (h5-h)
(A4)        x g +'
              '

                               (h5-g)(h-g)

                  -p -         p   +   p



In these computations, (Al) has been used to substitute for p in (A3) and (A2)

has been used to substitute for p in (A4). Now we define            —   (pN'PX')/P'   at

a point of intersection where p(g)=p(g)—p. Then
                                              32




               —    1 +              n
                          (gg)(b,g)t(1-a)h5-g1

where


              —                      -
                   [(1a)h-g.](h-g)       [(1-a)h-g)(g-g)

Labor-market   clearing in the North (18) implies hN> g, which in turn implies



          )   > [(1.a)hg](h-g) - [(1-a)h-g)(h-g.)

               —
                   ahfl(g-g) > 0.


Since the NN curve asymptotes to (l-a)hN, we must have g <   (l-a)hN   at any

point of intersection of the XX and NN curves. Hence, & > 0, as claimed.
                                       33

                                   References


Dollar, David. "Technological Innovation, Capital Mobility, and the Product
     Cycle in the North-South Trade." American Economic Review 76 (March
     1986): 177-190.

Grossman, Gene M. and Helpman, Elhanan. "Product Development and International
     Trade." NEER Working Paper No. 2540. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
     Economic Research, 1988.

_____ • "Comparative Advantage and Long-Run Growth." NBER Working Paper No.
     2809. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1989. (a)

      • "Growth and Welfare in a Small Open Economy." In preparation, 1989.
     (b)

Jensen, Richard and Thursby, Marie. "A Strategic Approach to the Product Life
     Cycle." Journal of International Economics 21 (November 1986): 269-284.

______ "A Decision Theoretic Model of Innovation, Technology Transfer and
     Trade." The Review of Economic Studies 54 (October 1987): 631-649.

Krugman, Paul R. "A Model of Innovation, Technology Transfer, and the World
     Distribution of Income." Journal of Political Economy 87 (April 1979):
     253-266.

Romer, Paul M. "Endogenous Technological Change." Paper presented at the SUNY-
     Buffalo Conference on 'The Problem of Development', 1988.

Segerstrom, Paul S., Anant, T.C.A., and Dinopoulos, Elias. "A Schumpeterian
     Model of the Product Life Cycle." Econometrics and Economic Theory Paper
     No. 8606. East Lansing, MI: Michigan State University, 1987.

Vernon, Raymond. "International Investment and International Trade in the
     Product Cycle." Quarterly Journal of Economics 80 (May 1966): 190-207.
       Figure 1

    The Wide—Gap Case




3




                        S
                           fure2
                      The Narrow-Gap Case




S




                   / /      I,
                                            N
                  7—
             -/
            0'-   —


       /7,.-

    / //              0.
