MEEK WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE LINKAGE BETWEEN SPECULATIVE AtTACK AND TARGET ZONE
KODELS OF EXCHANGE RATES

Robert

P. Flood

Peter K. Gerber

Working Paper No. 291.8

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC REflARCM
1050 l4asnchus.tts Avenue

Cathridge MA 02138
April 1989

This paper is part of NBERs research progra. in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of the National Eureau
of Economic Research.

N8ER Working Paper #2918
April 1989

THE LINKAGE BETWEEN SPECUlATIVE ATTACK AND TARGET ZONE
MODELS OF EXCBANG€ RATES

ABS TRACT

In this paper we generalize the target zone exchange rate as model
formalized by Krugman (1988b) to include finite-sized interventions in
defense of the zone. The main contributions of these pages consist of
linking the recent developments in the theory of target zones to the
mirror-image theory of speculative attacks on asset price fixing regimes
and in using aspects of that linkage to give an intuitive interpretation
to the smooth pasting" condition usually invoked as a terminal condition.

Robert P. Flood
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431

Peter H. Gather
Economic. Department
Brown University

Providence, RI 02912

I. Introduction
Agents in the public or private sectors often follow one systemic set
of

actions when

and

their environment lies within some prescribed boundaries

switch to another

Their

set of actions when the boundaries are reached.

recognition of the presence of the boundaries ties the two sets of

actions

together. In previous work, we have studied economic behavior in

similar situations, but we found it difficult to produce closed form
solutions. Jj
Recently, several authors have investigated this class of problems
with a set of tools that readily generates closed form solutions in a

stochastic setting. The new research, aimed at issues in exchange rate
policy, has been due to Smith (1987), Krugman (1987. 1988). Smith and
Smith (1988), Miller (1988), Klein (1988), and Froot and Obstfeld (1989).

Additional

work in a .iicroeconomic setting has been carried out by Krugman

(1987), Bertola (1987), and Dixit (1987, 1988).
All

this recent work was partly stimulated

by

the publication of

Harrison (1985), which shows how to derive closed form solutions for a

variety of problems in controlled Erownian motion. Harrison's results
make it

easy to

implement the idea that

the

anticipation of "bumping Into"

the boundaries generates important nonlinearities that are not well
modeled by linear approximations.

j/ In Flood and Garber (1980. 1983b), we studied the impact of an
endogenous triggering of monetary reform on the current price level in the
German hyperinflation. In Flood and Carber (1983a). we considered the
determination of the current floating exchange rate when the regime would
switch to a fixed rate system at an endogenously determined, random tirue.

-2-

In this paper, we will arbitrage yet another result from Harrison

(1985) into the study of exchange rate target zones. We will generalize
the target zone (TZ) exchange rate as model formalized by Krugman (1988W
and extended by Froot and Obstfeld (1989). 1.!

the

Itrugi.an

it bears some

resemblance to the European Monetary System (EMS), where members agree to

maintain their exchange rates within prespecified bands. While the EMS
recognizes the possibility of occasional band shifts (devaluations), we
will study a system in which the exchange rate bands are permanent. 2/

The main contribution of these pages consists of linking the recent
developments in the theory of target zones to the mirror-image theory of

speculative attacks on asset price fixing regimes. j/ We also use aspects
of this linkiage to provide an intuitive interpretation of the "smooth
pasting" condition, generally invoked as a terminal condition in this
literature.

We aim to unify these two literatures by showing that the solution

concepts in both are identical. Indeed, we can show that in the TZ
context speculative attacks must generally occur as a result of a policy

to defend the zone. 4/ Thus, Krugman's recent (1987, 1988) work is

j/ The Krugman

TZ is in spirit a simplified version of the TZ blueprint

offered by Williamson and Miller (1987).
2/ The TZ models can readily be integrated with models of speculative

attacks either of the buying or selling varieties, if a

limit is placed on
the amount of reserves or bonds that the authorities are willing to buy or
sell to defend the zone.
For some literature on speculative attacks, see Salant and
Henderson (1978), Krugman (1979) Salant (1983), Flood and Carber (l984a,
b), and Obstfeld (1984 1986).
4/ ecause of the upper and lower bounds in a TZ, these may be either
buying or selling attacks as in Grilli (1985).

V

-3-

actually &

•tep

toward coming full circle on his (1979) contribution on

balance-of-payments crises.

We derive our results in the two remaining sections. In Section II,
we present the exchange rate TZ problem in a standard exchange rate model.

The TZ literature developed thus far has considered only the case of

infinitesimal interventions. A closed-form solution for the exchange
rate for the case of discrete-sized interventions can be read directly

from results in Harrison (1985), however. Therefore, we simply reproduce
the relevant problem from Harrison and indicate those properties of
Harrison'. solution which convey economic intuition about boundary
conditions. In Section III, we restudy the IZ problem in the ilanner of
Krugman and of Froot and Obstfeld using the boundary conditions developed

in Harrison for discrete interventions. We also extend the analysis to
situations in which the policy authority may use discrete interventions of
uncertain magnitude to keep the exchange rate within possibly stochastic

boundaries. Finally, we also examine the interest rate implications of
adopting a TZ in this model and conclude by placing the current analysts
in a broader perspective.

II. A Model of Tarzet Zones
The TZ is a nonlinear compromise between fixed exchange rates and

freely flexible exchange rates. The basic idea of the exchange rate TZ is
that a country or group of countries sets explicit margins within which

exchange rates will be allowed to fluctuate. While the exchange rate is
within those boundaries, policy can be directed toward other goals. When
the boundary is reached, the policy maker focuses resources on maintaining

-4-

the boundaries. The TZ does not preclude foreign exchange interventions
inside the boundaries. Indeed, the TZ studied by Xrug.an simply does not
specify govenu.ent behavior inside the TZ boundaries, Of course, this is
the point of the TZ. While the exchange rate ii

inside

the band, policy

can be directed as desired toward goal. other than fixing the exchange
rate. JJ

Xrugman (1988) was able to characterize the behavior of the exchange
rate within a target zone when exchange rates are driven by reeulated

3rownian notion. Regulated Brownian notion is Brownian notion with
occasional intervention by a regulator, which we identify as a policy

authority. In Krugman's case, the unregulated fundamentals follow
nondrifting Brownian motion. The intervention which regulates the process
is triggered by the edges of the TZ, which are syimietric

about zero.

Froot and Obstfeld (1989) extend Krugman's results to the case of
fundamentals following Brownian

notion

with constant drift and to

nonsyimEetric zones. 2/

/ There

is no claim that such a nonlinear setting of policy would be
welfare improving compared to linear nonsterilized intervention in
response to a set of indicator variables. In fact, for fairly general
quadratic welfare functions, the optimal policy is linear. Therefore, the
case for a TZ must rely on, for example, welfare's being poorly modeled by
a quadratic function, the optimal settings of the coefficients in a linear
policy rule being difficult to achieve (with the TZ providing a better
welfare outcome than inappropriate coefficients in a linear policy), or
possibly some multilateral negotiating aspects of a TZ providing a better
chance of reaching a near Pareto optimal policy than would be true for a
linear policy.
2/ Obstfeld and Froot (1989) have also extended these results to the
case of a different forcing process, the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process, and
to the case of absorbing barriers, The absorbing barriers case was
studied by Flood and Carber (1983a) with closed form solutions first
derived by Smith (1987).

-S-

W. extend this analysis to allow both a discrete intervention and the

possibility that intervention may be triggered randomly. While both
extensions are required before models of this type can be applied to data.

the ability to obtain solutions for discrete interventions is the more

interesting result. This extension provides the intuitive link between
the earlier literature on discrete attacks on foreign exchange reserves
and clarifies the latitude available to a policy authority while

maintaining the fl
To study the behavior of the exchange rate inside the band, Krugman
and Froot and Obstfeld use a standard law of motion for a flexible price
-

exchange rate model: Jf

(1)

x(t) —

k(t)

+

aEfdx(t)I/dt.

a > 0.

x(t) is the logarithm of the exchange rate, a can be interpreted as the
Cagan interest rate semi-elasticity, and the expectation operator is

conditioned on current inforaation. Only information about the forcing
variable k(t) is relevant to the exchange market. In a standard monetary
approach model, k(t) is a linear combination of the logarithms of foreign
and domestic money supplies, real incomes, money demand disturbances and
real exchange rate movements.

jJ The law of motion would be generated in the exchange rate models of
Bilson (1978), Frenkel (1978), and Mussa (1978). The same model was
adapted by Flood and Carber (l983a) to a continuous tine stochastic
environment with future exchange rate fixing. The underpinning of the law
of motion would be a Cagan money demand function in two countries,
purchasing power parity, and open interest parity. Other models, of
course, would produce laws of motion for the exchange rate of a similar
form with different interpretations of the forcing variables.

-6-

k(t) can be controlled by intervention of the monetary authorities.
Specifically, the authorities can control k(t) to assure that

(2) x>x>x1
where xa and x' are the upper and lower bounds of the exchange rate TZ,

respectively. Krugman and Eroot and Obstfeld assume that the authorities
interfere with the motion of Ic only when x reaches the boundaries of the

TZ. j/ When the exchange rate is inside the TZ boundaries, k follows a
random walk with drift that is independent of the exchange rate: 21

(3)

dk — 7dt +

odz

where q and a are constants and z is a standard Wiener process.
implying that the variance of k over any period t
(8k)2 —

o2dt

is

02t and that

(see Harrison (1985) page 65).

An exchange rate solution with discrete intervention

1.

We now transcribe from Harrison (1985) the closed form

solution when intervention is
Brownian

discrete. Consider a situation in which the

notion with drift process Ic is controlled as in Figure 1. When

it

is between the bounds k" and k' 1€

of

equation (3).

follows the Brownian

motion process

When Ic hits the upper bound k". an intervention throws Ic

discontinuously back to the interior point Q — Ic"

Jj Both x and k are

suppress

exchange rate

-

1u, where I" measures

functions of time, however, we will usually

the time dependence notation in the following presentation.

2/ Krugman assumes a zero drift parameter. Froot and Obstfeld argued
that the policy specification in Krugaan is incomplete since both discrete
Jumps in kK and infinitesimal interventions are compatible with a given
TZ. They base their discussion on a similar point nade in Obstfeld and

Stockman's

(1985) discussion of an indeterminacy in Flood and Carber
(1983a). Nevertheless, they consider only the case of infinitesimal
intervention. It turns out that this case implies intervention only at
the boundaries of the TZ.

-7-

the magnitude of intervention. At Q,
action given in equation (3).

the process resumes the random

II k hits the lower bound k1 it is thrown

back to the point q—k' • l Of course, when I" 11_O, we have the
case of Froot and Obstfeld: asymmetric reflecting barriers with
infinitesimal interventions. When, in addition, ij — 0 and k" —

-id,

we

have the symmetric case of Krugman.

These discontinuous shifts in k can be interpreted as interventions
that occur to saintain the exchange rate k within its prescribed bounds.

Krugman implicitly and Froot and Obstfeld explicitly assume that such
interventions are infinitesimal; they associate the attainment of x' with
the simultaneous attainment of lc1.

Je doubt, however, that agents

operating in a TZ would be sure that any intervention would be

infinitesimal and would take place only at the TZ boundary. In the
generalization to discrete interventions, these two events will not

coincide. J
How will the exchange rate, x, behave under such circumstances? Note

that the exchange rate solution for the differential equation (1) can be
written as:

(4) x —

g(k(0))

—

'E

[7 k (r)exp(—c)dr Ik(0)]

The analytical solution of this integral, as well as the layout in
Figure 1. is presented in Harrison (1985). Chapter 3, page 52, problem 13,

j/ Apparently actual interventions by the bundesbank in defense of the
ENS margins neither take place only at the declared exchange rate margins
nor is the size of the intervention always related to the proximity of the
margins.

-8-

for the case where units are chosen so that xT —

0.

From special cases

of this solution, it is easy to arbitrage most of the results of the

literature applying controlled rownian notion to economics. For current
purposes, however, we note that the general functional for, of the
solution is exactly that of Krugman and Froot and Obstfeld:

(5) x — g(k) — It + aq + Aexp

[A11c) +

B.xp

(A2kJ

where
1

1

2

1

) +

+ (202) ()

and

A2 —

()

[(2 ,

(2o2))(

-

For a given U even the constant terms A and B are identical to those of
Krugman and Froot and Obstfeld, thoug)i they are apparently determined by
different boundary conditions.

We graph Harrlion's solution for the function gOt) for the case of

discrete intervention in Figure 2. The functional form in equation (5) is

invariant to the size of the intervention; and I" and I will affect
neither A nor B for a given TZ. Also, it can be shown with some
manipulation that Harrison's solution for x as a function of It is
continuous at It —

— g(k1 +

It"

Il).

and It —

so that g(k") —

g(k"

-

I")

and

We will present an intuitive argument for this result

and use it as a boundary condition below.

-9-

2.

A derivation of the fimetional for, of the exchanee rate solution
Our presentation

of

Harrisons solution for g(Ic) without

any

development is a bit mysterious. Therefore, we now follow Krugman and
Froot and Obstfeld a to develop the functional form of the solution

presented by Harrison. Suppose that the exchange rate solution is
x —

g(k).

Our

problem

is to develop the g(k) function explicitly.

If g(k) is the solution then Edx/dt can be derived from the

appropriate differential of the g(k) function. The g(k) function and thus
the exchange rate is driven by k. which follows a Weiner process.

Therefore we must apply Ito differentiation to g(k). According to

Harrison (1985) page 65 we obtain: 1/

(6) dx —

g(k)dk

• (l/2)g (k)dk2

Nov take the expectation of each side of equation (6). conditional

on current information. Inside the TZ. E(dk) — ndt since Edz —
current k is known to agents. Eg'(k)dk —

g'(k)Edk

—

g'(k)vjdt.

0.

Since

Further

— o2dt (see Harrison, page 65) so that equation (6) may be rearranged
to become:

(7) Edx]/dt —

8(k)i7

+

(l/2)g

(k)a2

Now substitute from equation (7) into equation (1) to find:

jJ The stochastic differential of x is slightly different from the
differential we normally encounter because though the path of the variable
Ic is continuous, it is not differentiable in the normal sense. Consequently the normal rules of differentiation are not applicable and we
must use a slightly different derivative concept, the Ito dervivative as
in equation (6).

- 10

(8) x — g(k) — k + o[g'(k)q

-

• (l/2)g''(k)a21

Equation (8) is a second order linear differential equation, which we

solve by: (1) finding a particular solution; (2) combining the
particular solution with the hosogenous solution; and (3) applying
appropriate boundary conditions.

A particular solution is obtained by ignoring
equations (1) and (3) require x —

k

+ W7,

and

the

TZ. Without the TZ

this is a particular

solution to equation (8). The homogenous part of the solution is

x —

Aexp(4k1

+

RexptA2kI.

The su, of the two parts of the solution is

the general solution given in equation (5) with 4 and A2

as

above.

Obtaining a complete solution requires application of the appropriate
boundary conditions.
3.

Miandary

conditions and the exolicit

exebante rate

solution

Though the explicit solution is available with some manipulation of
Harrison's result, we prefer for expositional purposes to develop the
solution for the problem of discrete interventions along the intuitive

lines provided by Krugaan and Froot and Obstfeld. To solve for A and & in
equation (5), Froot and Obstfeld (following Krugman) impose the "smooth
pasting conditions," a requirement that g.(ku) — 0 and g'(kt) — 0.

These

two conditions provide sufficient boundary information to determine A

and

3.

to

see that these conditions are valid in the cases studied by

Krugman and Froot and Obetfeld, let us consider Figure 2. the diagra. of

Harrison's solution for discrete interventions. Define 1çmaI' and
the solutions of g'(k) — 0.

Note that Ic"> klUx > Q and

<

as

c

q.

- 11

-

Assuring that the endpoints of the segment defined by I always lie on the
solution curve at the same vertical height, let i" converge to zero.
Similarly, let il converge to zero. Q and Ic" will then converge to
and q and Ic1 will converge to kmin. Therefore, for infinitesimal

interventios, 8(k") —

g(k1),

the smooth pasting condition. The smooth

pasting condition is applicable for infinitesimal interventions, but it is

inapplicable for finite interventions. Similarly, the assumption that the
TZ boundary points are attained simultaneously with

the

Ic boundary points

is true only in the case of infinitesimal intervention.
4.

Continuity at the boundaries

What

is

the intuition behind the continuity of the exchange rate in

the presence of discrete forseen interventions?

This is a natural

requirement familiar from the speculative attack literature. If there
were a discontinuity in response to an anticipated intervention i.e. •

if

g(k") did not equal g(k"-V3). there would be a foreseeable profit at an

infinite rate, Speculators would act to remove this opportunity.
Recall that in the speculative attack literature of Krugman (1979) or
Flood and Garber (1984), domestic credit is usually rigged with upward

drift. An attack on a fixed exchange rate system is timed to prevent an
expected discontinuity in exchange rates. In the context of equation (1)
exchange rate continuity in the face of an expected attack on the fixed
rate regime requires the exchange rate to be the same in the instant just

before and the instant just after the attack. Yet, the expected rate of
change of the exchange rate would jump discontinuously from zero to a
positive number, driving down money demand and accomodating the sudden
loss of reserves at the moment of the attack.

- 12

-

The logic for a discrete intervention in a TZ is identical. When the
distance from Ic to k" is infinitesimally small, there will be a shift from
k'' to Q

with

probability one. Since the expected value of the integral

in equation (4) takes account of the shift, its value will not change when
the shift occurs. Now evaluate equation (1) at Ic" and Q,

respectively.

and subtract the two results. Since the exchange rate is the same at the
two k values, the result is:

k'' -

(9)

Q

—

— -atEdx/dt

-

jk—k

The discontinuous

bond holdings

Edx/dt
k—Q

shift in It (e.g.. the reduction in foreign reserves or

of the policy authority) exactly offsets the discontinuous

shift in expectations.

In this It problem, the shift in the expected depreciation adjusts to

the arbitrary magnitude of the intervention. In the speculative attack
literature, the magnitude of the intervention adjusts to the specified

shift in expected depreciation rates rigged into the problem. Otherwise.
the problems are identical.

Indeed, there is even a run on reserves in the Ti

model.

When k

(domestic credit) reaches a high enough level, speculators will approach
the policy authority to convert domestic currency for reserves, thereby

forcing an intervention of the prescribed magnitude. This monetary
alignment

crisis (MAC Attack) serves to preserve the TZ, however.

The relevant (AS) pair for a specific intervention strategy that
supports a particular It can be found by noting that x" — g(kma) and
—

g(kThi), where u and x1 are the announced TZ bounds. For arbitrary

values of A and B, we can find kma)t and kmit the critical values of g(k),

- 13

-

as functions of A and 5. Substituting these functions into x" — g(kma))
and xt —

(kmuhI) yields two equations in the unknowns (A,B). In the

Appendix

we sketch more completely the determination of A and B

for a

intervention strategy.
The continuity condition requires that gUi") — g(k" - 1u) and
g(k1 + Il). These two conditions are also sufficient to determine A and S

particular

in equation (5)

pair

as

functions of the policy quadruple (Ic", Q,

q,

Ic1). The

(AS) associated with a specific TZ can therefore be generated by an

infinite number of combinations of values for the inner and outer bounds
on Ic.

In this sense, simply announcing a specific Ti is not a well-

specified policy. A particular TZ can be supported by an infinity of
intervention strategies. This incompleteness is not an indictment of the
TZ policy, which was designed as a part of a broader policy. Indeed, the
incompleteness of the TZ allows policy to be directed toward other goals
with only occassional attention to the maintenance of the Ti.
5.

A discrete intenentioi with 0

ii

An interesting case occurs when Q < q as depicted in Figure 3.

In

this case, the exchange rate can float downward toward the floor of the Ti
even though It approaches its upper bound, Ic". When Ic teaches k' &

large

intervention to reduce It occurs although the exchange rate is near or even

at its minima level. Thus, in a situation in which an intervention to
purchase reserves appears necessary to prevent breaching the floor of the
zone,

the intervention instead consists of

preventing

a large reserve sale aimed at

the breaching of the zone's ceiling.

- 14

6.

-

-

Intervention uncertainty
In

our analysis so far we have assumed a preannounced intervention

strategy defending a sharp TZ, i.e.

practice,

a preannounced pair

(1a1l)• In

however, it is unlikely that the intervention strategy would be

precisely preannounced and we find interesting the possibility of "soft
zones, •

which we formalize as a probability distribution concerning the

boundaries of the TZ. JJ In this situation we need to examine some
additional possibilities to find a formula for x inside the TZ. In
particular, recall that a 'solutioir for the exchange rate must be of the

form given by equation (3). To use equation (3) in the current setting
let:

(10)

E(dxj/dt —

JfE([dxln.Y]/dt)f(n.Y)dnciY.

where n is an intervention strategy y is a TZ boundary pair and f(ny) is
the distribution function giving the appropriate probability density for

any n.y. For any n and for any y we can solve the model conditionally as
above to get the appropriate values of A and B. We then calculate the
unconditional expected rate of change of x from equation (10) and
substitute the result into equation (1) to find the value of the exchange
rate with stochastic intervention policy.
Since the actual intervention can surprise private agents.

intervention can result in seemingly perverse exchange rate movements. To
see this point examine Figure 2.

The figure was predicated on the

We assume an information structure such that there is no learning
j,1
about the nature of intervention or the boundaries of the zone. In our
version both the nature of intervention and the soft boundaries will be
random exogenous variables drawn from a time-invariant distribution.

- 15

-

exchange authority's intervening in aaount I" when k reaches its upper
bound. If instead the authority were to intervene by less than I" then
the currency would actually depreciate.
7.

volatility of

The

exchanze

and interest rates

Krugman (1988) showed that the TZ will stabilize the exchange rate.
This result occurs because the function gOt)
responsive

floating
Yet,

without

to k than is

the functional

is

almost everywhere less

relation between x and k in a pure

regime.

the possibility

of achieving

some

exchange rate stability

actually having to intervene has the disturbing appearance of a

free lunch. Where does the volatility go?
To address this question, let us assume that the domestic interest
rate i equals the constant foreign interest rate plus the expected rate of

depreciation. Since the foreign interest rate is constant,

the only

volatility in the domestic interest rate stems from movements

in E(ds].

Then

(11) V(i(k),t) —

02V(g(k)-k,t)

where V(y,t) is the variance of the variable y over an interval of length
t.

For both fixed and floating exchange rates V(i(k),t) —0 in the
constant drift cases that we have considered. Since g(k) constant for the TZ, however, V(i(k),r

k

is not

0 in the target zone. Thus the

exchange rate becomes less volatile at the expense of raising the interest
rate volatility.

- 16

-

-

IV.

Public

Conclusion

and private sector agents often adopt one set of actions when

some indicator is within certain bounds and switch to another set of
actions wtien the bounds

are

reached.

Examples

of

such action patterns are

widespread in policy making circles and seem to describe a possibly
i.portant part of the policy making process not captured linear rules.

The purpose of the present paper was primarily technical: to extend
the literature to the possibility of finite-sized and stochastic
interventions in defense of the U. IJ0 found the terminal conditions

required both for the finite-size interventions and for the infinitesimal
interventions to be most easily understood by relating them to the
mirror image problem of describing an anticipated speculative attack.

- 1.7 -

Ante ix
In this Appendix we sketch the developuient of the explicit forirnilas

requited to find A and I when the TZ is defended by finite interventions.

Recall equation (9) in the text. This equation shows

expected

the

shift in the

rate, of change of the exchange rate required to accomodate an

intervention of size i". An analogous formula holds, but is not
displayed, for a finite intervention from below in size I. Note that the
two expected rates of exchange rate change in equation (9) nay be

developed in terms of A and B by using equations (5) and (7), which imply:

— qjl

Edx

+

A1AexpA1k" + A2BexpA2k")

1k—k"

+

—

Edx /dt

(a2/2)t4AexpA1k" + 4BexpA2k"].

.j(l

+

A1AexpA1Q + A2Bexp2Q1

Ik-Q

+ (o2/2)[AAexpA1Q
These

two

equation

equations may be

in

A

+

ABexpA2Q

substituted into equation (9) to give one

and B. A second equation in A and may be developed by

considering intervention at the lower bound, which may be finite as above
or infinitesimal as in Krugman and Froot and Obstfeld.

- 18

Bertola,

C. •

"Irreversible

-

Investment," MIT working paper (July 1987).

Bilson, John, Rational Expectations and

The Econotic.
(Reading.

of

Exehanse

the

Exchange Rate," Chapter 5
Frenkel and H. Johnson

Rates, ed. by 3.

Mass.: Addison-Wesley,

in

1918).

Avinash, "Intersectoral Capital Reallocation under Price
Uncertainty" (Princeton University: November 1987).

Dixit,

A Simplified Exposition of some Results Concerning
Brownian Motion" (Princeton University, August 1988).

_____

Regulated

Flood,

Robert P., and Peter N. Carber, "an Economic theory of Monetary
Reform," Journal of Political Econo.v (February 1980).

(1983a), A Model of Stochastic Process Switching," Econometrics
(May 1983).

____

____ • (1983b), "Process Consistency and Monetary Reform: Further
Evidence,"

Journal of Monetary

____ (l984a), "Gold
Political Econov
____ • (l984b),
Journal

of

Econotics (August 1983).

Monetization and Gold Discipline," Journal
(February 1984).

of

"Collapsing Exchange Rate Reglises: Some Linear Examples,"
International Econosics, Vol. 17, No. 1-13 (1984).

Frenkel,

Jacob, "A Konetary approach to the Exchange Rate: Doctrinal
Aspects and Empirical Evidence," Chapter 1 in The Economics of
Exchanee Rates, ed. by J. Frenkel and H. Johnson (Reading, Mass.:
Addison-Wesley, 1978).

Froot,

Kenneth A. • and Maurice Obstfeld, Exchange Rate Dynamics under
Stochastic Regime Shifts: A Unified Approach," Working Paper

(January 15. 1989).

Crilli, Vittorio, luying and Selling Attacks on Fixed Exchange Rate
Systems," Journal of International Econoeiès, vol. 20 (1986)
pp.

143-56.

Harrison, .7.
York:

Michael, firownian Notion and
John Wiley and Sons, 1985).

Stochastic Flow Systems (New

Krugman, Paul, "A Model of Balance-of-Payments
Credit and !ankin. (August 1979).

Crises, • Journal

of Money.

"Trigger Strategies and Price Dynamics in Equity and Foreign
Exchange Markets," NEER Working paper No. 2459 (December 1987).

- 19 -

____ "Target

Zones and Exchange Pate Dynamics." NBER Working Paper
Ho. 2841 (January 1988).

Miller, Marcus, and Paul Weller, "Solving Stochastic Saddlepoint Systems:
A Qualitative Treatment with Economic Application" (October 1988).

Nuns, Michael, "The Exchange Rate, the Balance of Payments and Monetary
and Fiscal Policy under a Regime of Controlled Floating." Chapter 3
in The Econctics of Exchann Rates, ed. by J. Prenkel and H. Johnson
(Reading. Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1978).
Obstfeld, Maurice, "Balance-of-Payments Crises and Devaluation," Journal
of None,. Credit and Bankin, (May 1984).

_____

"Rational and Self-Fulfilling Balance of Payments Crises," american
Econo.ic Review (March 1986).

Salant, Stephen, "me Vulnerability of Price Stabilization Schemes to
Speculative Attack," Journal of Political Econoav (February 1983).

_____ and Dale Henderson, "March Anticipations of Covernaent Gold

Policies

and the Price of Gold, •

Journal

of Political Econoav (August

1978).

Smith, Cregor V. • stochastic Process
Working Paper (1987).

_____

Switching,"

and Todd Smith, "Stochastic Process

Queen's University

Switching

and the Return to

Gold, 1925," Queens University Working Paper (1988).

Figure 1
Controlled Brownian Motion with Discrete Intervention

II,

Q

q
I

Tune

Figure 2
Exchange Rates with Discrete Interventions
x—gØ)

Q
XI

kMX

Ic

Figure 3
Large Discrete Intervention with Q C q
x=g(k)

x41

k

I"

