                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE LOCAL DECISION TO TAX:
                       EVIDENCE FROM LARGE U.S. CITIES




                              Robert P. Inman




                           Working Paper No. 2921




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 April 1989




This paper is a significantly re-written and expanded version of two earlier
papers:   "The Local Decision to Tax" completed for the Department of Housing
and Urban Development (Inman, 1979) and "Does Deductibility Influence Local
Taxation?" (Inman, 1985) completed for U.S. Treasury.    The National Science
Foundation (SES87-18768) and the Wharton Real Estate Center provided the
necessary funding for this major revision.   Conversations about this research
with Martin Feldstein (beginning as a graduate student in 1970), Alan
Auerbach, Douglss Holtz-Eakin, Helen Ladd, and Harvey Rosen were particularly
helpful as were presentations to colleagues at HIJD, Penn, Rochester,
Treasury, and the NBER.   Andrew Haughwout assisted ably with this last
revision.   Ken Shepsle provided the passage from Woodrow Wilson cited in
Section V. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Taxation.     Any
opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National Buresu
of Economic Research.
                                          N8ER Working Paper #2921
                                          April 1989


          THE LOCAL DECISION TO TAX:   EVIDENCE FROM LARGE U.S. CITIES


                                    AZSTRACT


    The structure of local taxation is an important determinant of the

fiscal performance of decentralized public economies.       In contrast to our

understanding of local government spending, however, we know surprisingly

little about how cities and states set taxes.      This study specifies and

estimates a model of the institutional,   political,    and economic determinants

of the local decision to tax.   Redistributivepolitics is an important

determinant of local tax policy, at least for this sample of 41 large U.S.

cities during the period 1961-1986.    The results cast serious doubt on the

validity of the "representative"   or average taxpayer approach to behavioral

                                                                       The results
modeling of fiscal policy for large, income diverse governments.

allow us to predict the effects on local financing of removing federal tax

deductibility of local taxes, an issue of current importance in the United

States.




                                          Robert   P.   Inman
                                          Finance Department
                                          Wharton School of Management
                                          University of Pennsylvania
                                          Philadelphia, PA 19104
                                       The Local Decision to Tax:
                                     Evidence FromLarge U.S. Cities

        There is no more hotly contested political issue in large United States cities than the
setting of the rates of local taxation--and for good reasons. Local taxes determine both the levels
of a city's public services and exactly who pays for those services. As an economic issue, local
taxation is importanttoo. From the perspective of economic efficiency, local taxation may have
                                                                                    and untaxed
significant consequences, both for resourceallocation within the city between taxed
activities and for the location of economic activity across communities.' Economic fairness may
be influenced                         local taxes take a significant share of household income
                 as well, particularly since

and such local governmentservices as education, health care, and housing can be important

determinants of long-run economic opportunity.2 With increasing policy interest in the possible

advantages    of decentralizing the United States public economy, it is important--perhaps now
more than ever--that we understand the economic and political forces which shape these local
decisions to tax.

          One contemporary issue in particular has heightened interest in the process              of local
revenue choice among U.S. economists and policy-makers: the possible removal                         of the

deductibility for state and local taxes when calculating U.S. federal taxable income. The debates
                                                                                              and
surrounding the 1986 Tax Reform Act focused in large measure on the advantages
disadvantages of dropping local tax deductibility. Removal was thought to be an important
source    of new federal revenues which could support broad reductions in overall tax rates.
Removal might also increasethe progressivity            of the federal tax code and eliminate an inefficient
                                                                                            new
subsidy to the local public sector. Opponents contended that removalwould not generate
revenues and might well reduce tax fairness and allocative efficiency.3 To resolve the issue it is


    1Wildasin (1986) provides an excellentintroduction to this literature.

   2For   a discussion of fairness in the local public economy, see Inman and Rubinfeld(1979).

   3Supporters include the initial proponents of broad-based tax reform; see McLure and Zodrow (1987) and
Courant and Rubinfeld (1987) for the arguments. Analyses which question these arguments can be found in
Cherrnckand Reschovsky (1986) and Feldstein and Metcalf (1987).
1&1L3
important to understand just how state and local taxes might be affected. Unfortunately, most of
the research which did address this question was forced to assume an elasticity of local taxes
with respect to federal deductibility. At the time, there simply were no compelling empirical

studies available on the determinants of local tax policy.

       This paper seeks to provide such a study. Two ingredients are necessary: a model of
local revenue choice and a data base with sufficient variation in the institutional, political, and

economic variables of interest to estimate the model. Section    II describes the model. In contrast
to the usualmodel of local fiscal choice which focuses on a single representative voter, this study
seeks to explicitly consider the redistributive nature       of local revenue choice. Section III
estimates the model. In contrast to one year cross-section studies   of local revenue choice whose
estimated coefficients may be biased because of omitted government-specific 'fixed effects" (see
Hausman and Taylor (1981)), this study develops     a large panel data base of 41 cities over
twenty-five years which allows unbiased estimation of the model's coefficients. A "fixed-effect'
or 'within-group' estimator is employed. Section IV then addresses the effects of removing

deductibility on taxation in our sample cities: what is likely to happen to local revenues, local
spending, and federal tax receipts with the loss of deductibility? Section V offers    a concluding
observation on this research.


II. The Analytics of Local RevenueChoice
   A. The Basic Structure
       Within larger U.S. cities, the local decision to tax is a decision made subject to
constraints. First, local taxation must be decided within the bounds of a local political process.

Competing coalitions within the city--the rich, the middle class, the poor, and local business
interests--all seek to influence the final decision to tax. Second, the mobility of resources within

the local and regional economy limit the ability of the city to raise revenues; taxable resources
may simply leave the taxing jurisdiction or, for those residents who remain, the taxed activity

may be curtailed. Third, state law may restrict the local community to the taxation         of only
well-defmed activitiesor resources, often further limited to a pre-specified rate of taxation. This
                                                       -3-




section outlines a model     of local taxation which embodies these political, economic, and legal
constraints.
      The model assumes an elected city executive--the mayor--responsible for coordinating
                                                                           from three sources: 1)
competing interests over the level of local taxes and fees. Pressures come
a city council interested in providing core government services with the lowest tax rate possible;

2) city agencies interested in providing agency services with the lowest agency fee possible; and
3) competitive taxpayer coalitions interested in shifting the aggregate burden of local services
from themselves to other taxpayers.4 City councilis responsible for approvalof the city budget

and uses broad-based taxes--forexample, property, income, and general sales--to finance what
we usually view as the primary local public services--for example, police and fire services,

education, public health, and public infrastructures. City agencies use user fees or selective

commodity taxes to finance all       or a portion of what may be viewed            as   the local government's

 private' service budget--for example, airports, parking facilities, tourism and conventions,
                                                                                 between the
hospitals, public housing, sewerage, and sanitation. Fiscal cross-subsidization

budgets of the two political bodies        is possible. City council can raise revenues from general
taxes sufficient to cover its own activitiesas well as subsidize agency activities when user fees

and selective taxes fail to cover the agency's average costs. Alternatively, the agency may set its

user fees or taxes above average costs, earn a profit, and then transfer these dollars to the
council's general budget. Left to their own devices, city council and agencies would prefer to

maximize the cross-subsidy from the other to their own budget. Finally, taxpayers' interests in

the distribution ofthe aggregate city burdens across individual taxpayercoalitions must be




       make no effort to formally model the local political process which might balance these competinginterests,
                                                                                                      the empirical
though recent work by Coughlin (1986) provides one model which might be used to motivate
                                                                       two candidates in which candidates cannot
specificationsused here. That model involves an election between
perfectly infer voter preferences over the disthbution of incomes. Coughlinshows thai such elections do have stable
outcomesover redistributive policies and that the final policies chosen correspond to those which would maii,ii.e
the sum of voter utilities. If voters have underlying preferences both over the levels of tax rates and the final
distribution of burdens, then this paper's equation (5) would follow from a Coughlin specification of electoral
politics.
1618.3
                                                     -4-




respected; these pressures will      be specified here by a mayoral preference for tax fairness. It is
the elected mayor's responsibility to balance these competing claims.
            More formally, the mayor proposes a budget which maximizes the simple sum           of each
political agent's--council's, agency's, mayor's--respective interests.         The city council has

preferences overthe level of local public goods it can supply (denoted g) and the net average tax
rate (denoted?) specified as the gross uniform tax rate (denotedr) net of state and federal tax
relief paid at an average (over household) rate t: ? = (1 — t) r. The deductibility of local taxes
from taxable federal and state income is the most prominent form of subsidy in the United States;

local tax credits, exemptions, or tax-based matchingaid (called "tax-effort" aid) may also be part

of 'r. Council preferences over g and? are specified       as v (g,7; Yg), where the vector Yg defines

the exogenous determinants of constituent preferences (specified below) for the level of core
governmentservices. Core services g may be uniformly or differentially disthbuted across
households, but for this study that distribution is taken as exogenous.        I assume    that the city

council prefers to offer more government services and to assess a lower net tax rate        (vIg > 0,
av/a? < 0) but that the political returns to these activities diminish as g rises and as r falls
(vIag2 <0, and v/a?2 <0).
            The administering agency has preferences over the level of the goods it can supply
(denotedq) and the net fee (denoted 1) that it can charge consumers. The net fee equals the
gross uniform fee (f) net of any state or federal government consumption subsidies paid at a rate
8:        = (1 — 0)1; Medicare   at Medicaid reimbursements is the most prominent U.S. example of
such a subsidy. Agency preferences over q        andf are specified as w (q,    Yq),   where the vector

Yq    represent exogenous determinants     of constituent preferences for the level of (now, "private')
government services (Yq). Like city council, the agency prefers to offer more services and to
assess lower charges (awfaq > 0, aw/af < 0), but both activities yield diminishing political
returns to the agency (2 w/aq2 <0, and w/af2 <0).




16.18.3
                                                             -5-




      Finally, the mayor has preferences over the distribution of total fiscal burdens amongst
the competing taxpayer groups within the city.5 If f3 represents the share of all taxpayers'

burdens borne specifically by taxpayer(s)            i (1 = 1,..., N), then the mayor's own preferences over
taxes and fees can be represented by m((31,..., 3N-1 ; X), where the omitted taxpayer N's share is

implicitlyincluded (since        E        1)   and where the vector X includes those exogenous variables

(specified below) which define the mayor's preferences over the relative distribution                           of the

aggregate burden of local financing.
          In specifying the burden shares        ([3k) ,   I assume that the burdens of local taxes and fees are
borne in proportion to each taxpayer's local consumption                   of the taxed or priced commodity.
Workers bear the full burden          of a local income tax (inelastic labor supply), homeowners and
renters as consumers of housing bear the full burden of local propertytaxation (perfectly elastic

supply of housing services), and consumers bear the full burden                            of general sales and
commoduty-specific taxes and fees (perfectly elastic supply of locally produced goods and
services including fee-based local services).6 For each taxpayer group, therefore, will be

specified as:

                    =     r(1 —tj)yj     +r(l —t)s +(rct)(l —c)b +f(1 —Oj)q1
                        {r(l —tj)yj +r3(1 —t)s + (ra)(1 —t)b1 ÷f(1 —8)q}
where r, and     r are city's uniform tax rates on income(yj, for taxpayer i) andlocal general sales
(si, for taxpayer i) respectively, r is the uniform local property tax rate on property (ba, for
taxpayer i) adjusted for possibly differential taxpayer property assessment at rate     (> 1, if         a
property is over-assessed relative to the city average, =                  1   if equally assessed, and <         1   if


     51n principle, I could also include mayoral preferences for the levels of governmentservices and the levels of tax
rates. Such an extension would add nothing of substance to this analysis, except to "clutter" the notation. I omit the
extension.

    6Perhaps the only possibly conuoversialassumption here is that regarding the incidence of property taxation. In
effect, I am assuming the city is a small part of an open regionalecxuniy in which land and other inputs can move
freely into and out of city housing production. I am also assuming that the demand for city housing is downward
sloping--thatis, the city has some unique attribute which residents value, fc example, cess to the CBD. See
Wildasin (1986, pp. 98-109) for a more complete discussion of the incidenceof propertytaxation.
16 16.3
                                                               -6-




under-assessed),         f is the uniform fee chargedfor commodityq (qj, for taxpayer i), and (1 t)              —


and (1    —
              O)    are taxpayer i's own rate of subsidy for local taxation and           fees.7     It is possible to
show as a first-order approximation that a taxpayer's share in total burdens (l3) rises with an

increase in        a particular tax rate or fee (e.g.,         r) if the taxpayer's share in that tax's subsidy
adjusted tax base (e.g., y, (1      —
                                        'ci)   /y (1   —
                                                           t)) is greater than the taxpayer's   share in aggregate
burdens (f3). Conversely,          ,    fails with an increase in a given rate or fee if the taxpayer's share

in adjusted base is less than his or her share in aggregate burdens.8 The mayor can therefore
                       of aggregate burdens across the politically relevant taxpayer groups by
control the distribution

manipulating aggregate tax rates and fees.9 I shall assume that the mayor has a target distribution
for fiscal burdens denoted by the target share, f3 (i = I                   N-i), and that deviations from these
targets are politically costly and increasingly so:            f3) <0 and —           —
                                                                                          m/(f3
                                                                                        3)2 <0.10
The mayor's target f3 's are defined by the relative politicalinfluence of each taxpayer, specified
here by the vector X of the exogenous "influence' variables:        = (X). Elements of X might

well include the percent of voters of type i. The balance between competing council, agency, and

mayoral interests         is specified here by the maximization of the simple sum of each agent's
                   11




     7Therate of subsidy for local taxes or fees can be different for different taxes or commoditiesas well, a subtlety
I ignore here but do include in the empirical analysis.

                                    )
         N be the numerator and the denominator for the definition of fl above: 3, = N/D. Thenfor a rate
           or fee (f) change, calculate afl/() = lID {aN/(.) —fl DTh()} for ()
(r,,r,r)                                                                                        r, or f. Note
           0 as (aN/a(.))/(aD/a(.)) J3. As a first-order approximation aNTh() a taxpayer i's own net of subsidy
base (e.g., for     r,
                   (1 —r1)y) and aD/a() a the aggregate net of subsidy base (e.g., for
conclusionsabove follow.
                                                                                                r,
                                                                                              Z(1 —r)y). The


    91t should be noted that control may not be perfect in the sense that all possible combinationsof the fl s are
possible. Generally, the mayor would need a separatetax for each of the (N—i) relevanttaxpayer group to have full
control over the f3 's.

    t0For example, m(•) might be specified as a quadratic loss function of the deviationsof the f3, 's from their
targets:
                                         in () = M —       —


   ttDifferent weightson each agent's preferences are certainly possible, but a full model of council-agency-
mayoral bargaining would be needed tojustify such weights in a compellingway.
16.18.3
                                                          -7.




                           V=v(g,7;Y) +w(q,f;Yq)                +m(j. 13N_1;X)
Maximization must occur with respect to economic and legal constraints.

            There are two economic constraints. First, the revenue raised from any broad-based tax
will be sensitive to the net, after-subsidy rate of taxation (7) on that base. For example, a
property tax implies a higher effective rental cost of housing and business capital which will
lower the rate of household and firm investment. Further a high net property tax rate may lead to
the exit of households and firms from the taxing jurisdiction, again reducing the value           of the
available tax base. Similar arguments can be offered for local taxes on household income and

firm profits or for taxes on local sales. Thus equilibrium revenues (denoted R) from any

broad-based tax will equal the gross tax rate (r) times the aggregate tax base (denoted B) which,
in equilibrium, is sensitiveto the net, after-subsidy rate of taxation (7):

                                      R(r) =r*B[7;cB(7, Y8,Z)J

where CB () is the elasticityof the tax base with respect to the net tax rate specified to depend on
the demand for core public goods and a vector Z of exogenous "Tiebout" variables. In the case

of property taxation, B [J is a variant of the now familiar Oates (1969) capitalization" equation.
I allow the long-run equilibrium response of base to net tax rate changes to be negative

(d.B/d7       0), though this equilibrium response may take several years because of lags in
investment and resource relocation. In the short-run, it is possible that dB/dV        =0, a fact which
has potentially important implications for local revenue choices.
         The second economic constraint faced by the city imposeslimitations on the city's ability
to raise funds from fees and selective sales taxes. Fees and selective sales taxes are treated

identically here, as gross user fees       (f) above average cost (c) can be viewed as a per unit tax at
rate (r):   f= c + r.   Agency "profits" in the case of user fees or agency "revenues" in the case of
selective sales taxation can be specified identically as:

                                   7tCf)   = (f — c) *q   [; 6q (1 Yq, Z)]
1618.3
                                                           -8-




where       f is the net fee to the residents after any state or federal subsidies,         Eq   ()   is the price

elasticityof demand for q by consumers purchasing q within the jurisdiction. The elasticity is
                                                                                   I assume
again specified to depend upon demand (Yq) and regional "Tiebout' (Z) variables.
dq/df 0, and that the equilibriumresponseof consumer demand for q with respect to changes
in        is instantaneous; that is, short-run and long-run elasticities are equal.

       In addition to political and economic constraints, city officials also face state-imposed

legal constraints. First, all cities are required to balance their budgets in each fiscal year.
Revenues received from own taxes and fees plus dollars received as federal and state aid must

equal current accounts spending on g and q arid interest payments (1) due for previous
borrowings. In the simple case of one public good g costing $1/unit, one broad-based tax levied
at the gross tax rate       r,one fee-based government service q costing $c/unit and priced at
                                 and

$f/unit, the government's annual budget constraint may be written, inclusive of exogenous
federal and state aid (A) and matchinggrants for g at rate p., as:

4)                                      g+cq+1=rB+fq+A+p.g.
Using the economic constraints in eqs. (2) and (3) and re-arranging eq. (4) gives a specification
for government services, g, as a function of grosstax rates and fees:

                                                     [R (r)   +A   —   I + it(j)J
                                       gr,       —
                                                 —
                                                              (1—p.)


wherethe exogenous determinants of R (r)             and   t(j) are understood.
        While the specification of the city's budget constraint in eqs. (4) and (4') generalizes
easily to several broad-based taxes--r becomes a vector of tax rates and total revenue becomes
the summation        of individual tax revenues--asecond, additional set of legal constraints makes this
extension unnecessary for large UnitedStates cities. While U.S. cities are often allowed to use a

variety      of broad-based taxes, under state law only the local propertytax remains solelyundercity
fiscal control.12 In all cities for my sample period               (FY1961 to FY1986), local income tax rates



      12Even this tax may face legal constraints;see section 11-B below.
16.11.3
                                                         .9-




and general sales     tax rates are set by state policy.'3 Cities may use these taxes to raise revenues,
but once chosen, their rates, and thus the level of tax revenues, are exogenously determined. To

allow for the effects     of local income and sales taxation on local finance, the exogenous level of
such other tax revenue (now denoted             T)   must be added to city revenue in the city's budget

constraint in eq. (4).

           One final change in the budget constraint also seems appropriate, given that the mayor
andL    city council are popularly elected and responsible primarily to the wishes of the voting
residents.     Council and mayor preferences will ultimately focus on residential tax burdens

associated with any increase in the property tax rate.              If so, property tax revenues should be
denominated in residential dollars as Rh (r)           = (1 — p) R (r), where R (r) is total property tax
revenues,    p is the share of revenues from the          commercial-industrial tax base, and (1 — p) the

share from the householdsector. Substituting            Rh (r) 1(1 — p) for R (r) in the budget     identity now
permits us to examinethe coffespondence            of local tax rates to local services from the perspective
of voting residents.
      Including T in city revenues and substituting Rh (r) 1(1 — p) for R (r) re-specifies the city's
budgetconstraint as:



                               g(r,f)=      [{} +A+J+]     (1—)

Equation(4) now captures all economic and legal constraints on the local tax choice. Together,
the maximization     of eq. (1) subject to the constraint in eq. (4) formalizes the political, economic,
and legal reality of the local decision to tax. Alternatively, eq. (1) can be specified inclusive of
all economic and legal constraints as:


5)        V(r,f) =v{g(r,f),7;Yg}+w{q(j),7;Y}+m{131(r,f)                                t3N_1(r,f);X}




     Except for small local adjustments in rates or eligible base, the state sets these tax rates; see ACIR (1974),
chapters3and4.
118.3
                                                         -10-




As specifiedhere,the local decision to tax has now been reduced to an 'as if' maximization of
this constrained objective function V(r, f)
        The resultingfirst orderconditions for an maximum are given by:

                        V                    (avYav'\ (am\                         and
6)
                                  _))+)_,)+_)=O
7             aV   _(        (ag"\(ait"\ [(aw"(aq                       aw1(ai     (am     -.
                                                                                           -o

Equation (6) defines the preferred value of the local property tax rate (r), given f. The choice of
tax rate involves a balancing of the politicaladvantages of increased revenues for the purchase of
council services against the political disadvantage caused by the resulting increase in the net

property tax rate borne by all residents. In addition, changes in r can alter the distribution of
local fiscal burdens which may benefit (am/ar >0) or harm (am/ar <0) the mayor. Equation (7)
defines the preferred value for local fees   (1), given r. Increasing fees offers the advantage that
extra profits are earned for expenditure on council-provided services. Offsetting this advantage
are the political losses from the reduced consumption of fee-related services and from the
increase in net fees. As for taxes, changes in fees can alter the distribution             of fiscal burdens,
again to the politicaladvantage (am/af> 0) or disadvantage (am/af < 0) of the mayor. Solving
eqs. (6) and (7) for r andf, defines rand! as functions of the model's exogenous variables:

8)         r = r{(1   —   'r), (1 —j, (1 —8), (1    —
                                                         i.L), C, A +     1; Y, Yq; EB (Z), Eq (Z);

                   ry,rs,al ...cz_j,(l—ti) ...(l—tN_1),(l—O1)                  •..(1—8N_1),X}

and

9)        f=f{(l —t), (I —p), (1—8), (1 —ii), c,A +T                      1; Yg, Yq; e8(Z), eq(Z);

                   r,r,ai ...CZN_1,(l—tl)          ...   (l—VN—1),(l—O1)... (l—9_i),X}.

In the end, tax rates and fees depend upon the economic, political, and legal environments which


16.18.3
                                                        —11—




defme local fiscal choices. Understanding how changes in these environments might alter the
choice of rand! is the next task.


B.      Comparative Statics
          Figure   1   describes the equilibriumlevel of city fees, given the rate of property taxation.
As defined by eq. (7) the mayor seeks to balance the virtues    of fees generating positive profits
against the political losses associatedwith the higher fees themselves. The curve denoted t(f) is
the city's profit function from fees; profits are negative when! is less than the (constant) average

cost c of producing q and reach a maximum at fm,.x when marginal revenueequals c ( = marginal
cost). The upward bending indifference curve denoted V(f*; r*)           is one of a family of mayoral
indifference curves balancing the gains from higher agencyprofits against the losses from higher

user fees; the slope of this indifference curve--(dit/df)v--is positive    (fis a 'bad   which must be

compensated by         i)   and increasing in    f because of (assumed) diminishingmarginal gains to
profits and increasing marginal losses to fees.
       The tangency of V (f*; r*) to it(J) defines the preferred level of fees, given r, and is
formally specifiedby:

              aw            aw   aq     am

(7')



Eq. (7') is   a slightly re-written version of the first-order condition in eq. (7), allowing that
d7/df = (1 — 8). The LHS term in             {    ) is the MRS between profits and net fees    (f); the
                                                           f
numerator is the marginal loss from an increase in whilethe denominator is the "shadow value'

of another dollar of profits to the city council's budget. This shadow value which I will denote
hereafter as (it; r) provides the crucial link between the setting     of fees and the decision on tax
rates. All else constant, higher tax rates (r) mean more public services, a diminishing marginal



161*i
         Figure 1: Fees & Selective Sales




                          V(f* ;r*)

ir>o
                                        ir(f)
lr(f*)


    0                                           f
                                  max



ir<o


ir(o)
                                                         -12-




utility to core public services (since        2 v/g2 <0), and thus a lower "shadow            value' to agency

profits. Thus,   2Jr <0.
        Figure 2 describesthe equilibriumcity property tax rate, given fees. The specification for
the optimal propertytax rate, given fees, is defmed by eq. (6) and can be re-written as:




                    1
                     I    (av"\
                         _______
                                (       am)
                                                                1       1          ](dRh



noting that dV/dr = (1     —
                                'r), or as:



(6')



The expression on the left--(dR" /dr)v—is the political MRS of the gross tax rate (r) for
householdrevenues        (Rh)   and depends upon the politicalwillingness to trade the net tax rate         (V)

for government services            Cs) multiplied   by   (1 — t)(1 — l.t)(l —p), a       deflator which turns
household tax revenues into core governmentservices. The right side of eq.                  (6') is the slope of
the householdrevenue schedule with respect to the gross tax rate, allowing for adjustments in

housing investment and the exit of residents as r increases. The peak of the revenue schedule
occurs at   r.     The equilibrium property tax rate--denoted               r   in Figure 2--is that value of r
which just equates the political gain of the extra revenue raised from an increase in r--
(dR"/dr) —to the ability of r to raise this revenue--dR"/dr.
                                      of dR"/dr. Do city politicians set r mindful of its long-run
         Important is the specification
                                                                    e
effects on tax base--that is, dR"/dr = Bk (1 + c8), where <0--or do they ignore the long-run

                                                c
consequences of rate on base and assume = 0 and thus dR"/dr = B" alone? Figure 2 describes
the tax rate equilibrium when politicians ignore the longer-run consequences of their tax
decisions. In this case, the indifference curve V(r*; f*)           is tangent to a short-run revenue line
16.1L3
         Figure 2: Property Taxation


   Rh
                          V(r* ;f*)




Rh(r*)




    0
                     r*     rm         r
                                                   -13-




with a slope equal to dRh/dr =B' but the tangency must occur along the long-run revenue

curve, Rh (r) evaluated at r*, to insure the political equilibrium    is also economically feasible.
Note that if local politicians responded to the long-run incentives created by their taxing

decisions, then the equilibrium would be described by the tangency of a political indifference
curve to the long-run revenue schedule; in Figure 2 a tax rate to the left of r* would then be

chosen (assuming diminishing marginal benefits from g). Note that this lower local tax rate

would make local politicians better off (a higher indifference curve), but only     f they   are   still in

office to enjoy the rewards     associated with the rate induced increase in local tax base and
revenues.    If the benefits of an expanded tax base come after the next election, this rate reduction
may bring in too little revenue today (along the short-run revenue line with slope Bh) to be

politically optimal.     Local fiscal policy   is exposed, therefore, to the dilemma of time
inconsistency: what is politically optimal in the short-run may be non-optimal in the long-run. If
there are no credible meansof commitment to the preferred long-run tax rate, then city fiscal
policy may be permanentlyinefficient. In fact, such an inefficientshort-run tax rate equilibrium
could occur even on the downward side of the local revenue-schedule; see Buchanan and Lee

(1982).
          While Figures 1 and 2 show separate equilibriums for fees and tax rates, the two are

linked through the requirement that the optimal level of fees    (f) in Figure 1 generate that level
of profits which corresponds to the optimal property tax rate (r*) in Figure    2. We have already

observed that changes in the optimal local tax rate will alter the "shadow value" of agency
profits, 2(it; r), and thus change optimal fees; an increase in r* lowers X(t) which steepens
agency indifference curves in Figure 1 thereby reducing f's.         Increases in     have a similar

negative effect on r*. An increase    inf raises agency profits which requires a larger purchase of
core services g, for a given tax rate. The increase in g, given r, lowers the marginal value of

government services which reduces the marginal value of tax revenues and increases         (dR"/dr).
The "steeper' indifference curves in Figure 2 imply a new lower r*. Here, Figures      1   and 2 are in
"balance--thatis, as drawnf' is optimal for r*, and conversely.

16.18.3
                                                              14-




          Changes in the model's exogenous variables will aIterf' and               r'. Table   1    summarizes the

comparative static predictions. Considerfirst the effects of an exogenous change in the city-wide
                      or state subsidies for local property taxation, 'r, for example through the
average rate of federal
removal of deductibility of local taxation when calculating federal and state income tax
liabilities. The resulting reduction in           t implies an increase in (1 t) and (dRh/dr)V for each
                                                                                    —



value of r,    see   eq.   (6') above. Increases in the gross property tax rate are now politically more
costly, requiring a larger increase in revenues as compensation. Steeper indifference curves
means a lowerpreferred r*. What happenstot? The lowervalue of r* implies a higher shadow

value for agency profits which flattens the indifference curves in Figure               1; see eq.   (7'). A higher
preferred level of fees results. Higher fees in turn feedback into the tax rate equilibrium and
                                                                    f
reduces r still further, while the new fall in r raises again. We can conclude, therefore, that
dr*/d(l — t) <0 and df*/(l — t) >0, as shown in Table                         i.'
                                                                  A similar argument can be

developed to show that an exogenous reduction in commercial-industrial tax base (lowering p)
will also lower r* and raisef; see Table 1.
          Changes in the average rate of fee subsidies--for example, lowering 0 through less federal
or state residential subsidies for public housing or hospitals--will also alter r* and                  f.   Here a

reduction in 0 raises (1 —8) which increases (drtldf)v, the slope of the indifference curves in

Figure 1. The added burden from gross fees with the fall in 0 now requires increasing profits as

compensation. Steeper indifference curves in Figure  imply a lower value of and a reduction
                                                                    1                         f
in agency profits. From the council's budgetconstraint the fall in profits reduces the level of g

that is possible for each value of r. The fall in g raises the marginal gains from raising the local

property tax rate; av/ag rises so (dRh Idr)v falls. The flatter indifference curves in Figure 2
imply an increase in r*. The larger r* "feedback" reduces to the shadow value of agency profits
which further reducesf". Thus,          df*/d(l    —
                                                       0)   <0 and dr*/(1 — 0) > 0 as shown in Table 1.
          A changein the rate of subsidy        for core service expenditures has ambiguous effects on

andf, however. For example, an increase in (1 — .t) increases (dR"/dr) v as specified by eq. (6')

      14Corner solutions are possible,but in this discussion I assume r*   >0 and >0.
16.18.3
                    Table 1: ComparativeStatics

                                         Effect on:
        Exogenous
         Variable    Property Tax Rate                     User Fees
                           (r*)                              (f*)

         (1—v)       fr*/d(1—t) <0                     dfs/d(1—t) >0

         (1 —p)      dr*/d(1—p) <0                     df*/d(1 —p) >0

         (1 —9)
                     frx/d(1 —0) >0                    df*/d(1—9) <0

         (1   —      fr*/d(1—j)     0                  dfs/d(1—t)      0
              C         dr*fdc >0                         df*Idc >0

        (A +T—I)    fr*/d(A +T—!) <0                  df*/d(A+T—I)<0

              1',      fr*/dY,    0                      df*/dYg     0
              Yq       dr*/dYq    0                      df*/dYq     0
         e8(Z)        drs/dIcIO                         df*/dIe >0
         Eq(Z)        dr*/dcq     >0                    df*/dCq      0
         r,           fr*/d 0                            df*/dr, O
                       dr*/da1    0                      df*Ida1     0
         (1—c)       dr*/d(1—t)     0                  dfs/d(1   —       0

         (1—9)       fr*/4(1—9)     0                 df*/d(1_91)    0
          xr           d,y*/dX0                          df*/dX, 0

          xp           dr*/dX 0                          df*/dX 0

              S        ifr*/js <0                        df*/ds >0

              r        fra/d7 0                          df*/d7 0


t&ILI
                                                         -15-




above. Since government matchingaid has fallen, each increasein r must now raise more own
revenues to maintain g and political support. The steeper slope to the indifference curves in

Figure 2 implies a fail in r*. The fall in           r* means a higher shadow value for agency profits
which stimulates an increase in fees and agency profits in Figure 1. Now, however, the rise in

profits means an increase in g, given r*, which in turn lowers (dR"/dr)p in Figure 2 acting to
increase r*. The initial effect of the fall in j.L is now offsetby the increase in it from the change in

fees. Thus no predictions are possible, eitherfor r* orf'; see Table 1.15

       The final average 'price effect" in the model occurs through exogenous changes in the
                                                                                      for each
average production cost of fee-based services. An increase in c lowers agency profits
value off, shifting the profitcurve to the right and down along the horizontal axis in Figure                    1. If,

as assumed, fees impose        an increasing marginal loss on the agency and the shadow value of

profits increases as    it declines, then the new fee equilibrium will involve higher fees, and (most

likely) lower agency            If so, the tangencyof an agency's indifference curve to the new
                          profits.16

profit hill will therefore occur to the southeast of the equilibrium shown in Figure 1. For
property taxation, the fall in agency profits means less g for each tax rate r and thus
                                                                                         the slope

(t.iRhIdr)vdeclinesin Figure 2. Tax rates thereforerise. The increasein tax rates is not sufficient
                                                                                                                     17
to offset the original fall in agency profits however, and therefore core services (g) decline.
The fall in g increases      av/&g     which flattens all indifference curves in Figure           1   (see eq.   (7))
furtherincreasing fees. In equilibrium, therefore, dr*/dc > 0 and df*/dc > 0.


    While clear predictions for the effects of tax and fee subsidies are possible in this model, no unambiguous
conclusionsfollow from the comparativestatic analysis of a change in expendituresubsidies. These results should
caution those who might use service price elasticities from expenditurestudies to drawconclusions about the policy
effects ofrevenue subsidies.

      16                                                                                              f
          addition to the downwardshift in the profit hill. the slopeof the profit hill at each value of may change as
well. With a constant elasticity of demand for q, the slope of the profit hill will steepen at  eh      value of1. This
further encouragesan increase in fees. It is possible that the steeper profit hill will encouragesuch a large increase
in fees that final agency profits may increase over the level obtained in the initial equilibrium,even though the new
profitcurve is itselfeverywherebelow the originalschedule.

     The equilibrium at a new higher tax rate means the siope of the short-run revenue curve is flatter (i.e.,
equilibrium tax base is lower) and therefore the slope of the council's equilibriumindifference curve must also be
flatter, or (dR"Idr)p is smaller in value. From (6') this can only occurat higher tax rate if (vThg)is larger in value
or, with diminishingmarginalbenefits, because g is smaller.
16.li.3
                                                            -16-




         Changes   in lump-sum federal and state aid (A), revenue from exogenous tax sources

(T) ,   or interestpayments(I) will affect r* and? jointly. From the council's budget constraint,

             (A + T — i) implies more core services (g) for any given property tax rate. This
an increase in

reduces (avig) and increases (dRhIdr)v for each value of r, the steeper indifference curves in

Figure 2 mean a lower r*. The fall in r* is not enough to offset the effect of more (A +                     —
                                                                                                                 I)
on g, however.'8 The net increasein g lowers            &v!ag      in eq. (7'), steepens the slopes of the agency
indifference curves in Figure 1, and implies                       a lower equilibrium value of     f.      Thus

dr*/d (A + T    —
                    i) <0and df*/d (A + T i) <0. —


         An increase in demands for public services                  (Y8, Yq) will   have ambiguous effects on
revenues. First, as a pure "taste" effect, an increasein the demand for government services will

increase   v/g which will increase? and r*.            However, there may be offsetting effects if Yg and

Yq   also change revenue bases. For example, if increases in Yq (Yg) induce a parallel upward shift
to the profit (tax revenue) curve, then fees (tax rates) will decline. Yet increases in              Yq   and 1'
may also steepen the slopes of the city profit and revenue curves as exit to outside suppliers and
                             If so, the steeper profit and revenue curves may encourage fees and
residential locations decline.

taxes. Which of these threeeffects dominates is not clear a priori.

         Exogenous changes in the elasticities               of the profit and tax revenue schedules--for
example, because       of increased Tiebout competition (Z) in the region--will also influence city
revenue decisions. Larger (in absolute value) revenue base elasticities imply profit and long-run

revenue schedules which are everywhere flatter and lower than the original schedules. (Flatter

from the slope specifications in eqs.(6') and (7') and lower because the profit curve and the
short- and long-run revenue curves will be "anchored" at it(f = 0) and at R(r = 0) respectively.)

In Figure 1, the flatter     slope to the profit curve will act to reduce fees and profits, but the
concurrent downwardshift in the profit curve acts to increasefees. Thus no clear prediction                   of
the effectof eq     on? is possible.    Plausible arguments can be offered for an increase in tax rates,

however. With a decline in agency profits,lowercore services will be provided for each value of



    18Theargument is the reverse to that in fn. 17 above.
t61Li
                                                       -17-




r in     Figure   2.19   Thus increases in    r are politically      more valuable, the required revenue

compensation (dR1' /dr)v falls, and r* rises. Similar arguments apply for an exogenous increase
inc  to show that while r* may fall (a "substitution'effect) or rise (a 'revenue" effect),fk must

rise because of an equilibrium decline in tax revenues and a resultingrise in the shadow value of
agency profits.

          Comparative static arguments can also be offered to predict the effects            of changes in the

exogenous determinants        of mayoral redistribution preferences.             A precise specification of

m (13i     N-1; K) and the availableredisthbutive policy instruments are needed, however. For
                                                                           Lindahl prices) then the
example, if city officials have a tax instrument for each taxpayer (e.g.,
preferred redistributive burden can be obtained with each    equal to its target 3. In this case, m

is always at its maximum,    &mIr =0 and am/af= 0, and uniform tax rate (r) and fees (f)
become irrelevant as redisiributioninstruments. Without such a complete set of tax instruments

however, 3 * f3 (for at least some i) and amR)r *0 and am/af 0 is likely. In this case, r andf
do become useful redistributive policy instruments; see eqs. (6') and (7'). Hence exogenous

changes in           through changes in            r
                                             and r, or the (1 — t) 's, (1 — 8) 's, or cr. 's--or

exogenous changes in         —through changes in taxpayer influence, X--may increase or decrease
m (), alter       am/J   and amTh7. and change the first-order conditions for a fiscal optimum.

Preferred rates and fees will therefore change. In general, however, no clear predictions are
                                                                                     for the
possible without further structure to m (); thus Table 1 shows ambiguous predictions
exogenous redistributive variables.
       One plausible special case seems of interest, however, for it helps explicate the pattern
and significance of redistributionchanges which are empirically observed for large U.S. cities.
Three coalitions of taxpayers are assumed: rich taxpayers, middle class taxpayers, and poor

taxpayers. Each taxpayer wishes to minimize his
                             of r and f
                                                                 or her share in total tax burdens,
                                          A typical finance structure in my sample cities is such that a
                                                                                                        ,    by

influencing the choices



     t9Sufficient for a decline in equilibrium profits is that   a2qjf2   0.   Linear demand curves satisfy this
resiriction.
16.1&3
                                                        -18-




rich taxpayer's        rises with an increase in fees (their share in the subsidy adjusted consumption

of q is greater than   i) and falls with an increasein r (their sharein subsidyadjustedpropertytax
baseis lessthan 3)20 The pattern is just the opposite for a very poor household whose                      3   rises

as the city raises property tax rates and whose            f3, falls   as the city raises fees.2' Middle class
households have shares in property taxation and fees just about equal to their average burden

share; their      'S   are   therefore unaffected by small changes in tax rates or fees.                   In this

environment, redistributive politics becomes             a balancing of the interests of rich and poor
taxpayers.     Individual rich taxpayers favor property tax increases and fee reductions, while

individual poor taxpayers prefer to reduce propertytax rates and to raise fees.

      What does such a distribution "game' imply for r and! if there are small changes in the
model's exogenous redistributive variables? If a coalition's initial equilibrium share is greater
than or equal to the mayor's target share             then any exogenous change which increases                will

induce                                                                                     r
        a policy responseto return closer to its target 3 22 Increases in (the rich bear the
larger relative burden of uniform local income taxes) or in (1 — 're), (1 — 9), and aj for therich
all increase   !3 for the rich. Such exogenous changes will induce compensating increases in r and



            p. 5 above. I have estimated values of I, for my average sample city for households whose incomes are
twice the community average. Assuming plausible consumptionpatterns (roughly one-half of all non-housing
consumption is made within the city) and assessment rates (a = .8 for rich households based on Inman and
Rubinfeld (1979)) the rich's value of 3 equals 1.6 of the averageresidential tax burden. A rich taxpayer's share of
adjusted property tax base is about 1.05 of the average adjusted base. Thus increases in r will lower 3 for a rich
taxpayer.
    A similar calculation for fees for a household with income twice the community average implies that the rich
taxpayer pays about twice the averagefee payment. Most residentialfees are paid for sewerageand sanitation borne

                                     .
in proportion to housing consumption. Thus the taxpayer's share in the fee base is greater than his average
Thereftire, inaeases in fees will raise

     2tPoor householdsin my sample cities are assigned an income equal to half the city average, they are assumed
                                                                                                                 ,.

to consume 90% of the non-housingconsumption in the city, and they are given an assessment rate equal to 1.8
times the city average (Inman and Rubinfeld (1979)). Their estimated value of 3 is .75 of the average residential
burden. The poor taxpayer's shareof the adjusted property lax base is just about equal to the average adjusted base;
this is so because of the poor's relatively high assessment rate and the fact that the poor do not deduct property
taxation when paying federal and state taxes. The poor's share of the adjusted fee base is about .3 of the average
share, however, becauseof housing subsidies and lower than averageconsumptionof fee-based services. From the
argumentsabove (pp. 4-5), therefore,the poor will prefer to increasefees and to lower rates.

       the initial equilibrium share is less than the target share, then all the conclusions which follow from an
exogenous increasein J3 are reversed.
16.18.3
                                                          -19-




reductions inf so as to lower          back towards its target. Conversely, an increase in r, (the poor
bear the larger relative burden of general sales taxation) or in (1 — ti), (1 — er), and a, for the

poor all increasethe poor's           above the initial equilibrium value. There is now a compensating

reductionin r and a compensating increase inf so as to lowerthe poor's share back to its target.24

Finally, an increase in the relative politicalinfluence of the rich or the poor coalition (X) will
lower their respective target shares,       J3, and stimulate adjustments in r andf For example, if the
percent of the electorate who are rich (PCR) increases, I3 for the rich may fall,             if so, there will
be pressure to reduce          for the rich taxpayer and thus,         by previous arguments, r will rise and f
will fall. Alternatively,   if the percent of the electorate who are poor (PCP) increases, I3 for the
poor may fall.     If so, there will be pressure to reduce r and to increase f. These hypotheses for
PCR and PCP--defined now as the elements               of X--as well as those for r,       r   and   (1   t) will be
testedwhen estimating the tax and fee equations. Table 2 will present empirical results generally
consistent with the pattern of redisiributive effects predicted here. The specific redisthbutive
structure outlinedabove provides one rationale for these results. I have no doubt however, that

other, perhaps equally plausible explanations, can also be constructed. The point here is a
modest one: redistributive politics may well play an important role in local fiscal choice.

         There has been one final change in the political-legal environment of the local decision to
tax which we can also examinewith the modelhere: the local property tax limitation movement.

Two general forms of limitations are in force. The first--called "soft' limitations--places various

voting and administrative harriers before local politicians as they seek to raise the rate                   of local

property taxation. Typically, such soft limitations require a specific voter referendum for all tax
rate increases above a certain annual rate of growth, often demanding a 2/3's rate of voter

approval. The second form            of limitation is an absolute restriction on the level of the local


    23Th the context ofeq. (7'), the term (am/a?) now becomesmore positive as           rises which in turn flauens the
slope of the indifference curves in Figure 2 ((dRk/dr) becomes smaller). The flatter slopes in Figure 2 imply
higher preferred values of r. The rise in r lowers the shadow value of agency profitswhich reduces the use of fees.
This effect on fees is reinforcedby the fact that (am/a7) has now becomemore negavc with the rise in JI, for the
rich, further steepening the slope of all indifference curvesin Figure 1 and furtherreducingfees.

    24Fonnally, the argument is the reverse of that in fn. 23 above.
1618.3
                                                           -20-




property tax rate applied either to market value (e.g., California and Massachusetts) or to
assessed value (e.g., Ohio). With absolute limitations, the local property tax rate must satisfy the

constraint:      r   7.
                      An Appendix details these limitations for the study's sample. The
comparative statics of "soft' (denoted s) and 'hard" (7) limitations are straight-forward
extensions     of the analysis above. Softlimitations can be seen as increasing the marginal political
costs of raising the local property tax by giving a more visible and politically effective forum to
the tax's opponents.26 This increases (dR1'/dr)v in Figure 2 which in turn implies a reduction in

r*,   an   increasein the shadow value of agency profits, and a final rise            in. Thus, dr*/ds <0 and
df*/ds > 0, where increases in s imply a "tougher" constraint. Hard limitations simply act as a
barrier--a vertical line at 7 in Figure 2 (not shown)--beyond which r cannot rise. If the constraint
occurs to the left of r*, then city rates must fall to             7. If the constraint is to the right of the
preferred rate, then the constraint does not bind and rates remain at r*. Thus dr*/dY                        0.   If the
constraint is binding and r* must fall to         7, then the shadow value of agency profits is increased,
and7 will rise in Figure        1.   If r is not binding. then remains unchanged.               Thus,   df*/dT       0.

See Table 1.
            It is instructive to compare the comparative static predictions developed here                with those
whichmight arise from the commonly used "representative" taxpayer model. Arnott and Grieson
(1981) provide such a model for local government taxation. Maximizing the indirect utility
function of the representative taxpayer, familiaroptimal tax rules for efficient--i.e., excess burden

minimizing--local taxation are derived, allowing for the fact that local taxes may be exported


      LiinitaIions applied to assessed value may be less resuiclive than market value limitationsif the city retains
control over the assessment process. Most states, however, have removed this degree of local discretion, giving the
county or the state itself sole assessment power see Ininan and Rubinfeld (1979).

     For example, if the "soft" limitation requires 2/3 referendumapprovaland the Umitation specifies a very low
reversion(or "fall back') tax rate withoutapproval, then r will settleat the preferred rate of the voter in 33% position
in the distributionofvoter preferences.

     27Applications of the representative taxpayer model to the empirical analysis of local taxation include tnman
(1979) in a study of property taxation alone, Feldstein and Metcalf (1987) in a study of state-local aggregate
taxation,and Holtz-Eakinand Rosen (forthcoming)for their study of property taxation in middle size communities.
Barro (1979) also uses the representativetaxpayer approh, but rather than tax mix he examines the intertemporal
distributionof tax burdens for a single tax. That analysisyields the now familiar "tax-smoothing"hypothesis.
16.1L3
                                                           -21-




(e.g., through deductibility) to non-residents.             Local tax rates (or fees) are higher for locally
consumed goods with low price elasticities of demand and for those goods where taxes can be

shifted onto non-residents. The prediction that tax rates will be higher on those goods where
taxes can be exported is consistentwith the predictions here for the average revenue subsidies

(1   —   t),   (1   —p), and (1 — 0). Demand elasticities are also important in both models and again
identical predictions can result. The variables most capable of distinguishing between the two

models are the redistribution variables(X, (1          —
                                                           ti), a, (1 — 8), r   and r3), variables which have

no independent role to play in the representative taxpayer model beyond their effects on average
exogenous revenue (T)    or average revenue subsidies. Also important here, but arguably
insignificant in the apolitical representative taxpayer model, is the variable measuring the

presence of a soft tax limitation. The separate statistical significance of the redistribution
variables and of s therefore provide        a distinguishing test of the hypothesis that local taxation is
determined in part by redistribution politics.


C. Econometric Specification
       A revenue system for property taxation, user fees, and selective sales taxation will be
estimated to test the comparative static properties of the revenue model. To do so, each of the

exogenous variablesin Table 1 must be specified.
           The uniform subsidy rate (1      —
                                                t) for local propertytaxation      is defined as the weighted

average        of the individual values of (1 — t) for taxpayers in each of the threeincome coalitions in
the city: poor (for that householdwhose income corresponds to the 25th percentile income in the
city), middle (for the median income household in the city), and rich (for that household which
income corresponds to the 75th percentile income in the city). There are three sources                          of
variation for each coalition's value         of 'ti:   whether in    fact the coalition's taxpayers deduct
property taxation from their federal and state income taxes, the coalition's taxpayer'smarginal



          redistribution model predicts any sign for the effects of changes in own-price elasticities (e8 and Eq), a
result which is also possible in the representative taxpayer model as long as demands are not independent.
                                   i)
Similarly,the variables(A + T — , Y1, Y, and will give identical predictions within the two models.
6.I8.3
                                                        -22-




tax bracket on federal and state income taxes if the family does deduct, and homesteaä

exemptions and property tax credits from the state available to the coalition's taxpayers. For this
study the probability of deduction is taken to be each year's national rate of deductibility for each
coalition's taxpayer's income leveL29 Federal and state tax codes define the marginal tax rate ii
the taxpayer does deduct;        I use the marginal tax         rate corresponding to the first dollar of

deductions for each coalition income level. Property tax credits and exemptions were also
estimated for each coalition and included in           t; generally such subsidies are limited to lower
income households and available whether or not the household itemizes. The weights for the

aggregation of the separate coalition         's were .25 for the poor cohort, .50 for the median income
cohort, and .25 for the rich cohort.
       The uniform rate of subsidy to residential property taxation from commercial industrial

property (p) is simply the share of commercial-industrial property in the city's assessed tax base.
Thisrate of subsidy applies uniformly to all income cohorts.
       The rate of subsidy for local user fees is limited to federal hospital and housing transfers
for the poor and elderly; thus in any one year there will be no variation in (1 — O) across our
cities.   I allow for any year to year trend in this variable onlycrudely through            the inclusion of a

year time dummy variable (Time). A similarspecification is adopted, for similar reasons, for the
average cost of fee-based government services (c).
          Federal and state   government matching grants for local spending on core services,
(1   —
       ji), do vary across the sample cities, however. The two major programs are assistance for
welfare spending on the current account (for those cities with this fiscal responsibility) and city

capital outlays; estimatesof these matchingrates have been developed for city expenditure data
and are included in this study as (1 — j.t) and (1 —       )   respectively.

          Federal and state government lump-sum transfer to U.S. cities are included in A, one

major component      of which is (now obsolete)        revenue-sharing aid. Included in (T—J) are city


    291t would be preferable to use the probability of deduction within the individual city, but this data does not
exist For their study ofaggregate state-localtaxation, Feldsteinand Metcalf (1987) were able to calculate deduction
probabilitiesby states which is an improvement
16.18.3
                                                     -23-




 revenues (T) from the two       major exogenously set tax sources--local income taxation and local
 general sales taxes-- less exogenously requiredinterestpayments on local government debt (I).
          Included as joint measures of the political benefits from providing core public      (Yg)   and

 private fee-based (Yq) services are average resident income in the city (CINC, for residential
demand), percent of the workforce who commute into the city (PCOM, for commuter and
 service-based business demand), the number of manufacturing sector jobs per capita (MANU, for

heavy industry business demand). CINC, PCOM,and MANU are each expected to increase the
political benefits from g and q service provision. Included in Y as unique measures of the
politicalbenefits of core service provision are the variables ED (= 1, ii city officials are fiscally
responsiblefor education, 0 if a fiscally independent school district is responsible) and REAG        (
  for the fiscally conservative years of the Reagan presidency, 0 otherwise). It is reasonable to
 1,

expect ED and REAG to have only "taste' effects (i.e., altervIag only). If so, then ED should
increaser* andf. Reagan's fiscal conservatism favored smaller government spending on core
services and increased privatization; if these preferences carried over to local politics then r*
should    fall   and may fall (smaller government) or rise (privatization) when REAG = 1.
          Direct estimates of the tax base and user fee elasticities, C and cq, are not avallable. It is
reasonable to expect, however, that these elasticities increase (in absolute value) as the city's

non-fiscal amenities decline and as the city's regional economy becomes more fiscally

competitive. Such variables constitute the vectorZ. Each regression will include city-specific

dummy variables ('City') to control for across city differences in all non-fiscal amenities; the
trend variable 'Time' will capture any uniform decline overtime in such amenities. To measure

regional fiscal competition     I specify   two variables: RCSI which measures the ratio of city to
suburban average income and the variable RCSI2. Values of RCSInear two appear to represent

regions where suburban exit options for city households and firms are most abundant; see the

Appendix. Very low (less than 1.0) or very high (above 4.0)values        of RCSI indicate limited exit
options for the average city resident, either because he or she is too poor (Newark) or too rich
(Omahaor San Antonio today) for the suburban alternatives. Thus Ca and Eq should be largest in
absolute value as the region's value of RCSI approaches the range 2-3, and smallest for very high
16.11.3
                                                              -24-




or '.'ery low valuesof RCSI. This U-shape relationship                of RCSI to e and eq requires both RCSI
and RCSI2 in the regressions.
                                                                 3, include the state-set rates
          Measures of exogenous shifts in individual taxpayers shares,

of taxation on income (denoted7,) and on general sales (denoted F). For large U.S. cities, an
increase in   7   will increase the rich taxpayer's share in total burdens         (3) and should, under the
                                                                                              an
special case redistribution model outlined in ll.B, increase r* and reduce fk, Conversely,
increase in Y will shift more of the aggregate local tax burden onto the poor causing f3 for the

poor to rise.   If so, then under the special case redistribution model, r* should fall andfk should
rise.

          Measures   of the exogenous redistribution variables (1 — 8) and           a are not available by
individual cities; the included city dummy variable ('City') should at least control for their
omitted effects. More importantly, measures of the redistribution variables (1                  are available
                                                                               —



city by city for each     of the local taxes. However, their separate inclusion in each revenue
                                                                      —            uninformative
equation along with the average subsidy for property taxation, (1 jt), proved
because the variables are so highly collinear. Therefore, only the property average rate (1 t) is
                                                                                           —



included in the revenue equations. Now, however, its estimated effect must be interpreted as
                                                                                        effects
measuring the joint effects of both the average subsidy and the possible redistributive
from variations in the individual (1   —
                                           'r1)   '5;   see   section III below.

       The political influenceof the upper income cohort (Xr) is measured here by the size of the

rich coalition, the percent of households in the city whose income exceeds the national 75th
                                                                                         the size
percentile income level (PCR). The politicalinfluence of the poor (Xe) is measured by
of the             coalition, the percent of city households whose income is below the national
          city's poor
25thpercentile income level (PCP). Since political influence is a relative concept, the effects of
these two variableson taxes and fees are measured relative to the residual influence of the city's

middle class.
                                                                                   limitations (s)
       Finally, two property tax limitation variables are specified, one for soft'
and one for 'hard" limitations (7). For hardlimitations the actual maximum tax rate available to

the city is used. For cities facing a soft limitation, a simple (1,0) dummy variable is used, where
16 iS.3
                                                           -25-




s = 1 if the city faces a specific election or administrative over-ride requirement before increasing
 rates, 0 otherwise.
              The dependent variables for the empirical analysis are total property tax revenues--
R (r)     = r*B(fl--and total fee-selective sales tax revenues--F (J) = f*q (J). While the model and
the comparative static analysis has beenconstructed for tax rates and fees, accurate measures of r

          f
and were not available for this study. The extension of the model to property tax and fee
revenues is straightforward, however. Since the exogenous determinants of tax base and private

                                                                                    r
service demands have already been included in the analysis of and f, tax and fee revenue
equations can now be specifiedas functions of the measured exogenous variables as:

 (lOs) R       =R{(1 —t),(1 —p),Time,(l—u),City,A +T_I,Yg,Yq,Z,Xr,Xp,Fy,T,s}
and

(us) F=F{(l—c),(l—p),Time,(l—.L),City,A+T—I,Yg,Yq,Z,X,,Xp,Yy,Ys,s}
for cities with no, or soft, limitations only, and:

(107)                                       R=R{Y,CB(Y,Yg,Z)}
and

(117)

for citiesfacing absolute propertytax limitations.
        The comparative static analysis for these F and R equations are also simple extensions of
the original analysis. If the city's equilibrium values of r* and place the cities on the rising
portions of their profit and revenue curves, then any change which increases (decreases) f* or
will also increase (decrease)        F and R.      This added restriction seems a modest addition to the

model's final set of maintained hypotheses.3°

     0Recentempincal evidexkesupports the assumption that cities are to be found on the rising portion of their tax
revenue curves; see Ladd and Bradbury (1988), Sexton (1987) and Holtz-Eakin and Rosen (forthcoming). The
estimated long-run elasticities of property tax base with respect to tax rates range from -.15 to -.53; thus increases in
tax rates will increase revenues.



16.1S.3
                                                                                                            (continued)
                                                         -26-




           With the inclusion   of city-specific dummy variables, revenue eqs. (lOs)-(lls) and (107)—
(117) define two 'fixed effects models, where the city dummy variables (City) control for all
unmeasured city-specific determinants of tax rates and fees. Unbiased estimates of the

coefficients for all remaining time-varying variables result; see Hausman and Taylor (1981).

Further, the model's error structure is specified as additive and allows for possible first-order
serial autocorrelation, heteroscedasticity, and the correlation                of errors across the revenue

equations. All dollar variablesare measured in real (1967) dollars per capita.


ifi.      Estimation and Results
     A. Estimation
           The revenue model was estimated for a sample of the forty-one largest U.S. cities for the

fiscal years 1961-1986. Estimationwas by generalized least squares and allowed for a possible
                                                                            This one period
lagged response of previous period revenues on current period fmancing.
                                                              true dynamic structure of city
dynamic specification is dL bvs a crude approximation to the
revenue adjustments where tax rates and fees are likely to adjust relatively quickly while tax
bases will adjust more slowly. The coefficients on lagged own revenues--R_i and F_, in the R
and F equations--will be an "average" of these separate dynamic processes.3'
       To test for possible serial correlation of the equation errors, each revenue equation was

initially estimated city by city using the 25 years of city specific data the lagged dependent
variable was excluded as a regressor. In all cases, the resulting Durbin-Watson test statistics
were near 2 and the data could not reject the null hypothesis              of no first-order serial correlation.


    Demand studies for the major fee-based public services (hospitals, housing, and garbage collection) and
selectivesales taxes (hotels, cigarettes, liquor) typically show price elasticities which axe also less than one. Thus
increasesin fees will increase total fee revenue.

      31  specification used here might be motivated by arguing that the marginal
                                                   with time--for          if tax
                                                                                      effects of past changes in the
                                                                                  rates are adjusted quickly (a large
model's exogenous  variables decline geometrically                example,
'impact" effect)and tax base    responds slowly (a diminishing long-run effect). Such a lag structure--called the
Koyck geometriclag--would imply the specificationadopted here; see Kmenta (1971, pp. 474-487). A theoretically
more appropriate lag specification would allow for other than simple geometric adjustments--forexample, a lag
distribution which permits marginal effects to first be positive and then negative. Estimation of such lag stnictures
for a few of the key policy variables wouldbe a useful extension of this work.
16.18.3
                                                        -27-




 Heteroscedasticiry, however, is a potentialproblem in this sample; thus, weighted least squares
 estimation was employed with the inverse             of city population used as the preferred weight.
Further, when the tax and fee revenue equations were jointly estimated (three-staged least

squares), the correlationof equation errors revealed no significant across equation correlations.
        i'his observederror structurecreates one final issue for model estimation. The dynamic
specification which includes the lagged value of the dependent variable as a regressor may now
involvea correlation between each equation's error and the lagged dependent variable; see
Kmenta (1971, P. 479). To obtain consistent estimates of the model's coefficients, instrumental
variables estimation was employed using current and lagged values of the exogenous variablesof
the model as instruments.32 Results based upon this weighted instrumental variablesestimation
are reported in Table 2.
         Table   2 reports parameter estimates for the               two separate tax limitation regimes, as

required by the revenue model's specification. Revenue equations were estimated for cities
facing no, or only 'soft", property tax limitations--eqs. (ls)-(3s) in Table 2 corresponding to eqs.
(lOs)-(lls) above--and also for cities facing absolute property tax limits of the form r               7—eqs.
(lr)-(3r) in Table 2 corresponding to eqs. (lOr)-(lir) above. An F test as to the appropriateness
of the regime split was performed;        the null hypothesis that the two samples could be combined

(i.e., no regime difference) was rejected at the .01 level for each revenue equation (F(59, 956) =
12.82 (R), = 3.32 (Fee) and = 6.836 (SST)). Further, an F test             for the exclusion restriction of the
tax preference variables((1 — c), (1 —p), Xr, Xi,,        7 and Y) supports the hypothesized source of
the regime difference; the null hypothesis that these variables can be excludedfrom the property




     2mereis another possible souice of simultaneity in this model,as notedby Feldstein and Metcalf(1987). The
rate of subsidy from federal tax deductibility will depend upon the taxpayer's marginal tax brket which depends
upon taxable income which in turn depends the level ofdeductible state and local taxes. Such simultaneity can be
avoided, however, if the rate of taxation used to estimate (1  -t) is based upon income befxe the first dollar of
deductions. This is the procedure I have used here when estimating (1- t).
1&i$.3
                                                                         Table2: Estbnallon

                Independent Varlabln                                                           Depmndait Variables

•$fl*
   3                        s                        7
                                                                R               Fee             SST            R         Fee            SST
                                                                                                                                        (37)


 *a
                                                               (1,)             (2s)            (1,)         (17)        (27)
                                    Mean                      66.62             5478           1186          6384       6851           867
                                                                                              (II 42)       (89 61)    (43 78)        (10 77)


                                                                                                         S*I**
                                    (o 4.)                   (51 74)           (33 64)
   City
  Final

  (I
       — 'r)
                    •S Siti
                          (or.)




                          .866
                                                   (or.)


                                                    .877
                                               (.036)
                                                              (n.e.)


                                                              18.950°
                                                             (11.154)
                                                                                (ni.)


                                                                               -12.314
                                                                              (18.383)
                                                                                               (nt.)


                                                                                              -10.104°
                                                                                               (3.226)
                                                                                                             (n.Y.)



                                                                                                               —
                                                                                                                         (n.Y.)



                                                                                                                       -94.g84
                                                                                                                        (43.709)
                                                                                                                                       (nt.)


                                                                                                                                         -3.232
                                                                                                                                       (11.931)
                        (.049)
                          .640                  .628         -13.589°          18.585'           0.551         --         8.454           3.112
  (1 —p)
                                               (.104)          (6.809)        (11.504)         (2.187)                  (18.697)        (5.120)
                        (.105)
                                                .163            -3.194           4.102           0.743         8.094      5.797           -.563
  (1   —a.(               .259
                                                                                (3.592)         (.686)       (6.390)     (8.042)        (2.193)
                         (.314)                (.235)          (2.145)
  (1—      i)             .972                  .975          45.199'         47.633'         23fl3         -131.83'   -75.305'       .29.133*




                                                             nsMa a
                                                              (11339)         (19.498)        (3.737)        (18.98)    (26.969)        (7.766)
                         (.063)                (.069)
                        18.932                 36.080        -0.141'           -0.086          0.002           .056*       -.003       -076'
(At-I'—])                                                                                                                 (.066)       (.018)
                       (15.372)               (30.534)        (.035)            (.059)         (.011)         (.031)
  Time                    1973                  1973           .106            1.487'          .487°         -.969'      .079          .674'
                                                                                               (.071)        (388)

                    t'irs se                                                                                                      -
                         (7.79)                    (7.79)     (.232)           (.381)                                   (.692)
                                                                                                                                       (.157),,




                    .
Ecnnonüc

       (Z)

  RI                                                          -4.840          -27191'         .3.8470        1.882     .36.8680        9561°




                                                                  ttS4.
                           1.446                   1.592
                          (.768)                   (.859)    (3.382)           (5.728)        (1.088)       (6.692)    (9.934)        (2.702)

                          2.681                    3.268      1.031°           4.540°         0412'          -.327      7.516'         1.174'
  RC20°                                                                                                                                (.527)
                          (3.235)                  (3.448)    (.538)           (.983)          187)         (3308)     (1.921)

 Political                                   -..



                                                                                              -0.159'          —                       .497'




                                                                                                         fl
 PCR(XY)                  23.768                   21.293    -1.166'             -0.598                                  1.275
                                                              (.279)              (.463)        (.088)                 (1.028)          (.280)
                          (4.995)                  (4.341)
                                                                                              -33.761'         —        86.613         -14.923
       7                    .008                     .015     23.110            -22.603
                           (.025)                   (.029)   (22.481)          (41.159)        (7.365)                 (79.270)       (20.956)
 PCP(X)                    11.816                   13.633   -1.327'             -0.383       0.576'           —         .534          .389'
                                                              (.386)              (.651)       (.129)                   (.677)          (.189)
                          (4.152)                  (4.342)
       r                   .1937                     .015    42381°             -41.107       64.854°          —       204.240         77.454°
                                                                                                                                      (14.793)
                          (.025)                    (.033)   (27.637)         (50.425)        (9.162)                  (53.68)
  (1'Y,)
                                                                               0014'           -0.000        .014'      .0070             .003a




                                                                                           r
  CINC                     3246                 3283          0.009°
                           (640)                (712)         (.082)           (.003)          (.001)        (.003)     (.1934)          (.001)
       ED                   .164                 .282         47.37°           10.820          -2.347       43.681'    9.839'          -4.910°
                                               (.451)        (6.856)          (11.449)        (2.189)        (815)     (9.059)          (2.489)
                          (.370)
                                                             -0.163'           0.218          0.128'          .214      1.428'            -.030
  PCOM                    37.721               41.137
                                              (13.431)        (.092)           (.155)          (ADO)         (.138)      (.274)          (.068)
                          (13375)
                                                              2154            -73.281'        6368'         125.87'    -354.39°          11408
  MANU                     .096                  .107
                          (.051)               (.041)        (10395)          (17.609)        (3334)        (55.16)     (98.41)       (26.077)
                                                 .331          -1.099          9.076'         0.880'          1.937     -1359              -.613
  REAG                     .173
                          (.375)               (.471)         (1.683)          (2.850)         (.542)       (2.910)    (3.689)           (.985)

  Limit,
                                                                                                                           —              —
                            312
                                                     —       -4.569°           4.282'          -0345           —
                                                              (1348)           (2.601)         (.496)
                          (.463)
                             —                      .014        —                 —              —          57136      -1357.6'       388.97'
                      .                            (.005)                                                   (54332)    (7031)         (190.19)
                             --                      —        0.437°           0.242'          0.457°        314'       .593°          .436°
 Lagged
Dependent                                                     (.022)           G(I2l)          (iflO)        (.029)     042)           (.049)

                            714                     311                         714                                      311
SampieSize


n.r. = Na reponed. Reaulno available opao itqnmt.
      Eatbnanedcoefficient eaceeda its estinnatni standard eior by 1.65 or giver.

 16.18.1
                                                          -28-




  tax   èuationfor absolute tax limit cities cannot         be rejected at the .01 level     of significance (F(6,
 227) = 2.12).
           Table 2 also reports separate econometric results for user fees and selective sales taxation,
 treated originally as a single endogenousvariable. Since we are estimating revenue
                                                                                    equations
 rather than price or selective tax rate equations, this natural correspondence is no longer

 appropriate. User fee revenues (denoted Fee in Table 2) equal f*q (7) and measure total
 revenues from the service, inclusive         of service costs (= c*q (7)).        Selective sales tax revenues

 (denoted SST in Table 2) equal t*q (7) and measure net profits from the taxed service, exclusive
 of service costs. Thus while the exogenous variables of the model should have the same
 qualitative effects on Fee and SST, the magnitude of the effects--i.e., the regression
 coefficients--will differ. A formal test          of the hypothesis of identical regression coefficients
 rejects that hypothesis at the .01 level of significance for each tax regime (F(50, 1400) = 14.78
 for no limit and F(26, 600) = 53.38 for limit regimes). Separate estimation of the two revenue
 equations is therefore appropriate.

          Finally, the statistical significance     of the lagged dependent variables in each estimated
revenue equation suggests dynamics are important to local revenue choice. Other studies (e.g.,
Ladd and Bradbury (1988) and Sexton (1987)) suggest that property tax bases change only

slowly in response to rate changes, and even then, the changes in base are modest.                  If so, then the
dynamics observed here reflect lags in the political decision process over the choice variables                    r
andf. The estimated coefficients imply that both fees and tax rates are adjusted rather quickly,
reaching at least 80% of their new equilibriumrates within two years.34




    33A similar test for the no limit cities confirms that these tax preference variables do
                                                                                             belong in that sample's
property tax equation (F(6,664) = 7.50).
    There is an additional difference between the two regimes' property tax equations in the way that the jointly
izluded exogenous variables influenceR; see section ffl-C below.

    An exogenously induced $1 change in R, Fee, or SST in the first fiscal year will eveliLually inply a $1.78
(=$1/(l - .437)) equilibrium changeinR,a$1.32(=$1/(1 - .242)) equilibrium changein Fee, anda$1.84(=$l/(1.
.457)) equilibrium change in SST. After two years the estimatedchanges are $1.44 inR, $1.24 in Fee, and $1.46 in
SST, eseh at least 80% of the way to their new equilibrium.
16JL3
                                                        -29-




B. Results: The "Soft" Limit Regime
     The estimated coefficients of eqs. (ls)-(3s) in Table                 2 confirm the comparative static

predictions of the soft-limit revenue model presented in Section II, conditional upon the
maintained hypothesis that cities are on the rising portions of their revenue schedules. Of

particular interest is the effect on revenues of the average tax subsidy variable, (1
                                                                                      —
                                                                                                         t). An
explanation for (1 'c) 's perhaps counter-intuitive effects
                  —                                                   is offered below; it draws upon this
model's distinction between efficiencyand redistributive motivations for local fiscal choice.
      The uniform tax subsidy variable (1 —p) does influence revenues as expected. As more
and more of the burden of an average dollar of property taxation falls on the residential base,
there is a move away from the use of this tax and towards the use of fees. The estimated

short-run elasticityof tax revenues with respect to (1 —p) is -.13 (calculated at sample means)
while the short-run elasticity of fees with respect to (1 —p) is .22. Long-run, equilibrium
elasticities allowing for the effect of the lagged dependent variables on revenues are -.23 for R
and .30 for Fee." In the end, the two revenue effects from a change in (1 —p) just aboutcancel
each other, leaving total own revenues (= R         + Fee + SST, with marginal effects calculated          as the

sum of regression coefficients) and thus city spending largely unaffected.
          Of the three grants-in-aid variables, capital matching aid, (1 — i&), has no significant
effect (statistically or quantitatively) on current own revenues; a plausible result given that city

capital outlays are largely debt financed. Current accounts matching aid (1
                                                                            —
                                                                                             t) is for welfare
services and this aid does affect own revenues, increasing property taxation and fees and

reducing selective sales taxation as the matching rate declines. The results imply welfare
assistance is price inelastic--that is, as the welfare matching rate is reduced own welfare

expenditures rise requiring an increasein own revenues. Those revenues come from property
taxation (biased towards the poor) and fees. Offsetting the increase in fees is a reduction in


            lag adjustment models such as this one, long-run marginaleffects of changes in exogenous variables are
calculated as the esumated regression coefficient (the impact effect of a change) times the equilibrium 'multiplier
effect" allowing for the influence of the lagged dependent variable. For the soft-limitsample these multipliers are
                                                                            -                                   see
equal to 1/(1 - .437) for property taxation, 11(1 .242) for fees, and 11(1 .457) for selective sales taxation;
                                                  -

Kmenta (1971, p. 479).
16.18.3
                                                         -30-




 selective sales taxation.    Finally,increases in lump-sum grants          (A)   and exogenous own revenues
 net of interest payments    —
                               (
                               i) reduce property taxation and fees about equally, but most of
 these new monies stay within the budget for current expenditures.36

        The two variables meant to describe the potential elasticity of city revenue
 schedules--RCSI and RCSI2--are (nearly) always significant and their effects are always

 U-shaped as anticipated. Tax and fee revenues are lowest(implying base elasticities are highest)
 when the region's RCSI is between 2 and             3. Selective sales taxation reaches        a minimum for
 RCSI = 4.7, the very upper end of our sample's values. RCSIseem to capture importantregional
 differences in the process       of fiscal competition. Cities with high values of RCSI face no
 competitive suburban fringe and local own revenues and spending are larger. Cities with low
      of RCSI contain residents too poor to exit to the average suburb and again fiscal
 values

competitionis low, and, ceteris paribus, own revenuesand spendingareagainhigher. Using the
same measure of fiscal competition, Inman           (1982) has presented some evidence that these higher

expenditures are often captured by public unions in the form ofhigher wages and benefits.
          Of the service demand variables, average city income (CINC) and responsibility for
education (ED) increase taxes and/or fees, while percent commuters (PCOM), manufacturing

jobs per capita (MANU), and a time dummy variable for the Reagan presidency (REAG) alter
the mix of financing in plausible ways. Burdens are shifted from taxpaying residents to

fee-paying non-residents as PCOM rises, from fee-paying businesses to taxpayers as MANU
increases, and from taxes to fees with the Reagan appeal to "privatize" governmentfinancing.
          The presenceof "soft" propertytax limitations do reduce the use of the tax (by about 12%
from the mean in the long-run) and increase fees by             a nearly equal amount Soft property tax
limitations control taxes but not total revenues or government spending.
          Of the included redistributive variables, increases in Y stimulate property taxation
(marginally) and reduce fees and selective sales taxation (significantly) as predicted by the


    The variables A and (1'-i) were also entered separately in these regressions; their separately estimated
effects on R, Fee and SST were neatly identical. Thus combiningthe variablesas our thetxy suggests is appropriate.
This is not the case in absolute limitationmodel, however see below at fri. 39.
11L3
                                                     -31-




redistributive model outlinedin section ILB. Increases in           7, have exactly the opposite effects,
also as predicted.    Of the two political influence variables, increases in the percent poor (PCP)
stimulate fees and selective sales taxation and discourage property taxation as expected.
Increases in the percent of taxpayers who are rich leads to reductions in all taxes, however,

perhaps reflecting the very wealthy's reduced demands for city services in addition to their
redisiributive preferences.
          It is the statistically significant effect on revenue mix of the average property tax subsidy

(1 — c)   which remains as a possible puzzle. There are two possible explanations. First, the

prediction that dr*/d(1 c) <0 is correct, but the estimates here based on
                       —                                                               a revenue equation
reveal cities to be on the downward side of their revenue curves where rate reductions increase
revenues. The recent work of Sexton (1987), Ladd and Bradbury (1988), and Holtz-Eakin and

Rosen (forthcoming) reject this interpretation. There is a second explanation consistent with the
redistribution model. As estimated, (1 — c) is being asked to play two roles, one as an average

subsidy to property taxation and the other as a proxy for the redisthbutive effects on local
taxation of federal and state tax policies. As constructed, the main source of variation in (1 — 'r)

is from the deductibility     of local taxes from federal and state income taxation. This subsidy
benefits only those who deduct, specifically middle and upper income homeowners. Thus

variation in the included average subsidy (1 — c)           is effectively variation in the income-target
subsidy (1 — 'v) received by the rich. As (1        —
                                                        c) for the rich increases,     for the rich is also
increased. From the redistributive model outlinedin ll.B, therefore, the resulting rise in            13   for

therich should stimulate an increasein property taxation and a reduction in fees and selective
sales taxation. This is what we do observe. Further, the other average subsidy variable in the

model, (1 —p), does not discriminate by income class or affect 13, but it does influence revenues
as predicted by the average subsidy effect? Together these results imply roles for both



         should note that Holtz-Eakin and Rosen (forthcoming)do obtain a negaivc effect of (1 — t) on property
taxationfor their sample ofcities. Their sample, however, is dominatedby small to middle sized suburbancommu-
nities with income homogeneous populations and (most likely) uniform assessment for propty taxation. In such
cities the avezgesubsidy effect of the variable(1 — t) is likely to dominateany redislribuiiveeffects.
1&1L3
                                                           32-



redistribution politics and excess-burden-minimizing behavior as separate explanations for the

 local decision to tax.


 C. Results: The Absolute Limit Regime
          Table 2, eqs. (lr)-(3r) provide estimates           of the revenue model for those cities of our
 sample living under an absolute property tax rate limit,              r 7.      All cities in this subsample are
known to be at their constrairn. The fact that the tax rate constraint is binding for these cities

implies the propertytax equilibrium will be defined fully by the constraint (7) and the variables
in the model which determine tax base. Thus all tax preference variables which uniquely define
the slopes of the tax rate indifference curves in Figure 2--(l — 'r), (1 —p), K, , , and Y and

7  —become irrelevant in the property tax equation.38 These tax preference variables may still

influence fees and selectivesales taxation, however, and are therefore retained in those revenue

equations; see Table 2.
         For the property tax equation, an F test confirms the exclusion restriction for the tax

preference variables.         Further, the included exogenous variables other than 7 all seem to
influence propertytax revenues through their effects on tax base as predicted by the constrained

specification. Qualitatively, these variablesbehave here as they might in a total property value

capitalization equation. City mean income (CINC), manufacturing jobs per capita (MANU), and
a large commuter workforce (PCOM) measure increased residential and business property

investments.       Given     r = 7,   increased current matching aid (pc) or lump-sum transfers

(A +     i) mean more currentperiod public services and higher tax bases, ceterisparibus.39 In
         —


the same vein, the Reagan presidency was particularly hard on central city budgets--numerous
small aid programs not measured in A were cut--and furtherdepressed center city tax bases. As


     38Further, there is no need to estimate the modelas part of a "switchingregime" specification. We know before
estimation that all constrainedcities are at the constraint,and, for this paper at least, the constraintis exogenous.

     As   part of a capitalization equation, A, 7', and I might well have different effects on tax base. Increases in A
and reductions in I should unambiguously increase base, but 7' will only do so if inereased government spending
more thancompensatesfor the increase in own exogenoustaxes. This is in      ft   what we doobserve when the effects
of the three variables are estimated separately, furtherconfirming the mterpretationof the R equation as a tax base
equation. Aidincreases revenues, I lowers ownproperty tax revenues, and is negativebut inSignificanL
                                                                            i'
1&1$.3
                                                    -33-




before, capital matching aid is insignificant for current accounts financing. Finally, the two
variables meant to measure regionaltax competition--RCSI and RCSI2--are no longer significant

in the property tax equation. This is as it should be since rate constrained cities cannot compete

through property taxation.
         In contrast, the exogenous variables    in the fee and selective sales tax equations ought to
influencethoserevenues much as predictedfor the unconstrained model. On the whole, this is
what we do observe; the explanations in IILB apply here as well. The two exceptions are the

negative effect on fees   of the net price for welfare (1 —   t) and the positive effect on selective
sales taxation of percentrich (PCR).
         What are the effects   of the tax limitationitself on local revenue choice? It is important to
note that the estimated results in eqs. (lr)-(3r) apply only to city revenue choice once the city has

fallen under limitation. The coefficientsfor the variable 7 in Table 2 do nor measure the revenue
 effects of the move from no limitations to absolute limitation; that must be estimated separately.
Table 3 provides those estimatesof revenue changes for sample cities whose states did impose a

limit during our study period (1961-1986), estimated as the difference between predicted city
revenues when unconstrained (using eqs. (ls)-(3s)) and actual city revenues under the constraint.

Table 3's estimates are the average by state of those changes for all cities in all years following
the imposition   of 7.    Tax limitations   have had large negative effects on the levels of local

property taxation, and while fees and selective sales taxation sometimes increase, only in
California have they offset the large declines in property taxation. New Orleans, long a user of

sales and income taxes, is the only sample city unaffected by its new property tax constraint.

         Once cities are within the tax limitation regime, however, redistributive politics returns to
the floor. What the coefficients for          in Table 2 do reveal are the effects on revenues of

increasing the limit, once the city has been constrained. Property taxes rise (but only slightly) as
7 is increased, while total revenues from fees and selective sales taxation declines. Total
spending is only marginally affected. Ttiese are the predictions of the redistribution model.



16.183
                       Table 3: IntroducingTax Limitations*


                                                RevenueChange in:

  Sample State                    R                       Fee                      SST

                          \R            %i       \Fee            %        LSST           %
     Arizona            -14.14        -64.66%     3.43           8.21%    -4.21      -35.29%
                        (3.97)                   (5.53)                   (3.17)
    California          -24.71        -30.65%    27.10          32.97%     1.43          8.51%
                        (17.56)                 (38.97)                   (4.41)
    Louisiana             .62           1.52%    10.32          15.39%    -4.78      -40.72%
                         (6.78)                 (13.55)                   (2.62)
 Massachusetts          -49.26        -14.65%    -7.93          -8.67%     4.82          oo**

                        (30.22)                 (15.09)                   (6.03)
   New Jersey           -58.12        -36.43%     .72           3.80%     -15.84     -53.86%
                        (22.91)                  (7.07)                  (11.17)




     measuresthe average level change of revenue for all sample cities in the state for
  all years following the introduction of limitations. Standard error of the estimated
  change is within parentheses. Measured as real (1967) dollars per capita.              %
  measures the ratio of the average change to the average revenue level of the tax one
  year before the introduction of limitations.
**SST are new taxes introducedfollowing the limitation; the       % is therefore infmite.




   16 iLl
                                                -34-




IV. Does Deductibility Influence Local Taxation?
          No recent issue in U.S. local government finance has been more seriously researched and

debated than the effects of the removalof federal deductibility for state and local taxes. Prior to

the federal Tax Reform Act of 1986, all state and local taxes except for fees and selective sales
                                                                                           The
(excise) taxes could be deducted from federal taxable income by an itemizing taxpayer.
debate preceding the 1986 reforms contemplated the full removalof these deductions, though in
the end,      the deductibility of sales taxation was disallowed. l'hree arguments were offered
           only
for their removal. First, deductibility is useful only for itemizing federal taxpayers, primarily
concentrated in the upper ends of the U.S. income distribution. Deductibility thereforemakes the

federal tax structure less progressive. Second, as a subsidy for local taxation, deductibility may
create a "false incentive to overspend on local governmentservices, or encourage the use of

taxes over economically more efficient user fees. Finally, deductibility was estimated to have
cost the U.S. Treasury $32.4 billion in lost revenues in FY 1985, certainly a helpful sum for a
federal government struggling to control a rising budgetary deficit. On their face, these

economic arguments for disallowance seem persuasive, but each ignores the reality of the local
decision to tax. Removing local deductibility may, or may not, improve U.S. fiscal performance.

To resolve the issue we must see how state and local governments will react to the reform. Table
4 summarizes the likely responses of this sample's cities.
       The full removaloffederal deductibility for all local taxes will increase the average net of
                                                                                               and
subsidy cost of local propertytaxation (1 'C) from .86 to .96 (state income tax deductibility
                                         —


state propertytax relief assumed to remain) and (1 — t) for income and sales taxation from .88 to

.98 (state income tax deductibility assumed to remain). The estimated impact and equilibrium
                                                                                     4
effects of these increases on each source of local own revenues are reported in Table for the
two subsamples, based upon the estimated coefficient for (1 — 'C) reported in Table2.
                                                                               effect on the mix of
        Dropping federal tax deductibility does have a potentially significant
local revenues. The loss of deductibility initially increases the bunlen share of city taxation for

middle and upper income households.       In both no-limit and absolute-limit cities, redistnbutive
local politics appears to compensate for this added burden on the rich by reducing fees and
16.18.3
                              Table4: Removing Deductibility


                                               Effects on Revenues

         Sample            aR                AFee               LXSST            aRevenuet
                           (%)               (%)                 (%)                (%)

         No Limit                         t$%S
         Impact*         $1.89               -$1.23             -$1.01              -$35
                        (3.00%)            (-1.22%)           (-4.86%)            (-.18%)
  Equilibrium**           $3.36             -$1.62              -$1.86
                        (5.32%)            (-1.60%)           (-8.96%)            (-.07%)

  AsoluteLmnt

         Impact*             0              -$9.49              -$.33             -$9.82
                                           (-8.42%)           (-1.94%)           (-5.00%)
  Equilibrium**              0              -$23.32             -$.57              -$23.89
                                          (-20.68%)           (-3.44%)           (-12.18%)


 ta.Revenue= zR ÷ 6.Fee + 6.SST
 *Jmpact effects estimated as A(1 — 'c) = .10 times the estimated coefficientfor (1 — t) for
  each endogenous revenue source; see Table 2. All dollar amounts are real (1967)
  dollars per capita; (%) measuresthe percentagechange from FY 1986 avenge sample
  revenue.

**Equilibrijim effects estimated as the impact effect adjusted for the estimated effect of
  lagged revenues from Table 2. All dollar amounts are real (1967) dollars per capita;
  (%) measures the percentagechangefrom FY 1986 avenge samplerevenue.




tttt.t
                                                  -35-




selective sales taxation.In an effort to maintainlocal services, there is an offsetting increase in

propertytaxation in those (no-limit) cities which are legally allowed to do so; the impact and
                                                                                             under
equilibrium decline in government spendingis less than $1 in these no limit cities. Cities
absolute property tax limitations do not have the property tax option, however, so the full effect

of reduced fees and selective sales taxation will be felt as reduced government services. One
might well expect redistributive services for the poor to be the most vulnerable; see Chernick and
                                                                                     tax limitcities
Reschovsky (1986). The equilibriumreductionin local variable revenues in these

may be as much 12%; as a percent        of total city revenues for current services the equilibrium
decline will be 7.5%.
         Three conclusions seem warranted from these results. First, while removing deductibility
will increase the progressivity of the federal tax code, it is likely to make the local tax structure in

larger U.S. cities marginally more regressive as property taxation is increased and fees are
lowered. Second, total local government spending in large cities may be reduced but the cuts
will not be large. If propertytaxes can be increased then they will almost fully offset the decline
in fees and selective sales taxation. If city property taxes are constrained, then local own
revenues and government spending will decline but by no more than 3-7%. Third, the U.S.
                                                                 Local taxes originally favored
Treasury will collect more money from taxpayers in large cities.
by deductibility are either constrained by state policy (income and sales) or rise slightly
                                                                   but business fees, at least, are
(property). Only local fees and selective sales taxes are reduced,
still a deductible expense.     Thus Treasury's revenues from this sample's cities will

unambiguously increase.
         This last policyconclusionis in direct contrast to the conclusion in Feldstein and Metcalf

(1987) who find that removing state and local tax deductibility may well reduce Treasury's
revenues. Using state-local aggregate taxation from property plus income plus sales taxation as

their dependent variable, Feldstein-Metcalf find that an increase in (1 'r) reducesthe use of
                                                                         —


these deductible taxes and increases the use of fees. Since fees are still deductible by business

firms, the substitution of fees for personal taxes induced by the increase in (1
                                                                                       —
                                                                                           t) will reduce
Treasury savings from droppingdeductibility and may actually turn the savings into
                                                                                   a loss.
1611.3
                                                       -36-




         Though the policy conclusions     of the two studies differ, the underlying analytical results
 need not be in conflict. The Feldstein-Metcalf analysis seeks to explain the variation in the

 aggregate of state and local taxes from propertyplus income plus sales taxation. Each of these
 taxes is variable in an aggregate state-local model. The total tax variable will respond to the
 negative average subsidy effect of changes in (1 — t) but also to redistributiveeffects. However,
 the redistributive effects following reform will likely have their biggest effects on the mix       of
 taxation, not on totaltaxation.   It is not inconsistent, therefore, for the Feldstein-Metcalf study to
 find a significant negative effect of (1    —
                                                 t)   on total personal taxation for all state and local

 governments, and for this study to find         a significant positive effect on (just) city property
 taxation. The Feldstein-Metcalf results help us to understand the aggregate effects on Treasury

revenues of tax reform. The results here allow us to look at reform's effects on a large city

 subsample and on the mix oflocal financing.

       Interestingly, it appears to be redisiributive politics' effects on the mix of taxation which
has determined the state and local response to the actual reforms in the Tax Act of 1986. Only
deductibility for state-local sales taxationwas removed. Since that time, state and local sales tax
rates have either remainedconstant or have increased, while state income tax rates have been
reduced. This outcome is in direct contrast to the predictions of the representative taxpayer's

average subsidy effect. It is, however, exactly the result expected from this tax model with
redistribution politics where increases in   r, and reductions in     r reduce the rich's share of the
burden   of state and local taxation (see p. 23 above). With the loss of deductibility as a federal
subsidy to richer local taxpayers,   r has been increased and r has been reduced to restore the
politically preferred distribution of the aggregate state and local net tax burden.




1&1L3
                                                  -37-




V. A Concluding         Comment
                 What we do not like is that we are taxed--not that we are stupidly taxed.
          (W)hen we have gotten angry about it in the past our rulers have not troubled
          themselves to study political economy in order to find out the best means of
          appeasing us. Generally they have simply shifted the burden from the shoulders
          of those who complained, and were able to make things unpleasant, to the
          shoulders of those who mightcomplain, but could not give much trouble.
          Woodrow Wilson, Congressional Government, 1885, p. 131.

          Woodrow Wilson seems to have it right.    Ifthere is one strong impression which emerges
from this analysis it is this: There are important incentives implicit within local redisthbutive
politics which define a community's decision to tax, incentives not accurately modeled or
estimated by the familiar representative taxpayer model           of fiscal politics.   By focusing

exclusively on the preferences of an average taxpayer and on minimizing the excess (or stupid")
burdens from taxation, those models necessarily exclude current period redistributive incentives
from local fiscal choice. In large U.S. cities, at least, that appears to be a mistake. The analysis
here finds an important role for variablesthought to influence the structure of local redistributive
politics but which are arguable excluded from the representative taxpayer model. Exogenous
                                                                                             of
changes which shift the balance of local tax burdens among income groups induce a pattern
revenue adjustments which move to restore that balance. Indeed, the estimated effects of one of

the model's central policy variables--the deductibility   of local taxes--can only be understood in
this light. Whether this redistributive approach and these empirical results generalize to other
                                                                              caution in the use
governments remains to be seen. At a minimum, however, the results suggest
of the representative taxpayer model for the behavioral analysis of large government fiscal
policy. Hopefully, too, the results will encourage further theoretical work on the modeling
                                                                                            of
redisiributive fiscal policy in large, income diverse polities.




16.1$.3
                                                -38.-




                                          References

Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations (ACIR), 1974, Local Revenue
      Diversification: Income, Sales, and User Changes (Government Printing Office,
      Washington).
Arnott, R. and R. E. Grieson, 1981, Optimal fiscal policy for a state or local government, Journal
        of Urban Economics 9, 23-48.
Barro, R., 1979, On the determination     of the public debt, Journal of Political Economy 87,
       940-971.

Buchanan, J. M. and D. R. Lee, 1982, Tax rates and tax revenues in political equilibrium: Some
      simple analytics, Economic Inquiry 20, 344-354.
Chernick, H. and A. Reschovsky, 1986, Federal tax reform and the financing of state and local
       governments, Journalof Policy Analysis and Management 5, no. 4, 683-706.
Coughlin, P., 1986, Electionsand income redistribution, Public Choice 50, 27-9 1.
Courant, P. and D. R. Rubinfeld, 1987, Tax reform: Implications for the state-local sector,
      Journal of Economics Perspectives 1, no. 1, 87-100.
Feldstein, M. and G. E. Metcalf, 1987, The effect of federal deductibility on state and local taxes
       and spending, Journal of Political Economy 95, no. 4, 710-736.
Hausman, J. A. and W. E. Taylor, 1981, Panel data and unobservable individual effects,
     Economeirica 49, 1377-1398.

Holtz-Eakin, D. and H. Rosen, 1987, Federal deductibility and local propertytax rates, Journal of
       Urban Economics, forthcoming.

Inman, R., 1979, Subsidies, regulations, and the taxation ofpropertyin large U.S. cities, National
       Tax Journal 32, no. 2, 159-168.
lnman, R., 1982, Public employee pensions and the local labor budget, Journal of Public
      Economics 19, no. 1, 49-71.

Inman, R., 1985, Does deductibility influence local taxation? Working Paperno. 1714 (National
       Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA).

Inman, R. and D. L. Rubinfeld, 1979, The judicial pursuit of local fiscal equity, Harvard Law
       Review 92, no. 8, 1662-1750.

Kmenta, J., 1971, Elements of econometrics (MacMillan, New York).
Ladd, H., and K. Bradbury, 1989, Property taxes and city tax bases, National Tax Journal 46, no.
       4, xxx-xxx.

i&ua
                                              -39-




McLure, C. E. and G. R. Zodrow, 1987, Treasury I and the tax reform act of 1986: The
     economics and politics of tax reform, Journal of Economic Perspectives 1, no. 1, 37-58.

Oates, W. E., 1969, The effects of property taxes and local public spending on property values:
       An empirical study of tax capitalization and the Tiebout hypothesis, Journal of Political
       Economy 77, 957-97 1.
Sexton, T. A., 1987, Forecasting property taxes: A comparison and evaluation       of methods,
       National Tax Journal 40, no. 1, 47-59.

Wildasin, D. E., 1986, Urban public fmance (Harwood Academic Publishers, New York).




16.18.3
                                              Appendix: City Sample
                                                                 Tax Limitation Status
              City             RCSI*
                                                  No               "Soft"                  Absolute

             Atlanta           1.567            1961-86               --                        --
            Baltimore          1.102            1961-86               --                        --
           BirTningham         1.300               --             1961-79             1980-86                =
                                                                                                      (7,,, .02)
             Boston            1.773            1961-80               --              1981-86        (7,,, = .025)
             Buffalo           1.525               --                 •-              1961-86         (7,,, = .02)
            Chicago            1.514            1961-86               --                        --
           Cincinnati          1.824               --                 --              1961-86        (7, = .01)
           Cleveland           1.229               --                 --              1961-86        (7,. = .01)
           Columbus            1.510               --                 --              1961-86        (7,. = .01)
             Dallas            2.652            1961-76           1977-86
             Denver            2.384               --             1961-86
             Detroit           1.442            1961-86              --
            Ft. Worth          2.178            1961-76           1977-86
            Houston            2.284            1961-76           1977-86
          Indianapolis         2.668            1961-73           1974-86
          Kansas City          1.653            1961-78           1979-86                       --
          Long Beach           2.143            1961-78               --              1979-86        (7,,, = .01)
          Los Angeles          2.102            1961-78               --              1979-86        (7,,, = .01)
           Louisville          1.525               --                 --              1961-86        (7,. = .015)
            Memphis            2.097            1961-86               --
           Milwaukee           1.439            1961-73           1974-86
          Minneapolis          1.905            1961-73           1974-86                       --
            Newark             1.221            1961-76               --              1977-86        (7,,,
                                                                                                             = .025)
          New Orleans          1.732            1961-74               --              1975-86     (7,. = .01)
           New York            1.713               --                 --              1961-86    (7.,, = .025)
            Norfolk            1.617           1961-86                --                        --
            Oakland            2.024           1961-78                --              1979-86        (7,, = .01)
          OklahomaCity         2.507               --                 --              1961-86        (7,. = .015)
             Omaha             2.963            1961-79           1980-86                       --
                               1.612            1961-86               --                        --
           Philadelphia
            Phoenix            2.756            1961-80               --              1981-86        (7,,, = .01)
            Pittsburgh         1.727               •-             1961-86                       -.
            Portland           2.094               --             1961-86                       --
                                                                                                     (7,,, = .02)
            Rochester          1.306               --                 --              1961-86
           SanDiego            2.577           1961-78                --              1979-86        (7,, = .01)
          SanFraacisco         2.240           1961-78                --              1979-86        (7,,, = .01)
          San Antonio          2.801           1961-76            1977-86
             Seattle           2.202           1961-71            1972-86
            St. Louis          1.583           1961-78            1979-86
            St. Paul           1.437           1961-73            1974-86                       --
             Toledo            1.565               --                 •-              1961-86        (7,. = .01)

   *The city's average Ratio of City Income per capita to Suburban Income per capita over the sample
    period, 1961-1986. Source: Sales and Marketing Management, Survey of Buying Power; 1960-1986.
a*Fal     years in which tax limitation applies; 7 is the exogenously set tax rate denoted 7,,, if set as a limit
    on market value or 7,. if set as a ("mill rate") limit on asessed value. Source ACIR, Significant Features
    ofFiscal Federalism, 1980-8 1 Edition.
16.18.1
