                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                CONSUMPTION, INCOME, AND INTEREST RATES:
                REINTERPRETING THE TIME SERIES EVIDENCE




                             John Y. Campbell

                            N. Gregory Mankiw




                          Working Paper No. 2924




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 April 1989




An earlier version of this paper was presented at the NBER Macroeconomics
Conference, Cambridge, MA, March 10-11, 1989. We are grateful to Karen Dynan
                                                          and Robert Hall for
for research assistance, Alan Blinder, Olivier Blanchard,
                                                   Foundation for financial
comments, and to the NBER and the National Science
support. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                            NBER Working Paper #2924
                                            April 1989


                       CONSUMPTION, INCOME, AND INTEREST RATES:
                       REINTERPRETING THE TIME SERIES EVIDENCE


                                       ABSTRACT




      This paper   prcçoses that the tiie-serieS data on ocnsuiTptiOfl, income,
ar interest rates are best viewed as generated not by a sfrle
representative conswtr bit by two gr4 of cons'.utrS. Half the consumers
are forwaxd-loOkirq ax consume their permanent irxt,       bit are extremely
reluctant to substitute consumption thtertanporafly. Half the consutrS
foll the "rule of thumb" of consuming their current incone. The paper
documents   three empirical rularities that, it axues,       are best explained

                    First, expected daxes in iie are associated with
by   this medal.
                                                         real interest rates are
expected dianges in cx,nsumptiOn. Secon, expected

not associated with  expected dwges in consumption. Third, perieds in
which ocnsulTption is high relative to irsui
                                             are typically followed by high

growth in ine. The paper concledes by briefly discussing the
 iiplicatiOns of these firxings for eocnanic policy ar economic research.



                                            N. Gregory Mankiw
 John Y. Campbell                           National Bureau of Economic Research
 Woodrow Wilson School
                                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
 Princeton University
                                            Cambridge, MA 02138
 Princeton, NJ 08544
       Introduction

       The study of aggregate consumption behavior has been profoundly
                                                     macroeconomics. The
altered by the rational expectations revolution in
                                                                of econometric
first example in Robert Lucas's (1976) influential critique

policy evaluation involved consumption. Lucas argued that traditional

consumption functions, no matter how well they fit the data, were not

useful for evaluating the effects of alternative policies.      Soon

thereafter, Robert Hall (1978) proposed a new approach to studying

consumption that was firmly founded on the postulate of rational

expectations and that was immune to the problems Lucas pointed out. Hall

suggested that aggregate consumption should be modelled as obeying the

first-order conditions for optimal choice of a single, fully       rational, and

forward-looking representative consumer. The new style of research based

on this assumption--sometimes called the "Euler equation approach"--has

dominated work on consumption during the past decade.

        In this paper we appraise what has been learned about aggregate

 consumption from this approach. We propose a simple,      alternative

 characterization of the time-series data on consumption, income, and

 interest rates. We suggest that the data are best viewed as generated       not

               forward-looking consumer but by two types   of consumers. Half
 by a single
       consumers are forward-looking and consume their permanent    income, but
 the
 are extremely reluctant to substitute consumption intertemporally in

 response to interest rate movements. Half the consumers follow the "rule

 of thumb" of consuming their current income. We document three empirical

 regularities that, we argue, are best explained by this model.


                                         1
      The first regularity is that expected changes in income are associated

 with expected changes in consumption. In contrast to the simplest version

 of the permanent income hypothesis, consumption is not a random walk: when

 income is expected to rise by 1 percent, consumption should be    expected to
 rise by 0.5 percent. The strong connection between current income and

 consumption provides at least circumstantial evidence for 'rule.of-thunib

 behavior on the part of some consumers.

      The second empirical regularity is that expected real interest rates

 are not associated with expected changes in consumption. This means that

 the predictable movements that we observe in consumption cannot be

 explained as a rational response to movements in real interest   rates. It
also means that forward-looking consumers do not adjust their consumption

growth in response to interest rates, so their intertemporal
                                                                elasticity of
substitution in consumption must be close to zero. Hall (1988) also argues

that the elasticity of substitution of permanent income consumers is small;

but since he does not allow for current income
                                                 consumers, he cannot explain

the existence of any predictable movements in aggregate consumption.

     The third empirical regularity is that periods in which consumption is

high relative to income are typically followed by rapid
                                                           growth in income.

This finding suggests that at least some consumers are forward-looking:

their knowledge of future income growth is reflected in current

consumption. Yet we show that the magnitude of the association between

consumption and future income growth is best explained by a model with both

permanent income consumers and current income consumers.

    Most of this paper is devoted to analyzing the data and
                                                               documenting
its consistency with the simple model we propose. In the final section, we


                                      2
                                                                 and economic
briefly discuss the broader implications for economic policy

research.



1. Is Consumvtion a Random Walk?

     In this section we reexamine the evidence on the simplest version of

                                                                    should
the permanent income hypothesis, according to which consumption
                                                        model and discuss
follow a random walk. We begin by reviewing the basic
                                                       standard one in two
how it can be tested. Our approach differs from the

ways. First, we emphasize a specific alternative hypothesis under which

some consumers follow the "rule of thumb" of consuming their current income

 rather than their permanent income. Second, we argue that more structural

 estimation using instrumental variables should be preferred over    the

 standard tests for a random walk using the reduced form of the    model. When

 we look at the data, we find that a substantial fraction of income accrues
                                                                     deviation
 to rule-of-thumb consumers, indicating an economically important

 from the permanent income hypothesis.



 1.1. The Permanent Income HvDothesis and a "Rule-of-Thumb" Alternative

      The permanent income hypothesis as usually formulated assumes     that

 aggregate consumption can be modelled as the decisions of a representative

 consumer. The representative consumer maximizes



 (1.1)       E E (l+6) U(C+ )                      U'>O, U''<O
                  s—O


 where C is consumption, 6 is the subjective rate of discount, and Et is the

 expectation conditional on information available at time t.      If the


                                         3
representative consumer can borrow and lend at the real interest rate r,

then the first-order condition necessary for an optimum is


(1.2)          EtIJ'(C÷i) —   () U'(C).
This says that marginal utility today is, up to a constant multiple, the

best forecast of marginal utility tomorrow.

        If we assume that r—6 and that marginal utility is linear, then we

obtain the random walk result1, EC+i —
                                             C.    Consumption today is the

optimal forecast of consumption tomorrow. This in turn implies


(1.3)              —


where       is a rational forecast error, the innovation in permanent income.

Thus, according to this formulation of the permanent income hypothesis, the

change in consumption is unforecastable.

        In evaluating how well this model fits the data, it is useful to keep

in mind an explicit alternative hypothesis. We nest the permanent income

hypothesis in a more general model in which some fraction of income A

accrues to individuals who consume their current income, while the

remainder (1-A) accries to individuals who consume their permanent income.

If the incomes of the two groups are         and      then total income is
   —       +       Since the first group receives A of total income,


       Obviously, these assumptions can be justified only as an
approximation. One can obtain the random walk result with other sorts of
approximations as well, e.g., the Taylor approximation in Mankiw (1981) or
the log-normality assumption in Hansen and Singleton (1983). These other
approximations may imply the log of consumption, rather than the level, is
a random walk- -a more appealing specification. They also often introduce
other terms, such as the difference between 6 and r and the variance of
consumption growth; these other terms are usually included as part of the
constant drift in consumption.

                                         4
           and          —             Agents in the first group consume their
   —
                            (l.A)Y.
                              —                              —        By contrast,
current income, so                    implying Clt —

agents in the second group obey the permanent income hypothesis, implying

     —
         (l-A)e1.
     The change in aggregate consumption can now be written as


                    —         +       —      +
                                                 (1A)Et.

Under this alternative hypothesis, the change in consumption is a weighted

average of the change in current income and the unforecas table innovation

in permanent income. Equation (1.4) reduces to the permanent income

hypothesis, equation (1.3), when A —         o.2
       Having set up the permanent income hypothesis as the null hypothesis

and the existence of these "rule-of-thumb" consumers as the alternative

hypothesis, there are two approaches to estimation and testing. The

approach we advocate is to estimate A directly and test the hypothesis that

A—O. It is important to note, however, that (1.4) cannot be estimated by

Ordinary Least Squares, since the error term               may be correlated with

The solution is to estimate (1.4) by instrumental variables. Any lagged

stationary variables are potentially valid instruments since they are

orthogonal to e1. Of course, good instruments must also be correlated with

Ytherefore, one should choose lagged variables that can predict future

 income growth. Once such instruments are found, one can easily estimate


      2 This alternative model with some rule-of-thumb consumers is
 discussed briefly in Hall (1978). It is also a simpler version of the
 model proposed in Flavin (1981), in which the change in consumption
 responds not only to the contemporaneous change in current income, but also
 to lagged changes in current income. Flavin designs her model so that it
 is just-identified; by contrast, we view the over-identification of our
 model as one of its virtues. See also Bean (1986).

                                                 5
the fraction of income accruing to the rule-of-thumb consumers.

     The second approach to testing the permanent income hypothesis- -used

by Hall (1978) and in most of the subsequent literature- -             is   to regress the

change on consumption on lagged variables to see whether the change in

consumption is forecastable. To see the relation between the two

approaches, note that equation (1.4), estimated by instrumental variables,

can be viewed as a restricted version of a more general two-equation system

in which     and         are regressed directly on the instruments. If we have

K instruments, X1 through X, then the general system is


                     +
                         filXlt + ... + KXKt   +          — xtfl   +
(1
              — '0   +
                         llt   +   ... + iict +    '7Yt
                                                          —
                                                              Xt7 + Vly.

The permanent income hypothesis implies that the vector — 0 (that is,
—     —    — 0).   This implication can be tested directly, without any need

for considering the Yt equation, by OLS estimation of the                      equation.

When there is more than a single instrument, however, equation (1.4) places

over-identifying restrictions on the two equation system (1.5): predictable

changes in consumption and income, and therefore the vectors                   and , are
proportional to one an:ther (8 — A7, or fl1/y1 —          ... —             — A).   The

instrumental variables test that A—O is in essence a test that —0 under

the maintained hypothesis that these overidentifying restrictions are true.

     Although estimating the reduced form equation for                  is more

standard, there are compelling reasons to prefer the instrumental variables

approach. One reason is power. Since there are many possible instruments,

the instrumental variables procedure estimates far fewer parameters than

are in the reduced form, thereby conserving on the degrees of freedom and


                                         6
providing a more powerful test of the null hypothesis.

     Perhaps more important, estimation of A provides a useful metric for

judging whether an observed deviation from the null hypothesis is

economically important. As Franklin Fisher (1961) emphasized long ago, an

economic model can be approximately true even if the strict tests of

overidentification fail. It is therefore hard to interpret a rejection of

the permanent income hypothesis in the reduced form framework. Indeed,

Hall (1978) concluded that the evidence favors the permanent income

hypothesis even though he reported formal rejections using stock prices.

An estimate of A is more informative about the economic importance of

deviations from the theory.3 For example, if the estimate of A is close to

zero, then one can say the permanent income is approximately true- -most

income goes to consumers who obey the theory- -even if the estimate of A is

statistically significant.     Conversely, if the estimate of A is large,

then one must conclude that the evidence points away from the permanent

income hypothesis.

      One question that arises in interpreting a failure of the permanent

 income hypothesis is whether our rule-of-thumb alternative adequately

captures the reason for the failure. The best way to answer the question is

 to consider explicitly other alternative hypotheses.4         Another way- -more

 statistical and less economic- -   is   to test the overidentifying restrictions

 that equation (1.4) imposes. This test is performed simply by regressing

 the residual from the instrumental variables regression on the instruments,

 and then to compare T times the R2 from this regression, where T is the


          Flavin (1981) also stresses this point.
      4
          For some examples, see Campbell and Mankiw (1987).

                                             7
sample size, with the x2   distribution   with (K-i) degrees of freedom. We

use this test below.



1.2. Two Siecification Issues

     Before we can estimate the model, we need to address two issues of

specification that arise from the nature of the aggregate time series on

consumption and income.

     Our discussion so far has been couched in terms of levels and

differences of the raw series C and Y. This is appropriate if these

series follow homoskedastic linear processes in levels, with or without

unit roots. Yet aggregate time series on consumption and income appear to

be closer to log-linear than linear: the mean change and the innovation

variance both grow with the level of the series. A correction of some sort

appears necessary. The approach we take is simply to take logs of all

variables. Although the parameter ) can no longer be precisely interpreted

as the fraction of agents who consume their current income, one can view

the model we estimate as the log-linear approximation to the true model.

Thus, the interpretation of the results is not substantially affected. We

use lower-case letters to denote log variables.5

     A second data problem is that consumption and income are measured as

quarterly averages rather than at points in time. If the permanent income

hypothesis holds in continuous time, then measured consumption is the time

average of a random walk. Therefore, the change in consumption will have a

first-order serial correlation of 0.25, which could lead us to reject the


       An alternative scaling method is to divide tC and    by the
lagged level of income, Y1. In practice both scaling methods give very
similar results.

                                          8
model even if it is true.6 We deal with this problem by lagging the

instruments more than one period, so that there is at least a two-period

time gap between the instruments and the variables in equation (1.4). The

time average of a continuous-time random walk is uncorrelated with all.

variables lagged more than one period, so by using twice-lagged instruments

we obtain a test of the model that is valid for time-averaged data.



1.3. Another Look at U.S. Data

     To estimate our model, we use standard U.S. quarterly time series

data, obtained from the Data Resources, Inc. data bank.      is measured as

disposable personal income per capita, in 1982 dollars. C is consumption

of non-durables and services per capita, in 1982 dollars. The sample

period is 1953:1 to l986:4.

     Table 1, which reports the results, has six columns. The first gives

the row number and the second the instruments used8. The third and fourth

columns give the adjusted R2 statistics for OLS regressions of        and

respectively, on the instruments. In parentheses we report the p-value for

a Wald test of the hypothesis that all coefficients except the intercept

are zero. The fifth column gives the instrumental variables estimate of A,

with an asymptotic standard error. The final column gives the adjusted

     6
         See Working (1960).

       In Campbell and Mankiw (1987) we discuss the importance of sample
period and, in particular, the peculiar behavior of the first quarter of
1950, when there was a one-time National Service Life Insurance dividend
payment to World War II veterans. The sample period of Table I extends the
data used in Campbell and Mankiw (1987) by one year.
     8
       A constant term is always included as both an instrument and a
regressor, but is not reported in the tables.


                                       9
statistic for an OLS regression of the residual from the instrumental

variables regression on the instruments. In parentheses we report the p-

value for the corresponding test of the overidentifying restrictions placed

by equation (1.4) on the general system (1.5). For reference, the first

row of Table 1 shows the coefficient obtained when we estimate equation

(1.4) by OLS.

     Rows 2 and 3 of the table use lagged income growth rates as

instruments. These are not strongly jointly significant in predicting

consumption or income growth; in row 3, for example, lags two through six

of income growth are jointly significant at the 21% level for consumption

growth and at the 14% level for income growth. It appears that the

univariate time series process for disposable income is close enough to a

random walk that income growth rates are not well forecast by lagged income

growth rates. Our instrumental variables procedure estimates A at 0.506

with an asymptotic standard error of 0.176 in row 3; this rejects the

permanent income hypothesis that A — 0 at the 0.4% level. Yet instrumental

variables procedures can be statistically unreliable when the instruments

have only weak forecasting power for the right hand side variable.9 The

rejection of the permanent income hypothesis in rows 2 and 3 should be

interpreted cautiously)0

    We obtain stronger results in rows 4 and 5 of the table, where we use

lagged consumption growth rates as instruments. It is striking that lagged


         See Nelson and Startz (1988) for an analysis of this issue.
    10
        These findings confirm the conclusions of Mankiw and Shapiro
(1985): since disposable income is so close to a random walk, modelling
income as a univariate process (e.g., Flavin (1981) or Bernanke (1985))
leads to tests with little power.


                                       10
consumption forecasts income growth more strongly than lagged income itself

does, and this enables us to estimate the parameter A more precisely.           This

finding suggests that at least some consumers have better information on

future income growth than is summarized in its past history and that they

respond to this information by increasing their consumption. At the same

time, however, the fraction of rule-of-thumb consumers is estimated at

0.523 in row 5 (and the estimate is significant at better than the 0.01%

level).    The OLS   test   also rejects the permanent income model in row 5.

     We next consider using some financial variables as instruments. We

tried using lagged changes in real stock prices (the quarterly percentage

change in the real value of the Dow Jones Industrial Average), but found

that this variable had no predictive power for consumption growth or income
          11
growth.        Results using lagged changes in quarterly average 3-month

nominal Treasury bill rates            were more successful, and we report these

in rows 6 and 7 of Table 1. The instruments are jointly significant for

consumption growth at the 1.0% and 0.2% levels. The parameter A is

estimated at 0.698 in row 6 (significant at the 0.3% level), and at 0.584

in row 7 (significant at better than the 0.01% level).12

     The final two rows of the table report restricted error-correction


        This finding contrasts with the positive results for stock prices
reported by Hall (1978) and others. Yet close inspection of Hall's stock
price regression (his equation (8), on p.984) suggests that almost all the
explanatory power comes from the first lagged stock price change. When we
include the first lag, we also find strong predictive power from stock
price changes; but for the reasons discussed above, we regard this as an
illegitimate test of the permanent income model.

      12 The spread between the yield on a long-term government bond and
 that on a three-month Treasury bill also provided a useful instrument2
 Using only the second lag of the yield spread, we obtained adjusted R 's of
 0.094 for c and 0.048 for y, and an estimate of A of 0.741 with a
 standard error of 0.235.

                                            11
models for consumption and income. Row 8 has lags of consumption growth,

income growth and the log consumption-income ratio as instruments; row 9

adds lagged interest rate changes. The results are broadly consistent with

those in earlier rows.

      Table 1 also tests the overidentifying restrictions of our model (1.4)

on the unrestricted system (1.5). The test results are reported in the

last column of the table. There is no evidence against our restrictions

anywhere in this column.

      Figures 1 and 2 illustrate what's going on in these instrumental

variables estimates. Figure 1 is a scatterplot of ex post consumption

growth against cx post income growth. The figure shows a positive

relation, but not a tight one. Figure 2 is a scatterplot of expected

consumption growth against expected income growth, where expectations were

taken to be the fitted values from the reduced form equations estimated in

row 9 of Table 1. Note that these points lie along a distinct line. In

contrast to the permanent income hypothesis, expected increases in income

are associated with expected increases in consumption.

     The two lines shown in the figure are estimated by IV regression of

     on      as reportd in Table 1, and by the reverse IV regression of

on        It is apparent that the normalization of the IV regression makes

little difference to the estimate of the slope A; this is what we would

expect to find if our model is correctly specified and the true slope is

not zero or infinite.13


     13 Nelson and Startz (1988) point out that there are severe problems
with the IV regression approach if the instruments do not forecast the
right hand side variable. In our framework, this would occur in the IV
regression of consumption growth on income growth if A is infinite, and in
the IV regression of income growth on consumption growth if A is zero.

                                      12
     While the results in Table 1 follow most of the literature by

examining consumer spending on non-durables and                       services,    we have also


examined two       measures    of consumption that include consumer durable goods.

The results are potentially sensitive to the treatment of durable goods,

because spending on them is so volatile. We therefore estimated equation

(1.4) both using total consumer spending and                      using    the   sum of   spending on

non-durables and services and the imputed rent on the stock of consumer

                    The results obtained with these two                   measures   turned out to     be
durables.14

similar to those reported in Table 1.

       In summary, we have found striking evidence against the permanent

income hypothesis. The results from our instrumental variables test are

particularly unfavorable to the permanent income model.                            When we use

instruments that are jointly significant for predicting income growth
                                                                                                  at

the 5% level or better, we get estimates of A, the fraction of the

population that consumes its current income, of about 0.5.                            The estimates

 are always strongly significant even though we have potentially lost some

 power by lagging the instruments two                  periods     instead of one. The

 overidentifying restrictions of our model are not rejected at any

 reasonable significance level.



 1.4. Evidence from Abroad

        To examine the robustness of our findings for the United States, we

 now turn     to   examining data for several other countries. From various DRI



      14 To calculate the stock of durables, we began with the Commerce
 Department's net stock of consumer durables for 1947 and then accumulated
 the spending flow assuming a depreciation rate of 5 percent per quarter.
 To calculate the imputed rent, we assumed a user cost of 6 percent per quarter

                                                         13
data banks,   we obtained data on consumption and income to estimate equation

(1.4) for the G-7 countries: Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the

United Kingdom, and the United States.15

     Two data issues arise. First, we found that long time series of

quarterly consumption data are often available only for total spending,

which includes spending on durables. Assuming exponential depreciation,

however, durability should merely lead to the change in consumer spending

being a first-order moving average process rather than white noise.16

Since we are using twice-lagged instruments, the inclusion of spending on

durables does not change the implication of the permanent income hypothesis

that forecastable changes in income should not lead to forecastable changes

in consumption. We can therefore proceed as before.

     The second data issue is that, for Canada, France, Italy, and Japan,

we were unable to find a quarterly disposable personal income series and

therefore used GDP as a proxy. The use of GD? to measure Y should still

provide a valid test of the null hypothesis that the permanent income

theory is correct. Yet real GD? is an imperfect proxy: in U.S. data, the

correlation of real GDP growth and real disposable personal income growth

is only 0.55. The use of this proxy can potentially reduce our test's

power. It turns out, however, that loss of power appears not to be a

problem.

       Table 2 presents the estimates obtained for these seven countries.


     15 Other studies that have used international data to test the
permanent income hypothesis include Kormendi and Laliaye (1987) and Jappelli
and Pagano (1988).
     16
        See Mankiw (1982). Matters become more complicated, however, if
one allows more complicated forms of depreciation or the possibility of
adjustment costs; see Heaton (1988).

                                       14
The results from six of these seven countries tell a simple and consistent

story. For Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and the United States,

the estimate of the fraction of income going to rule-of-thumb consumers is

significantly different from zero and not significantly different from 0.5.

Moreover, the overidentifying restrictions imposed by our model are not

rejected. The only exception is the United Kingdom, where neither the

permanent income hypothesis nor our more general model appear to describe

the data adequately. Taken as a whole, these results confirm the failure

of the simple random-walk model for consumption and the apparent rule-of-

thumb behavior of many consumers.



2.   Consunotion and the Real Interest Rate

     The "random walk" theorem for consumption rests crucially on the

assumption that the real interest rate is constant. Here we examine the

Euler equation that allows for a varying and uncertain real interest rate.

     There are two reasons we look at this extension of the basic model.

First, a rejection of the theory might be attributable to the failure of

this assumption, rather than to an important deviation from the permanent

income hypothesis. In particular, variation through time in the real

 interest rate can make consumption appear excessively sensitive to income,

even though individuals intertemporally optimize in the absence of

borrowing constraints.17 We show, however, that the departure from the

 theory documented above- -the apparent existence of rule-of-thumb consumers-

 -is not an artifact of the assumed constancy of the real interest rate.

      Second, we want to check whether Hall's (1988) conclusion that the


      17 Michener (1984) makes this argument. See also Christiano (1987).

                                       15
intertemporal elasticity of substitution is close to zero is robust to the

presence of current-income consumers. Hall assumes that the underlying

permanent income theory is correct and uses the absence of a relation

between consumption growth and real interest rates as evidence for a small

elasticity. In contrast, we argue that the underlying theory is not

empirically valid. Unless one is willing to admit that a substantial

fraction of income goes to rule-of-thumb consumers, the data cannot yield

an answer on the intertemporal elasticity of substitution.



2.1. The Model with Only Permanent Income Consumers

        We begin our examination of consumption and real interest rates by

maintaining the hypothesis that the permanent income theory is correct. We

will then go on to consider a more general model with some rule-of-thumb

consumers.

        The generalization of the consumer's Euler equation to allow for

changes in the real interest rate is now well-known. The log-linear

version of the Euler equation is18



(2.1)         —   i + ar

where rt is the real interest rate contemporaneous with         and as before

the error term       may be correlated with rt but is uncorrelated with lagged


        18
        See, for example, Grossman and Shiller (1981), Mankiw (1981),
Hansen and Singleton (1983), Hall (1988). Note that in the process of log-
linearizing the first-order condition, the variance of consumption growth
has been included in the constant term. Hence, heteroskedasticity is one
possible reason for rejection of the model; see Barsky (1985) for a
preliminary exploration of this issue.

                                        16
variables. According to (2.1), high cx ante real interest rates should be
                                                                    the real
associated with rapid growth of consumption. The coefficient on

interest rate, a, is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution)9

     Equation (2.1) can be estimated using instrumental variables, just in
                                                                              is
the way we estimated equation (1.4). The nominal interest rate we use

the average three-month treasury bill rate over the quarter.    The   price
index is the deflator for consumer non-durables and services.      We assume a

marginal tax rate on interest of 30%.

     We obtained the results in Table 3. We find fairly small values for

the coefficient on the real interest rate. Mall interprets evidence      of


this sort as indicating that the intertemporal elasticity of substitution

is close to zero--that is, consumers are extremely reluctant to     substitute


 intertemporally.

      In our view, however, the equation estimated in Table 3 is

misspecified because it does not allow for the presence of rule-of-thumb

 consumers. This misspecification shows up in several ways in Table 3.

 First, the hypothesis that consumption growth is unpredictable    is rejected

 at the 1% level or better in 5 out of 8 rows of Table 3, and at    the 5%

 level or better in 7 rows. This is inconsistent with Hall's interpretation

 of the data: if the permanent income theory were true and a were zero,

 consumption should be a random walk. Second, the overidentifying

 restrictions of equation (2.1) are rejected at the 5% level or better

 whenever lagged real interest rates are included in the set of instruments.


      19 If the representative agent has power utility, then a is the
 reciprocal of the coefficient of relative risk aversion. Epstein and Zin
 (l987a, 1987b) and Giovannini and Weil (1989) have shown that the same
 Euler equation can be obtained in a more general model in which risk
 aversion and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution are decoupled.

                                        17
Third, the estimates of are highly unstable; while they are generally

small, they do exceed one when nominal interest rate changes are used as

instruments.

     Perhaps the most telling check on the specification comes from

reversing the Hall IV regression. Table 4 shows the IV regression of the

real interest rate on the change in consumption.       We do not find that the

estimates of l/ are extremely large, as would be predicted by the Hall

hypothesis; instead, they cluster around one.2°

     Figure 3 shows graphically why the results are 50     Sensitive   to

normalization. We regressed c and r on the instruments in row 9 of Table

3 and then plotted the fitted values as estimates of the expected change in

consumption and the real interest rate. The figure shows that there is

substantial variation in these two variables over time. Yet contrary to

the predictions of the theory, the fitted values do not lie along a line.

The two   lines   in this figure correspond to the two regressions estimated

with the two   normalizations.    Because the fitted values are not highly

correlated, the estimated regression is crucially dependent on which

variable is on the left-hand side. Hence, this scatterplot does not imply

that the elasticity cf substitution is small. Instead, it suggests that

the model underlying the Euler equation (2.1) should be rejected.



2.2. Includinz Rule-of-Thumb Consumers

    We now reintroduce our rule-of-thumb consumers into the model. That

is, we consider a more general model in which a fraction A     of   income goes


     20 This cannot be explained by small-sample problems of the Nelson and
Startz (1988) variety, since consumption growth is fairly well predicted by
the instruments in Table 3.

                                         18
to individuals who consume their current income and the remainder goes to

individuals who satisfy the general Euler equation (2.1). We estimate by

instrumental variables



                                  +
(2.2)
              — M +
                      Ay +   Gr

where 9 —   (l-A)a.   We thus include actual income growth and the cx post

real interest rate in the equation, but instrument using twice lagged

variables. The results are in Table 5.

        The first implication of the results is that the rule-of-thumb

                                                                   in the real
consumers cannot be explained away by allowing for fluctuations

interest rate. The coefficient on current income remains substantively and

statistically significant.
        The second implication of the results in Table 5 is that there is no

 evidence that the ex ante real interest rate is associated with    the growth

 rate of consumption after allowing for the rule-of-thumb consumers.      The

 coefficient on the real interest rate is consistently less than its

 standard error. The small estimated coefficients on the real interest rate

 indicate that the intertemporal elasticity of substitution for the

 permanent income consumers is very small. In addition,     there is no

 evidence of any misspecification of the sort found when the rule-of-thumb

 consumers were excluded. The overidentifying restrictions are never      close


 to being rejected.

        Figure 4 illustrates the finding of a small elasticity of substitution

 by plotting the expected real interest rate and the expected change in

 consumption for the permanent income consumers assuming A—OS. This figure


                                          19
is exactly analogous to Figure 3, except that c has been replaced by c-

O.5y. These fitted values lie almost along a horizontal line, as is

required for an elasticity near zero. The figure also includes the

regression line of the expected consumption change on the expected real

interest rate, and it is near horizontal. Note that we cannot estimate the

reverse normalization: we have been unable to find any instruments that

forecast c-O.5y (as must be the case if A—O.5 and a—O).

     In summary, the data show little or no correlation between expected

changes in consumption and cx ante real interest rates. Yet this finding

should not be interpreted as implying that the permanent income hypothesis

holds with a small intertemporal elasticity of consumpti6n: that hypothesis

would require that expected changes in consumption are small and linearly

dependent on the cx ante real interest rate. Instead, it seems that

expected changes in consumption are dependent on expected changes in

income, which can be explained by the existence of some rule-of-thumb

consumers. Once these rule-of-thumb consumers are admitted into the model,

the data become consistent with an elasticity of substitution near zero for

the permanent income consumers.



3. From Euler Equation to Consunrntion Function

    Modern empirical work on consumption behavior has focused almost

exclusively on the Euler equations implied by optimizing models of

intertemporal choice. Our own work is no exception. Yet it seems that

something has been lost in this change of emphasis. The Euler equation

determines only the level of consumption today, relative to the level of

consumption tomorrow. We would like to be able to determine the absolute


                                      20
level of consumption, given either wealth and expected future interest

rates, or expected future income flows and interest rates. For this we

need a traditional consumption function, that is, a closed-form solution

for consumption given exogenous variables.

     Of course, there are considerable technical difficulties in deriving a

consumption function from an optimizing model. In fact, closed-form

solutions are available only in a very few special cases, the best-known

being log utility or power utility with independently and identically

distributed asset returns.21 The problem is that a closed-form solution is

obtained by combining an Euler equation with the intertemporal budget

constraint. But even when the Euler equation'is linear or log-linear, the

budget constraint is always non-linear when asset returns are random.

Consumption is subtracted from wealth to give the amount invested, and this

amount is then multiolied by a random rate of return to give tomorrow's

level of wealth.

     In this section we explore a class of approximate consumption

functions obtained by log-linearizing the intertemporal budget constraint.

These approximate consumption functions give considerable insight into the

 implications of alternative models, and they offer an alternative way to
                                     22
confront the models with the data.


      21 See Samuelson (1969) or Ingersoll (1987).


      22 Our
             log-linearization is similar to the one used by Campbell and
                                                                       It
 Shiller (1988) to study stock prices, dividends and discount rates.
 differs slightly because we define wealth inclusive of today's consumption,
 which is analogous to a cum-dividend asset price. There is also an
 interesting parallel between our approach and the continuous-time model of
 Merton (1971). Merton was able to ignore the product of random returns and
 consumption flows, since this becomes negligible in continuous time. See
 also Hayashi (1982), who examines a similar model under the maintained

                                          21
3.1. The intertemooral budget constraint

        To see the way our approach works, consider the budget constraint of a

consumer who invests his wealth in a single asset with a tine-varying risky

return R. We do not explicitly model income at this stage; this is

legitimate provided that all the consumer's income flows (including his

labor income) are capitalized into marketable wealth. The period-by-

period budget constraint is



(3.1)       W÷1 —   Rt+1(WC).

Solving forward with an infinite horizon and imposing the transversality

condition that the limit of discounted future wealth is zero, we obtain




(3.2)       Wt —     +
                         i—l Ct÷./(llR+j).


This equation says that today's wealth equals the discounted value of all

future consumption.

        We would like to approximate the nonlinear equations (3.1) and (3.2)

in such a way that we obtain linear relationships between log wealth, log

consumption, and log returns, measured at different points of tine. To do

this, we first divide equation (3.1) by W, take logs and rearrange. The

resulting equation expresses the growth rate of wealth as a nonlinear

function of the log return on wealth and the log consumption-wealth ratio.



assumption of a constant real interest rate.

                                        22
In the Appendix we show how to linearize this equation using a Taylor

expansion. We obtain



(3.3)      Awt+i =    k   +
                              r+i + (ll/p)(Cw).

In this equation lower-case letters are used to denote the logs of the

corresponding upper-case letters. The parameter p is a number a little

less    than one, and k is a constant.23 This equation says that the growth

rate of wealth is a constant, plus       the   log return on wealth, less a small

fraction (i-lip) of the log consumption-wealth ratio. In the Appendix we

solve equation (3.3) forward to obtain




(3.4)       c -   v   —        p   (r+jc+j) + pk/(l-p).


Equation (3.4) is a log-linear version of the infinite-horizon budget

constraint (3.2). It states that a high log consumption-wealth ratio today

must be associated either with high future rates of return on invested

wealth, or with low future consumption growth.



 3.2. Wealth-based and incpme-...-..—.-....-—                one

        So far we have merely manipulated a budget constraint, without stating

 any behavioral restrictions on consumer behavior. We now assume that          the

 consumer satisfies the log-linear Euler equation discussed earlier in

 Section 2:


      23 The parameter p can also be interpreted as the average ratio of
 invested wealth, W-C, to total wealth, W.

                                               23
 (3.5)       EtAct+i —    p +    aEr1.
         Equation (3.5) can be combined with equation (3.4) to give a

 consumption function relating consumption, wealth, and expected future

 returns on wealth. Take conditional expectations of equation (3.4),
                                                                                  noting
 that the left hand side is unchanged because it is in the consumer's

information set at time t.            Then   substitute in for expected consumption

growth from (3.5). The resulting expression is



(3.6) c             —    (1-a)
                                       cjp      r+ + p(k-p)/(l-p).
                                 Et



This equation generalizes Paul Samuelson's (1969) results for              independent
and identically distributed asset returns. It says that the               log

consumption-wealth ratio is a constant, plus (1-a) times the expected

present value of future interest rates, discounted at the rate p. When a —

1, the consumer has log utility and we get the well-known result that

consumption is a constant fraction of wealth. When a > 1, an increase in

interest rates lowers the log consumption-wealth ratio because substitution

effects outweigh income effects; when a <            1,   income effects are stronger

and high interest rates increase consumption. Whatever the              sign of the

effect, persistent movements in interest rates have a stronger impact             on
the level of consumption than transitory movements do.

    Traditional macroeconomic consumption functions usually determine

consumption in relation to income flows rather than wealth. We can move

from the wealth-based consumption function (3.6) to an income-based


                                                24
consumption function by expressing the market value of wealth in terms of

future expected returns and the future expected income flows from wealth.

A full derivation is given in the Appendix. The resulting consumption

function is



                     —
(3.7) c -      yt        E j—l           - ar+j)   -
                                                       p;h/(l-p),


where         is   the income at time t+j generated by the wealth held at time

t.   The log consumption-income ratio depends on the expected present value

of future income growth, less c times the expected present value of future

interest rates. As         falls towards zero, interest rates have less and less

effect on the consumption-income ratio and the model becomes a log-linear

version of the standard permanent income model which ignores interest rate

variation.

     Two aspects of (3.7) are worthy of special mention. First, the

interest rate terms in (3.7) capture the effects of changes in interest

rates holding future income constant (while the market value of wealth is

allowed to vary). By contrast, the interest rate terms in (3.4) capture

the effects of changes in interest rates holding wealth constant (while

future income is allowed to vary). When one holds future income constant,

higher interest rates lower the market value of wealth; when one holds the

market value of wealth constant, higher interest rates increase future

income flows. As Lawrence Summers (1981) has emphasized, higher interest

rates reduce consumption more when income flows are held fixed, since there

is no positive income effect to offset the negative substitution effect of

interest rates on consumption. With fixed income flows, the impact of


                                          25
interest rates on consumption approaches zero as a approaches zero.

      Second, the income growth terms in (3.7) represent the influence of

expected growth in income on current wealth, that is, net of the effects of

further wealth accumulation. This complicates the use of (3.7) in

empirical work, although the component of measured income growth that is

due to wealth accumulation may be small in practice.24

      The analysis of this section has so far ignored the possibility that

some fraction A of income accrues to individuals who consume their current

income rather than obeying the consumption function (3.7). But it is

straightforward to generalize (3.7) to allow for these consumers. We

obtain




(3.8) c -           — (1-A) E jl p            -
                                                  ar+)
                                                         -
                                                             (l-A)p/(l-p).

The presence of current-income consumers reduces the variability of the log

consumption-income ratio. The model of Hall (1988) sets a —         A   — 0 and thus

has the consumption-income ratio responding fully to expected income growth

but not at all to expected interest rates. By contrast, our model with

A —   0.5   has a reduced response of the consumption-income ratio to expected

future income growth.



3.3. Emirical imolementation

       Since equation (3.8) shows that both the permanent income model and

our more general model with rule-of-thumb consumers can be written as a



       24 For a discussion of this issue, see Flavin (1981).

                                         26
present value relation, all the econometric techniques available for

examining present value relations can be used to test and estimate these

models. Applying these techniques is beyond the scope of this paper. To

see what such exercises are likely to find, however, we take an   initial

look at the data from the perspective of this present value relation.

     If we assume the intertetnporal elasticity of substitution is small and

set a —   0, equation (3.8) says that the log of the average propensity to
consume (c-y) is the optimal forecast of the present value of future income

growth. To see if in fact there is any relation between these variables,

Figure 5 plots the log of the average propensity to consume (computed using

spending on non-durables and services) and the present value of realized

income growth (computed using personal disposable income per capita). We

assume a quarterly discount factor of 0.99, and set the out-of-sample

income growth rates at the sample mean. As the theory predicts, the figure

shows a clear positive relationship between these variables. When

consumption is high relative to current income, income will tend to grow

faster than average. When consumption is low relative to current income,

income will tend to grow slower than average.25

     We can obtain an estimate of A, the fraction of income going to rule-

of-thumb consumers, by regressing the present value of realized income

growth on the log of the average propensity to consume. Since the error in

 this relationship is an expectations error, it should be uncorrelated with

 currently known variables--in particular, c-y. The coefficient on c-y is

 therefore a consistent estimate of 11(1-A). We can see from Figure 5 that



      25 This figure thus confirms the findings using vector autoregressions
 in Campbell (1987).

                                        27
the estimate is likely to be greater than one: the present value of future

income growth seems to respond more than one-for-one to fluctuations in c-

y, which suggests that A is greater than zero.

     Table 6 shows the regression results for three measures of

consumption: spending on non-durables and services, total consumer

spending, and the sum   of   spending on non-durables and services and the

imputed rent on the stock of consumer durables. We present the results

with and without a time trend.26 The implied estimates of A in Table 6

vary from 0.233 to 0.496, which are similar to those obtained in Table i.27

These findings lead us to believe that more sophisticated examinations of

the present value relation will likely yield a conclusion similar to the

one we reached examining the Euler equation: a model with some permanent

income consumers and some rule-of-thumb consumers best fits the data.



4. Conclusions

     We have argued that aggregate consumption is best viewed as generated

not by a single representative consumer but rather by two groups of

consumers--one consuming their permanent income and the other consuming


     26 We include a time trend to proxy for mismeasurement in the average
propensity to consume due to the treatment of consumer durables. The ratio
of spending on consumer durables to spending on consumer non-durables and
services has grown over time. Therefore, a failure to include consumer
durab].es or an incorrect imputation is likely to cause mismeasurement in c-
y that is correlated with time. We confess that inclusion of a time trend
is a crude correction at best.
     27
        We have somewhat more confidence in the estimates of A obtained
from Euler equation estimation. In Table 6, measurement error in
consumption biases downward the estimate of A (as does the inability to
observe the out-of-sample values of future income growth.)    Yet such
measurement error does not affect the Euler equation estimates if this
measurement error is uncorrelated with the instruments.


                                         28
their current income. We have estimated that each group of consumers

receives about fifty percent of income and that the intertemporal

elasticity of substitution for the permanent income consumers is close to

zero. This alternative model can explain why expected growth in

consumption accompanies expected growth in income, why expected growth in

consumption is unrelated to the expected real interest rate, and why

periods in which consumption is high relative to income are typically

followed by high growth in income.

     Our model also has the potential to explain the "excess smoothness" of

aggregate consumption pointed out by Angus Deaton (l987).28     Deaton shows

that if income follows a persistent time series process, then the variance

of the innovation in permanent income exceeds the variance of the change in

current income.     According to the permanent income model, the change in

consumption should then be more variable than the change in income; but in

fact consumption is considerably smoother than income. Our model can

resolve this puzzle because it makes the change in consumption a weighted

average of the change in current income and the change in permanent income.

If these two income changes are not perfectly correlated, then a weighted

average of them can be less variable then either one considered in

isolation. Aggregate consumption is smooth in our model because it is a

"diversified portfolio" of the consumption of two groups of agents.29

     28
          See also Campbell and Deaton (1989), Christiano (1987), and West
(1988).
     29
        As an example, consider the case in which income is a random walk
but is known one period in advance. In this case, since the change in
permanent income and the change in current income are contemporaneously
uncorrelated, our model implies that the variance of the change in
consumption will be one half the variance of the change in income. For
more discussion of excess smoothness in our model, see the 1989 version of

                                       29
        Although our emphasis in this paper has been on characterizing the

    aggregate data rather than on analyzing economic policies, our findings are

    suggestive regarding the effects of policies. In particular, if current

    income plays as central a role in consumption as our alternative model

    suggests, economists should not turn so readily to the permanent   income

    hypothesis for policy analysis. An important application of this

    conclusion is in the debate over the national debt. Since the Ricardian

    equivalence proposition relies on the permanent income hypothesis, the

-
    failure   of the permanent income hypothesis casts doubt on this

    proposition's empirical validity. Rule-of-thumb consumers are unlikely to

    increase private saving and bequests in response to government deficits.

    The old-fashioned Keynesian consumption function may therefore provide a

    better benchmark for analyzing fiscal policy than does the model with

    infinitely-lived consumers.

         Our alternative model with rule-of-thumb consumers is very different

    from the alternative models considered in much recent work on Ricardian

     equivalence.30 Those alternatives are forward-looking, but involve finite

    horizons or wedges between the interest rates that appear in private sector

     and government budget constraints. We believe that such effects may be

     present, but are hard to detect because they have much more subtle effects

     than the rule-of-thumb behavior we document here. Thus, the tests in the




     Campbell and Mankiw (1987).

          30 For example, see Evans (1988), which tests Ricardian equivalence
     within the framework of Blanchard (1985).


                                            30
literature may have low power.31

     The failures of the representative consumer model documented here are

in some ways unfortunate. This model held out the promise of an integratec

framework for analyzing household behavior in financial markets and in

goods markets. Yet the failures we have discussed are not unique. The

model is also difficult to reconcile with the large size of the equity

premium, the cross-sectional variation in asset returns, and time-series

fluctuations in the stock market.32 The great promise of the

representative consumer model has not been realized.

     One possible response to these findings is that the representative

consumer model examined here is too simple. Some researchers have been

attempting to model the aggregate time series using a representative

consumer model with more complicated preferences. Non-time-separabilities

and departures from the von Neumann-Morgenstern axioms are currently

receiving much attention.33 It is also possible that there are non-

separabilities between non-durables and services consumption and other




     31
        An exception is the study by David Wilcox (1989) which reports that
consumer spending rises when Social Security benefits are increased. This
finding provides evidence against the infinite-horizon model of the
consumer. Moreover, since these benefit increases were announced in
advance, this finding also provides evidence against models with forward-
looking, finite-horizon consumers.
     32
        See Mehra and Prescott (1985), Mankiw and Shapiro (1986), and
Campbell and Shiller (1988).

        For models with non-time-separability, see Constantinides (1988)
and Heaton (1988). For departures from the von Neumann-Morgenstern axioms
see Epstein and Zin (1987a, 198Th) and Giovannini and Weil (1989).




                                     31
contemporaneous variables.34

     Alternatively, some have argued that random shocks to the

representative consumer's utility function may be important.35 This

contrasts with the standard assumption in the consumption literature that

fluctuations arise from shocks to other equations, such as productivity

shocks or changes in monetary and fiscal policy. If there are shocks to

the utility function and if they are serially correlated, then they enter

the residual of the Euler equation and may be correlated with lagged

instruments, invalidating standard test procedures.36

     Unlike our model with rule-of-thumb consumers, these approaches remain

in the spirit of the permanent income hypothesis by positing forward-

looking consumers who do not face borrowing constraints. We believe that

such modifications of the standard model are worth exploring, but we doubt

that they will ultimately prove successful. We expect that the simple

model presented here- -half of income going to permanent income consumers


         In Campbell and Mankiw (1987), we looked at cross-effects with
labor supply, government spending, and durable goods; we found no evidence
for these types of non-separabilities. There is perhaps more evidence for
non-separability with the stock of real money balances; see Koenig (1989)
Nason (1988) proposes a model in which the marginal utility of consumption
depends on current income. His model is observationally equivalent to
ours, and has the same implications for policy; it is a way to describe the
same facts in different terms.

        See Garber and King (1983) and Hall (1986).

     36 One response to this point is to try to find instruments that are
uncorrelated with taste shocks. We have experimented with several
instrument sets, including lagged growth of defense spending and political
party dummies, but these did not have much predictive power for income. On
the other hand, the change in the relative price of oil had significant
predictive power two quarters ahead. When we used lags 2 through 6 as
instruments, we estimated the fraction of current income consumers to be
0.28 with a standard error of 0.09.   These instruments, however, did not
have significant predictive power for real interest rates, so we were
unable to estimate the more general Euler equation.

                                      32
and half going to current income consumers- -will be hard to beat as a

description of the aggregate data on consumption, income, and interest

rates.
        Aooendix: Derivation of Atoroximate Consumption Functions

        We first divide equation (3.1) by W and take logs. The resulting

equation is



(A.l) w1 - w              —
                              r÷i + log(lC/W)                   —
                                                                    rt+l   +
                                                                               log(lexP(cw)).

The last term in equation (A.l) is a nonlinear function of the log

consumption-wealth ratio, c -            w        —
                                                      x.     The next step is to take a first-

order Taylor expansion of this function, log(l.exp(x)) around the point
   —    x.   The resulting approximation is



(A.2)        log(lexp(cw)) = k                +
                                                      (l-l/p)(cw),

where the parameter p —           l-exp(x),       a number a little less than one, and the

constant Ic —    log(p)   -
                              (l-l/p)log(l-p).              The parameter p can also be

interpreted as the average ratio of invested wealth, W-C, to total wealth,

W. Substituting (A.2) into (A.l), we obtain (3.3).

        The growth rate of wealth, which appears on the left hand side of

equation (3.3), can be written in terms of the growth rate of consumption

and the change in the consumption-wealth ratio:



(A.3) w1 — c+1                +
                                   (cw)       (c+1w÷1).


Substituting (A.3) into (3.3) and rearranging, we get a difference equation

relating the log consumption-wealth ratio today to the interest rate, the

consumption growth rate, and the log consumption-wealth ratio tomorrow:


                                                       34
(A.4)                     —
                                  p(r÷ict÷i)    + p(ct+iw+i) + pk.



Solving forward, we obtain (3.4).

        To obtain an income-based consumption function, we suppose that total

wealth       consists of                shares, each with ax-dividend price P and

dividend payment Y in period t:


              —
(A.5)             N(P+Yt).
The return on wealth can be written as


(A.6)             —


Combining (A.5) and (A.6) and rearranging, we get


                                  —             -
(A.7) Wt/N+I                          R+i(W/N

where             —           +       is the cum-dividend share price at time t. This

equation is in the same form as (3.1) and can be linearized in the same

way. The log-linear model is



(A.8)         -
                      w       —   -n    + E         p (r+j -
                                                               Yj)   + pk/(1p).



(Implicitly we are assuming that the mean dividend-price ratio equals the

mean consumption-wealth ratio since the same parameter p appears in (A.S)

and in (3.4)). Normalizing Nt_i (n—O) and substituting (A.8) into (3.6),

we obtain (3.7).


                                                        35
                                               Table 1

                                        United States 1953-1986

                                           ct — p +

Row   Instruments             First-stage regressions         A estimate      Test of
                              c equation y equation             (s.e.)     restrictions

1     None (OLS)                                                0.316
                                                               (0.040)

2 yt-2            yt-4        -0.005            0.009           0.417        -0.022
                              (0.500)          (0.239)         (0.235)       (0.944)

3 yt-2                 t-6
                               0.017            0.026           0.506        -0.034
                              (0.209)          (0.137)         (0.176)       (0.961)

4 ct-2                 t-
                               0.024            0.045           0.419        -0.009
                              (0.101)          (0.028)         (0.161)       (0.409)

5 ct-2                 t-6
                               0.081            0.079           0.523        -0.016
                              (0.007)          (0.007)         (0.131)       (0.572)

6 it-2            it-4         0.061            0.028           0.698        -0.016
                              (0.010)          (0.082)         (0.235)       (0.660)

7     Ai                       0.102            0.082           0.584        -0.025
           t-2         t- 6
                              (0.002)          (0.006)         (0.137)       (0.781)

8     ty                       0.007            0.068           0.351        -0.033
                              (0.341)          (0.024)         (0.119)       (0.840)
           ct-2-yt-2
9 y                            0.078            0.093           0.469        -0.029
                              (0.026)          (0.013)         (0.106)       (0.705)

             ct-2-yt-2
Note: The columns labelled "First-stage regressions" report the adjusted
for the OLS regressions of the two variables on the instruments; in
parentheses is the p-value for the null that all the coefficients except the
constant are zero. The column labelled "A estimate" reports the IV
estimate of A and, in parentheses, its standad error. The column labelled
"Test of restrictions" reports the adjusted R of the OLS regression of the
residual on the instruments; in parentheses is the p-value for the null that
all the coefficients are zero.




                                                         36
                                   Table 2

                           Evidence from Abroad

                                   — p +
                                         AAy


       Country        First-stage regressions        A estimate      Test of
    (sample period)   tc equation Ay equation          (s.c.)     restrictions


1      Canada          0.047        0.090              0.616         0.007
     (1963-1986)      (0.127)       (0.030)           (0.215)       (0.263)


2      France          0.083        0.155              1.095        -0.055
     (1970-1986)      (0.091)       (0.015)           (0.341)       (0.714)


3      Germany         0.028        0.086             0.646         -0.030
     (1962-1986)      (0.211)       (0.031)           (0.182)       (0.639)


4      Italy           0.195         0.356            0.400         -0.034
     (1973-1986)      (0.013)       (0.000)           (0.094)       (0.488)


5      Japan           0.087         0.205             0.553        0.018
     (1959-1986)      (0.020)       (0.000)           (0.096)      (0.178)


6 United Kingdom       0.092         0.127             0.221        0.086
     (1957-1986)      (0.012)       (0.002)           (0.153)      (0.010)


7 United States        0.040         0.079             0.478        0.004
     (1953-1986)      (0.092)       (0.014)           (0.158)      (0.269)



Note: For all couxttries, the consumption data are total spending. The set
of instruments is: t-2
                                t-4' C2                    c2.y2. Also see
note, Table 1.




                                                37
                                       Table 3

                                United States, 1953-1986

                                        —    +

Row     Instruments          First-stage regressions       estimate      Test of
                             c equation    r equation       (s.c.)    restrictions



1     None (OLS)                                           0.276
                                                           (0.079)


2     r 2         r           0.063         0.431          0.270         0.031
                             (0.009)        (0.000)        (0.118)       (0.029)


3     r 2         r 6         0.067         0.426          0.281         0.034
                             (0.014)        (0.000)        (0.118)       (0.050)


                              0.024         -0.021         -0.707        0.000
         t- 2
                             (O.lOl)        (0.966)        (2.586)       (0.215)


                              0.081         0.007          0.992         0.008
              2          6
                             (0.007)        (0.316)        (0.478)       (0.189)


6                             0.061         0.024          1.263         -0.021
         t- 2
                             (0.010)        (0.105)        (0.545)       (0.918)


                         6 0.102            0.028          1.213         -0.022
              2
                             (0.002)        (0.119)        (0.445)       (0.700)


8                 r           0.062         0.455          0.204         0.047
      rt 2
                                            (0.000)        (0.114)       (0.033)


9 rt      2
                  r           0.103         0.476          0.150         0.100
      c2              jt-4
                             (0.006)        (0.000)        (0.111)       (0.005)



Note:    See Table 1.


                                                      38
                                                Table 4

                                         United States, 1953-1986

                                           rt —

w       Instruments            First-stage regressions         1/a estimate      Test of
                               c equation    r equation         (s.e.)        restrictions



        None (OLS)                                             0.304
                                                               (0.087)


    r           r               0.063           0.431           1.581          0.086
                               (0.009)         (0.000)         (0.486)        (0.001)


    r           r               0.067           0.426           1.347          0.113
        t-2         t-6
                               (0.014)         (0.000)         (0.390)        (0.001)



         t-2
                 c t-4          0.024          -0.021          -0.341         -0.021
                               (0.101)         (0.966)         (0.428)        (0.878)



         t-2
                 c t-6          0.081           0.007           0.419         -0.010
                               (0.007)         (0.316)         (0.258)        (0.440)


                                0.061           0.024           0.768         -0.021
         t-2          t-
                               (0.010)         (0.105)         (0.334)        (0.919)


                                0.102           0.028          0.638          -0.024
         t- 2              6
                               (0.002)         (0.119)         (0.249)        (0.747)


    r           r               0.062           0.455          1.034          0.236
    t-2             Ct4        (0.026)         (0.000)         (0.333)        (0.000)



    r 2         r               0.103           0.476          0.521           0.455
                    Ct4        (0.006)         (0.000)         (0.220)        (0.000)
    tt_2            it_4
)te: See Table 1.

                                                          39
                                   Table 5

                         United States, 1953-1986

                               —     +        + 9r

Row Instruments      First-stage regressions                A        9       Test of
                                             r            (s.c.)   (s.c.) restrictions




1   None (OLS)          ---        ---        ---         0.294    0.150
                                                          (0.041) (0.070)



2                      0.045   0.030         0.471        0.438    0.080     -0.010
        2
     r2          r4 (0.061) (0.125) (0.000) (0.189) (0.123)                  (0.441)




              Lc       0.062   0.046         0.455         0.467    0.089    -0.006
        2                                                                    (0.391)
     r2          r4 (0.026) (0.060) (0.000) (0.152) (0.110)


                                                                    0.016    -0.022
    M. 2               0.092   0.034         0.431         0.657
                 r4 (0.005) (0.106) (0.000) (0.212) (0.146)                  (0.665)




Note: See Table 1.




                                                     40
                                    Table 6

                            United States, 1953-1986



                      E_1
                                  —p   +    [l/(lA)](c.y)

Consumotion Measure               11(1-A)                           ImDlied A


Non-durables and Services          1.306                    0.690    0.234
                                  (0.233)


Non-durables and Services          1.983         0.0005     0.792   0.496
                                  (0.221)       (0.0001)


Total Consumer Spending            1.455                    0.302   0.313
                                  (0.408)


Total Consumer   Spending          1.303        -0.0004     0.463   0.233
                                  (0.256)       (0.0002)


Non-durables, Services, and        1.576                    0.740   0.366
Imputed Rent on Durables          (0.225)


Non-durables, Services, and        1.937         0.0003     0.776   0.484
Imputed Rent on Durables          (0.203)       (0.0001)




Note: These regressions were estimated using Ordinary Least Squares. The
present value of future growth was computed assuming p—.99; out-of-sample
growth rates were set at the sample mean. Standard errors in parentheses
were computed using the Newey-West (1987) correction for serial correlation;
these standard errors use a lag length of 20, although lag lengths of 10 and
30 yielded similar results.




                                                 41
     Bib1ioravhv

     Barsky, Robert B., Three Interest Rate Paradoxes, PhD Dissertation,
M.I.T., 1985.

     Bean, Charles R., "The Estimation of 'Surprise' Models and the
'Surprise' Consumption Function," Review of Economic Studies 53: 497-516,
August 1986.

     Bernanke, Ben S., "Adjustment Costs, Durables and Aggregate
Consumption", Journal of Monetary Economics 15:41-68, January 1985.

     Blanchard, Olivier J., "Debt, Deficits, and Finite Horizons", Journal
of Political Economy 93:223-247, April 1985.

     Campbell, John Y., "Does Saving Anticipate Declining Labor Income? An
Alternative Test of the Permanent Income Hypothesis", Econometrica 53:1249-
1273, November 1987.

     Campbell, John Y., and Angus S. Deaton, "Why is  Consumption So
Smooth?" Review of Economic Studies, April 1989, forthcoming.

     Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw, "Permanent Income, Current
Income, and Consumption", NBER Working Paper No. 2436, November 1987;
revised January 1989.

     Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, "The Dividend-Price Ratio and
Expectations of Future Dividends and Discount Factors", Review of Financial
Studies 1:195-228, Fall 1988.

      Christiano, Lawrence J. , "Why Is Consumption Less Volatile than
Income?", Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis quarterly Review 2-20, Fall
1987.

     Constantinides, George M., "Habit Formation: A Resolution of the
Equity Premium Puzzle", unpublished paper, Graduate School of Business,
University of Chicago, 1988.

     Deaton, Angus S., "Life-Cycle Models of Consumption; Is the Evidence
Consistent with the Theory?" in T.F. Bewley ed. Advances in Econometrics,
Fifth World Congress, Vol. 2, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987.

     Epstein, Larry C. and Stanley E. Zin (l987a), "Substitution, Risk
Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Consumption and Asset Prices I: A
Theoretical Framework", Econometrica, forthcoming.

     Epstein, Larry G. and Stanley E. Zin (l987b), "Substitution, Risk
Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Consumption and Asset Prices II:     An
Empirical Analysis", unpublished paper, 1987.

      Evans, Paul, "Are Consumers Ricardian? Evidence for the United
 States", Journal of Political Economy 96:983-1004, October 1988.

                                      42
     Fisher, Franklin, "On the Cost of Approximate Specification in
Simultaneous Equation Estimation," Econometrica 29, April 1961, 139-170.

     Flavin, Marjorie A., "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing
Expectations about Future Income", Journal of Political Economy 89:974-
1009, October 1981.

     Carber, Peter M., and Robert C.) King, "Deep Structural Excavation? A
Critique of Euler Equation Methods." NBER Technical Paper 31, 1983.

     Giovannini, Alberto, and Philippe Wail, "Risk Aversion and
Intertemporal Substitution in the Capital Asset Pricing Model," NBER
Working Paper 2824, 1989.

     Grossman, Sanford J. and Robert J. Shiller, "The Determinants of the
Variability of Stock Market Prices", American Economic Review 71:222-227,
May 1981.

     Hall, Robert E., "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent
Income Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence", Journal of Political Economy
86:971-987, October 1978.

     Hall, Robert E., "The Role of Consumption in Economic Fluctuations,"
The American Business Cycle: Continuity and Chanae, ed. Robert J. Gordon,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986, 237-266.

     Hall, Robert E., "Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption", Journal
of Political Economy 96:339-357, April 1988.

     Hansen, Lars P. and Kenneth J. Singleton, "Stochastic Consumption,
Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns", Journal of
Political Economy 91:249-265, April 1983.

     Hayashi, Fumio, "The Permanent Income Hypothesis: Estimation and
Testing by Instrumental Variables," Journal of Political Economy 90:895-
916, October 1982.

      Heaton, John, "The Interaction Between Time-Nonseparable Preferences
and Time Aggregation", unpublished paper, University of Chicago, November
1988.

     Ingersoll, Jonathan E., Jr., Theory of Financial Decision Making,
Totowa: Rowman and Littlefield, 1987.

     Jappelli, Tullio and Marco Pagano, "Consumption and Capital Market
Imperfections: An International Comparison", CEPR Discussion Paper No. 244,
June 1988.

     Koenig, Evan, "Real Money Balances and the Timing of Consumption: An
Empirical Investigation", Discussion Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas,
March 1989.

                                      43
     Kormendi, Roger C. and Laura La}laye, "Cross-Country Evidence on the
Permanent Income Hypothesis", unpublished paper, University of Michigan,
revised December 1987.

     Lucas, Robert E., Jr., "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique", in
Carneeie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 1:19-46, 1976.

     Mankiw, N. Gregory, "The Permanent Income Hypothesis and the Real
Interest Rate", Economics Letters 7:307-311, 1981.

     Marikiw, N. Gregory, "Hall's Consumption Hypothesis and Durable Goods,
Journal of Monetary Economics 10:417-426, November 1982.

     Mankiw, N. Gregory and Matthew D. Shapiro, "Trends, Random Walks and
Tests of the Permanent Income Hypothesis", Journal of Monetary Economics
16:165-174, 1985.

     Mankiw, N. Gregory and Matthew D. Shapiro, "Risk and Return:
Consumption Beta versus Market Beta, Review of Economics and Statistics
68:452-459, August 1986.

     Mehra, Rajnish and Edward C. Prescott, "The Equity Premium: A Puzzle
Journal of Monetary Economics 15:145-161, 1985.

     Merton, Robert C., "Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a
Continuous-Time Model", Journal of Economic Theory 3:373-413, 1971.

     Michener, Ron, "Permanent Income in General Equilibrium", Journal of
Monetary Economics 13: 297-306, 1984.

     Nason, James M., "Permanent Income, Current Income, Consumption, and
Changing Tastes", unpublished paper, Board of Governors, Federal Reserve
System, December 1988.

     Nelson, Charles R. and Richard Startz, "The Distribution of the
Instrumental Variables Estimator and its t-Ratio When the Instrument is a
Poor One", Discussion Paper 88-07, University of Washington, May 1988.

     Newey, Whitney , and Kenneth West, "A Simple, Positive Definite,
Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,
Econometrica 55:703-708, 1987.

      Samuelson, Paul A. , "Lifetime Portfolio Selection by Dynamic
Stochastic Programming", Review of Economics and Statistics 51:239-246,
1969.

     Sargan, J.D., "The Estimation of Economic Relationships Using
Instrumental Variables", Econometrica 26:393-415, 1958.

     Summers, Lawrence H., "Capital Taxation and Accumulation in a Life
Cycle Growth Model", American Economic Review 71:533-544, September 1981.

                                     44
     West, Kenneth D., "The Insensitivity of Consumption to News about
Income," Journal of Monetary Economics 21:17-33, January 1988.

     Wilcox, David, "Social Security Benefits, Consumption Expenditure, and
the Life Cycle Hypothesis", Journal of Political Economy, April 1989.

     Working, Holbrook, "Note on the Correlation of First Differences of
Averages in a Random Chain", Econometrica 28:916-918, October 1960.




                                     45
                                       FIGURE 1




         Scafferplot of Changes in Consumption and Income
z0     0.02                                         .
F-
0    0.016                                                        .
                                           S. S                       S
U)   0.012                        •   ••.•
z0                                  •••• $% S .
0    0.008           S             ../        .:.'i.
                          S
(9   0.004               'S
0
-J               S                5$..
z        0                        • •.
                              •        S       ••
                                   S           S
w -0.004                      S            •
(9
z                                 SS
     -0.008              S
I0   -0.012
         -0.03       -0.01                     0.01          0.03         0.05
                         r'I-l1xrdr tri        i    nr   IN(OMF
                                FICUR 2


z0      Scatterplot of Expected Changes in Consumption and Income
I—   0,0 12
0
      0.01
U)
     0.008
z0
0
(9   0.006
     0.004
z
LU   0,002
(9
z        0
I0   -0002
0
LU
I-   -0.004
0
LU
0    -0006
>(      -0.008   -0.004     0             0.004   0.008   0.012
LU
                 EXPECTED CHANGE IN LOG INCOME
                                 FIGURE   3



                Scatterplot of Expected Change in Consumption
z0                     and the Expected Real Interest Rate
I—     0.012
        0.01
(I)
z0     0.008
 0     0.006
 0
      0.004
 z     0002
 0
 z
I     -0.002
0     -0.004
a
w
F-    -0.006
0
Ui    -0.01
0             -0.012   -0.008 -0,004          0   0,004   0008   0.012
xUi
                       EXPECTED REAL INTEREST RATE
                                 F1GURt 4


                     Scatterplot of Expected Change in
                Consumption for "Permanent Income" Consumers
                     and the Expected Real Interest Rate
       0.0 12

>       0.01

      0.008
I')   0.006
0
      0.004
0
      0002
a
w          0
I-
0     -0.002
IiJ
      -0.004
><
w     -0.006

      -0,008
          -0.012     -0.008   -0.004        0   0,004   0.008   0.012

                     EXPECTED REAL INTEREST RATE
                          FIGURE 5



       The Average Propensity to Consume as a Forecast of
                     Future Income Growth


z
Lu


0
IL
z0
I-
>
Ui
a
     -0.08
        1950       1960           1970      1980     1990
                                YEAR
