                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE DEMAND FOR LOTTERY PRODUCTS




                           Charles T. Clotfelter

                               Philip J. Cook




                           Working Paper No. 2928




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 April 1989




This paper is part of NBER's research program in Taxation. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper
                                         April 1989


                        THE DEMAND FOR LOTTERY PRODUCTS


                                   A$S TRACT




     Lotteries constitute one of the fastest-growing catagories of consumer
expenditure in the United States. Not only have an increasing number of
states legalized state lotteries, but the per capita expenditures on
lotteries in lottery states have increased at an annual rate of 13 percent
after inflation between 1975 and 1988. This article examines the demand for
lottery products. A majority of the adult public in lottery states play in
any one year, but relatively few of these players account for most of the
action". Socioeconomic patterns of play, measured from both sales data and
household surveys, offer some surprises -- for example, that the Engle curve
of lottery expenditures decline with income. There is some evidence that
lottery sales increase with the payout rate, although it is not clear that it
would be profitable for the states to increase payout rates. The addition of
a new game, such as lotto, does not undercut sales of existing games, and the
oft-heard claim that interest (and sales) will "inevitably" decline is
contradicted by the data. The organizational form of the lottery is evolving
in response to the quest for higher revenues: in particular, smaller states
are forming multistate game. This article is a chapter from Selling Hope:
State Lotteries in America, an NBER monograph to be published by Harvard
University Press in November, 1989.




Charles T. Clotfelter                     Philip J. Cook
Duke University                           Duke University
4875 Duke Station                         4875 Duke Station
Durham, NC 27706                          Durham, NC 27706
                             THE DEMAND FOR LOTTERY PRODUCTS

                                                 by
                                  Charles      T. Clotfelter

                                                and

                                         Philip   3. Cook
                                       Duke University



       Who plays the lottery, how much do they play, and what factors affect

their participation? iestions such as these underlie the enpirical analysis

of the demand for     any consumer product, and the lottery may be            examined in

much   the same   way. First among those interested in the             demand for lottery
products    is, not surprisingly, the state lottery agencies. As we discuss in

greater    detail in our book*,       these   agencies use modern methods of marketing
to increase    their sales. Knowledge of the market and the factors that

influence demand are essential ingredients in any              marketing   strategy. Not

only do    marketers need     to know who buys their product,      but they also aim to
distinguish heavy     users    from occasional users and determine how the product's
price or promotion affects demand. e question that often arises in
discussions   of lottery marketing is whether lottery purchases constitute

"impulse    buying"   —
                      irregular purchases determined on the spur of the moment.
       But there are good reasons other than the mercantile interests of
marketing to examine the demand for lottery products. One is the pragmatic
concern of states that may be considering whether or not to adopt a lottery:
how much revenue can a state expect to collect from a lottery? Another
application for the       empirical   study of lottery demand     is   in assessing the

                                                 1
distributional incidence of the revenue burden of lotteries. As we discuss in

Chapter    11, lotteries levy an implicit tax on players, and the incidence of

that implicit tax corresponds to the distribution of lottery expenditures.

        In this chapter we explore the diversity of lottery participation. We

first develop a picture of high concentration in the context of broad

participation. Then we demonstrate that some population groups play more

often than others on the average. Of special concern is whether minorities

and low—income groups are especially active in lottery play. Finally we

examine the variables associated with high levels of lottery expenditures and

analyze    specifically   the   demand for lotto games.


The Curious      Majority, the Intense Few

        Most adults who live in lottery states have played the lottery at least

once,   but the real market for the lottery consists of those who play      on a

regular    basis or who   might   be enticed into playing regularly by the offer of a
new game or      a more effective sales pitch. As with most products, a nall
percentage                            active (relatively speaking) as to
              of lottery customers are so

account for the bulk of all sales. This group is of special interest to those
responsible for marketing lotteries, as well as to those concerned about the
financial hardships caused by excessive garrtding.
        In 1986 the average     expenditure on lottery tickets was slightly over $110

per   adult in lottery states, which works out to about $2 per week.      But   the $2
bettor is not at all typical of lottery players. Rather, the distribution of
lottery play is concentrated among a relatively small fraction of the public
who spend much more than that. In this respect the lottery is like most other

cormrKx3ities.     First of all, not everyone plays the lottery. In any    given
week    only about one—third of all adults play; over the course of a year
participation broadens to encompass one—half or more of the adult public.

                                             2
Among those who do play, the top 10 percent of players in terms of frequency
account for 50 percent of the total amount wagered, while the top 20 percent
wager about    65   percent of the total. Interestingly,      the degree   of
concentration among players (as indicated by these percentages) does             not.

depend on the time interval under consideration. Measures of concentration
are    virtually identical for three surveys that asked respondents to report

lottery expenditures for some period preceding the interview: a one—week

period (Maryland, 1984), a two—month period (California, 1985), and a twelve—

month period (all lottery states combined, 1974).

        The distribution for the California survey is depicted in Figure 6.1,

which illustrates the importance of heavy players in determining total lottery

sales. Half     of the survey respondents said that they had purchased          a lottery
ticket    in the preceding two months.    Within this group the median expenditure

was a modest $12, but those players who        bet that   amount or less accounted for

only about one—seventh of the total handle. The top 10 percent             of players
reported    spending more than $50 and   accounted   for over half the total.

        How does the distribution of lottery play compare with the distribution

of expenditures for other commodities? Cne rule of thumb of marketing, the

"law of the heavy half," holds that the top 20 percent of consumers of any

commodity account for 80 percent of total purchases.1 If this is indeed                 a
law,    then lotteries are in violation, since the most active 20 percent of

players    account for only 65 percent of lottery play. Still, the qualitative
outcome    is the same: a relatively small minority of all consumers are

responsible    for the bulk of total expenditures.

        While expenditures on lotteries are somewhat less concentrated than this

"law"   would suggest, expenditures on other sorts of coninercial gambling are
more concentrated. A survey conducted by the University of Michigan Survey



                                           3
Research Center th 1975, titled Gambling in the United States, provides the

most complete available account of self—reported gambling            participation   in the

United States. Thirty percent of the national sample reported having

participated      in some form of commercial gambling, legal or illegal, in 1974
(not including state lotteries). The top 20 percent of these players (about 6
percent of the sample) accounted for fully 93 percent of the total reported
wagers, and the top 10     percent of players wagered 84      percent of the total. To
what extent this is due     to differences in the availability of the various

forms of   commercial gambling is unclear. Whatever the explanation, the state
lotteries     have considerably broader participation, and less concentration of

play among participants, than other forms of commercial gambling. There is,

however, one form of illegal gambling whose distribution of play appears to

resemble that of its legal cousin auite closely. Calculations based on data

from   a 1972 stody of the illegal numbers game        in New York   City shs that the
degree   of   concentration among           of the illegal game was quite
                                    participants

similar to that in Maryland's three—digit legal numbers game in 1986.2
       A corrudity that has much in common with        commercial gambling and

lotteries     is alcohol, and it is illuminating to compare      this distribution

across   the adult population. Drinking and gambling are both stject to
special    legal controls and have    been   broadly   condemned in religious teachings.
The dominant modern view is that moderate indulgence in either of these

activities is acceptable, but the potential exists for excess and abuse and

must be curtailed through special regulations. The distribution of alcohol

consumption reflects both the moderate nature of "normal" drinking, and the

potential for trouble. Most adults in the United States abstain (33 percent)

or drink moderately. The top 10 percent of drinkers average about ten drinks

each   day, and   account for about half of       total alcohol consumption.3 Thus, the
degree of concentration of drinking is much          the same as the concentration of


                                              4
lottery play, and the basic implication is the same for both alcohol and

lotteries: most participants indulge lightly; the majority of the "actionTM

involves the relatively small group at the top of the distribution.

       For lotteries, as for alcohol and other coitrdities, the relatively heavy

participants  are of special interest. From the perspective of the state
lottery   agencies, since this is the group that accounts for most of the
revenues,    maintaining the   interest of the heavy players is essential to the
financial    health of the lottery.    Because of the   predominance of regular

players   in total lottery sales,     one lottery marketing consultant has disputed

the   comon belief that lottery demand is based on impulse buying.4        On the
contrary, he says, for many lottery players — especially the big spenders ——
purchases are planned and are made regularly. Upon such distinctions depend
crucial choices about how best to market the product. Finally, from the
perspective of lottery critics, the heavy players are the ones at greatest
risk from the hazards associated with gambling: the feeding of self—
destructive compulsion and the temptation to neglect other financial

obligations for the sake of pursuing the dream of wealth.

       The concentration of lottery play is also of interest because of its

effect on public perceptions. The typical lottery player may quite        rightly be
perceived    as someone who spends a few dollars a week or less. For this player

the lottery is surely a harmless diversion. What is not so easily understood

from casual observation is that the typical player is not the source of the

typical revenue dollar.



Who Plays?

      The focus here is on the readily observable characteristics of

individuals and groups; age, gender, race, income, place of residence,



                                            5
education, family status. We do not explore the more sttle dimensions of
human div :rsity,    such as personality characteristics or attitudes, although
these may well    be instrumental and have been       studied   exten5vely by those
whose job it    is to market lottery products. But        the   politics of the question
"Who plays?"     is dominated by socioeconomic concerns, especially the         pattern

of    play across income distribution. As it turns        out, several socioeconomic
characteristics     are highly correlated with lottery play, but income is not one

of them.

       At least three measures of lottery involvement may be used to measure the

play of a given population group. The first is the participation rate: the

percentage of group members who bought at least one lottery ticket during a

given period of time. Second is the      average expenditure by members       of the

group — the total expenditure over some period of time divided by the number

of people belonging to the group.       Third is the prevalence of heavy players

within the group: the percentage of group members who spent a relatively

large amount over the specified time period. In practice            these three measures
are   closely related, in the sense that groups that rank relatively high on one

measure are also high on the     other two.       For example, dividing the adult

population    of California   into four groups by educational level, we find that

the group with the highest average expenditure (those who did not complete

high school) is also the group with the highest participation rate and the

highest concentration of heavy players.. While it is logically possible that

certain groups might attain a high average expenditure level despite a low

participation rate (that is, if those who did participate were all heavy

players), this possibility is not observed in practice.

       We obtained information on the characteristics of players from a number

of different sources. Most important were household surveys from Arizona,

California,    Maryland, and the nation at large that included questions        about

                                              6
participation in state lotteries. We also have used information based on
household surveys taken in Massachusetts and        New Jersey   and a national
household survey of gaJTl.ling made in 1944, and we have examined lottery data
aggregated by zip code    for   California and   Maryland.5 In    analyzing who     plays
lotteries    it is informative to begin by examining simple two—way

classifications that compare the rates of play for members of various

demographic groups. We have also analyzed these data using multivariate

analysis techniques that control for the effects of other characteristics, but

in general we have found that the simple tabulations give a good qualitative

picture of the patterns of lottery play.


Differences by Socioeconomic Group

        Figure 6.2 compares the rates of lottery play among various population

groups based on a survey taken in California in 1986, at          a time when only
instant games were available in that state. For each group the figure shows

the participation rate, measured by the percentage of people who          played     in

the   previous week. In    the entire adult population 38 percent bought       at
least    one ticket during the week. The   discussion here presents a number of

generalizations    which are illustrated by the patterns       in Figure 6.2, but

which    are based on a number of other sources of information as well.
        Gender. Men gamble more than women as      a rule, but the    difference    is

small in    the case of lotteries. The   national surveys of gambling in 1975

found    that 68 percent of men participated in some form of gambling, compared
with only 55 percent of women. In California the difference in lottery

participation is small, as shown in Figure 6.2. A survey in Massachusetts

also found similar participation rates for men       and women in all three lottery
games.6    Generally   the gender difference in amount   played     is more notable than

the difference in participation rates, with men       having     a definite edge.


                                           7
       Age.   The pattern of lottery participation by age is an inverted U, with
the young (eighteen to twenty—five) and     the      old (sixty—five   and over)   playing
less   than the broad middle range. Hevy play is most prevalent in the middle

years as well. Interestingly, this pattern is a departure from the age

profile of gambling in general, which shows the highest rates of gambling

among young adults and a steady decline in participation with age.

       Religion. In lottery play as with gambling in general, the biggest

religious difference is the markedly higher rates of participation among

Catholics. Previous surveys of gambling have shown that participation rates

for   Catholics are half again as large   as those of Protestants, and the

differences   for lottery purchases shown      in    Figure 6.2 are similar. Roman
Catholic dogma is tolerant of moderate gambling, and Catholic churches,
unlike Protestant ones, have long used bingo nights as a fund—raising device.
Lottery   play among those   not affiliated with organized religious bodies
falls in between    rates   for Catholics and those of     other religious groups.

       Education. Anytime a lottery critic calls the lottery a "sucker bet" or

decries   the exploitation of uninformed citizens the role of education in

lottery   play is being questioned. Indeed there         is no more clear—cut

correlationwith lottery participation: lottery play falls with formal
education. Figure 6.2 shows that the proportion of adults who participate
drops   from 49 percent for those with less         than a high school education to 30
percent   for those with a college degree. Yet this clear association cdntrasts

sharply   with   that for gambling in general. In national surveys conducted in

1944 and 1975    gambling was shown to increase with education.           Whatever the
role of education in the ability of players to assess objective aspects of
betting, it is clear that lotteries appeal to a less well—educated clientele
than   most other forms of gambling.
       Occupation and employment status. Another way to gain a            picture of who


                                           8
plays lotteries is to examine how       play breaks   down   by oc:uation and
employment. Among six broad occupational categories in the California survey

lottery   play was most common among laborers     (including both    skilled and
unskilled), with a participation rate of 46 percent. Right behind are service
and protective and clerical workers. Among the occupations showing the lowest
rates of play were advanced professionals, although even among them the
participation rate was over 25 percent. Retired people and students played
the least.
     Race and ethnic group. Racial and ethnic classifications are, of course,
loaded   with   social and   political significance in almost any context, for

better or worse. In the case of lotteries the social significance is enhanced

by the history of the daily numbers game.        As we saw in (iapter 4, the daily

numbers gaines developed by state lotteries were       copies   of illegal numbers

games that had operated for decades. Blacks, and to a lesser extent Hispanic
groups, considered policy and numbers       "their"   games, and with good    reason.
These illegal games had thrived in minority neighborhoods          for   decades,

providing a source of cheap entertainment, employing hundreds of residents as

runners and bankers,    and ultimately becoming a fixture of the cultural

landscape.7

     Although the evidence is somewhat mixed, it appears that in the United

States blacks and Hispanics play more than non—Hispanic whites. Figurç 6.2

shows that in California Hispanics played considerably more than other whites

but that the rates of play for blacks was similar to that for non—Hispanic

whites. Betting at least $5 per week was twice as conn for Hispanic adults

as for others. Similarly, a survey taken in Arizona showed a higher rate of

play for Hispanics than other whites. while only 9 percent of other whites in

that state reported playing the lottery at least once a week, the rate for



                                            9
Hispardcs was 28 percent.8 The available survey material in the East sgests

that blacks play more than whites in that region.9              Calculations     based on a

survey taken in Maryland in 1986 reveal that some 43 percent of whites had

played the lottery within the previous ITonth, but among blacks the comparable

figure was 68 percent. The size of this racial difference depends on the type

of lottery game, and     is   largest for the legal version of the nuribers game.             In

Maryland blacks participated in the           three—digit   nunbers game    at a rate over
twice that of whites, 61 to 24 percent, whereas the difference for lotto was
only   54   to 38 percent)0 A survey in New Jersey produced similar findings,
showing blacks     and Hispanics   playing nurbers      games at   a rate twice that of the
population    in general and lotto at a rate 30         percent higher than average)1
This   preponderance of blacks and Hispanics in the daily nurbers game also

closely parallels the racial pattern of play in New York's illegal nunbers

game)2 Given the importance that has been attached to racial differences in

lottery play, one must ask whether differences such as these can be explained

by other observable differences. We turn to this question in considering the

last of the demographic variables to be discussed.

       Income. The relationship between income and lottery expenditures is of

particular    interest owing to the frequent charge that lotteries are played
disproportionately by the poor.         In   fact there has been    more   research on this
question than on almost any other related to lotteries. The preponderance of
the   evidence   suggests that there is little systematic relationship between
income and the amount     spent on lottery play.         Absolute   expenditures   appear   to

be remarkably uniform over a broad range of incomes. This uniformity is
noteworthy since spending, say, $10 per week on the lottery represents a much
greater financial corruiitment for a household with an income of $10,000 per
year than for one earning $40,000 per           year.   Yet we find no consistent
differences in participation       or   play over this range, with the possible

                                               10
exception of daily nuithers games, whether or not other household
characteristics are         taken into account.

        Figure    6.3 depicts the patterns of lottery play by income using data from
the 1986 California survey. Most of the respondents lived in households with
incomes in              $10,000 to $60,000. Over this range average play
                 the range of

does not differ much. As a percentage of income, however, average play
declines     over the entire income range, as shown          by   the dotted line in Figure

6.3.    While the       average person   in the lowest income class spent 2       percent of

his    household income on lottery tickets, those with incomes above $40,000
spent    less    than   0.5 percent   on tickets. The    expenditure     pattern evident in
this   table is consistent with several previous studies of lottery

expenditures, most of which were based on weekly passive lottery games)-3 it

is    also consistent with the        patterns   that emerge when expenditures are
estimated by counting the nunter of winners by zip code (see Table 6.1).
Using data for Maryland and Massachusetts we              found that,    with one exception,
the estimated average level of expenditures bore no consistent relationship
with   the average income by zip codes. The exception was lotto games with

comparatively large jackpots, for which expenditures tended to rise with

income.

       Of the various data sets we analyzed there was just one showing the

poorest   respondents playing more than others. A 1984 Gallup               survey in

Maryland     (see Table 6.2) found that respondents with incomes below $15,000
(about 15 percent of the        sample) played more than those with higher incomes ——

indeed more than twice as much. Whether this difference is valid or an

artifact of the special difficulties involved in surveying poor neighborhoods

is not clear. The less error—prone data on winners by zip codes, found in

Table 6.1,      does not   provide much   support     for this result.



                                                 11
             the basis of   a number   of   data sets for different states and years, we

conclude that there is no strong and consistent pattern of lottery play across

income    categories. Indeed, the upper and lower ranges of the middle              class

play   at about the same rate on the average. Income patterns differ somewhat
among games, with lotto having a relatively strong appeal to upper income
households, and numbers to lower—income players. The most definitive finding
is   that,    as a percentage of household income, lottery expenditures decline
steadily      as income rises.

       In sum, members      of   certain groups are more likely to play lotteries and

to   play them heavily: males, Hispanics, blacks, the middle—aged, Catholics,
laborers, and those with less than a college degree. One question that arises
in the interpretation of such results is whether or not these factors remain
significant when the others are taken            into   account. Does   income   have an
effect,      for example, when education and      race are accounted for? In order         to

examine the independent effects of race, education, and other individual
characteristics, we estimated multivariate equations explaining average weekly

expenditures      based on the survey of Maryland residents. Largest and
statistically most significant among the explanatory variables is race, with
blacks spending an average of about $4.50 more than whites, other
characteristics being the same. This racial difference is so large in this

data set that we estimated separate equations for blacks and whites. (The

estimated equations are given in Table 6.2). Lottery expenditures for whites

and blacks alike tend to fall with education. This effect is significant only

for whites, with the difference between college graduates and those who did

not complete high school being almost $5 per              week. A   similar pattern with

smaller differences is observed for blacks, but owing to the small sample the

coefficients are estimated very imprecisely. Regarding age, the estimates

imply that expenditures on lottery products are lowest for the elderly and


                                                12
highest in the prime earning years of twent aive -o fifty—four. Males spend
more than   females:        the   estimates     imply a difference of about $1 for whites
and $4 for blacks. Surprisingly, expenditures do not vary significantly
between urban and rural counties once income, race, and other characteristics
are held constant.
      The estimated effects of income reflect the patterns previously
discussed. Among         those who report       their income,   expenditures   are   lowest   in
the   $15,000 to $25,000 income group, other factors being equal. The highest

expenditures are recorded at the under—$l0,000 level for the                  entire sample, a
pattern    which the      separate regressions suggest Is        limited to black

respondents;       for   whites, there are no significant differences in play by

income category.



Other    Gambling
        The demographic categories used here to describe lottery players give a
useful but incomplete picture of who plays the lottery. There are                    also   less
readily observable characteristics that affect whether people play regularly,

such as personality (do they like to take chances?) and                associates     (do their

friends    gamble?). One      obvious      indicator is the extent of participation in

other forms of commercial gambling: people who participate in other kinds of

gambling are more likely to play the lottery, and to play it heavily, than

people who do not. But            the   introduction of a lottery does not     simply   provide

those who    already participate          in   commercial gambling, whether legally or
illegally,     with a new game.          Lotteries also recruit a great many people into

commercial gambling. The participation rates in state lotteries far exceed

participation rates for other forms               of   commercial gambling.

        The most   complete survey of gambling paticipation ever conducted was


                                                   13
the 1975 "Gambling    in the   United States."    A total of 1,735    respondents were
interviewed, of whom 907     lived in   states   that   operated lotteries

in 1974. Questions were asked concerning participation in all aspects of

commercial gambling, both legal and      illegal.       Overall, 58 percent of lottery

state residents reported gambling at some         time   during 1974, compared with

only 27 percent of residents from nonlottery states. Most of this

difference was due   to   the much higher rate of lottery play by residents of

lottery states: comparing the t groups by participation in            commercial
gambling other than the lottery, the lottery state residents are only "ahead"

by a margin of 34    to   23 percent.

        These differences are dramatic and strongly stgest that the introduction

of a state lottery brings a large fraction of the adult population into

commercial gambling. To confirm this conclusion it must be demonstrated that

the observed differences in commercial gambling are not the result of other

differences between residents of lottery and norilottery states. Hence, we

conducted a multivariate statistical analysis (probit) of participation in

commercial gambling for the entire sample, which included variables for sex,

race,   religion, frequency of church attendance, household income, age,
education, the size of the respondent's city of residence, and whether or not
the respondent lived in the South. Controlling for all of these variables, we
found that the likelihood of participation in commercial gambling was still
heavily influenced by whether or not the respondent lived in a           lottery state.

For   example, a person with the socioeconomic characteristics associated with a

participation probability of 27 percent if living in a non—lottery state had a

participation probability of 52 percent in a lottery state. Thus we conclude

with considerable confidence that the lottery is a powerful recruiting device,

which in 1974 was responsible for inducing about one—quarter of the adult

population, who sould not otherwise have         done so, to participate in comercial

                                           14
gambling.

      The     national data do confirm, however, that people who participate in
other forms of comercial gambling are more likely than average to plv the
lottery, if given the opportunity. Indeed for respondents from lottery
states, lottery participation was twice as high among gamblers as among those
who did not participate in other commercial gambling (74 percent as opposed to
36 percent). We can             up these results this way: the lottery has an
especially strong appeal to established gamblers, but it also creates new
ones.
        One   indication   from the "Gambling in the   United States" survey is that
most commercial gamblers do not specialize in a single type of gambling. Even
within the confines of the lottery many players will regularly buy tickets for
two or more types of games. To demonstrate the overlap in play among various
lottery products we report findings from surveys in Massachusetts and New
Jersey. Lotto is very popular in Massachusetts, and, according to one survey
commissioned by the state lottery agency, almost everyone who bought lottery
tickets       played lotto. Overall, 62 percent of adults played at least one game.

About half of these played lotto exclusively, and the remainder played lotto

in   combination with one or both of the other games (numbers and instant
games). As might be expected, those who play more than one game usually bet
more than those who dabble in only one. For example, those who play only
lotto bet       an   average of about $12 per week, but those who combined lotto with
numbers bet      an   average of $3]., and   those who played   all three bet   over

The heavy       players who account for such a large share of total lottery wagers
thus tend to diversify their portfolio of lottery gaines.
        A New Jersey survey affirmed the predominance of lottery players who play
more than one game. For example, 22 percent of the population played the


                                               15
numbers game, but among lotto players 43 percent also playel        nunbers.15 The

survey   reveals the degree of overlap between    participation   in the lottery and
in   other forms of commercial gambling, reinforcing the results reported in the

NSG study.    In general, those who play the lottery are more likely than

average to bet on bingo or horse races. And, according to this survey,

lottery players are much less likely than average to use cents—off coupons in

stores, whereas they are more likely than average to participate in giveaway

games.     Between the   prudent coupon—clipper and the let's—take—a--chance

sweepstakes player, there is little doubt who will be in line to buy lottery

tickets.


Conclusion

      The socioeconomic variables by which social scientists classify people ——

sex, race, age, religious background, education, income, profession —— provide
a useful framework in which to understand observed patterns in lottery play.

But even when such readily observed characteristics are accounted for, there

remains considerable diversity. Ultimately the question of personality

enters: some people simply find gambling a more engaging activity than others.

When the state introduces a lottery, residents who are already betting on the

horses or bingo or the illegal numbers game      tend   to become regular customers.

But the lottery also finds a large following among the majority who had not

previously been spending money on comercial gaines and whose taste for

gambling needed the stimulus of the lottery in order to be awakened.

      Of course whether and how much someone plays the lottery is not simply a

function of circumstances and tastes. Also important is the nature and

quality of the products being offered by the lottery. In the next sections we

consider the determinants of lottery sales which are under the control of the

state agency, including the types of gaines offered, the payout rate, the prize



                                           16
structure, and the amount   of   advertising.


Influencing   Dem?nd

     In fiscal 1986 Massachusetts       lottery revenues were $193 capita,
                                                                     per            the

highest in the nation. The   lottery with the lowest sales that year was

neighboring   Vermont, at $23 per capita. Both states had well—established

lotteries, offering all three of the major games—lotto, rnxthers, and          an

instant game. How can this   eight—to—one disparity in per capita sales be

explained?    What can Vermont and other states with relatively low        sales   learn

from Massachusetts, Maryland, and other states whose lotteries have been sales

leaders?

     We have described the socioeconomic patterns of lottery participation.

Much of the interstate variation in lottery sales is the result of differences

in these factors, which are determinants of the gambling propensity of the

resident population. For example, 84 percent of Massachsetts residents live

in urban areas, compared with only 34 percent of Vermont residents. In

Massachusetts sales also are enhanced in comparison with Vermont by the

relatively high percentage of residents who are Roman Catholics and/or members

of ethnic groups in which participation in coiwnercial gambling has

traditionally been high. Such factors help explain the large interstate

disparities in sales,16 but this sort of explanation is not very helpful to

the lottery manager seeking to increase sales. Presumably this manager is not

in a position to proselytize for the Catholic church or encourage rural

residents to move to the city.

     A number of actions that are available to lottery managers are

potentially effective in stimulating sales. First, expanding the product line

by introducing a new game will increase total sales. Second, increasing the

payout rate on existing games    will   probably increase sales, and a carefully


                                           17
considered restructuring of the prize offerings may also help in this respect.

Third, for the game of lotto an increase in the population base (through

joining a consortium of states) will increase sales by making it possible to

offer larger jackpots.


Expanding the Product Line

      The typical pattern for lotteries which began operating in the 1980s was

to get started with the instant game and then introduce one of the on—line

games (nuithers or lotto) several months or even years later, with the other

following after an additional interval. There is a natural concern that

introducing a new game will detract from sales of existing games ——        for
example, that given a chance, players may redirect some of their instant game

expenditures to playing lotto. If this were to happen, then the increase in

overall lottery sales uld be somewhat less than the sales of the new game.

In technical terms the concern is that the several types of lottery games are

substitutes for one another, just as are, say, different brands of cigarettes.

This concern is plausible, especially since most lottery participants play

more than one game, given the opportunity. But the evidence very clearly

indicates       that the standard lottery games are not   substitutes for one another.

Indeed,   sales of an existing game    or   games are unaffected by the introduction
of   a new one.

       Figure 6.4 depicts sales trends for       four states that introduced nw games
during    the   198c. In each case it appears that the sales trend in existing

games was unperturbed by the introduction of a new one. Patterns for other

states help confirm this remarkable result. In particular, we checked sales

trends for nurrbers and instant games in thirteen states        around the time they
introduced                                           the average growth rates
                a lotto game. In each state we compared

for   the two—year periods before and after the introduction of lotto. In nine

                                            18
of these    states the growth rate increased; in only four did the growth rate
decrease, as would be expected if lotto were a substitute for the other
      l7    Based on this evidence we         conclude that the introduction of lotto in
a   state does not reduce sales of other games;              expenditures on lotto come from
increased   play and new players. The three major games are thus not

substitutes for one another.

       Another type   of   evidence provides further support for this conclusion.

Lotto sales tend to vary widely from drawing to drawing, depending on the size

of   the jackpot (as determined by the number of             consecutive rollovers from

previous    drawings). Figure 4.1 in Chapter 4             illustrates this effect. If

lotto    and other games were substitutes, then the run—up in lotto sales when
there   is a large jackpot would         depress    sales of other games.        An analysis of
Massachusetts    numbers sales data for eighty—five consecutive weeks was

conducted to test for this possibility; it revealed that the size of the lotto

jackpot, which had an enormous effect on lotto sales, had no discernible

effect on sales of the numbers game.               The additional betting on       lotto was

"new'    money.18
       The evidence presented here is limited to the three major games currently
offered.    In the future, as new games like keno and sports pools are
developed    and widely introduced, the pattern may be change. But at present

the three   available      games   are   remarkably independent of one another. For

states   that do not already offer all three games, expanding the product line

is virtually guaranteed to increase sales.


Increasing the Payout Rate

        Much has already been       said   about    the   low payout   rate   offered by the

lotteries. Most states pay          about 50 cents in prizes to every dollar of
revenue, and in about half         the states the authorizing legislation would            have

                                                   19
to be amended in order to increase this rate. The uniformly low payout rates

are likely to persist until persuasive evidence is produced that a higher

payout rate   would increase net revenues to the state treasury, and available
evidence    on this sject is not especially persuasive one way or the other.
      The basic issue   here is analagous to the attention paid      in the field of

public finance to the relationship between a tax rate and the aimunt of tax

revenue collected. During the early years of the Reagan administration the

economist Arthur Laffer became famous for his claim that lowering the

federal income tax rates would increase         federal revenues. In the case of
the   lottery the analagous assertion is that an increase in the payout rate

would increase sales by so much that net revenues would increase, despite

the reduction in net revenue per dollar of sales.

       It would be surprising indeed if an increase in the payout rate did not

increase sales somewhat. Given a higher payout rate,          the lottery game
designers could increase the lotto jackpet or the numbers prize, thus

enhancing the appeal. Alternatively, designers could increase the nunber or

size of small prizes in lotto or instant games, thus giving more players the

experience of being winners and encouraging them to continue playing. In

short, a larger payout rate would give the designers new options for creating

attractive prize offerings, which would in turn generate increased action from

players whether they evaluated a game on the basis of actuarial science or on

instinct.

       Interestingly, one common pattern of lottery play —        reinvestment of
winnings —     virtually    ensures a sales increase from a higher payout, even if

players'    evaluation of   the game does not    change. In   a poll conducted for the

Los Angeles Times in    March 1986 respondents who reported having won money in
California's instant game were      asked, "When you win, what do you usually do?



                                           20
Do you put the cash     in your pocket or do y i      your winnings by yirg
                                                   reinvest

more California lottery tickets with the money you have won?" Cly 14 percent

reported taking the cash; the rest said they reinvested the winnings (73
percent) or did both about equally (12 percent).19 If more prize money is
paid out, then more will be re—invested, at least for the       instant game.   The

virtually inevitable     result is that an increase in the payout rate will

increase sales. But the question remains whether the Increase would be

sufficient to increase net revenue to the state2°

       This question cannot be answered from the available data. For example,

take the case of the nuuiers game. As of 1986 every state but one offered a

payout rate of 50 percent. The exception was Massachusetts, with a payout

rate   of 60 percent.   It is true that Massachusetts' per capita sales were

relatively high: 36 percent higher than       Connecticut's, for instance, and the
difference   was greater still compared with other neighboring states. &it

Massachusetts also has much higher instant game and lotto sales per capita

than its neighbors, and for those games its payout rate is no different from

theirs. It is thus not feasible to infer what proportion of Massachusetts'

nunbers sales are due to its high payout rate.21

       The game of lotto offers slightly more interstate variation in payout

rates. In fiscal 1986 nineteen     states offered lotto. While most of these had
a payout rate of 50 percent, five had lower payout rates. A regression
analysis of sales data for lotto did yield a coefficient estimate

significantly greater than zero for one specification. Indeed, the point

estimate was large enough to suggest that an increase in payout would increase

net revenue, although the coefficient was estimated imprecisely enough to

leave considerable statistical doubt about this conclusion. Other variables

included in this specification were population, per capita income, and percent

urban (all positive and significant) and percent black (small and


                                         21
insignificant). Other specifications yielded smaller coefficient estimates on

payout rate.22 Given      the   multitude of plausible specifications and the nall

nurrber   of observations, this approach does not yield confidence—inspiring
estimates. 23
     From the point of view of a lottery agency, increasing the payout rate is
an expensive tactic for stimulating sales. (For example, the unit cost of
increasing the payout rate by 2 percentage points      is equivalent to more   than

doubling the     advertising budget   in most states.) While it seems likely that

the tactic would be effective in increasing sales somewhat, it is not clear

that sales are sufficiently responsive to the payout rate that net revenues

would increase. At the level of payout rates currently being offered, an

increase in the rate would produce an increase in net revenues only if sales

were increased by more than 2 percent for each percentage point hike in the

payout rate.24      In particular, increasing the payout   rate from 50 percent to

60 percent would increase net revenues only if sales increased by more than 30

percent   as a result.25 Given currently available evidence, there is no
persuasive basis      for predicting whether that much of an increase would be

likely to occur.


Modifying the Prize Structure

      Most players do not care about the payout rate per se; indeed, very few

lottery participants even know the payout rate of the games they       play.
Players    are   concerned about the prizes offered by a game, and presumably
different    players focus on different aspects of the prize structure ——      the
likelihood of winning some prize, or the size of the top prize, or the

likelihood of winning a prize that is above some minimum magnitude. While

players may not have an accurate impression of the prize structure, they can

form some sort of impression from personal experience (and the experience of


                                           22
their acquaintances) in playing the game and from advertising and promotional

material. The primary objective in designing a prize structure for a game is

to create as favorable an impression on the market as possible within the

financial   limits of the game. The   reason why we expect an increase in the

payout rate   to increase sales is that the payout    rate   defines the budget for
the prize structure, which if   increased   would allow changes that would make
the   prize structure more attractive to at least some potential players. Put

another way, the success of a game    depends   not just on its payout rate but to

a large extent on how the payout is structured into prizes.26

       This point is illustrated with a case study from Ohio. In Noveither 1987

the Ohio lottery introduced a new instant game, Holiday Cash, with an

unprecedented payout rate of 75 percent, compared with the normal 50 percent.

Holiday Cash sales averaged about $4 million per week during the first month,

which was about double the sales rate for the two previous instant games

introduced by the Ohio lottery. At first glance this appears to be evidence

that sales are highly sensitive to an increase in the payout rate. Subsequent

history casts doubt on that interpretation, however, since the two games

introduced after Holiday Cash enjoyed sales just as high, despite the fact

that   these games offered the traditional 50 percent payout rate. Why did
sales persist at the new level after the payout rate reverted to the old
level? One possible explanation is that Holiday Cash introduced a new, prize
structure along with the high payout rate. The new structure eliminated
prizes above $1,000 and increased     the nuner of smaller prizes. Subsequent

games continued   to emphasize lower—tier prizes. So it      would appear that the

new prize structure found a larger market than the old, even with the payout

rate at the old level.27

       Game design is an inexact science at best, but    lottery agencies have been


                                         23
quite active in experimenting with changes in prize structures for irtan
games and   for    lotto. Ohio provides another interesting example, in this case
a lotto format experiment. Prior to February 1986 Ohio offered a twice—a—week
drawing   for a 6/40 lotto game   that placed only 43 percent of the prize pool
into   the jackpot. That month    the   agency introduced a new 6/44 game, with 70

percent of the prize pool in the jackpot. The t         games ran side by side for
over    a year, with one weekly drawing for each. In April 1987 the old game was

dropped   in   favor of a twice—a—week drawing   of the new game. What   the agency

had    learned from this experiment was    that the new game had   about the   same

sales as the old when there was no rollover, but that the new game had more

rollovers (as one would expect from the format) and as a result generated

higher total sales.

       The prize structure is an important feature of lotto and instant games,

and, unlike in the case of the payout rate, lottery agencies have felt free to

experiment.       Given the diverse motivations for and styles of playing the
lottery    (discussed in Chapter 5), it is    perhaps not surprising that designing
prize    structures that will maximize public appeal remains more a matter of

trial and error than science.


Increasing the Population Base

        For the game of lotto bigger is better.      Small states are unable to

mount a lotto game that attracts much public interest because the jackpots

are inevitably small compared to the multimillion-dollar bonanzas generated

in California and New York. As a result, multistate lottery consortiums

have formed in order to offer a lotto game that, by coirbining the

populations of several small states, rivals the games of the largest states.

The first such consortium was the Tn—State (Maine, New Hampshire, and

Vermont). The second was LottoAmerica, initiated in 1988, including the



                                           24
District of Colu,bia and five widely scattered states with a coriine

population of about 12 million. The states in both of these consortiums have

enjoyed a considerable jump in lotto sales since jol ing together.

Explaining the peculiar economies of scale for lotto requires more than a

sentence    or two.
        Lotto   is a parimutuel game, with the jackpot set equal to a percentage of
the amount      bet (typically   about 25 percent). If there is no jackpot winner in
a   drawing, the money in   that jackpot rolls over into the jackpot for the        next

drawing, as described in Chapter 4. When several players win, the jackpot is

divided among them. The explanation of why           the   population base is important

to lotto sales but not sales of other lottery games hinges on the role of the

jackpot in attracting lotto action.28 An example may help explain how this

works.

        Suppose state A has an adult population of 10 million and state B has

only 100,000. Given equally attractive games, we assume that lotto purchases

in both states will average $1 per capita at each drawing. In state A the

initial jackpot is then worth $2.5 million,         compared with only $25,000 in
state B. If both states set the probability of winning at 1 in 100,000, then

there will be an average of one hundred winners in state A and one winner in

state B, with the average prize per winner the same in both states. Given

these rules, the games in        the two   states do not appear to differ much.    State
A, however, has the option of reducing the probability of winning to, say, 1

in 10 million, in which case there         would be only one winner on the average.
Under    these rules, which state has the more attractive lotto game?

      compared with state B, state A offers one hundred times the jackpot but a

much lower probability of winning — 1 percent of state B's probability. For

reasons discussed in Chapter 5, most players prefer state A's game to state

B's. The prize in state A is the stuff that dreams are made of, and in case


                                              25
anyone is    not paying attention, the   lottery agency   will focus   its advertising
on the magnitude of this jackpot. Yet the         correspondingly   large difference in

probabilities between the two states has little influence on potential

players. The failure of intuition to corrrehend such probabilities1 or the

belief that the chance of winning is influenced by effort and skill, ensure

that probability has less meaning to the average player than to an actuary.
As long as most drawings produce a winner, the prospect of winning will be
equally credible in both states.
    Our statistical analysis of lotto sales data confirms that the number of
sales per capita is driven by the size of the jackpot and is quite insensitive

to the objective probability of winning that jackpot.29 Under
                                                                        these
circumstances, then, a large population        base can generate a more attractive
lotto    game than a small one. Of course      it is these large lotto jackpots that
produce much of    the folklore of the lottery as well.     Fbr a small state that

wishes to be part of the lottery action, joining a lotto consortium is a

sensible move.


The     "Inevitable"   Decline in Interest

        The conventional wisdom regarding lotteries is that after they have

 been   around for a while, the public loses interest.30 Maintaining sales
 requires the introduction of new games or new versions of old games. As           in


 Alice'sexperience through the looking glass, it is necessary for the
 lottery agencies to run very fast just to hold their ground. In the words
 of one observer: "Two considerations motivate the constant search for
 new ways to dress up the lotteries' ancient arithmetic. The first is the hope
 that    a new conbination of price, prize, and gimmick will attract new players.

 The second is the inevitable decay of a consumer product that.is not unlike

 the hula hoop or Ooca Cola, and      closer   to the hula hoop than Coca Cola."31


                                             26
        Is waning interest   inevitable? erta-i1y it is t—ie that new lotteries

in    the mid—l98 experienced a surge of interest when first introduced, which
dissipated quickly. California sold over $120 million in instant game tickets
during its first week of operation but by the end of a year was down to about
$20 million per week. After this honeymoon period is over, however, the
pattern is not one of further decay, as is stgested by the statement just
quoted, but rather of more or less steady growth. The introduction of a new
game, notably      lotto, creates a surge in total sales, but even   in   the absence
of    such innovations it appears that growth is the norm in all three types of

gaines. The sales trends in Figure 6.4 support this conclusion.

       Perhaps the impression of declining interest is created in comparison

with   an expectation of very high growth. Per    capita sales in lottery states

increased    at   an annual rate of 14 percent in real terms between 1975 and 1985.

To sustain this sales trajectory, in which sales double     every    five years or

so,   would require major innovations in product and marketing techniques.
Recent history suggests that in the absence of such innovations, sales will
grow at a moderate rate. Consumers are not going to lose interest in          the
lotteries    anytime soon.



Conclusion

       Lottery managers are very much concerned with increasing their "profits,"

the net revenue that remains after prizes and other costs of doing business

are paid. In most circumstances achieving growth in profits requires

increasing sales. Recent experience indicates two methods that have enjoyed

universal success——adding lotto to the product line and (for smaller states)

joining   a consortium of states to expand the population base for lotto games.
One cannot be so confident about the effects of      changing the prize structure



                                          27
of an existing game or changing the payout rate.
      The state agencies have been remarkably timid about experimenting with
payout rates. Their reluctance to increase payout rates may result from the
fact that this is a costly strategy for increasing sales on a per unit basis.
nd while     it is certainly to be expected that increasing the      payout rate     on a

game from, say, 50 to    60   percent would increase sales, there is no persuasive

evidence that it would stimulate sales enough (more than 30 percent) to

increase net  revenues. Perhaps if the competition siere to increase among
states for cross—border sales, the standard 50 percent payout would no longer
be   tenable.32

      In addition to the modifications in product line, product design, and

payout    discussed here, lottery agencies seek to increase demand through
marketing    and promotion    efforts and by increasing the nunber   of   outlets.

These    mechanisms are described in Chapter 10.
        Finally, the various methods for increasing sales may also influence the
distribution      of sales across different population groups. Introducing or

expanding the game of lotto brings in more middle class players, just as the

nunters game brought in more minority players. The lottery has a vast           and

 varied   market. The contour lines of growth of this market depend in part on

 the detailed choices of the lottery agencies.




                                           28
                                 Figure 6.1
                Concentration in Lottery Wagers,
                    California, March 986         1



      The 10% of the adult population who bet most heavily accounted
                       for 65% of the total wagers



                                             ,/

non—bettors


                                        'I

   light
 bettors

  heavy
 bettors

 Source: Los Angeles Times Poll, March 1986
                                                Figure 6.2


             Lottery Participation Rates, One Week,
                     California, March 1 986
                                                               38%

 gender
               male                                            4°
                            ____________________________________
             female                                         36

                            —                                  j7
              18—29                                             l3
             30—44
                                                                        1ç4.
               65+                               126
flthWQfl                                '                                             1
            Catholic
                            _________________ 54
           Profestant _________________________31
              o'ther                           1 25
         no affiliation                                     p139
education               ______________________________________________149
        less than h.s,                                         I
              h.s.   grad                                               4
           some coileae                                            30
            college grdd                                  30
                                                                                          1   55
             Hispanic
            0th r White _________________________________      3
               ack          ________________________I
               Asian                                      13234


                            0      10      20       30                           50                60

                                                 'erall
                                                               40
                                                          participcitiori rate
 Source: Los Angeles Times Poll, 1986
LA.TTAB 1035.7/18/88.cCO; iuly 18.1988
                                                               fljur    .3
                      Household Weekly Expenditure on Lotteiy
                               California, March 1986

             5.5


                                                                                                            2
               5
arage                                                                                                       1.8     arage
  in                                                                                         in   dollars              as
dollars      4.5
                                                                                                            1.B    percentage
                                                                                                                      of
                                                                                                            -1.4   household
               4                                                                                                    in come

                                                                                                            1.2

             3.5
                                                          4


                                                                                                            0.8
              3                                                              —4

                                                                                   '-        7 of income
                                                                                        'S                  0.6

                                                                                                  1-.
                                                                                                            0.4


                                                26
                                                        household income



          &urce:   L Ml   T1rn. poll, LAJI/rJ I 3C,   ./l 1/   L11/Ei   I I3      7/l8/
                                                      Figure 6.4
             CON N CRC U           I                                                          LLI NOl S
                                                                /00


                                                                600
                                                  p
 200

                                                                500


 0))
                                                                400
                                                                                                                                 -,
                                                                                                                          -.
                                                                300
 0))




                                                                                                    TEAR
                        'TEAR                                                       -



             PEIII'ISYLVAI IA                                                                      OHIO
       700                                                      0ll

   600


   500


                                                            V
       400
                                                          Li'
                                                                 3.)')

L00
                                                                 20•)

       200



       00
                                                                  0')
                                                                                                                          — --
                                                                                                                                      //
                                                                      0                 63                 64
                                                                                                                                           6)
                                                                          II   6?
                                                                                                    •4(J))
                                                                                                      (AR_I     •   LOT
         0 -17OThI--; 87
             Il')INIT      •lIAR       • 1Q11')                                         11014)1)                          II)
                                             Table 6A.1

  Weekly Lottery Expenditures, for Three Lottery Games, by Income

                                    Maryland 1984


                                 Average weekly expenditures:
                              Sample      3—digit     4—digit
Income                              Size        numbers     numbers
Lotto Total

Under $10,000                           85           $3.65          $1.58 $1.88
$7.30

$10,000 under $15,000          104            2.99            .98 1.23      5.37

$15,000 under $25,000          226            1.26            .49 1.22      2.99

$25,000 under $50,000         451             1.61            .40 1.26      3.21

$50,000 and   over             206            1.19            .37     .99   2.57

Don't know, refused                    175           1.44             .50   .86
2.79

TOTAL                        1247            $1.86        $   .55   $1.19 $3.46


Sources: Gallup Poll, November 1984 (see text); U.S. Bureau of the
Census (1986,
      p. 19).

NOTE: Comp3nents do   not    add to totals because those who did not
know amounts were
        excluded, and sample sizes varied.
C54b 7/28/88,    GLTI'STAR   6/30/87,    6035; GLTTAB   6/25/87     3142.

Disk 76
                                                                         Table 6A.2

                                                   Relative Expenditures by Income,     Selected Lottery       Games

                                                                                              Median   household income for       zip code, 1980
                                                                   I              I                             I             I
                                                                                                                I   $15,000 I      $20,000   I   $25,00
                                                                   I   Number     I             I   $10,000
                                                                                      Under     I    under      I    under  I       under    I    and
                                                                   I     of       I
State and                                                              Winners        $10,000   I   $15,000         $20,000   I    $25,000        over
 data                                                              I              I



Maryland                                                                                34             116             150            99           99
Upper—tier   winners,           Number of zip codes
      1/86 to 8/86                Ratio of share of sales
  Lotto    jackpot   winners,      in c1as to share of
      1/84 to 8/86                     households, by game
                                                                         211           1.34            1.01            .92           1.31          .74
                                         4—digit numbers
                                                                          66           1.85            1.48            .90           1.20          .48
                                         Instant
                                                                         581•5a        1.00             .72            .89           1.12         1.20
                                         Lotto


Massachusetts                                                                          28              113             227            135           67
  Lotto jackpot winners,          NuIT*er    of zip codes
   12/82 to 3/86                      Ratio of share of sales
                                        in class to share of
                                        households
                                           All   lotto                   425          .47              .90             1.01          1.24          .89

                                           Lotto when jackpot
                                                                         123          .24              .85              .90           1.60         .71
                                             exceeded $5 million


                                                                                                             code shown   were assuted to reside     in
        aTicket shared with non—resident.          All winners of shared tickets with only one         zip
the   same   zip code.   Otherwise,    shared tickets were prorated among zip codes.


Source:      MASS 4617 8/7/86; MDZIP 3252, 9/2/86
                                       Table 6A.3

                  Average Weekly Expenditures on Lottery Products
                        in the Last Month, Maryland, 1984

Equation                       10.1                10.2               10.3
                        Full Sample               Whites             Blacks

Education
  High school            —    2.79            —   493*                1.36
   graduate only             (1.98)               (1.98)             (5.19)

  Ollege graduate        — 8.34*              1l.24*                  0.62
                             (2.08)               (2.08)             (5.55)

Age
  25—39                       1.70                  .51               5.15
                             (1.68)               (1.70)             (4.39)

  40—54                       3.81*               1.73               11.61*
                             (1.84)               (1.83)             (4.90)

  55—69                       3.59                3.44                3.62
                             (2.10)               (2.02)             (6.67)

 70+                     —    2.43            —   2.25              — 8.61
                             (3.67)               (3.37)            (13.59)

Race
  Black                      10. 20*
                             (1.48)

 Hispanic and
  other nonwhite         — 3.12
                             (4.34)

Income
  Under $10,000               4.50             0.90                  25.02*
                             (2.55)           (2.60)                 (6.94)

 $10,000—15,000               0.89             1.14                  10.02
                             (2.33)           (2.53)                 (5.50)

 $25,000—50,000               0.85             0.48                   5.55
                             (1.67)           (1.60)                 (5.14)

 $50,000 and over        —    1.25             1.05                   4.48
                             (2.02)           (1.92)                 (6.67)

 Refused, don't know — 1.59                  — 2.02                   6.71
                             (2.12)           (2.10)                 (5.86)
Table 6A3 (Continued)


                              10.1                     10.2                  10.3
EquatiOn                                                                    Blacks
                           Full Sample             Whites

Male                              3.14*                2.59*                    745*
                              (1.16)               (1.12)                    (3.46)
                                                                                .128
Percent   urban                    .036                 .020
                                                                                .084)
    in county                 (    .023)           (    .021)               (


                                                  — 0.10                —   23.8*
Intercept                         6.72
                                                   (3.05)                   (10.4)
                              (3.18)




       Likelihood         — 2485.8            —   1797.1               —    619.9
Log


Mean of dependent
    variable                      3.73                 2.71                     8.79

Proportion non—zero                .500                 .455                     .725

N                                 1051                  847                      182

F(z)                               .444                 .420                     .548




Note:      Method of estimation was Tobit. Standard errors are in parenthesis.
 Asterisks (*) denote t—statistics 2.0 or greater in absolute value,. The
 derivative of the expected expenditure with respect to any right—hand
 variable is      equal   to the estimated Tobit coefficient    multiplied by F(z).




 GALLUP 3/27 6870, 6879, 6881.

 7/22/87

 C45
                                        idC oA.4
                     FY 1986 Per    Capita Sales Regressions:
                             Log   Linear Specification


       Independent             Nurrter             Lotto
        variable                   sales           sales

       1. Intercept            —4.50               —18,06
                                   (.2)             (2.9)
       2. Populationa          —0.11                 0.52**
                                   (.5)             (6.8)

       3. incorneb                 1.06              1.94*
                                   (.4)             (2.8)

      4. Blackc                    0.72*            —.14
                                (2.7)               (2.0)

       5. Urbanc               —0.28                 1.04*
                                   (.2)             (2.6)
      6.     Payout rated          3.05              2.55*
                                   (.7)             (2.3)


      N                            15                 16

       R2                           .75               .89

       Root MSE                     .79               .23

       Mean sales               322e                3e
*
     p<.05
**
     p<.Ol
Note: All      variables   are in natural log   form.       Numbers in parentheses

               are t—statistics.

a Estimates of 1985 population from Bureau of Census, Series P—25,

       Nuirber 998, Decenter 1986.

b Per   capita    income for 1985, from Government Finances (GF 85—No.3).
C Percent black and percent urban for 1980 from Statistical Abstract

     of the United States, 1986.

d Payout rates obtained by telephone from state lottery corr*iissions.

e Per capita sales computed using FY 1986 data from Gaming and

     Wagering Business, May 1987, and provisional population

     estimates (note a).




p95 (up)

12/13/88
                                     Table 6A.5

                        Regression Explaining Logarithm of

                          Per   Capita Daily Lotto Sales
Variable                             Coefficient             t—statigtic

Logarithm of:

     probability                         —0.01                   0.3

     jackpot                              0.40                  40.3

     proportion of prize                  0.38                   4.6

       pool     in lower prizes
     payout                               1.35                   1.6
Drawings per week                         0.20                   3.8
Time trend                               — .00093                3.9

State dummy variable (Ohio omitted)

     Arizona                              0.13                   2.3

     District    of ODlumbia             —0.08                   0.5
     Delaware                            —0.14                   1.5
     Maryland                             0.15                   2.3
     Missouri                            —1.01                   8.3
     New York                           —0.12                    1.3
     west Virginia                      —0.96                    6.8

Intercept                               —6.8                     6.4

Note: Regression weighted by the square root of state population.
                = .92

            N   = 1029

L0T0NEW 2325, 8/29/88, p. 8
                            C93 (wp), August 30, 1988
                                          FcxTNcYrES




*
    Selling   Hope:   State   Lotteries in Anierica, National Bureau of Economic

Research Monograph (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, forthcoming).

        'This is also referred to as Pareto's law or the "80/20 rule." See

Handbook of Modern Marketing, ed. Victor P. Buell, 2d ed. (New York:

McGraw—Hill), 1986, pp. 8—10, and Macmillan Dictionary of Marketing and

Advertising, ed. Michael S. Baker (New York: Nichols Publishing Company,

1984), p. 150.

        2Calculations    based on Oliver Quayle and Co., Appendix, in Fund for the

City of New York, Legal Gaithling in New York (New York: for the Fund, 1972),

p. 19, indicate that the top 10.5 percent of players in the illegal game made

47.8 percent     of the bets, quite similar to the 48 percent of bets made by the

top   10 percent of players in Maryland. The top 20 percent bet about 67
percent in the illegal game, compared to about 63 percent in          Maryland.

        3National     Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, Sixth Special

Report to the U.S. Congress on Alcohol and Health, Washington, D.C., January

1987,    p. 3.
        4John Koza, "Who Is Playing What: A Demographic Study," pt. 2,
Public Gaming 12 (March 1984): 72. Likewise, Maryland's advertising agency
cites evidence that the great bulk of lottery purchases are made by "regular,
loyal, repeat customers," and concludes that it would be incorrect to base a
marketing strategy on stimulating impulse sales. Trahan, Burden,           and Charles,

Inc.,Advertising and Marketing the Maryland State Lottery, Senate
Governmental Affairs Committee, Subcommittee on Intergovernmental Relations,
September 1984.
       5The data sets referred to in this section are: American Institute of

Public    Opinion, national survey of gambling, conducted in 1944, suTniarized in
Edward C. Devereux, Jr., Gambling arid the Social           Structure   (Ph.D.

dissertation,     Harvard   University, 1949; New   York:   Arno,   1980),   Appendix D;
University of Michigan Survey Research Center, Gambling in the United
                                                                 States

(ICPSR 7495), unpublished data from national survey, conducted Sumner 1975;

Gallup    Organization, Inc., Gallup Study GO 84190, unpublished data from survey
conducted November, 1984; Arizona State Univer—sity, Survey Research Lab,
Arizona   Survey P1922, unpublished data from survey conducted Fall 1985/Winter

1986; The Field Institute, The California Poll 8504, unpublished data from

survey conducted November—December 1985; Los Angeles           Times, Los Angeles Times
Poll No. 103, unpublished data from      survey   conducted March 1986; The Field
Institute, The California Poll 8602, unpublished data from survey conducted
May 1986.
       6calculations are based on Gallup Study GO 84190, unpublished data from

survey conducted November, 1984.

       7For   descriptions of the role of numbers and policy, see, for example,

St.   Clair Drake and   Horace R. Cayton, Black Metropolis:         A Study of Negro
Life in   a Northern City (New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1945; 1970);

Illinois      House of Representatives, Policy Numbers Game Study mmittee,
"Report   and Recomendations to the Legislature," June 1975 (Photocopied); and

Fund for the City of New York, Legal Gambling in New York. 1972). withesses

testifying on the possible legalization of policy in Chicago agreed about its

prevalence in black neighborhoods, some expressing the hope that a legalized

and locally administered game would      continue   to provide employment for blacks.

One witness stated: "Policy is an evil in the Black community which we might

compare with rrosquitoes and flies. None of us like them particularly, but we

know they are there to stay and we must live with them". (Illinois Study
Coinittee, p. 31). Another gave the       positive   side:   "Policy   offers a posi:ive

expectation that one could be lifted out of the most sordid entrapTents of

life in the ghetto". (p. 17).

     8Calculations are based     on   Arizona State University, Survey Research Lab,

unpublished   data from survey conducted Fall 1985/Winter 1986.
     9Data from household surveys were requested from the Massachusetts and
Illinois lottery agencies, but neither consented to allow them to be used
for this study.
     10Calculations     are based on   Gallup survey, 1984 (see Note 5) and are
corrected for the   9   percent of the population (all non players) who were
excluded from the survey.
     11Koza, "Who Is Playing What." For each game regular players were
defined so as to account for 80 to 90 percent of all expenditures. Indices of
participation were then calculated as the ratio of regular players in a group
as a percentage of all regular players to adults in the group as a percentage
of all adults. Data were taken         from a household survey in New Jersey.      Index

values for blacks and     Hispanics were 199 for four—digit numbers, 197 for
three—digit numbers, 131 for lotto, and 105 for instant games.
     12Oliver Quayle and Co., Appendix, p. 9, reports that 20
percent of whites and 40 percent of blacks and Puerto Ricans played the
numbers.
     13For example, Roger E. Brinner and Charles T. Clotfelter, "Art Economic
Appraisal of State Lotteries," National Tax Journal 28 (December 1975),
400, presents data on expenditures by income based on surveys of three states.
 For none of the states is there a pattern of absolute expenditures with

 income. Likewise, Daniel Suits, "Gambling Taxes: Regressivity and Revenue

 Potential," National Tax    Journal 30 (1977), 23,    tabulates average lottery
expenditures by income based            on the national study of gambling i.n 197 The

average     bet   rises    from $7.48   in the under—$5,000 income class to almost $17

between $5,000       anc    $14,999, and then falls again to about $8.72 in the
$30, 000—and—above         class.

         14Hjll, Holliday, Connors, Conopulos, Inc. Quantitative Research

Findings: The Massachusetts State Lottery Game, Wave II. Report prepared for

the Massachusetts State Lottery (Boston: March 1986).

                  Koza. NWho Is Playing What: A       Demographic Study," Public Gaming
12 (Part I: March 1984, 12; Part II: April 1984, 37).

              example, in fiscal 1986 most of the interstate differences in per

capita nunbers sales could be explained by the percentage of blacks in the

population. The correlation between the logarithms of these t variables

(per capita       sales    and percent black), is .87 for the sixteen numbers games

operating that year.

         17The states are Arizona, Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Maine,

Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Hampshire, New Jersey, Ohio,

Pennsylvania,      and    Vermont.

         18The data are for the period from July 18, 1984, to March 8, 1986. Each

of   the 170 observations consists of the sum of three days' numbers sales, in

thousands of dollars (NtJM), corresponding in each case to the three—day period

between lotto drawings. The regression ecuation included a time trend (T), a

dumy variable for the second half of the week (SAT), and a variable giVing

the amount of rollover included in the lotto jackpot (R), equal to zero if

there was a winner in the previous drawing, otherwise the amount advertised as

the official jackpot for the preceding drawing, measured in thousands of

dollars. The estimated equation (with standard errors in parentheses) was:

N(JM =    2797 (21) — 0.0018 (.0038) R + 332 (18) SAT + 4.34 (0.19) T, R—squared =

0.84, mean of dependent variable $3,331 (thousand). The coefficient on the
rollover variable was      equal   to just one   quarter   of its standard error. If

taken literally, the point     estimate   implies that      a   $1,000   increase   in rollover

reduces   nuitters sales by less than a penny.
        19Calculations are based on Los Angeles Times Poll, 1986 (see te 5).
     20 is not plausible that the reinvestment pattern would by itself
increase net revenue. Even if all the additional prize money were

reinvested following an increase In the payout             rate,   the   states'   net revenue
would fall somewhat because a percentage of the additional sales would go to
retailers    as commissions. Of course, where there are other mechanisms by

which    the payout rate influences sales, then      sales may increase enough to

increase net revenue.
     21A series of cross section regressions of m.mthers sales was run                  to

estimate the effect of payout rate. rising fiscal 1986 data for the fifteen
states that were offering a nuithers game at that time, we found that the
coefficient estimate on the payout rate in no case exceeded its standard
error. A total of seven (log linear) specifications were tried, using
various corrbinations of the following set of variables: percent black,
 population,      per capita income, and percent urban. The only variable that was

 statistically different from zero by normal standards was percent black. Its

 coefficient implied an elasticity of about .7. This result is given in Table

 P.4.

         22 Table A.4.
                        a nu±er of attempts to estimate the payout elasticity
         23There have been

 of demand using regression analysis of state sales data for all games
 corbined. Unsurprisingly they reach contradictory conclusions on this issue
 and    others.    For example, Larry IDeBoer, "Lottery Taxes May Be O High,"
 Journal of Policy Analysis and       Management    5 (Spring 1986), 594—596, reports
a strong positive effect from the payout ratc, while Jon David Vasche, "Are

Taxes on Lotteries Too High?" Journal of Policy Analysis and Manaqernerit 4

(Winter    1985), 269—271, reports a negative effect. These and other authors
choose    differing sets of control variables, arid there is no a priori method of

choosing which are nest appropriate. See John L. Mikesell, "The Effect of

Maturity and competition in State Lottery Markets," Journal of Policy Analysis

and Management 6 (Winter 1987); Jerome F Heavey, October 1978, "The Incidence

of State Lottery Taxes," Public Finance Quarterly 6 (October 1978), 415—426;

and Roger E. Brinner and Charles T. Clotfelter, "An Economical Appraisal of

State Lotteries," National Tax Journal 28 (December           1975), for additional
regression analyses     of interstate sales patterns.
       If the different types of lottery games         have independent markets, as we
have argued, then    the preferred     econometric    strategy is to estimate separate

regressions for sales of each game rather than a single equation on total

sales. This is what we have done for numbers and             lotto   in Table A.4. This

disaggregated approach provides the basis for estimating the distinct patterns

associated with each game, rather than averaging them together. Most

important, separate equations avoid the problem that an overall payout rate is

a sort of price average with different weights in each state and is hence

endogenous to the pattern of sales.

            a payout rate   of   50 percent and a marginal cost of administration of

6 percent, the elasticity of sales with respect to the payout            rate ould    need

to   be 1.14. To see   this algebraically, let net revenue be N = S(p) — p3           —



C(s), where s is sales, p    is the payout rate, and C is the cost of

administration (including coniiissions). The effect of the payout rate on

sales is given by N'(S) =        S'(p) —   S —   pS'(p) — c'(s) S'(p), where primes
denote partial derivatives. This will be positive if the elasticity of sales

                                                                                 —
with respect to the payout rate (S'(p) (p/S) is greater than p/(1 — p
c'(S)). If the   payout rate is 50 percent (.5) and the marginal cost is 6

percent,
         the elasticity must exceed 1.14.
     25For example, consider a lottery with sales of $100, fixed costs of

$5, a payout rate    of 50 perCent, and commissions      and additional administrative

costs amounting to six cents per dollar. After s.btracting prizes of $50 and

operating costs of $11, net revenue would be $39. Ould the lottery increase

its revenues by increasing its payout rate        to 60 percent? It could if sales
rose at least 30 percent, to $130. Then deducting prizes of $78 (60 percent
of $130), the fixed cost of $5, and other costs of $7.80, net revenues would be

$39. 20.

             Z. Pdar    and N. M. Edelson,   "Gambling   8ehavior and Lottery Prize
Structures," Discussion Paper 72, Fels Center of Government, University of
Pennsylvania, May 1975. See also       Chapter 4.

              account   of the history of Holiday Cash was     provided   by Anne
Bloorberg, public information manager for the Ohio state lottery, in a
telephone call in September 1987. The lottery also provided weekly sales
data for Holiday Cash and other gaines played just before and after Holiday
Cash.
                of regressions (log linear form) were run on fiscal year
        28A number

 1986 lotto sales data for the sixteen states that operated lotto games at that
 time. The specifications included different subsets of the following
 variables: income per capita, percent black, percent urban, and payout rate.
 The state population was included in every specification, and was highly
 statistically significant in each case. The point estimate implies that a
 10 percent increase in population causes a 5 percent increase in sales per
 capita.    The results for one specification are given in Table A.4.
       29A pooled sample of sales by          drawing period   was compiled by eight
sta'es' lotto games       for    calendar years   1986 and 1987.     An equation was

estimated explaining the logarithm of average daily per capita                    sales.

Independent variables included state dtrnies, a time               trend,   and   the
logarithms of the       probability    of any ticket's winning the grand prize, the

advertised     jackpot, the proportion of the prize pool         devoted    to prizes below

the   grand   prize,   and the    payout   rate. The estimated elasticities of these

last variables (with t—statistics in parentheses) were: —0.01                 (0.3), 0.40
(40.3),   0.38 (4.6) and 1.35 (1.6), respectively. Table A.5 gives the full

regression.

       30For   example, Elder Witt,        "States Place Their Bets On a Game of

Diminishing     Returns," Governing 1 (November 1987), 52: "Bettors want new
games or they quit."
       31Chris Wood, "Odds Makers: The Very Profitable Gamble of Canada's Four
Public Lottery Corporations," Canadian Business 57             (April   1984), 25.
       320ne impediment to this sort of competition is the federal prohibition
on using the mail to ship lottery materials. As of 1988 that restriction was
being circumvented through the use of other shippers, telephone orders, and
illegal couriers. But these methods are somewhat costly and inconvenient to
players. If federal restrictions were eliminated, a true national market in
lottery tickets would emetge, with profound effects on game design and sales
patterns.
