NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE COMPETITIVE EXTERNALITIES AND THE
OPTIMAL SEIGNIORACE

Joshua

Aizenman

Working Paper No. 2937

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1989

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper was written
while the author was at the Institute for Advanced Studies at the Hebrew
University, attending the program on International Economics and Market
structure, organized by Elhanan Helpman. The author wishes to thank Jacob A.
Frenkel, Leonardo Leiderman and Nissan Liviatan for useful discussions that
motivated this paper. Any errors, however, are mine.

NBER Working Paper #2937
April 1989

COMPETITIVE EXTERNALITIES AND THE
OPTIMAL SEICNIORAGE

ABSTRACT

The purpose of this study is to analyze the behavior of the inflation tax in an economy
where, due to coordination failure, the inflation rate is not determined by a unique

policy maker but by several competing decision makers. Each decision maker can
effectively print more paper money via the central bank, which operates only as the
printing agency of nominal balances. This market structure generates a competitive
externality. A key result is that the optimal' inflation rate depends positively on the
competitive externality. We provide two examples of scenarios where these externalities

are relevant. First, the case in which the central bank is a powerless agent whose only
responsibility is to print money upon demand by the ministers. The second example is a

common currency area, where several countries operate in a monetary union.
Alternatively, this may be the case of a country composed of several states or
provinces, where the centralized government system is weak and local governments
can use seigniorage to their advantage. The effect of competitive externalities is to
increase the inflation rate, to an extent that puts the economy on the wrong side of the
inflation tax Laffer curve.
Joshua

Aizeninan

Economics Department
The Hebrew University
Jerusalem, 91905, Israel

-11. INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY

The inflation tax approach originated in Friedman (1969). It considers the case of a
central bank with monopoly power in supplying nominal money balances, which may
use this power to tax money holders by inflation. This approach generated a number of
influential results. First, in the absence of fiscal revenue motives, welfare maximization

requires following optimal deflation, so as to minimize the costs of using money
balances.1 Second, allowing for fiscal revenue motives requires an inflation rate that is

derived as part of the public finance problem, determining the vector of optimal taxes
(see Phelps (1973)).

The above results were derived for the case of a centralized decision maker,
assuming away coordination problems. This assumption may be questionable in certain
interesting economic situations. For example, if both the central bank and the treasury

are weak, one could envision a situation in which various ministers may compete for
seigniorage. Alternatively, a common currency area composed of several countries may

generate a similar situation. The purpose of this study is to analyze the behavior of the

inflation tax in an economy where, due to coordination failure, the assumption of a
centralized decision maker determining the optimal inflation rate does not hold. This
will allow us to examine how the implicit market structure influences the predictions of

the traditional inflation tax argument. Specifically, we replace the monopolist decision
maker (like the central bank) with several competing decision makers.
For simplicity we assume that the inflation tax is determined by decisions makers

who are organized in a monopolistic competitive' structure. Each decision maker can

effectively print more paper money via the central bank, which operates only as the
printing agency of nominal balances. The decision makers thus compete among

1.

See Friedman (1969). Further research on optimal inflation can by found in,

for example, Phelps (1973), Frenkel (1976), Helpman and Sadka (1979), ..Jovanovic
(1982), Fischer (1982) and Kimbrough (1986).

-2themselves for the inflation tax revenues. We start by assuming that their number is
large enough for each ones marginal printing decision not to affecting that of the other
decision makers. Latter we extend our analysis to the conjecture variations equilibrium.
We show that the monopolistic competitive' market structure generates a competitive

externality in which each decision maker overlooks the externalities he himself
introduced.2 Our analysis focuses on the role of these externalities in explaining the
inflation tax. A key result is that the 'optimal inflation rate depends positively on the

competitive externality. This externality may generate an inflation rate that put the
economy on the wrong side of the Laffer curve.

Two examples are given of economic scenarios where these externalities are
relevant. First, we consider the case of the central bank being a powerless agent whose

only responsibility is to print money upon demand by the ministers. If the ministers

have equal power and can not collude into a binding cartel, the economy s
characterized by the above competitive externality. We show that if each minister aims

at maximizing his inflation tax revenue, the Nash equilibrium will yield an inflation
that puts the economy on the wrong side of the inflation tax Laffer curve. The second

example considers an environment where the ministers are replaced with small
countries that operate as part of a common currency area, as may be the case in
Europe in the future.3 Alternatively, this may be the case of a country composed of
several states or provinces, where the centralized government system is weak and the
local governments can use seigniorage to their advantage (as may be the case in Brazil

2.

These externalities are similar to those identified in the literature on

international coordination (see Hamada (1976)).
3.

A recent study of monetary policy in a common currency union (Casella

arid Feiristein (1988)) analyze the way monetary arrangement influences the optimum
financing of a public good, in a two country world. A pioneering study of this topic is
Mundell (1961).

-3and

Argentina). We derive the optimal inflation rate for each country in a Nash

equilibrium, where each country can print more money. We show that in the absence
of a cartel agreement on the division of seigniorage, the optima1 inflation rate for each

country will exceed the optimal inflation rate obtained in a cooperative solution, and
may put the economy on the wrong side of the inflation tax Laffer curve. In both

examples the same externality operates: each minister (or country) is aware that
marginal printing of money for his own benefit will increase inflation and thereby erode

the base of the inflation tax (and reduce welfare), but he overlooks the adverse welfare
consequences of inflation on all other ministers (or countries).

The above results can solve a puzzle recently observed in the context of the
inflation tax. The public finance approach to inflation tax generated predictions that
cast doubt on the validity of the inflation tax argument as an explanation for inflation.
Specifically, maximizing inflation tax revenues is similar to maximizing the revenue of

a monopoly whose marginal costs of production are nil, yielding an equilibrium at an
inflation rate that yields a version of the unitary elasticity rule. While such inflation

exceeds the socially optimal rate, it sets an upper limit to the inflation rate supported

by the inflation tax argument. Recently, however, several studies detected inflation
rates that seem to exceed those that maximize the revenue from inflation tax,4 putting
the economy on the wrong side of the inflation tax Laffer curve. One explanation for
this phenomenon is the possibility of multiple equilibria, where the same inflation tax
can be raised by either a low or a high inflation rate (see Liviatan (1984) and Bruno

4.

See Cukierman (1987), Bruno (1988), Edwards and Tabellirii (1988), Kigue]

and Liviatan (1988)). For other relevant empirical studies see Fischer (1982) and
Eckstein and Leidermari (1988). Note that an alternative explanation for the above
observations may refer to time-inconsistent behavior of the type analyzed in Calvo
(1978).

-4and Fischer (1984)). This approach explains the high inflation equilibrium by focusing
on parameters like the speed of adjustment and learning. It has problems, however, in
explaining the economic process that may lead the policy maker to such an inefficient

equilibrium. Our analysis explains the process that leads decision makers to the
inefficient equilibrium, without relying on multiple equilibria. We demonstrate that the

competitive externality identified in our analysis may put the economy on the wrong
side of the Latter curve due to the lack of coordination among the decision makers. This
may occur even if the conditions needed to generate multiple equilibria are not met. By

focusing on the decision making process and lack of coordination we suggest that a
reform fails to address the underlying coordination problem will not work, thereby
shifting the emphasis to the political structure of the economy.
Section 2 describes the derivation of the revenue maximizing inflation tax for the
case of competing ministers; Section 3 considers the case of the optimal inflation tax in
a common currency area, where various states compete for seigniorage. Section 4 closes

with concluding remarks. The Appendix derives several of the equations used in the
paper.
2.

COMPETITION AMONG MINISTERS

Consider an economy with zero growth and two assets: money and real bonds. For
simplicity of exposition, let us assume that there is perfect foresight arid no uncertainty.
Real output (Y) is constant, equal to 1. The Appendix provides a detailed example of the

maximization problem and the budget constraints that yield the following demand
structure. The demand for real money balances is given by:
(1)

5.

mt

For a related study see Obstfeld (1984).

-5where i4

p+i-pt
is

Pt

the expected inflation rate, Pt the price level at time t, and

is the price level expected in period t+1. Henceforth we will identify

e

with Pt+i. We

assume a very simple fiscal structure: the only tax is seigniorage. Let us denote by Gt
total nominal revenue from seigniorage at time t:
Gt = Mt - Mt_i.

(2)

There are n ministers, with symmetric power. Each of them can print money Gt
such that
n
(3)

Gt

IGt;j.

j1

Each

minister prints money so as to maximize his revenue, taking the printing of other
ministers as given. Thus, the condition determining the level of printing by minister h is
given by

=0.

(4)

our attention on the properties of a symmetric equilibrium, where Gt.h
- Gt/n. To simplify, we henceforth suppress the time index, Direct derivation of Gh/P
We

focus

yields

(Gh/P)
EGh

1

1 G cP

-6The direct effect of a marginal dollar printed by minister h is to increase his revenue by

• The indirect effect is to tax his total revenue C

i

effect,

Note that

)

-

at a rate of the induced price

ap

the total tax revenue is gwen by6
it

G

(6)

Taking derivatives of the two sides of (6) yields
1

(7)

- GP

1-e(1+rt) it

=m

(1+tr)2 G'

is the elasticity of demand for money with respect to inflation, defined to be
it am
positive (c = ). From (6) we get that in the steady state equilibrium
where

G

(8)

it

Applying (8) we get that at an increase in nominal seigniorage (i.e.,
affect inflation by7

G Mt-Mti

Mt M1 nt-i

Pt

(G/M)

M), will

This follows from the fact that in a steady state equilibrium

6.

7.

G=

—-m(1-

Note that
1

M(1+rt) ; and

a(it/(1+it))

=

it

___
1

(1+)2

it

mj.
Equating the two results we get (9).

-7an

1+ir

.

(9)

Substituting

(9) in (7),

solving for

G

a

- , and applying the solution to (5)

yields

a key

equation:

c)(Gh/P)

(10)

1

aGh

n-i

1

it

-c+———(c+j--——)),

from which we obtain that the revenue-maximizing inflation rate for the
noncooperative, competitive equilibrium (denoted by ) is given by the following
elasticity condition
(11)

n—i + €c

where

We denote by c the elasticity that yields the cooperative solution, where a
unique policy maker maximizes the revenue (n1). He will set inflation at a rate that
8
will put the economy at the peak of the inflation tax Laffer curve, where = c At
that rate a marginal increase in printing money will generate a direct revenue effect
that is fully offset by the indirect tax revenue of higher inflation. In terms of (5), for
n=1 at the revenue-maximizing inflation rate, the indirect tax effect of the higher
inflation rate equals unity (i.e., 1

GP

--). Suppose now that we operate at such an

inflation rate, with competing minsters. For each of them the tax effect of higher
inflation is only 1/n of the total effect, as can seen from (5). Thus, at the cooperative

8.

It can be shown that this rule is equivalent in continuous time to the

unitary elasticity rule.

equilibrium ( th

each

minister has the incentive to print more.9 This printing

will move us to a non-cooperative equilibrium, with a higher inflation rate, arid will
place the economy on the elastic part of demand for money (see
Suppose now that we allow for limited strategic interaction among the various
minsters, by assuming a conjecture variation equilibrium, where each minister reacts
according the the following rule:

(12)

='r forih.

In a symmetric equilibrium we now get:

(13)

c(Gh/P)
aGh

1+(n-1)'r G P

1

n

Following the same steps as in the previous discussion we get that:

(10)

(Gh/P)

1
1

£-

+

(1-"r)(n-l)

(

+

it

and the revenue-maximizing inflation rate is given by the condition:

1
- iT

a(GhIP)
ôGh

1 n-i

9.

In terms of (10), at £

10.

To gain further insight it is constructive to consider an example in which

the demand for money has the Cagan form, m Y exp (a -

b it). Direct calculation

n1b+V(b+1n)2+4bn
reveals that the revenue-maximizing inflation is given by it 2b
As the decision process becomes more diffuse (higher n), we observe higher inflation
rates, moving to the elastic portion of the demand f or money.

-9(14)

Note that

(1 -

'

n-i
1+(n—1)'r

+

as long as we get a partial response ('r ' 1) all our previous results continue to

hold, where the competitive externality is proportional to 1 -

.

3. COMPETITION AMONG COUNTRIES IN A COMMON CURRENCY AREA

We can apply our previous analysis to the case where the coordination problem arises
in a common currency area composed by several countries, each having the capacity to

print money, directly or indirectly. We will solve this problem for the case where the
relevant criterion for each decision maker is to raise a given revenue in a way that will

minimize the welfare loss of taxes. Specifically, suppose that there are two taxes:
seigniorage and income (or endowment) tax (denoted by p). The income tax is associated
with net collection costs (i,) . Thus, each dollar paid by a consumer yields only 1 -

to

12

the fiscal authorities. We preserve the assumptions of the previous part, and for

ii.

This also suggests that one way of overcoming the competitive externality is

by devising a system with a complete response (i.e., where

aG,

1

for i

h).

Note that such a system will not solve the coordination problems in the presence of
incomplete information on the true printing of each minister.
12.
Alternatively, to collect one dollar the authorities must spend ,/(i-.) on
enforcing the law. Consequently, the private sector pays i/(1-,) for each dollar of net
taxes. Throughout the analysis we assume a constant collection costs. We allow for
collection costs because this issue plays a key role in explaining the use of inflation tax.

As was shown by Kimbrough (1986), the optimal inflation tax is zero. According to
Aizenman (1987) and Vega (1988), the inflation tax is positive if one allows for collection

- 10 simplicity assume a neutral rate of time preference (in terms of the Appendix, we
0). For exposition simplicity we assume a symmetric environment,
assume that

where all the members of the currency area are similar in size and in the underlying
economic structure.13 The periodic utility of the representative consumer in country h
is given by
(15)

u[C] + vjmh)

where u and v stand for the utility from consumption and money balances, and m are
the real balances. The Appendix demonstrates that
(16)

C Y(1 - p) -

m

The periodic consumption equals the output net of income tax and net of seigniorage;

which is given by the resources spent on preserving the real balances at their steady
state level. The Appendix demonstrates that the first order condition determining
optimal money balances is given by14
(17)

ju.v.

costs. For a study on collection costs, political instability and seigniorage see Cukierman
and Tabelhni (1989).
13.

For an analysis of seigniorage in Europe that focuses on the differences

among countries see Grilli (1988).
14.

See equation (A6), applied for the case where

0.

- 11 We

denote by mh(Tt) the demand for real money balances derived form the above first

order condition.

The revenue of the fiscal authorities of country h is given by

(18)

The global money market equilibrium condition is

" j• Imj()
j1

(19)

j:1

that is, the aggregate printing of real balances (the left hand side) should match the
aggregate loss in real balances due to inflation.

Alternatively,
(19)

—

where M

n

i-i

—

and G =

n

IGi.

j-1

In the Appendix we solve the problem of optimal taxes for the case where the
welfare loss associated with the various taxes is given by a quadratic loss function. Here

we take the direct approach. The problem facing the authorities in country h is to raise
a given real revenue target, denoted by , in a way that will maximize the welfare of

the, representative consumer in country h. Applying (15), (16) and (18), this is
equivalent to choosing Gh so as to maximize

-12-

uEY +

(20)

m]

-

subject to the global money market clearing conditions, as given by (19). Direct
derivation of (20) yields the following first order condition:
1

(21)

a(Gh/P)

15

m ait

h (j+1)2 G

l-E,

Equation (21) has a simple interpretation: the condition for optimal seigniorage is that
extra printing will save as much income tax payment (the left hand side) as equals the
induced capital loss on the domestic holder of money (the right hand side).

Taking derivatives of the two sides of (19) yields that in a symmetric equilibrium the
following condition holds

GP
[1--')-nm
ra'
r
1

(22)

1-t(1+it) art
(1+it)2

where m stands for the real balances in each country.

Applying (19) we get that at in a symmetric equilibrium an increase in nominal
M)

seigniorage (i.e.,

j+it

ait

G nmP

(23)

Note that

will affect inflation by:

a(Gh/P)

1

[1 -

1

Applying this result, (21), (22). and (23), we get

that the condition determining optimal inflation in the non-cooperative solution is

15.

In deriving (21) we make use the fact that the consumer optimizes his

money balances, and thus (17) holds.

— 13

-

(24)

or, alternatively

m

(25)

Note that n the absence of collection costs ( 0), the cooperative solution (n -

1)

yields zero as the optimal inflation rate, in line with the standard result. With positive
collections costs we get that the optimal inflation rate is positive, depending positively

on the collection costs (formally, the cooperative solution yields

=

Alternatively, if we operate in a non-centralized system with competing decision

makers (n >

1),

we get positive inflation even in the absence of collection costs. This

occurs because each country at the margin can export part of the inflation tax
abroad.16 If the competitive feature is powerful enough we may end on the backward
portion of the Laffer curve, where
c.

Similar to the analysis in Section 3, allowing for a conjecture variation
- r for i h will yield
equilibrium where
(26)

-=

(1

- r)

n-i
1+(n—1)'r

+

1+it

Consequently, we conclude that the competitive externabty is proportional to 1 which measures the degree to which there is coordination failure.

16.

The possibility of exporting the U.S. inflation tax due to elements of currency

substitution and the presence of tradable nominal assets is the topic of Tabellini (1988).

- 14 4.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

Our paper analyzed the determination of seigniorage when several decision makers
determine the seigniorage and the resulting inflation. We focused on the monopolistic
competitive equilibrium, and extended the discussion to the conjecture variation

equilibrium. Our analysis did n1 attempt to model the political factors underlying a
non-cooperative solution that prevent reaching a more efficient cooperative solution.
Taking these factors as given, we focused on the consequences of the interaction among

the various policy makers. We identify the presence of a competitive externality. The
problem here is similar to the case of a fragile cartel, where each agent ignores the

adverse consequences of his cheating on other cartel members. As in the cartel
example, the welfare consequences are clear: it is advantageous to delegate, if possible,
the printing power to one agent, who will generate the cooperative optimal solution and

then distribute the revenue. In the case of the ministers, this will occur if there is
either a powerful finance minister or a powerful central banker. In the case of the
various countries, it will be useful to delegate the power regarding monetary policy to

the central bank, or to one dominant country, subject to the appropriate revenue
sharing rule.

Our analysis refers to the case where there is no uncertainty. Under this
assumption one can solve the problems generated by the competitive externality by a
sharing rule, where each marginal printing of an atomistic decision maker will trigger

equal printing by all other decision maker. The conseqi.ience of such a rule is to
internalize the competitive externality, but its practical application is limited by the
availability of full information on the printing of each agent and costless monitoring. A

useful extension of our analysis may consider the case where monitoring is costly and
partial, increasing the importance of competitive externalities.

- 15 APPENDIX

The purpose of the Appendix is to provide a detailed description of the economy,
yielding the demand structure applied throughout the paper.
A. The Consumer

We consider consumers whose preferences are given by

(Al)

u(Ct) +

v()] 1(1 +

where u s the sub-utility from consumption, and v is the sub-utility from money. The

periodic budget constraints for t 0 are given by
PtCt + PtBt + Mt

(A2)

Pt Y(l — p)

+

Pt_iBt_i(l

+

)

+

Mt_i

where p stands for an income tax, and we assume the existence of a real, one-period
bond, yielding an interest rate . To simplify, we assume that both output Y and the
real interest rate are time invariant, and that B0 0. We can combine the above
periodic budget constraints into a unif led intertemporal budget constraint:

tlI ECt+1/(l+B)t tlI [Y(1_p)]/(l+B)t

(A3)

- Mt_i. The consumer problem is to choose the vector of consumption
((Ci) and {Mt)) and money balances that maximizes (Al) subject to (A3). The first order

where Mt -

Mt

conditions are:

(A4)

Ct

A

- 16 -

(A5)

where

X

is

v(mt) - (1+)(1+rt)-1
amt
multiplier associated with the budget constraint. Note that our assumptions

imply that the solution of (A4) and (A5) are time invariant. The simultaneous solution
of (A4) and (A5) yields the steady state values of C and m. Taking the ratios of the two
first order condiUons we get:

(A6)

av(m)
am

=

u(C) (1+B)(1+it)-1
ac
(1+)(1+ir)

Note that from the budget constraint we get that
(A7)

C+

m

Y(1 - p).

Solving (A6) and (A7) simultaneously yields the functional solution for m:
(A8)

m

B. Optimal taxes with a quadratic loss function.

Our discussion in Section 3 was implemented in terms of the utility of the
representative agent. We here describe the derivation of the optimal seigniorage for the
case where the welfare loss associated with the various taxes is given by a loss function.

Suppose that the that the loss associated with the taxes is the net present value of the
periodic loss, given by
(A9)

L - Cp2 +

- 17 where

p is the income tax and C and C, are constants, measuring the size of the

welfare triangles measuring the welfare losses due to the presence of distorted taxes'7

The aggregate demand for real balances, rn, is given by
(AlO)

m n k(Tr)Y

where n is the number of the countries in the common currency area, k(rr)
summarizes the functional dependency of the demand for money balances on inflation,

and Y is the fixed GNP in each country. For exposition simplicity we assume a
symmetric environment, where all the members of the currency area are similar in
size and in the underlying economic structure , yielding equal C's
The problem facing the policy maker h is to raise a given real revenue target, ,
so as to minimize the loss from taxes. Formally, E is given by

(All)

Gh

pY +--

where Gh is the seigniorage and P is the general price level,

The problem facing the policy maker is to choose (p. Gh) such as to minimize the

welfare loss, L, subject to the given revenue target, E. Applying the (A9). (All) we can
summarize this problem as choosing Gb so as to minimize

This welfare loss can be derived as a second order approximation of the
welfare losses around the undistorted equilibrium. It is a useful approximation as long
as the various taxes are small. The size of the various C's are determined by the
various elasticities and by the presence of collection costs associated with the various
17.

taxes.

-

CR -

(Ai2)

18

-

2

2

• F/Y is the GNP share of the revenue target. Direct derivation of (A12)

where
yields:

(A13)

CpER

a(G/P)
an
- Gb a(Gh/P) C
a
(G/P)
a
Gh
a Gh

In deriving (A13) we make use of the fact that the inflation rate is determined in the
steady state equilibrium by the global seigniorage, denoted by G/P. Applying the fact

that G/P

ii

we get that in the symmetric equilibrium

(G/P)
(A14)

- it k(tt) I

C1

it ii(i-(1+n)€)
a(Gh/P)
a Gh

Applying the logic of Section 2 (equation (5)) we get a key equation determining
the condition for the optimal non-cooperative inflation rate:

GP

(A15) C - it k(n)]

=

it _________

l••

Equation (AlS) can be interpreted as follows: a marginal increase in revenue collected as

seigniorage by country h will generate two effects: a marginal benefit due to the
reduction in the tax rate, p, needed to collect the given revenue target and a marginal
cost due to the induced higher inflation rate. The first effect (the marginal benefit) is

— 1.9 -

given by the left hand side of (A15), the second effect (the marginal cost) is given by the

right hand side of (A15).

The presence of the competitive externality is reflected in the fact that each
country view the effective inflation tax base as the aggregate supply of money balances,

n m. As a result, each country internalizes only a portion 1/n of the total effect of a
higher inflation. The cooperative solution is characterized by full internalization, which,

The effect of the competitive externality is to
reduce the marginal cost of higher inflation, thereby reducing the right hand side of
(A15), and increasing the inflation rate.
in terms of (A15), will occur for n •

1.

- 20 REFERENCES

Aizenmari, Joshua "Inflation, Tariffs and Tax Enforcement Costs,"

Journal of

International Economic InteV'ation. 2 (2), 1987, pp. 12-28.

Bruno, Michael. "Econometrics and the Design of Economic Reform," NBER Working
paper no. 2718, 1988.

Bruno, Michael and Stanley Fischer. "Expectations and the High Inflation Trap,"
manuscript, 1985.
Calvo Guillermo A. "On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a Monetary Economy,"
Econometrica, November, Volume No. 46, 1978.

Casella Alessandra and Jonathan Feinstein. "Management of a Common Currency,"
NBER Working Paper No. 2740, 1988.

Cukierman, Alex. "Rapid Inflation: Deliberate Policy or Miscalculation," presented at the
Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy, 29, pp. 11 - 76, 1988.
_________ and Guido Tabellini. "Seigniorage, Political Instability, Polarization and

Taxation in Developing Countries," manuscript, 1989.

Edwards Sebastian and Guido Tabellini. "Fiscal Policies, Inflation and Stabilization in

Developing Countries, a Political Economy Approach," manuscript, U.C.L.A.,
January 1989.
Eckstein, Zvi and Leonardo Leiderman. "Intertemporal Models of Consumption and
Money Holding: Their Implications for Seigniorage and Inflation," manuscript, TelAviv University, 1988.

Fischer, Stanley. "Seigniorage and the Case for a National Money," Journal of Political
Economy, 90, April 1982.

Frenkel, Jacob A. "Some Dynamic Aspects of the Welfare Cost of Inflationary Finance."

In Ronald I. Mckjnnon (ed.), Money and Finance in Economic Growth and
Develoment , Marcel Dekker, Inc., 1976.
Friedman, Milton. "The Optimum Quantity of Money," in the The ODtimum Quantity of
Money and Other Assays. Aldine, Chicago, IL. pp 1-50.

— 21

-

Grilli Vittorio. "Seigniorage in Europe, manuscript. Yale University, 1988.

Hamada, Koichi. "A Strategic Analysis of Monetary lnterdependency,"Jourrial of Political
Economy , Vol. 84, 1976.

Helprnan, Elhanan and Sadka, Efraim. •Optimal Financing of Governments Budget:
Taxes, Bonds or Money?" American Economic Review, 69, 1979, 152-160.

Jovanovic, Boyan. "Inflation and Welfare in the Steady State." Journal of Political
Economy , 90, June 1982; 561-77.

Kiguel Miguel A. and Nissan Liviatan. "inflationary Rigidities and Orthodox Stabilization

Policies: Lessons From Latin America," The World Bank Economic Review,
September, Volume no. 2, 1988.

Kimbrough, Knet P. "The Optimal Quantity of Money Rule in the Theory of Public
Finance," Journal of Monetary Economics. November 1986, pp. 277 -

285.

Liviatan, Nissan. "inflation and the Composition of Deficit Finance," in Adams, F.E. (ed.)
Global Econometrics, Cambridge, Mass., MIT Press.

Mundell, Robert A. "A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas," American Economic
Review, Vol. 51, 1961.

Obstfeld, Maurice. "Multiple Stable Equilibria in an Optimizing Perfect-Foresight Model,"
Econometrica ,Vol. 52, 1984.

Phelps, Edmund S., "Inflation in the Theory of Public Finance," Swedish Journal of
Economics. 75, 1973, 67- 82.
Tabellini Guido "Exporting the Inflation Tax," manuscript, U.C.L.A., January 1989.

Vega, Carlos. "Essays on Currency Substitution and Inflation Tax,"
University of Chicago, 1987.

Ph.D. thesis,

</ref_section>

