                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 MEAN REVERSION AND CONSUMPTION SMOOTHING




                               Fischer Black




                          Working Paper No. 2946




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                April 1989




I am grateful to William Brock, George Constantinides, James Poterba, Robert
Stambaugh, and especially to Robert Merton for comments on a previous draft.
This paper is part of NBER's research program in Financial Markets and
Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                   NBER Working Paper #2946
                                   April 1989


          MEAN REVERSION AND CONSUMPTION SMOOTHING


                             ABSTRACT




            Using    a simple conventional model with additive separable
utility and constant elasticity, we can explain mean reversion and
consumption smoothing. The model uses the price of risk and wealth as
state variables, but has only one stochastic variable. The price of risk
rises temporarily as wealth falls. We also distinguish between risk
aversion and the consumption elasticity of marginal utility. We can use
the model to match estimates of the average values of consumption
volatility, wealth volatility, mean reversion, the growth rate of
consumption, the real interest rate, and the market risk premium.




                                    Fischer Black
                                    Goldman, Sachs & Co.
                                    85 Broad Street, 29th Floor
                                    New York, NY 10004
                       MEAN REVERSION AND
                     CONSUMPTION SMOOTHING
                                       Fischer Black




INTRODUCTION
Fama and French (1988), Poterba and Summers (1988) and others seem to find
mean reversion in common stock prices. Over intervals of several years, they find
that a decline in prices has been associated with a rise in expected return, and a rise
in prices has been associated with a decline in expected return.
Expected returns are not observable, so it's hard to estimate the process by which
expected returns change, as Merton (1980) and Summers (1986) point out.
Moreover, the amount of mean reversion in the market may change over time. Black
(1988) suggests that changing mean reversion may help us understand the stock
market crash of 1987. In the postwar period, Kim, Nelson, and Startz (1988) point
out that the Fama and French estimates of mean reversion do not differ significantly
from zero. On average, though, there may well be some mean reversion in stock
prices and expected returns. Mean reversion can occur in two ways: first, the
expected return on the market can go in a direction opposite to that of the market;
and second, the expected return can revert toward a mean level. Cecchetti, Lam,
and Mark (1988) show that the amount of mean reversion we have seen is consistent
with equilibrium asset pricing. They also discuss the tie between mean reversion
and consumption smoothing.
     am grateful to William Brock, George Constantinides, James Poterba, Robert Stambaugh,
and especially to Robert Merton for comments on a previous draft.


                                               1
Hall (1978, 1988), Hansen and Singleton (1983) and others find consumption
surprisingly smooth relative to income and asset prices. This may be due in part to
liquidity constraints, as discussed by Zeldes (1988), in part to "rule-of-thumb"
consumption, as discussed by Campbell and Mankiw (1989), and in part to habit
formation, as discussed by Sundaresan (1985) and Constantinides (1988). As I hope
to show in this paper, it may also be due to a process that gives mean reversion in
asset prices and expected returns. The mean reversion in asset returns may also be
related to the mean reversion in GNP observed by Cochrane (1988).
Mehra and Prescott (1985) find that they are unable to reconcile such facts as
smooth consumption, a high risk premium in the stock market and a low real
interest rate in a model with additive separable utility. The model I use is in the
spirit of theirs: what I add is a new definition of risk aversion. Prescott (1986) gives
an overview of the relation between this kind of model and the stylized facts about
business cycles.
I believe that we can explain all of these stylized facts in a conventional model
without such features as liquidity constraints and habit formation. The model in
this paper is a special case of the Merton (1973) models of uncertainty in
technology, as expanded by Brock (1982). It is close to Merton's more specific
models (1969, 1971), but has an uncertain price of risk.
We use an additive separable utility function with constant relative risk aversion
and a constant utility discount rate. Whenever the derived utility function has more
than one state variable, the notion of "risk aversion" becomes ambiguous. What's
conventionally called "risk aversion" we split into two concepts: an "elasticity" that
fixes the volatility of consumption, and a "risk aversion" that fixes the amount of
market risk the typical investor wants to take for a given price of risk. With two
state variables, elasticity and risk aversion can differ, and risk aversion can vary
even when elasticity is constant. I feel that my definition of risk aversion matches
the parameter that researchers like Friend and Blume (1975) have estimated.
Epstein (1988) discusses another way to separate risk aversion and intertemporal
substitutability, using an unconventional utility function.
In this model, neither consumption nor market prices follow a geometric random
walk with constant parameters. Stapleton and Subrahmanyam (1988) show that if
one of these fails to follow a geometric random walk (and utility shows constant
elasticity) the other must fail as well.
Kandel and Stambaugh (1988) give similar results in an exchange model with both
mean reversion and consumption smoothing. Their model has two state variables

                                           2
other than wealth. They say that the price of risk can fail to measure relative risk
aversion when the consumption growth rate shows serial correlation. This is similar
to my notion that 1 and relative risk aversion can differ.


AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL
We will assume identical individuals who live forever. All variables will be per
capita. Let's write w for wealth, c for the consumption rate, and r for the
level of investment in units of risk.
As investors, individuals can choose from a continuous range of technologies for
investing their real assets. The technology corresponding to risk level x has an
expected return equal to interest at rate r plus x times the price of risk a
Thus the equation governing changes in wealth is:

                             dw = (rw—c+ax)di+xdz                                  (1)

Describing the technology in this way allows the risk of the market to reach any
level we choose. In more conventional models, like Merton's (1971), there are two
technologies: riskless and risky. The risk of the market is limited to the level
reached when everything is invested in the risky technology. So long as the amount
invested in the risky asset stays below 100%, this conventional technology will give
exactly the same results as the one I use.
We will assume that changes in the price of risk are perfectly correlated with market
returns. We have two state variables (the level of wealth and the current price of
risk) but only one stochastic variable z . We assume the price of risk follows a
simple process of the form given by equation (2). In a more general model, we
would use separate and imperfectly correlated stochastic variables for wealth and
the price of risk. None of our qualitative results depend on our assumption that
changes in the price of risk are perfectly correlated with market returns.

                                da = f(a)dt + g(a)dz                               (2)

Since we want a to be positive or occasionally zero, we will choose f(a) and
g(a) to satisfy:

                                        f(0)>o                                     (3)

                                          3
                                         g(O)=O                                       (4)

Let's write v(c) for the direct utility function, p for the utility discount rate,
and u(w, a) for the indirect utility function. We will assume that p is large
enough to give a finite value for the indirect utility function. Since no variables
depend directly on time, the basic maximization equation is:


                      u(w,a) =     max [E[u+du]/(1+pdt)+v(c)dt]                       (5)


Expanding du , substituting from equations (1) and (2), and using subscripts to
refer to derivativ, we have:


                       = max[u+[(rw—c+ax)ui+fu2
                         C, X

                          + x2u11 + xgu12 + g2u22 — Pu + v(c)]dt]                     (6)


The first order conditions are (7) and (8).


                               o    = —uj + vi(c)                                     (7)

                               o    = au1 + zu11 + gu12                               (8)


Assuming that c(w, a) and x(w, a) satisfy (7) and (8), equation (6) becomes (9).


        0=      (rw — c + az)ui + fu2 + z2uii + xgu12 + g2u22 — Pu + v(c)             (9)


In equations (7)-(9), we are taking c and x to be c(w, a) and r(w, a)
Let's write 5 for the elasticity of marginal utility with respect to consumption.
(We are purposely not calling it relative risk aversion.) Thus the direct utility
function satisfies:

                                            4
                                     cvii(c) =
                                                                                (10)
                                      Vi(C)

Assuming that marginal utility decreases as consumption increases, fi will be
positive. We will assume throughout this paper that    is constant.
The local volatility of consumption comes from changes in either of the state
variables w and a . Recall, however, that we are assuming that changes in w
and a are perfectly correlated. Writing o for the variance rate of the
percentage change in consumption, we have:

                                    — (xc1+gc2)
                                 o.c_     C
                                                                                 11)


Taking   derivatives with respect to w and a of (7), we have equations (12) and
(13).


                                  U11 =                                         (12)

                                  ti = v11c2                                    (13)

Substituting from (12) and (13) into (8), we have:

                                              V11
                              0 = a+(xci+.gc2)—                                 (14)
                                              V1


Using equations (10) and (11) together with (14), we have:

                                          =                                     (15)


Note that equation (15) holds at all times, even though the price of risk a is
changing. Also note that equation (15) follows only from first order conditions (7)
and (8). We did not use equation (9). Finally, note that equation (15) does not
contain either f or g


                                          5
Next, let's derive an expression for the volatility o of wealth. Again, the square
of the volatility will be a variance rate, so the volatility will have the dimension
"inverse square root of time."
Since x is the investment in the risky asset in units of risk (or volatility), we have:

                                                                                  (16)

Let's look for a solution in which consumption and investment are both
proportional to wealth, and in which the indirect utility function shows constant.
elasticity of marginal utility. In fact, let's use the same function h(a) in the
expressions for consumption and indirect utility to satisfy equation (7):


                              c=     w/h(a)                                       (17)

                              x=     y(a)w                                        (18)

                              u=     h(a)5w'5/(1 —6)                              (19)

                              v   = c15/(1 — 8)                                    (20)


Substituting from equations (18) and (19) into equation (8), we have:


                                   y=a16+ghi/h                                     (21)

Using equations (15) and (16), this becomes:

                                                                                   (22)

Equation (17) implies that:

                                     c2/c = h1/h                                   (23)

Combining equations (22) and (23), we have:

                                           6
                                  0w = — gc2/c                                      (24)

To model mean reversion in the market, we make g negative in equation (2). When
c2 is positive, this means:



                                                                                    (25)

In Merton's (1969, 1971) models, g is zero, and o        is   equal to c .   As g
becomes more negative, c2/c becomes more positive, and the difference between
a.., and a increases rapidly (since it is the product of two increasing numbers).
By making g sufficiently negative, we can make o, large relative to a,
So far, all our results depend on first order conditions (7) and (8), but none depend
on equation (9). Let's substitute from equations (17) - (21) in equation (9). This
gives a differential equation (26) for h(a)


                  0=
                          + [5f/(1 —6) + agjh1 + 6g2hi1/(l —6)                      (26)


Note that this is a linear, second order, ordinary differential equation. Given choices
for f(a) and g(a) , we can solve it analytically or numerically.
Here are some possible choices for 1(a) and g(a) , where n ,          b   , and   m are
positive constants.


                                   f(a)=n(b—a)                                       (21)



                                    g(a) = —ma                                       (28)

With these choices (and with many other choices) the price of risk a will remain
above zero and will fall back when it goes too high. It will have a mean level, and so
will f(a) , g(a) , h(a) , a and 0 . The constant b will be one measure of
a's central tendency.

                                          7
Let us define k as the ratio of the mean levels of a       and   o
                                                                                   (29)

In the light of equations (15), (16), (18), and (29) it seems natural to define risk
aversion -y as:
                                         = 5/k                                     (30)

Equation (30) is the natural definition for risk aversion because it makes the
equilibrium amount of risk that the investor chooses depend on the price of risk and
on risk aversion in a simple way. Moreover, in the limiting case where the price of
risk is constant, we have:

                                                                                   (31)

Another way to interpret this definition of risk aversion is as follows. The elasticity
5 can be estimated from the average price of risk and the average consumption
volatility through equation (15). But consumption volatility depends on the
differencing interval: it is larger for longer intervals. In the limit as the interval
becomes long, the elasticity estimated through equation (13) approaches y as
defined in equation (30). Naik and Ronn (1988) also emphasize the importance of
the differencing interval in estimating relative risk aversion. Constantinides (198S)
distinguishes elasticity and risk aversion in much the same way I do.
Here is another way to think about the difference between the elasticity of utility
and relative risk aversion. Look at the derived utility function in (17). If we vary w
holding a fixed, we have utility changes associated with the elasticity. But if we
allow a to change along with w , since they are correlated, we have utility
changes associated with relative risk aversion.
The literature on the "equity premium" has implicitly assumed that (31) always
holds. That's one reason why the estimates of risk aversion have seemed high. By
separating elasticity and risk aversion, we are able to explain smooth consumption
without resorting to high risk aversion.
Using a model of this form, we can match features of the world as follows.

   1. Real interest rate. We set the model's constant real interest rate to match our
      estimate of the average real rate. In a more general model, we can allow the
      real rate to vary. We can even give it its own stochastic variable.

                                           8
  2. Market risk premium. The market risk premium does not appear explicitly in
     the model. We use the average of the price of risk a in the model to match
     the observed ratio of market risk premium to market volatility.
  3. Consumption volatility. Using equation (15), we choose elasticity 6 together
     with our estimate of the average price of risk to match the average volatility of
     consumption. In a more general model, we can let the elasticity be a state
     variable with its own stochastic variable, so utility will become state
     dependent while remaining additive and separable.
  4. Wealth volatility. Using our estimate of the average volatility of consumption.
     we choose g(a) to match the average volatility of wealth. In a more general
     model, we can add a stochastic variable that will allow us to make changes in
     consumption volatility and changes in wealth volatility less than perfectly
     correlated.
  5. Mean reversion. We can choose 1(a) to give the amount of mean reversion
     we want, in the sense of the rate at which the price of risk returns toward its
     average value after a deviation. In a more general model, we can put in more
     dimensions to mean reversion.
  6. Consumption growth rate. We can choose the utility discount rate p to give
     the consumption rate and thus the consumption growth rate we want. A
     higher utility discount rate means a higher consumption rate and thus a lower
     consumption growth rate. We can define two consumption growth rates: a
     true growth rate that depends on the interest rate, the consumption rate, and
     the market risk premium as in equation (1); and a certainty equivalent growth
     rate that depends only on the interest rate and the consumption rate.

I resist trying to find the actual values of the factors in the model that let us match
various features of the world. I don't know what I would make of the values. If the
values let us match features of the world, then they must, in this sense, be
"reasonable." If there are features of the world other than numbers 1-6 above that
we want to match (such as interest rate volatility) then I will want to add factors to
the model that correspond to these features.
While it is nice to have a model with fewer factors than features of the world we are
trying to match, I don't consider it crucial. Any model is only an approximation.
As we make the model more precise, we will always add factors so we can match
more features of the world.


                                          9
While we used a model that starts with technology and derives equilibrium
consumption and investment, we could have derived the same solution in an
exchange economy like that of Lucas (1978). We start with a consumption process
depending on two state variables that we call w and a , and derive the interest
rate and the distribution of risky asset returns. If we start with the consumption
process c(w, a) we will find that the equilibrium interest rate is constant at r
that w is always equal to wealth, and that a is always equal to the price of risk.
Production and exchange models of this kind are interchangeable.
In fact, Abel (1988) has an exchange model that is quite similar to my production
model. He has an endowment of consumption goods each period, where the mean
and coefficient of variation both fluctuate through time.
In Abel's model, stock prices fall when endowments become riskier, other things
equal. In my model, investments becomes riskier when stock prices fall and the
price of risk rises. Both models are consistent with an inverse relation between stock
prices and risk.




                                         10
REFERENCES
Abel, Andrew B. "Stock Prices Under Time-Varying Dividend Risk: An Exact
Solution in an Infinite-Horizon General Equilibrium Model." Journal of Monetary
Economics 22 (November, 1983), 375-393.
Black, Fischer. "An Equilibrium Model of the Crash." in Stanley Fischer, (ed.),
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1988. (Massachusetts: MIT Press), 269-275.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean and N. Gregory Mankiw. "Consumption: Beyond Certainty
Equivalence." Harvard Institute of Economic Research, Discussion Paper No. 1378
(April, 1988).
Brock, William A. "Asset Prices in a Production Economy." in John J. McCall, ed..
The Economics of Information and Uncertainty, University of Chicago Press, 1982.
Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw. "Consumption, Income, and Interest
Rates: The Euler Equation Approach Ten Years Later." Prepared for the NBER
Macroeconomics Conference, (February, 1989).
Cecchetti, Stephen G., Pok-sang Lam, and Nelson C. Mark. "Mean Reversion in
Equilibrium Asset Prices." NBER Working Paper No. 2762, (November, 19S8).
Cochrane, John H. "How Big is the Random Walk in GNP?" Journal of Polilica!
Economy 96 (October, 1988), 893-920.
Constantinides, George M. "Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity Premium
Puzzle." University of Chicago, Graduate School of Business, Working Paper No.
225 (February, 1988).
Epstein, Larry G. "Risk Aversion and Asset Prices." Journal of Monetary
Economics 22 (September, 1988), 179-192.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French. "Permanent and Temporary Components
of Stock Prices." Journal of Political Economy 96 (April, 1988), 246-273.
Friend, Irwin and Marshall Blume. "The Demand for Risky Assets." American
Economic Review 65 (December, 1975), 900-922.
Hall, Robert E. "Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption." Journal of Polztical
 Economy 96 (April, 1988), 339-357.




                                         11
Hall, Robert E. "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle - Permanent Income
Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence." Journal of Political Economy 86 (December,
1978), 971-987.
Hansen, Lars P. and Kenneth J. Singleton. "Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion
and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns." Journal of Political Economy 91
(April, 1983), 249-266.
Kandel, Shmuel and Robert F. Stambaugh. "Modeling Expected Stock Returns for
Long and Short Horizons." Wharton School Working Paper, University of
Pennsylvania (December, 1988).
Kim, Myung Jig, Charles R. Nelson and Richard Startz. "Mean Reversion in Stock
Prices? A Reappraisal of the Empirical Evidence." NBER Working Paper No. 2795
(December, 1988).
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. "Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy." Econometrica 46
(November, 1978), 1429-1445.
Mehra, Rajnish and Edward C. Prescott. "The Equity Premium: A Puzzle."
Journal of Monetary Economics 15 (March, 1985), 145-161.
Merton, Robert C. "On Estimating the Expected Return on the Market." Journal
of Financial Economics 8 (December, 1980), 323-361.
Merton, Robert C. "An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model." Economeirica
41 (September, 1973), 867-887.
Merton, Robert C. "Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a
Continuous-Time Model." Journal of Economic Theory 3 (December, 1971),
373-413.

Merton, Robert C. "Lifetime Portfolio Selection Under Uncertainty: The Continuous
Time Case." Review of Economics and Statistics 51 (August, 1969), 247-257.
Naik, Vasanttilak T. and Ehud I. Ronn. "The Impact of Time Aggregation and
Sampling Interval on the Estimation of Relative Risk Aversion and the Ex Ante
Real Interest Rate." University of Chicago Working Paper No. 240, (August, 19SS).
Poterba, James M. and Lawrence H. Summers. "Mean Reversion in Stock Prices:
Evidence and Implications." Journal of Financial Economics 22 (October, 1988).



                                       12
Prescott, Edward C. "Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement." Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review (Fall, 1986), 9-22.
Stapleton, Richard C. and Marti G. Subrahmanyam. "Risk Aversion and The
Intertemporal Behavior of Asset Prices." Churchill College, University of Cambridge
Working Paper 88-39 (April, 1988).
Summers, Lawrence H. "Does the Stock Market Rationally Reflect Fundamental
Values?" Journal of Finance 41 (July, 1986), 591-601.
Sundaresan, Suresh M. "Intertemporally Dependent Preferences in the Theories of
Consumption, Portfolio Choice and Equilibrium Asset Pricing." Graduate School of
Business Working Paper, Columbia University (January, 1987).
Zeldes, Stephen P. "Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical
Investigation." Journal of Polilical Economy 97 (April, 1989), 305-346.




                                        13
</ref_section>
