NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REAL EXCHANGE RATES IN ThE DEVELOPING COUNTRIES:
CONCEPTS AND MEASUREMENT

Sebastian Edwards

Working Paper No. 2950

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1989

A previous version of this paper was presented at the Annual Meeting of the
International Agricultural Trade Research Consortium, San Antonio, Texas,
December 14-15, 1988. Financial support from the National Science Foundation
and UCLA's Academic Senate is gratefully acknowledged. David Gould provided
able research assistance. As always I am indebted to Miguel Savastano for
his kind assistance.

NBER Working Paper #2950
April 1989

REAL EXCHANGE RATES IN THE DEVELOPING COUNTRIES:
CONCEPTS AND MEASUREMENT

ABSTRACT

This

paper deals with three important issues related to real exchange

rates. First, it discusses the analytical concept of real exchange rate
(RER) placing particular emphasis on providing an operational definition for

the equilibrium real exchange rate. Of course, once this concept is defined
we can begin to discuss in a meaningful way what we mean by real exchange

rate misalignment, or deviations of the actual RER from its equilibrium

value. Second, this paper deals with problems associated with measuring
real exchange rates. Several proposals are analyzed and the more serious
problems encountered when attempting to compute RER's in the developing

countries are discussed. And third, I analyze the actual behavior of RER's
in a number of developing countries. Here, issues related to the behavior
of alternative indexes and to the statistical properties of real exchange

rates are emphasized. Additionally, I study the real consequences of
increased real exchange rate volatility.

Sebastian Edwards
Department of Economics
University of California
Bunch Hall, Room 8283
405 Hilgard Avenue

Los Angeles, CA 90024

1

1. Introduction
The exchange rate has been at the center of recent economic debates

regarding developing countries. For example, Cline (1989) has argued that
the inappropriate exchange rate policies pursued by a number of developing
countries in the late 1970s contributed in an important way to the current

international debt crisis. Other authors have argued that the maintenance
of overvalued exchange rates in Africa for a prolonged period have resulted
in the dramatic deterioration observed in that continent's

agricultural

sector and external position (Gulhati et al., 1985). Still other experts
(i.e., Corbo et al., 1986) have postulated that it was the failure
sustain an adequate exchange rate policy that triggered the

to

collapse of the

Southern Cone (Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay) experiments with economic

reform and free market policies. Moreover, some authors have argued that
the economic success of countries like Indonesia, Korea, Thailand and

Colombia is to a large extent attributable to the fact that these countries
have pursued realistic and appropriate exchange rate policies (Dervis and
Petri, 1987).

There is little doubt that during the last 15 years or so, the real
exchange rate has claimed a crucial role in the economic literature devoted
to economic performance and policies in developing countries.

One of the

most important of these exchange rate-related problems has to do with
defining whether a country's real exchange rate is overvalued, or out of

line with its long run equilibrium value. A second important problem refers
to how real exchange rates should be measured. Here there are remarkable
disagreements, with different people arguing in favor or against the use of
particular indexes.

2

The purpose of this paper is threefold: first, it discusses the
analytical concept of real exchange rate (RER) placing particular emphasis on
providing an operational definition for the equilibrium real exchange rate.

Of course, once this concept is defined we can begin to discuss in a
meaningful way what we mean by real exchange rate misalignment, or deviations

of the actual RER from its equilibrium value. Second, this paper deals with
problems associated with measuring real exchange rates, Several proposals
are analyzed and the more serious problems encountered when attempting to

compute RERs in the developing countries are discussed. And third, I
analyze the actual behavior of RER's in a number of developing countries.

Here, issues related to the behavior of alternative indexes and to the
statistical properties of real exchange rates are emphasized. Additionally,
I study the real consequences of increased real exchange rate volatility.1

2. Equilibrium and Disequilibrium Real Exchange Rates
Exchange rates play a crucial role th determining the external position

of a particular country. The long run external equilibrium position of a
country (i.e. ,

current

account) will be affected by the real exchange rate

as opposed to the nominal exchange rate. In the literature, however, there
has been some disagreement regarding the definition of the real exchange
rate.

2

In this section some of the alternative definitions offered in the

literature are critically reviewed. The concept of "equilibrium" real
exchange rate is then introduced, and the difference between equilibrium and

LThe material presented in this paper summarizes and expands work I
have been doing on real exchange rates in developing countries during the
last 6 years. See the references for a list of related papers.

2See, for example, Dornbusch (1982) and IMF (1984). See Edwards and Ng
(1985) for an exhaustive review of alternative definitions of the real
exchange rate.

3

disequilibrium real exchange rates is briefly discussed.

2.1 The Definition of the Real Exchange Rate
The real exchange rate has been defined in a number of

alternative ways

in the economic literature. According to earlier views the real exchange
rate was defined as the nominal exchange rate corrected (i.e.,

multiplied)

by the ratio of the foreign to the domestic price level. The main idea was
that in an inflationary world changes in the nominal exchange rate would
have no clear meaning, and that explicit consideration should be given to
changing values in the domestic. and fo:reig currencies,, as measured

by the

respective rates of inflation. In this context a number of writers referred
to the real exchange rate as the Purchasing Power Parity

(PFP) exchange

rate. However, this approach to the real exchange rate is subject to the
well-known criticisms and problems of the PPP theory,

including those

related to the selection of appropriate price indexes and of an adequate
reference time period.3

More recently most authors have defined the real exchange rate in the
context of a dependent economy type model, with tradable and nontradable

goods. In this setting the real exchange rate has been defined as the
(domestic) relative price of tradable to nontradable goods

(see, for example,

Dornbusch (1974, 1980), Krueger (1978, 1983), Mussa (1979, 1984), and Bruno

(1982)). It should be noted, however, that there is no universally accepted
definition of "the" real exchange rate. Indeed, some authors still object to
the idea of even considering that an exchange rate
definition --

could

-

-a

nominal concept by

become a real variable (see Maciejewski (1983)), while

3See, for example, Krueger (1983, p. 18), McKinnon (1979, pp. 121-28),
Officer (1982, pp. 148-50) and Williamson (1983b, p. 14). For discussions
on the merits and problems of the PPP theory see, for example, Officer
(1982) and Frenkel (1978, 1981).

4

others continue using the PPP notion of the real exchange rate.

Unless otherwise explicitly stated, in the rest of this study we will
use the modern concept of the real exchange rate, defined as the relative

price of tradable to nontradable goods. If E is the nominal exchange rate
defined as units of domestic currency per unit of foreign currency, P is
the world price of tradables in terms of foreign currency, and

is the

price of nontradable goods, and no taxes on trade are assumed, the real

exchange rate (e) is then defined as:4

e•The reason for defining the real exchange rate in this way is that in
the context of a tradable and nontradable goods model, the trade account will
depend on the (domestic) relative price of tradables to nontradables, and not

on the PPP definition of the real exchange rate. This follows directly from
the fact that the trade account is equal to the excess supply for tradable

goods. In fact, assuming that the supply for tradables depends positively on

the relative price of those goods (EP/PN) and that the demand depends
negatively on this relative price and positively on real income, the current
account - -

defined

as the excess supply of tradables -

- will

be a positive

function of real income and of the relative price of tradables to nontrad-

ables or real exchange rate. In this setting, a higher relative price of
tradables will result in a higher supply and lower demand for these goods

and, consequently assuming that the Marshall-Lerner condition holds, on an

4Notice that this definition assumes that the law of one price holds
for tradable goods. This, of course, is a debatable issue.

5

improved current account.5 The real exchange rate defined in

this way, then,

captures the degree of competitiveness (or Profitability) of the tradable

goods sector in the domestic country. With other things

given, a higher e

means a higher degree of competitiveness (and production), of the domestic

tradables sector. Williamson (l983a) writes:

"[linternational competjtjve

ness of our goods, ... can ceteris aribus be identified with the real

exchange rate N (P. 161). Maciejewski (1983), on the other hand,

writes:

"[S]uch index values [of the real exchange rate] may provide some broad
indication of the gain or loss in price (cost) Competitiveness

.

." See

also

Diaz-Alejandro (1983), Neary and Purvis (1983) and Williamson (1983b).
It is interesting to compare further the

tradables-nontradables

relative price definition with the (traditional) PPP definition of the real

exchange rate. The PPP real exchange rate is defined as:

— EP*

where

P and P* are domestic price indexes.

Assuming that these indexes

are geometric weighted averages of tradable and nontradable prices:

—

p,l-a
NT'

—

NT

and further assuming that the country in question is a small country and
that the law of one price holds for tradable
possible to find the relation between

goods (i.e., T —

PE),

it is

percentage changes in e and in the

PPP real exchange rate (where, as usual, the "hat" operator ()

represents

50n this type of model see, for example, Dornbusch (1980) and Mussa
(1984). Notice that since, as explained below, the real exchange rate
defined as above does not have to move in the same direction, then the PPPdefined real exchange rate (an improvement of the latter) does not
necessarily result in an improvement of the current account.

6

percentage change):

—

(l/c)E,, +

(/) (P-)

From this expression it is possible to see that, in general, changes in
the two definitions of the real exchange rate will differ (i.e.,

Moreover, changes in the two definitions of the real exchange rate can even
go in the opposite direction, depending on the behavior of foreign relative

prices (P/P).
2.2 The Equilibrium Real Exchange Rate
From an analytical and policy perspective, a crucial question is related
to the determination of the equilibrium value of the real exchange rate.

Once this equilibrium level is established it is possible to determine, among
other things, whether the actual real exchange rate is misaligned (i.e.,

overvalued or undervalued).6 In this section the literature on the equilibrium real exchange rate is briefly and selectively reviewed.

Robert Mundell (1971) provided an early formal analysis of the

determination of the equilibrium real exchange rate. Assuming the case of a
small economy that faces given terms of trade, Mundell defines the equilibrium real exchange rate as the relative price of international to domestic

6For recent discussions on the causes and magnitudes of disequilibrium
or misalignments of the real exchange rates see, for example, Dornbusch
(1982), Williamson (1983b) and McKinnon (1984).
A common confusion in the literature is to use the concepts of the real
exchange rate and the terms of trade interchangeably. See, for example,
Isard (1983). Of course, since the terms of trade are defined as the
relative price of exportables to importables, and the real exchange rate is
defined as the relative price of tradables to nontradable goods, there is no
reason for them to be equivalent. In fact, as will be discussed below
(Section 2.3), there are circumstances where these two variables will tend to
move in the opposite direction. Williamson (1983b) has recently stressed the
importance of distinguishing between the terms of trade and the real exchange
rate. Katselj (1984) has recently shown, using a cross-country data set,
that these two variables have tended to behave quite differently in the
recent years.

7

goods that simultaneously equilibrates the money market, the domestic goods

market and the international goods market. Even though Mundell does not
explicitly use the term real exchange rate in this paper, his analysis
rigorously describes how the equilibrium relative price of tradables to
nontradables is determined.

More recently, Dornbusch (1974, 1980) developed a model of an open
dependent economy to analyze the determination of -the equilibrium real

exchange rate. In its simpler version the model considers a two goods
economy with a tradable and nontradable sector. It is assumed that the
production of tradables depends positively on the real- exchange rate, while

the production of nontradables depends negatively on that relative price.

On the other hand, the demand functions for tradables and nontradables are

assumed to depend on the real exchange rate and real expenditure. The
equilibrium real exchange rate is defined as the relative price of tradables

to nontradables at which income equates expenditure, and both the tradables
and noritradable goods markets are in equilibrium. Once the

equilibrium real

exchange rate is defined Dornbusch investigates the characteristics of
disequilibrium in terms of an overvalued or undervalued RER (Dornbusch
(1980, pp. 102-03)). Dornbusch (1980, pp. 103-08) also discusses how, under
the assumptions of complete price flexibility and full employment, different
disturbances will affect the equilibrium real exchange rate.

A problem with a number of models on the equilibrium real exchange
rate, including those of Mundell and Dornbusch, is that they do not allow
for a distinction between the effects of temporary and permanent changes in

the real exchange rate determinants. This distinction can, in fact, be
crucial in some policy discussions. For instance, it is possible to think
that while a particular value of the real exchange rate can reflect a short-

8

run equilibrium situation, it may be way out of line with respect to its

long-run equilibrium. This possibility has recently been emphasized by a
number of authors including Williamson (1983b), Harberger (1983), Edwards

(1984), Isard (1983), and Frenkel and Mussa (1984). For example, if there
is a temporary transfer from abroad, the real exchange rate that equilib-

rates the external and internal sectors will appreciate. While this new
real exchange rate will be a short-run equilibrium rate it accommodates the transfer -

- in

the sense that

- it will be out of line with respect to its

equilibrium long-run value (i.e., once the transfer has disappeared).

The distinction between the short-run equilibrium and long-run
sustainable equilibrium real exchange rate has been introduced explicitly in

some recent analyses of the determination of the equilibrium real exchange

rate.7 In most of these studies the "long-run equilibrium real exchange"
rate has been associated with a situation where there is equilibrium in the
internal and external sectors

where foreign assets are being accumulated

or decuznulated at the desired rate. For example, according to Hooper and
Morton (1982):

The equilibrium real exchange rate is defined as the rate that
equilibrates the current account in the long-run. The long-run
equilibrium or "sustainable" current account, in turn, is
determined by the rate at which foreign and domestic residents
wish to accumulate or decuniulate domestic-currency-denominated
assets net of foreign currency denominated assets in the lonE run.
(1982, p. 43)
Williamson (1983b) writes:
[TJhe fundamental equilibrium exchange rate is that which is
expected to generate a current account surplus or deficit equal to
the underlying capital flow over the cycle, given that the country
is pursuing international balance as best it can and not

7What we have called here the long-run sustainable eguilibrium real
exchange rate is (somewhat) equivalent to Williamson's l983b) "fundamental
equilibrium real exchange rate."

9

restricting trade for balance of payments reasons, (1983b,

p. 14)

Finally, in their chapter for the handbook of International
Economics,

Frenkel and Mussa (1984) express:
[T}he long-run equilibrium real exchange rate is expected to be
consistent with the requirement that on average (in present and
future periods), the current account is balanced.
(1984, p. 64)

More recently, Peter Neary (1988) has develcptd an optimizing model of a
real economy to analyze the determinants of the equilibrium real exchange

rate. An important improvement in Neary's approach over the previous literature is that it explicitly considers that producers and consumers are
rational and optimize some objective function.

Also, by ignoring all

monetary considerations Neary was able to concentrate on the

long-run proper-

ties of the model, and, thus, on the determinants of the equilibrium real

exchange rate. A shortcoming of Neary's model, however, is that it is basically static and does not allow us to make a distinction
permanent shocks, or between anticipated and

between temporary and

unanticipated disturbances.

2.3 An Intertenmoral Model of Equilibrium Real Exchange Rates
In this subsection I present a minimal

fully optimizing model of

equilibrium real exchange rates. The model is partially based on Edwards
(l989a,b). The equilibrium real exchange rate (ERER) is defined as that
relative price of tradables to nontradables that, for given sustainable
(equilibrium) values of other relevant variables such

as taxes, internation-

al prices and technology, results in the simultaneous attaimnertt of internal

and external equilibrium. Internal equilibrium means that the nontradable
goods market clears in the current period, and is expected to be in

equilibrium in future periods. In this definition of equilibrium RER it is
implicit the idea that this equilibrium takes

'natural" level. External equilibrium

place with unemployment at the

on the other hand, is attained when

10

the intertemporal budget constraint that states that the discounted sum of a

country's current account has to be equal to zero, is satisfied. In other
words, external equilibrium means that the current account balances (current
and future) are compatible with long run sustainable capital flows.

A number of important implications follow from this definition of
equilibrium real exchange rate. First, the ERER is not an immutable number.

When

there

are changes in any of the other variables that affect the

country's internal and external equilibria, there will also be changes in

the equilibrium real exchange rate. For example, the RER "required" to
attain equilibrium will not be the same with a very low world price of the

country's main export, than with a very high price of that good. In a
sense, then, the ERER is itself a function of a number of variables including import tariffs, export taxes, real interest rates, capital controls and

so on. These immediate determinants of the ERER are the real exchange rate
"fundarnentais". Second, the ERER will not only be affected by current
"fundamentals," but also by the expected future evolution of these

variables. To the extent that there are possibilities for intertemporal
substitution of consumption via foreign borrowing and lending, and of
intertemporal substitution in production via investment, expected future
events - -

such

as an expected future change in the international terms of

trade, for example --

will

have an effect on the current value of the ERER.

In particular, the behavior of the equilibrium real exchange rate will
depend on whether changes in fundamentals are perceived as being permanent

or temporary. If there is perfect international borrowing, a temporary
disturbance to, say, the terms of trade, will affect the complete future

path of equilibrium RERs. However, if there is rationing in the international credit market, interteniporal substitution through consumption will be

11

cut, arid temporary disturbances will tend to affect the ERER in the short

run only. In this case a distinction between short-run and long-run
equilibrium real exchange rates becomes useful.

Although this framework is very general and it can accommodate many
goods and factors, it is useful to think of this small economy as being
comprised of a large number of profit maximizing firms, that produce three
goods --

exportables

(X), importables (M) arid nontradables (N) -- using

constant returns to scale technology, under perfect competition. It is
assumed that there are more factors than tradable goods, so that factor price

equalization does not hold. One way to think about this is by assuming that
each sector uses capital, labor and natural resources.

There are two periods only - the present (period 1) and the future
(period 2) -- and there is perfect foresight. Residents of this small

country can borrow or lend internationally. There are, however, taxes on
foreign borrowing; the domestic (real) interest rate exceeds the world

interest rate. The intertemporal constraint states that at the end of

period 2 the country has paid its debts. The importation of H is subject
to specific import tariffs both in periods 1 and 2. In this model the
current account is equal to savings minus investment in each period.
Consumers maximize intertemporal utility and consume all three goods.
There is a government that consumes both tradables and nontradables.

Government expenditure is financed through nondistortionary taxes, proceeds
from import tariffs, proceeds from the taxation of foreign borrowing by the

private sector, and borrowing from abroad. As in the case of the private
sector, the government is subject to an intertemporal constraint: the
discounted value of government expenditure (including foreign debt service)
has to equal the discounted value of income from taxation.

12

In addition to the private sector and government budget constraints,
internal equilibrium requires that the nontradable market clears in each

period. That is, the quantity supplied of nontradables has to equal the sum
of the private and public sectors demands for these goods. The model is
completely real; there is no money or other nominal assets.

The general model is given by equations (1) through (9), where the
(world) price of exportables has been taken as the numeraire:

5R(l,,Q,K÷I)

R(1,p,q,V,K) +
-

I(S)

-

Gx + P*GM +

T

-

qG

+ b(NCA) +

T

ST —

+

EL1r(l,p,q),6(l,),w)

&*(Gx

+

PCM

+

qC)

—

(1)

r(E-R)

+

+

(2)

Rq_Eq+GN

(3)

(4)

pp*+r

(5)

(6)

SRKl,
—

+ (l-i)P;
RER —

T1N'

(7)

P —

+ (i--i);

(P —

—1)

RER —

(8)

(9)

Table 1 contains the notation used.
Equation (1) is the intertenipora]. budget constraint for

the private

sector and states that present value of income valued at domestic prices has
to equal present value of private expenditure. Given the assumption of a
tax on foreign borrowing, the discount factor used in (1) is the domestic

factor 8, which is smaller than the world discount factor 5*•

13

Table 1

Notation Used in Model of Euiljbrjum Real Exchange Rates

R( ); R( )

Revenue functions in periods 1 and 2. Their
partial derivatives
with respect to each price are equal to the

supply functions.

Domestic relative price of importables in periods 1 and 2.
q;

Relative price of nontradables in periods 1 and 2.

V;

Vector of factors of production,

K

Capital stock in period 1.

I( )

Investment

6*

excluding capital.

in period 1.

World discount factor, equal to (1+r*1,

where r* is world

real interest rate in terms of exportables
&

Domestic discount factor, equal to (l+r)1.

Since there is a

tax on foreign borrowing, 6 < 6*.
b —

(6*-6)

p*; *

r
T;

(T)

C, GM, GN;

Discounted value of tax payments per unit borrowed from abroad.
World relative price of imports in periods 1 and 2.
Import tariffs in periods 1 and 2.
Lump suni

tax

in periods 1 and 2.

GXGMGN Quantities of goods X, M and N consumed by
government in periods 1 and 2.

E( )

Intertempora]. expenditure function.

ir(l,p,q) ( ) Exact

price indexes for periods 1 and 2; which under

assumptions of homotheticity and
unit expenditure functions.

W

Total welfare.

separability, correspond to

14

Table 1 continued

NCA

P,P;

Noninterest current account of the private sector in period 2.

Nominal world prices of M and X in periods 1 and 2.
Notice that we assume that P —

N' N

— 1.

Nominal price of nontradables in periods 1 and 2.

World prices of tradables, computed as an index of the prices of

X and M, in periods 1 and 2.
RER; RER

Definition of the real exchange rate in periods 1 and 2.

15

Equation (2) is the government intertemporal budget constraint. It
states that the discounted value of government expenditure has to equal the

present value of government income from taxation. NCA, which is equal to
(R-E-) in (2) is the private sector current account surplus in period 2,
and b(NCA) is the discounted value of taxes on foreign borrowing paid by
the private sector. Notice that the use of the world discount factor 6*
in (2) reflects the assumption that in this model the government is not
subject to the tax on foreign borrowing.

Equation (3) and (4) are the equilibrium conditions for the
nontradables market in periods 1 and 2; in each of these periods the quant-

ity supplied of N (Rq and R) has to equal the sum of the quantity
demanded by the private sector (Eq and E) and by the government. Given
the assumptions about preferences (separability and homotheticity) the

demand for N by the private sector in period 1 can be written as:

E —
q

ir E ,

(10)

qr

Equations (5) and (6) specify the relation between domestic prices of

importables, world prices of imports, and tariffs. Equation (7) describes
investment decisions, and states that profit maximizing firms will add to

the capital stock until Tobin's "q" equals 1. This expression assumes that
the stock of capital is made up of the nunieraire good.

In this model we can distinguish between the "exportables real exchange

rate" (l/q) and the "importables real exchange rate" (p/q). Since the
relative price of X and M can change we cannot really talk about a
tradable goods composite. It is still possible, however to compute how an
index of tradables prices evolve through time. Equation (8) is the defini-

tion of the price index for tradables, where 1

and (l-y) are

the weights

16

of importables and exportables. Equation (9) defines the real exchange rate
index as the domestic relative price of tradables to nontradables.
Equations (1) through (9) fully describe the inter and intratempora].

(external and internal) equilibria in this economy.

In this model there is an equilibrium path for the RER. The vector of

equilibrium RERs, RER — (RER,RR)

is composed of those RERs that satisfy

equations (1) through (9) for given values of the other fundamental

variables. Notice that since we have assumed no rigidities,

externalities,

or market failures, our equilibrium real exchange rates imply the existence
of "full" employment (see, however, Edwards 1989a).
From the inspection of equations (l)-(9) it is apparent that exogenous
shocks in, say, the international terms of trade, will affect

the vector of

equilibrium relative prices and RERs through two interrelated channels.

The

first one is related to the intratemporal effects on resource allocation and

consumption and production decisions. For example, as a result of a temporary worsening of the terms of trade, there will be a tendency to

produce

more and consume less of M in that period. This, plus the income effect
resulting from the worsening of the terms of trade will

generate an incipient

disequilibrium in the noncradables market which will have

to be resolved by a

change in relative prices and in the equilibrium RER. In fact, if we assume
that there is an absence of foreign

borrowing these intratempora]. effects

will be the only relevant ones. However, with capital mobility and investment, as in the current model, there is an additional intertemporal channel
through which changes in exogenous variables will affect the vector of

equilibrium RERs. For example, in the case of a worsening of the terms of

trade, the consumption discount factor 8/ir will be affected, altering the
intertemporal allocation of consumption. Also, in that case the investment

17

equilibrium condition (7) will be altered, affecting future

output.

Naturally, without specifying the functional forms of the

expenditure,

revenue, and other functions in (l)-(9) it is not possible to write the

vector of equilibrium relative prices of nontradables, nor the equi1ibri

real exchange rates, in an explicit form. It is

possible, however, to write

them implicitly as functions of all the sustainable
variables (contemporaneous and anticipated) in the

levels of all exogenous
system:

(11)
(12)

A crucial question is related to the way in which the equilibrju
vectors of relative prices and RERs will change in response to different

types of disturbances. That is, we are interested in the
signs of the partial derivatives of RER and RER with

minants. The actual discussion of these effects

(most plausible)

respect to their deter-

is beyond the scope of this

paper, and can be found in Edwards (l989a,b,c). The main

conclusions from

the manipulation of the model can be summarized as follows:

(1) With low initial tariffs the imposition of

import tariffs (either

temporarily or permanently) will usually generate an ecuilibrium real

ppreciatjo in the current and future periods. A sufficient condition is
that we have (net) substitutability in

demand among all three goods X, M

and N. If initial tariffs are high, for this result to hold, we need, in
addition, income effects to be dominated by substitution effects.

however,

there is cornplementarity in

If,

consumption it is possible that the

imposition of import tariffs will generate a real equilibrium depreciation.

(2) If the income effect associated with a terms of trade deterioration
dominates the substitution effect, a worsening in the terms of trade will

18

result in an equilibrium real depreciation.

(3) Generally speaking, it is not possible to know how the effect of import
tariffs and terms of trade shocks on the ERER will be distributed through
time.

(4) It is crucially important to distinguish between permanent and temporary
shocks when analyzing the reaction of the equilibrium real exchange rate.

(5) A relaxation of exchange controls will always result in an equilibrium
real appreciation in period 1. Moreover, in that period we will observe
simultaneously a real appreciation and an increase in borrowing from abroad.

(6) A transfer from the rest of the world - capital inflow for that matter -

- will

or

an exogenously generated

always result in an equilibrium real

appreciation.

(7) The effect of an increase in government consumption on the equilibrium
RERs will depend on the composition of this new consumption. If it falls
fully on nontradables there is a strong presumption that the RER will

experience an equilibrium real appreciation. If it falls fully on tradables
there will be an equilibrium real depreciation.

2.4 Real Exchan2e Rate Misalignment
Even though, as suggested by the model presented above, long run
equilibrium real exchange rates are a function of real variables

only,

actual real exchange rates respond both to real and monetary variables. The
existence of an equilibrium real exchange rate does not mean that the actual
real exchange rate has to be permanently equal to this

equilibrium value.

In fact, the actual RER will normally exhibit departures from its long run
equilibrium; short run and even medium run deviations of the actual from the

19

equilibrium RER, that are typically not very large and that stem from short
term frictions and adjustment Costs, can be quite Common.
are other types of deviations that can become persistent

However, there
through time,

generating major and sustained differentials between actual and

equilibrium

real exchange rates, or real exchange rate misalinments.
In order to construct a model of real exchange rate

misalignment it is

necessary to abandon the frictionless "real" world of the previous

subsection;

we need to introduce monetary and financial sectors, as well as rigidities

that impede instantaneous adjustments. Although the construction of such a
model is well beyond the scope of this paper, in the rest of this section I
discuss some of the most important characteristics of

misalignment situations.

A fundamental principle of open economy macroeconomics is that in order
to have a sustainable macroeconomic equilibrium it is

necessary for monetary

and fiscal policies to be Consistent with the chosen nominal exchange rate

regime. This means that the selection of an exchange rate

system imposes

certain limitations on the extent of macropolicies. If this

consistency is

violated severe disequilibriuxij situations, which are usually reflected on

real exchange rate misalignment, will take place.
Perhaps the case of a "high" fiscal deficit under fixed nominal
exchange rates is the most clear example of macro and exchange rate incon-

sistencies. In most developing countries fiscal imbalances are partially or
wholly financed by money creation. The inflation required to finance

a

fiscal deficit equal to a fraction 8 of GDP can be calculated as:

— 6/A
where

ir

(13)

is the rate of inflation required to finance the government

deficit, and A is the ratio of high-powered money to GDP. If the required

20

rate of inflation is "too high," it will possibly result in the price of

nontradables

growing faster than the international price of tradables

(P) and in a real appreciation. This type of "inconsistent" fiscal policy
will result in domestic credit creation above money demand growth. This, in
turn will be translated into an excess demand for tradable goods, nontradable

goods, and financial assets. While the excess demand for tradables will be
reflected in a higher trade deficit (or lower surplus), in a loss of interna-

tional reserves, and in an increase in (net) foreign borrowing above its long
run sustainable level, the excess demand for nontradables will be translated
into higher prices for those goods, and consequently into a real exchange

rate appreciation. If there are no changes in the fundamental real determinants of the equilibrium RER this real appreciation induced by the expansive
domestic credit policy will represent a departure of the actual RER from its

equilibrium value, or real exchange rate misalignment. Naturally, since this
policy is unsustainable, something will have to give. Either the inconsistent macropolicies will have to be reverted, or at some time the central bank
will "run out" of reserves and a balance of payments crisis will ensue.
The consistency between monetary and exchange rate policies is not only

needed under fixed rates, but also under most types of predetermined and

managed nominal exchange rates such as an active crawling peg. Perhaps
Argentina in the late l970s is the most notorious recent case of an incon-

sistent fiscal and crawling nominal exchange rate policies. During that
period the Argentinian government implemented the by-now famous preannounced

rate of devaluation or "tablita" as a means to reduce inflation. However,
the preannounced rate of crawl was clearly inconsistent with the inflation

tax required to finance the fiscal deficit (Calvo 1986). This inconsistency
not only generated a real appreciation, but also a substantial speculative

21

activity where the public basically bet on when the "b1ita' would be
abandoned.

Nonunified (or multiple) nominal exchange rates have traditionally had
some appeal for the developing countries, and have recently become fairly

common. Under this type of system different international transactions are
subject to differential nominal exchange rates, giving rise to the possibil-

ity of having more than one real exchange rate. Under nonunified exchange
rates, the relation between macroeconomic policies and the rest of the
economy will depend on the nature of the multiple rates system.

If, for

example, the multiple rates regime consists of two (or more) predetermined
(i.e., fixed) nominal rates, the system will work almost in the same way as

under unified predetermined nominal rates. This is because multiple fixed
nominal exchange rates are perfectly equivalent to a unified rate system

with taxes on certain external transactions. In this case, as with unified
predetermined rates, inconsistent macroeconomic policies will result in loss
of international reserves, a rate of domestic inflation that will

exceed

world inflation, and in real exchanze rate overvaluatjon. This situation,
of course, will be unsustainable in the long run and the authorities

will

have to introduce corrective macropolicies.

A different kind of nonunified nominal exchange rates consists of a
fixed official rate for current account transactions and an (official)

freely fluctuating rate for capital account transactions. The main purpose
of this system is to delink the real side of the economy from the effects of

supposedly highly unstable capital movements. In this dual exchange rate
system, portfolio decisions are highly influenced by the differential

between the free and fixed rates or exchange rate premium. The private
sector decisions on what proportion of wealth to hold in the form of foreign

22

currency denominated assets is directly influenced by the expected rate of
devaluation of the free rate.

Under a dual exchange rate regime, even if no current account
transactions slip into the free rate, changes in the fluctuating nominal rate

will exercise an influence on the real exchange rate. Consider, for example,
the case of an increase of domestic credit at a rate that exceeds the

increase in the demand for domestic money. As before this will provoke an
excess demand for goods and financial assets. As a result of this policy
there will be a decline in the stock of international reserves, an increase

in the price of nontradable goods, and consequently a real appreciation. In
addition, there will be an increase in the demand for foreign assets, which
will result in a nominal devaluation of the free rate, and in changes in the

domestic interest rate. The devaluation of the free rate will, in turn, have

secondary effects over the official j exchange rate via a wealth effect.
The bottom line, however, is that in this case inconsistent macropolicies
will eventually be also unsustainable, as international reserves are drained.

By partially delinking the current from the capital account, all the dual

rates system can hope to do is delay the eventual crisis. A system that is
particularly relevant for the developing countries consists of the coexistence of a fixed rate for commercial transactions with a floating parallel
(either black or grey) market rate governing the financial transactions.

8

3. Measurinz Real Exchange Rates
From an empirical point of view the first question that should be

addressed is: how should the real exchange rate be measured? From equation

8Edwards (l989a) develops a formal model of exchange rate misalignment
and balance of payments crises.

23

(9), which defines the real exchange rate as the relative price of tradables

and nontradables, it is apparent that the main measurement problems are those

related to the selection of the real-world counterparts of P and
reality, it is extremely difficult -

- if not

impossible -

to

In

define which

goods are actually tradables and which are nontradables. A second measure-

ment problem is related to the definition of E. Should the nominal exchange
rate with respect to the U.S. dollar be considered? Or is the exchange rate
with respect to the DM the most appropriate? Or, should an average of both
rates be used? These and other problems related to the measurement of the
real exchange rate will be discussed in this section. The analysis will be
restricted to the actual measurement of the RER, without entering into the
important and difficult question of the empirical definition of the equilib-

rium level of the real exchange rate. The analysis presented in this section
will first discuss, briefly, the arguments traditionally given in favor of

alternative measures of the real exchange rate. The discussion will be quite
general and will provide a broad cover of the literature. That is, the
presentation will also deal - -

even

though briefly -

- with

the PPP real

exchange rate. Section 4, on the other hand, deals with the actual behavior
of different RER indexes in the developing countries.
As expressed in equation (9), RER is defined as the relative price of

tradable to nontradable goods. Ideally, one would want to have data on
tradables and nontradables. In almost every country, however, these are not
available. For this reason, some proxy for the analytical concept of the

RER should b found. In some respects, the selection of the appropriate
proxies for

and P resembles the definition of the adequate price

levels in the old discussions of the Purchasing Power Parity theory (see,

for example, Keynes, 1924, Viner 1937, and Officer's 1976 review). Indeed,

24

most of the discussion on the appropriate measurement of the real exchange
rate has been closely related to the PPP literature.
Basically four alternative price indexes have been traditionally
suggested as possible candidates for the construction of the real exchange

rate index. However, as we will see, most of these propositions relate to
the traditional PPP definition, and are not entirely appropriate as proxies

for the relative price of tradables to nontradables. The following price

indexes have actually been suggested: (1) the Consumer Price Indexes at
home and abroad (CPI); (2) the Wholesale Price Indexes (WPI);
CDP deflators (GD);

(3) the

(4) and wage rate indexes (Wit).9 Also some authors

have suggested using specific components of the CPI and WPI as proxies for

the prices of tradables and nontradables. In practice, however, this
procedure has the same type of problems as those arising from the use of

more standard price indexes. The relative merits of these indexes are also
somewhat related to the old PPP discussion.

Of course, none of these indexes is perfect and all of them present

some advantages and disadvantages. The relevant question, then, is which
index, or indexes, are preferable for analyzing changes in the real exchange

rate and the degree of competitiveness. In the rest of this subsection the
discussion will be restricted to the merits of the alternative price

indexes. Below, the question of bilateral versus multilateral real exchange
rates will be tackled in detail.

9Sorne authors have also suggested using an alternative indicator of
competitiveness constructed as the ratio of export unit cost to import unit
costs. Of course the problem with this is that it confuses the terms of
trade with the real exchange rate! See Williamson t1983b. See also
Connolly and Lackey's (1983) proposition for using the "real monetary
parity".

25

Within the context of the PPP real exchange rate, the most

commonly used

index of the real exchange rate in empirical and policy discussions, is that
constructed using CPIs as the relevant price indexes (see DeVries (1968)).
It has been argued that this indicator will provide a comprehensive measure

of changes in competitiveness since the CPIs include a broad group of goods,

including services (see Genberg 1978). Another advantage of this index is
that almost every country periodically (i.e., monthly) publishes

fairly

reliable data on CPI behavior. However, an obvious problem with this measure
is that since the CPI includes a large number of nontraded goods, it will

tend to provid a biased measure of the changes in the degree of competitive.
ness of the tradable goods sector (see Frenkel (1978), Officer (1982)).
Some authors have suggested that this problem would be solved if WPI
indexes, which contain mainly tradable goods, are used in the computation of

the real exchange rate. This measure, however, has also been subject to
criticism. It has been argued, for example, that since these indexes
contain highly homogeneous tradable goods, whose prices tend to be

equated

across countries when expressed in a common currency, the real exchange rate

computed using WPIs will vary very little, without really measuring actual

changes in the degree of competitiveness (see Keynes 1930, Officer l982))0
Also, the use of WPI (as well as other) indexes, is subject to the problem
arising from the use of different weights across countries.

The main merit of the CDP deflator as a candidate for the construction
of the RER is that it is a genuine price index of aggregate production, while
both the CPI

10

This
.

and the WPI are indexes of consumption prices. It has been

.

.

.

.

.

.

criticism implicitly assumes that the "law of one price' holds
for homogeneous tradable goods. See, however, Kravis and Lipsey (1983) and
Isard (1977).

26

thought, then, that a real exchange rate index computed using GDP deflators

will provide a good indicator of changes in the degree of competitiveness in

production (see Officer 1976, 1982; Barro 1983). On the other hand, a
crucial drawback of the GDP deflator is that, for most developing countries
it is only available on a yearly basis, and that as in the case of the CPI it
has a large component of nontradable goods (see Harberger (1981)).

Many authors, including the IMF staff (Artus (1978), Artus and Knight
(1984)), prefer to compute the real exchange rate as a ratio of unit labor

costs (see also Houthakker (1962, 1963)), the reason being that this index
is, in some sense, a direct measure of relative competitiveness across

countries (see Maciejewski (1983)). It has also been argued that relative
labor costs are more stable than relative goods prices (Artus (1978),

Officer (1982)). As in the case of the other indexes, there are a number of
analytical problems related to the use of this type of measure for the real

exchange rate. First, an indicator based on wage rates behavior will be
highly sensitive to cyclical productivity changes. For this reason the IMF
has constructed the so-called normalized unit labor costs indexes which
correct the competitiveness measure by these productivity changes (see
Maciejewski (1983), and International Financial Statistics (April 1984, p.

63)). Unfortunately, however, due to data availability limitations, the IMF
only computes these normalized unit labor costs for the Q.Q.2 countries. A
second shortcoming of the wage rate based measure of the real exchange rate

is that it takes into account only one factor of production. To the extent
that the capital/labor ratio differs across countries, this will introduce a

bias into the index. Finally, the poor quality and limited availability of
wage rates data for developing countries is also a serious drawback for the
use of this indicator.

27

Recently some authors have argued that the best way to construct a real

exchange rate index is to use some component of the more traditional price
indexes to construct proxies for the domestic price of tradables and non-

tradables. For example, Kravis and Lipsey (1983) have suggested using (for
most countries) the CDP deflator for services and government expenditures to
construct a proxy for nontradables and the deflators of the rest of the

sectors to construct a proxy for tradables. Even though this sounds like a
sensible proposition, it has two important drawbacks. First, the existing
disaggregation at the national account level in most countries is too broad
to allow for really meaningful comparisons across sectors. Second, and more
important, with very few exceptions, national account data are only avail-

able on a yearly basis and with a substantial delay. This, unfortunately,
defeats the whole idea of having a reliable and fast index of external

competitiveness. At this level, a more practical proposition is to
construct the real exchange rate using components of the consumer and

wholesale price indexes to build the proxies for tradables and nontradables

prices. These indexes are available fairly quickly and in almost every
country on a monthly basis. A problem with this proposition, however, is
how to make the selection of which components to be included as part of what

index. Another problem, of course, is related to the selection of the
weight to attach to each component in the construction of the proxies. Even
though these are tricky problems, they are not insurmountable. Their
solution will basically require good judgment.

Thus from a practical point of view and for most purposes, it is
advisable to stick to real exchange rate indexes constructed with the

traditional price indexes. There are two main advantages to this. First,
the cost involved in building these series is relatively low; and second, in

28

this way cross-country comparisons can be made more easily. In the rest of
this section, the discussion will be restricted to the behavior of real
exchange rate indexes constructed using CPIs, WPIs, CDP deflators and wage

indexes. A growing number of authors have recently proposed that an
adequate proxy for the relative price of tradables to nontradables can be
constructed if the foreign WPI is used in the numerator and the domestic CPI
is used in the denominator. Later .in this section a more detailed discussion on the merits and demerits of this particular index will be provided.

3.1 The Real Exchange Rate in a World of Floating: Effective Real Exchange
Rates vs. Bilateral Real Exchange Rates
The preceding discussion referred to bilateral rates between the

domestic currency and, say, the U.S. dollar. However, in a world where the
main currencies are floating there are many different bilateral rates, and
there is no reason why one rate should be preferred over another. For this
reason indexes of real exchange rates that take into account the behavior of

all the relevant bilateral rates have been constructed. These exchange rate
indexes have been called real effective exchange rates or real basket
exchange rates.
The behavior of the effective exchange rate can be, at least in theory,

very different form the behavior of any bilateral exchange rate. In order
to illustrate this point we will concentrate on effective vs. bilateral

nominal exchange rates. The analysis follows easily for the case of real

exchange rates. Assume that a country trades with k countries. Then the
effective nominal exchange rate

B is defined as:

k

Bt =

E
—

a. E .
1

cit

where a. is the appropriate weight for country i, and

(14)

is an index

29

of the bilateral nominal exchange rate between the home country's currency

and country i's currency in period t. By triangular arbitrage:

Eci —EciEii
where Ed

is, for example, the bilateral nominal exchange rate betwen the

home country and the U.S. dollar, and E1. is the rate between the U.S.
dollar and country i's currency (i.e., the U.S./Yen Rate).
The rate of change of the nominal effective exchange rate

written as (where

—

dX/dt

ci +

can be

i/X):

[i2

(15)

riEhii li]

where

k
Z a. E

A—a +

j—2
Equation (15) indicates that in a world of floating rates the rate of

change of the effective nominal rate

will differ from the change in the

bilateral rate with respect to the reference country c1' by the term in
square brackets. In particular, if the U.S. dollar -of which the bilateral rate is defined -

market (i.e., E.2 (aEii/A) E1.

< 0),

- is

the

currency in terms

appreciating in the world

the rate of nominal depreciation of

the effective nominal rate will be smaller than the rate of nominal depreci-

ation of the bilateral rate

<

ci

o course,

the contrary would be

the case if the dollar depreciated relative to the other currencies, as has
been the case since 1985.

110n the selection of the "appropriate" weights see Branson and de
Macedo (1982) and Branson and Katseli (1982).

30

4. Real Exchange Rate Behavior In Selected Develooing Countries
The purpose of this section is to investigate how different indexes of

RERs have behaved in a large number of developing countries. In particular,
the analysis compares the behavior of bilateral, effective, official and

parallel market exchange rates. The discussion concentrates on determining
whether RERs have exhibited trends and on how volatile RERs have been. In
addition the analysis inquires into whether it really makes a difference
which price indexes are used to construct RER indexes.

4.1 Official Nominal Exchange Rates and RER Behavior in 33 Develoting
Countries
Effective Real Exchange Rates and Bilateral Exchange Rates
In the construction of the effective indexes of real exchange rate the
following equation was used:

k
Z a.E
P!r
iitit

MRER. —

Jt

where MRER.

is the index of the multilateral or effective real rate in

period t for country j; Ej is an index of the nominal rate between

country i and country j in period t; i —

1,... ,k

refers to the k

partner countries used in the construction of the MRER index; a. is the
1.

weight corresponding to partner i in the computation of MRER; P is
the price index of the i partner in period t; and

is the price

index of the home country in period t. An increase in the value of this
index of MRER reflects a real depreciation, whereas a decline implies a
real appreciation of the domestic currency.

Two indexes of multilateral real exchange rates were constructed and

their behavior compared. The first index --

which

is a proxy for the

31

relative price of tradables to nontradables -. used the partner countries'

WPIs as the Ps's and the borne country CPI as
this index was called MRER1. The second index --

For notation purposes

which

more traditional PPP measure of the real exchange rate -

is related to the

- used

consumer

price indexes for both partner countries and the home country. This index

was called MRER2.
In the construction of both indexes the following procedure was

followed: (1) The weights (a's) were trade weights constructed using
data from the International Monetary Fund Directions of Trade.

(2) For

each country the ten largest trade partners in 1975 were used for the
construction of the real exchange rate indexes.

(3) In all cases the

nominal exchange rate indexes (E) were constructed from data on official
nominal exchange rates obtained from the International Financial Statistics

(IFS). In those cases where there were multiple official exchange rates the

"most common" rate as listed by the j, was used. This means that these
indexes are capturing some of the distortions introduced by the existence of

multiple rates. What they do not capture, however, is the role of nonofficial black or parallel markets for foreign exchange (see, however,
Edwards 1989a).

Two indexes of bilateral real exchange rates with respect to the U.S.

were also constructed using data on official nominal rates. These indexes
were defined as:

BRER1 —

and,

E

JPI

32

BRER2 —

E

CPI

where E is the bilateral (official) nominal exchange rate with respect to

the U.S. dollar; WPIUS and CPIUS are the wholesale and consumer price
indexes; and CPI is the domestic country consumer price index.

BRER1,

then, is the bilateral counterpart of MRER1. On the other hand, BRER2
uses both the domestic country and the U.S. CPIs and has historically been
the most popular RER index in policy analyses.

Figures 4-1 through 4-8 show the evolution of two real exchange rate
indexes, the multilateral MRER1 index and the bilateral BRER1 index, for 33

developing countries. As may be seen, in most cases bath indexes tended to
move roughly in the same direction throughout most of the

period, and in

particular between 1960 and 1971. After the collapse of the Bretton Woods
system, in many of the countries depicted in these diagrams the multilateral
and bilateral indexes started to exhibit some difference in behavior.
In order to formally compare the behavior of the four alternative
indexes of the real exchange rate constructed

using official data, coeffi-

cients of correlations between the multilateral and the bilateral real

exchange rate indexes were computed using quarterly data for the period that
goes from the first quarter of 1965 up to the second quarter of 1985. The
following regularities emerged from this analysis.

First, in most countries

the two alternative definitions of the bilateral real exchange rate index

moved closely together during this period. In 27 out of the 33 countries
considered the coefficient of correlation between

log(BRER1) and

log(BRER2) was above 0.9 and in all cases it exceeded 0.8. Second, the two
indexes of trade weighted multilateral RER also moved closely together. In
30 out of the 33 countries the

coefficient of correlation between the logs

I.F.S.

THE

FROM

IIILATERAL

_______—

I1ULTILATERAL

OBTAINED

DATA

RAIN

FROM

CONSTRUCTED

SOURCE:

TEAl

19831985196119891971197319751971197919811983

19631965196119691971197319751177191919811983

I

E A9

xE

[ IA 9 x t I

AE9

A E9

COLOMBIA

CHILE

Yt*

YEAR

198.3

1981

1979

1977

1975

196319651967196919711973

1983

198!

1979

1971

1975

1973

1971

1969

1987

1985

1963

A

E

EI 9 xE LA 9

( IA9 x( L A[9

BRAZIL

BOLIVIA

RATE

EXCHAN(

REAL

FIGURE

BLATERAL

AND 4.1

MULTLATERAL

FIGURE 4.2

ITLATERAL AND BLATERAL
REAL EXCHAN( RATE
CYPRUS

DOMINICAN REP.
200
190

R

R 180

(

(170

A

A 160

L

L 150

E

(ISO

x

X 120

R

110
R 100

A

A

140

90

1
E

70
60

51
1963 1965 1961 1969 1911 191319751977 1979 19611963

1963 1965 196196919711973 19Th 1977 1979 1981 1983

YE
ECUADOR

EL SALVADOR

R
E

A
I.

E

x
R

A

I

(

1963 1965196119691971191319751971191919611983

—

1963 1965196119691971197319751917191919811983

YEM

V11JLTILATERAL

YEPR

BILATERAL

SOURCE: CONSTRUCTED FROM RAI DATA OBTAINED FROM THE LF.S.

FIGURE 4.3

MULTLATERAL AND BiLATERAL

REAL EXCHAN( RATE
ETHIOPIA

GREECE

R

g

(

E
A

A
I.

I.
E

E

x

x

R

R

A

A

E

E

I

I

1113 I%5 1%1 1969 1971 1113 1975 1971 1979 1961 1963

19631965196719691971197319751971197911811183

YE

tM

GUATEL&IA

GUYANA

R

R

E

E

A

A

L

I.

E

E

x

x

R

R

A

A

(

E

I

I

19631965196719691911117319751111197919611963

1963 1965 1961 19691971 1973 1975 1971 1979 19611963

yw

VR

VIULTILATERAL

BILATERAL

SOURCE: CONSTRUCTED FROM RA/ DATA OBTAINED FROM THE LF.S.

FIGURE 4.4

MULTLATERAL AND BLATERAL

REAL EXCHANC RATE
INDIA

HONDURAS

N

N

E
A

E
A

(

E

I

I
x

x

N

N

A

A

(

E

I

I

1963 19651967

1963 1965196719691971197319751977 1911 19611963

1961197119731975197719791961196.3

yw

YE

KENYA

ISRAEL

N

N

E

E

A

A

I

I.

E

E

x

I

N

N

A

A

E

E

I

I

1963196519611969191119731975197119791961 1963

1963 19651967196919111973 1975 1977 1979 19611963

YEAR

V1tJLTILAT[RAL

BILATERAL

SOURCE: CONSTRUCTED FROM RAY,' DATA OBTAINED FROM THE LF.S.

FIGURE 4.5

MULTLATERAL AM) BLATERAL

REAL EXCHAN( RATE
MAIAYSL&

KOREA

R

E
A

E
A

(

£

I
x

x

R

9

A

A

£

E

I

I

1983 1985 1987 198919711973197519171979 1981 1983

113 085 081 089 911 1113 1175 1177 1979 1981 1983
if AR

MAUR1JS

MALTA
150
140

R
E

130

E

A

120

I

110

£

x

x

R

9

A

A

£

E

I

I

19831985 1981 198919711913197519711979 19811983

1963 1985198719891911197319751971197919811983

YEAR

YtJLIILATERAL

_______

BILATERAL —

SOURCE: CONSTRUCTED FROM RA DATA OBTAINED FROM THE LF.S.

FIGURE 4.8

MULTLATERAL AND BLATERAL
REAL EXCHANGE RATE
TUNISIA

THAUAND
175
151
150
A 140
130

120

I
A

' Is

x ,io
tOO

R

S
A

ASS

C

70

I

SO

103 1055 1057 ISIS t7I 173 VS
YLAR

YUGOSLAVIA

TURKEY
R
C

A

I
IE
YL45

ZAMBIA

A

I.

S
A

tVIIJLTILATERAL

_______——

BILATERAL —

SOURCE: CONSTRUCTED FROM RAYI DATA OBTAINED FROM ThE I.F.S.

1077

tOll

till

1053

33

of MRER1 and MRER2 exceeded 0.9. And third, the behavior of the bilateral
and multilateral RER indexes has been quite different in many of these

countries. In 16 cases the coefficient of correlation between log MRER and
log BRER was below 0.5 and in two countries it was even negative. These
findings indicate that for most countries, and within a particular type of
index -

- bilateral

or multilateral --

the

selection of the price indexes

used in the construction of the RER measure is not a major practical

problem. The results also show that the bilateral and multilateral real
exchange rate indexes move in different, and even opposite, directions.
This means that when evaluating policy-related situations it is necessary to

use or construct a broad multilateral index of real exchange rate. A
failure to do this, can result in misleading and incorrect inferences
regarding the evolution of a country's degree of competitiveness.

Trends and Variability
The real exchange rate indexes depicted in Figures 4-1 through 4-8 have

two important characteristics. First they show that in most countries the

real exchange rate has been fairly variable. Second, in spite of the
observed variability, in several of these countries it appears that these
indexes have not had significant long term trends during the whole period

under consideration. For the shorter, more recent periods, however,
negative trends can be detected in a number of cases.
Tables 2 and 3 contain data on the main statistical properties of the

multilateral real exchange rate index MRER1 for our 33 countries. These
indicators have been calculated for two periods of time: 1965-71 and 1972-

85. The years 1965-71 correspond to the last years of the Bretton Woods
period, where a majority of countries were pegged to the U.S. dollar. The
last period, 1972-85, corresponds to the post-Bretton Woods era, a period

34

TABLE 2
Basic Statistical Properties of Multilateral Real Exchange
Rate Index MRER1 (Quarterly Data 1965-1971)

Mean
Bolivia
Brazil
Colombia
Cyprus
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Ethiopia
Greece
Guatemala
Guyana
Honduras
India
Israel

Kenya
Korea
Malaysia
Malta
Maurjtjus
Mexico
Pakistan

Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Singapore
South Africa
Sri Lanka

Thailand
Tunisia
Turkey
Yugoslavia
Zambia

i.r.çe: See text.

78.95
62.73
90.93
76.98
102.35
92.17
97.31
108.06
86.66

87.48
68.64
81.11
66.90
78.10
91.94
81.57
80.43
68.81
84.61
96.82
53.31
84.53
64.95
78.78
88.28
83.37
29.82
84.45
80.74
71.88
94.77
87.72

St. Dev.
5.79
9.05
8.39
1.58
2.82
7.36
3.37
2.82
2.34
2.63
4.32
1.61
6.77
9.12
2.85
3.98
2.43
4.49
3.79
2.00
2.32
3.63
4.20

11.65
3.04
2.65
2.11
2.67
2.68
15.78
17.87
8.25

C.V,

7.33
14.43
9.23
2.05
2.75
10.15
3.46
2.60
2.70
3.00
6.30
1.98
10.12
11.68
3.10
4.87
3.02
.6.53

4.48
2.06
4.35
4.29
6.47
14.79
3.45
3.18
7.10
3.16
3.32
21.95
18.85
9.41

Max
90.62
92.37
101.59
80.26
108.43
110.19
106.49

Mm
72.05
50.02
68.26
74.34
97.67
82.69
92.30

115.09 102.51
92.53
94.02
75.59
85.14
76.53
88.88
97.83
88.29
86.18
74.88
92.65
100.04
58.12
91.40
72.29
102.45
94.47
88.03
32.91
91.09
85.23
92.35
115.91
104.05

83.65
83.13
62.46
78.03
52.45
65.72
87.60
77.12
76.48
62.31
80.91
51.09
-

56.82
56.39
68.40
83.89
80.08
26.22
80.99
76.41
55.68
35.65
78.96

35

TABLE 3
Basic Statistical Properties of Multilateral Real

Exchange

Rate Index MRER1 (Quarterly Data 1972-1985)

Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Cyprus
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Ethiopia
Greece
Guatemala
Guyana
Honduras
India
Israel
Kenya
Korea
Malaysia

Malta
Mauritius
Mexico
Pakistan
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Singapore
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Thailand

Tunisia
Turkey
Yugoslavia
Zambia

Source: See text.

Mean

St. Dev.

91.00
82.38
93.47
103.15
93.57
100.57
98.86
95.71
100.09
98.35
94.60
89.38
92.94
90.93
89.42
104.49
98.92
86.80
93.12
97.23
106.72
97.59
90.81
87.07
101.61
88.68
98.91
72.64
96.42
95.32
92.70
103.25
95.43

17.99
16.30
26.44
11.12
8.68
17.68
7.93
21.25
17.65
4.03
7.85
12.15
9.47
11.01
11.39
6.04
6.54
6.76
8.40
6.17
15.70
10.81
17.43
16.40
6.43
6,41
8.26
28.11
5.77
8.87
13.39
13.94
17.32

CV.
19.76
19.79
28.29
10.78
9.27
17.58
8.03
22.20
17.63
4.10
8.30
13.59
10.79
12.10
12.74
5.78
6.61
7.79
9.02
6.34
14.72
11.07
19.19
18.83
6.33
7.23
8.35
38,70
5.98
9.30
14.45
13.50
18.15

Max
122.92
115.23
147.66
124.12
103.40
175.51
114.38
123.94
140.18
112.29
108.46
105.08
106.10
105.30
110.68
118.96
119.72
101.72
106.02
111.62
148.95
125.48
131.60
117.96
123.87
100.99
116.21
105.63
110.21
107.50
123.08
133.93
213.73

Mm
47.17
61.85
18.67
84.71
74.73
59,95
79.60
51.07
64.27
90.38
67.93
63.03
74.58
70.44
67.91
92.83
87.02
75.49
73.43
89.15
85.06
54.81
56.82
61.64
87.99
75.84
84.50
27.41
84.85
77.51
73.11
87.76
79.12

36

during which most advanced countries have adopted a dirty (or managed)
floating nominal exchange rates system and most of the developing nations

have maintained some kind of peg. The more important findings that emerge
from these tables can be summarized as follows: First, as the diagrams
suggested, real exchange rates have been quite volatile in many of these
countries, with the extent of this variability being quite different across

countries. For example, while in Zambia the difference between the maximum
and minimum values of the index for the complete 1965-85 period surpasses

130 points, it was only 25 points in Singapore. A second fact that emerges
from Tables 2 and 3 refers to the increased real exchange rate variability

through time. A comparison of the coefficients of variation for 1965-71 and
1972-85 reveals that in all but 4 countries (Ecuador, Philippines, Turkey
and Yugoslavia), the multilateral real exchange rate has been significantly
more volatile during the post-Bretton Woods era.
In all of these countries a steady depreciation of the multilateral real
exchange rate was observed until a certain date -

- usually

late 1970s - -

and

a fairly steep real appreciation has been detected since. Not surprisingly a
number of these countries have pegged, or managed their currency against the
U.S. dollar; as the U.S dollar appreciated in the first part of the l980s so

did these countries real exchange rates. It can also be identified a group
of countries whose RERs have exhibited clear long term trends: Cyprus,
India, Malta, Mauritius, Tunisia and Turkey have a definitively strong
positive trend (i.e., the RER has depreciated through time), while Bolivia,

Ecuador, Ethiopia, Paraguay and Zambia have exhibited a negative (real

appreciation) long run trend, Finally, there are those countries whose RERs
do not show a significant long term trend. However, in spite of the absence
of a long term trend, in some of these cases, as in Kenya and Mexico, there

37

have been some fairly abrupt jumps in RERs usually as a result of major

nominal devaluations. The degree of RER instability across these countries
has also been fairly different, with Kenya, for example, being quite stable,
while Mexico has exhibited a fair amount of instability.
In order to further investigate RER behavior, linear trends regressions

were estimated for four time periods: 1965-1985, 1965-1971, 1972-1985 and
the more recent period 1978-1985. For most countries the absolute value of
the estimated coefficients for the whole period were small, although in most

cases they were significant. A comparison of the number of negative signs
of the trend coefficients in the earlier Bretton Woods era and the more
recent period shows that during 1965-71 in only 8 out of the 33 countries
the trend coefficient was small but negative, indicating a weak tendency

towards appreciation. However, during 1978-85 in 23 out of 33 countries the
trend coefficient was negative, and in some cases like Ecuador, Paraguay and
Bolivia, fairly large.

4.2 Parallel Markets and RER Behavior: The Cross Country Evidence
The RER indexes used in the analysis of subsection 4.1 were constructed

using data on official nominal exchange rates. However, as pointed out in
Section 3 above, in many developing countries at different points in time
there have been quite significant parallel (or black) markets for foreign

exchange. The coverage and importance of these parallel market varies from
country to country and from period to period. In some cases they are quite
thin, and are mainly used by those nationals that want to spend their
vacations abroad and are only allowed a limited quota of foreign exchange at

the official rates. In other cases, the coverage of the parallel market is
very broad and the parallel market exchange rate is the relevant marginal

rate for most transactions. The degree of legality of these parallel

38

markets also varies from case to case. While in some cases they are quasilegal and accepted by the authorities as a minor nuisance, in others they
are strongly repressed with the authorities severely persecuting those that
engage in black market transactions.
By the very nature of these markets --

illegal

or quasi-illegal --

it

is not possible to have accurate data on their volume of transactions and on

their relative importance. However, there are relatively reliable data on
parallel market quotations and parallel market premia. Generally speaking,
the parallel market premium will become higher as exchange controls become
more pervasive and generalized and as fewer transactions are allowed through

the official market. In fact, under conditions of generalized exchange
controls and rationing the RER indexes computed using official rates will

become more and more irrelevant for a number of transactions and in particular for imports.

There is no reason why the parallel market RER index (PMRER) should
move closely with the indexes constructed using the official nominal

exchange rates. In fact, there are a number of circumstances under which,
in a country with pegged nominal official rates, these two RER indexes will

tend to move in opposite directions. This will be the case, for example,
when there is a massive domestic credit creation under

generalized exchange

controls and active parallel markets. Under these circumstances, the higher
growth of domestic credit will sime aneously generate an appreciation of
the official RER index and a depreciation of the parallel market RER. In
order to investigate this issue further coefficients of correlation between

the parallel market RER and official RER bilateral indexes were calculated
(see Edwards l989a). The parallel market index was constructed as:

39

wPIUs

where (PM) is an index of the parallel market bilateral nominal exchange
rate with respect to the U.S. dollar,

p1US is the U.S. wholesale price

index and CPI is the domestic country consumer price index. PMRER1, then

is the bilateral parallel index equivalent to BRER1 in Section 4.1. The
results obtained clearly capture the fact that the parallel and official RER

index indeed behave very differently. In fact in 13 out of the 28 cases the
coefficients of correlation turned out to be negative!

5. Real Exchange Rate Volatility and Economic Performance12
An important finding on RER behavior reported in the previous section

refers to the increased degree of volatility experienced by RERs. From a
theoretical perspective it has been well established that real exchange rate
disequilibrium and heightened uncertainty regarding RER behavior will have

negative effects on economic performance (Willet, 1986). Empirically,
however, there has been more difficulty finding evidence that supports these

theoretical insights. According to the IMF (1984), for example, there is
insufficient evidence linking increased real exchange rate instability to

less active international trade. To quote the Fund (1984, page 36):
The large majority of empirical studies on the impact of exchange
rate variability on the volume of international trade are unable
to establish a systematic significant link between measured
exchange rate variability and the volume of international trade,
whether on an aggregate or on a bilateral basis.
In its own empirical investigation the Fund found no empirical evidence
of a relationship between exchange rate instability and bilateral trade

flows for 7 industrial nations. Cavallo and Cotani (1985), however, were

section draws partially on Edwards (l989d).

40

able to find some evidence on a negative relation between RER variability

and economic performance. Their analysis looked only at bilateral rates and
concentrated on official nominal exchange rates. We have seen above,
however, that not only effective and bilateral rates behave in a signifi-

cantly different way, but also, that black market and official rates many
times move in opposite directions.

In this section we report some regression results on the relation
between real exchange rate instability and economic performance using cross
section data for 23 out of the 33 countries of the previous

section.13 The

data were broken into two periods: 1965-1971 corresponding to the last six
years of the Bretton Woods System, and 1978-1985 corresponding to

the most

recent period with an international floating exchange rate system. The
analysis dealt with four different measures of economic performance: (1)
average rate of growth of real GDP over each of the two periods considered;
(2) average rate of growth of real GDP per capita; (3) average rate of

growth of real export; and (4) average investment-output ratio. The
regressions were estimated both in levels as well as in logs. The
structural form of the equations actually estimated were:

Xn —a+ n+Eji ni
Z +n

(16)

and,

log X — a' +

' log

s + z j log

+

En

where the following notation has been used:

Xn

— performance variable (average growth of GDP; average growth of
exports; and average investment ratio) for country n.

13These are the only countries for which there are data on all the
required variables.

(17)

41

—

6

Z.

in

coefficient

of variation of the real exchange rate index for
Three indexes were considered: bilateral; effective
country it.
and black market.

— other relevant variables.

n,wn — error

terms, assumed to have the usual properties.

Depending on the left hand side variable different Z.'s were
included. In the two output growth equations, two Z.'s (i.e., "other"
variables) were incorporated to the regressions: investment-output ratio
and variability (coefficient of variation) of the international terms of

trade. The investment variable was incorporated as a way to capture the
effects of capital accumulation in explaining cross country growth

differentials. Its coefficient is expected to be positive. The terms of
trade variability was added in an effort to incorporate other sources of
external instability faced by these nations, and its sign is expected to be

negative. In the growth of exports equations the variability index of the
terms of trade was the only

included; its sign is expected to be

negative. Finally, in the investment ratio equation no additional variables

(Z's) were incorporated.
Our interest is to find out whether greater real exchange rate
instability has indeed been associated to some kind of "poorer" economic

performance. In terms of equations (15) and (16) we are interested in
testing whether the coefficients

and 9'

are significantly negative, or

if as suggested by the IMF, there has been no relation between exchange rate

instability and economic performance. The output growth equations performed

better when they were estimated in levels. The exports and investment
equations, on the other hand, generated better fits when estimated in logs.

For the sake of saving space we only report the better results. Other
estimates, including those obtained when nonlinear terms were added, are

42

available from the author on request.
Tables 4 through 6 contain the regression results obtained when
"official" RER indexes were used in the computation of the RER variability

measure. A number of interesting results emerge from these tables. In
particular, there seems to be a definite difference in the way these
variables have interacted during the Bretton Woods and the floating rates

periods. The results are quite strong in indicating a structural break
between the two periods. While real exchange rate instability played no
role in the Bretton Woods era, they help explain cross country differentials

in economic performance during the more recent period. Moreover, during the
more recent floating rates era there is a quite clear negative relation
between real exchange rate instability and our real performance measures.
Table 4 contains the regression results for the average rate of growth

of real GDP and real GDP per capita. The results are quite satisfactory,

especially for the floating rates era. The R2s indicate that a fairly
significant fraction of the variability of average rates of growth across

countries can be explained by these equations. Not surprisingly, the
investment ratio is positively related to the average rates of growth.
Those countries that accumulate capital more rapidly have generally grown at

a faster average rate. This result holds both for the Bretton Woods period
as well as for the floating rates period. Notice, however, that there is a
marked difference in the magnitude of the coefficients. For the more recent
era the point estimates are almost one half of those obtained for the

Bretton Woods period. As noted, the coefficients of the RER variability
indexes are quite different across periods. The results do provide quite
strong support to the hypothesis that, during the floating rates period,
higher real exchange rate instability has been associated to poorer economic

43

TABLE 4

Cross Country Regressions: Average Growth of
Real GDP and Real Exchange Rate Variability,
1965-1971 and 1978-85 (OLS)

Variability of RER

Period
65-71

Constant

1.716
(0.600)

65-71

1.460

ilatera1
-0.091
(-0.747)

-

(0.519)

78-85

78-85

1.898
(1.036)
2.244
(1.120)

-0.185
(-3.044)

-

Effective
-

-0.086
(-0.681)

-

-0.279
(-2.593)

Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics.

Investment

Variability

Ratio

T of T

0.303
(2.436)

-0.068
(-0.457)

0.306

0.310

-0.056
(-0.383)

0.302

-0.043
(-0.895)

0.579

(3.261)

0.157
(2.500)

-0.016
(-0.300)

0.532

(2.428)

0.194

44

Table 5

Cross Country Results: Investment Ratio and Real Exchange Rate
Variability, 1965-71 and 1978-86 (OLS)*

loz of RER Variability

Period
65-71

Constant

2.886
(64.113)

65-71

2.839
(24.464)

72-85

3.203
(39.849)

72-85

3.472
(16.940)

ilatera1.

0.038

Effective
-

R2

0.013

(0.626)

0.033
(0.507)
-0.158
(-2.092)
-

-

-0.173
(-2.048)

*The dependent variable is the log of the gross investment to CDP Ratio.

0.009

0.127
0.123

45

Table 6
Cross Country Regressions:

Export Growth and RER Variability,
1965-1971 and 1978-85 (OLS)*

bE of Variability
Bilateral

Period
1965-71

Constant
2.067

Effective

RER

2.644
(6.488)

1978-85

1.353
(2.928)

1978-85

-0.121

T of 1'

-0.664
(-1.487)

0.147

-0.333
(-1.615)

-0.145
(-0.953)

0.195

0.326
(0.898)

(0.205)

-

(0.296)

(1.715)
1965- 71

REER

log of
Variability

0.099

0.917

0.286

(1.207)

(0.789)

0.019
(0.093)

*The dependent variable is the log of the average rate of growth of real
exports.
Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics.

0.067

0.054

46

performance. It is interesting to note that the coefficients of the index
of variability of the real effective rate are higher than those of the index

of variability for the real bilateral rate. In all equations the index of
instability of external terms of trade turned out to be non-significantly
different from zero.

How can we account for the differences in the results for the Bretton

Woods and floating rates period? A possible explanation lays on the
different nature of real exchange rate instability in both periods. During
the old institutional arrangements real exchange rate movements were much
more predictable, since the institutional framework rule out wide daily
fluctuations in third parties bilateral exchange rates.

Table 5 presents the regression results for the investment equation. A
double log specification was used. In many ways these results are similar
to those on real output growth, indicating that during the floating rates

period there has been a pretty strong negative relation between the degree

of real exchange rate instability and investment. Notice, however, that
these equations only explain a very low percentage of the cross country

variation of investment ratios. Finally, Table 6 contains the results for
the export growth equations. Interestingly enough, these results are in
line with those of the IMF, indicating that there is no significant connec-

tion between RER instability and exports performance. However, a word of
caution related to measurement is needed here. The exports growth data used
in these regressions refer to exports in real U.S. dollars, and have been
computed as the rate of growth of exports in U.S. dollars deflated by the

U.S. WPI. There is, then, a potential valuation problem that may be
responsible for the fact that the coefficients of the variability indexes
are nonsignificant.

47

The reports reported above were obtained using indexes of instability
of RER which were constructed using

official data on nominal exchange rates.

However, as was shown in Section 4 above, in the developing countries many
times there are significant departures

of the black market rate from the

official rates. For this reason performance equations using instability of
The following result was obtained

black market rates were also estimated.
for the floating rates period and

2.507

Growth Real GDP —

for the rate of growth of real GDP.

0.190 Variability BMRER

-

(1.812) (-3.445)

0.166 Investment Ratio

+

-

0.004 Variability T of T
(-0.910)

(2.939)

R2 — 0.646

This result supports our previous findings,

indicating that higher real

exchange rate instability has been clearly associated with poorer economic

performance (i.e., real growth) during

the Bretton Woods period, the inter-

esting thing here is that since we are dealing with black market instability
this measure is clearly dependent on the policies followed by the government.
In order to further analyze these issues regressions

RER instability and variability of the

including both official

black market RER were estimated. This

allows us to have some idea of how, with other things given, each of these
sources of instability have affected economic performance:

Growth Real GDP —

3.208

-

(1.767)

0.711 Variability RER
(-1.427)

+ 0.153 Investment Ratio +
(2.767)
-

0.009 variability T of T
(0.176)

0.138 Variability ENRER

(-2.239)

R2 — 0.694

48

6. Concluding Remarks
In this paper I have analyze& some off the mast. imartant
related to the concept: and measurement of: real excbange

rates.

aspects
In addition

I have provided an. einpirical analysis off real exchange rate behavior in a

large group of develop;thg countries. The discussion emphasized that it is

crucially important to make a distinction between equilibrium and

disequilibrium changes of real exchange rates. For this purpose I presented
an intertemporal model of equilibrium real exchange rate behavior in a fully
optimizing economy, and I discussed bow' alternative macroeconomic policies

can result in real exchange rate misalignment.
The empirical analysis showed that in the recent years bilateral and
multilateral real exchange rates have exhibited markedly different behavior.
This indicates that ignoring those problems emerging from the existence of
floating rates international monetary system can result in greatly biased

policy recommendations. It is also pointed out that in a large number of
developing countries parallel markets for foreign exchange can be quite

important. This means that in these cases using RER constructed with
official nominal rates can also result in misleading conclusions.
Finally, in this study I investigate empirically the effects of real
exchange rate variability on economic development in a group of developing

countries. It is found using a cross section data set that higher RER
volatility has been associated with lower output growth and lower

investment. There are no indications, however, that higher variability in
the RER affects the level of exports.

49

Artus, J. (1978) "Methods of Assessing the Long-Run Equilibrium Value of an
Exchange Rate," Journal of International Economics 8: 277-99.

_________ and M. Knight (1984), Issues in the Assessment of the Exchange
DC.
Rate in Industrial Countries. IMF Occasional Paper 29, Washington,

Barro, R. (1983) "Real Determinants of the Real Exchange Rate," unpublished
ms. University of Chicago.
Branson, W. and L. Katseli (1982) "Currency Baskets and Real Effective
Exchange Rates," in M. Gersovitz, et al. (eds.) The Theory and Experience
of Economic Development. London: Allen & Unwin.
for a
_________ and J. deMacedo (1982) "The Optimal Choice of Indicators
2: 165-78.
Crawling Peg," Journal of International Money and Finance,

Under
Bruno, M. (1982) "Import Competition and Macroeconomic Adjustment
Wage-Price Rigidity," in J. Bhagwati (ed.) Import Competition and
Response. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Calvo, 0. (1986) "Fractured Liberalism: Argentina Under Martinez de Hoz,"
Economic Development and Cultural Change, 34: 511-34.
Cavallo, D. and J. Cotani (1985) "Real Exchange Rates in LDC's," unpublished
ms., Washington: World Bank.

Cline, W. (1989) "Latin American Debt: Progress, Prospects and Policy," in
S. Edwards and F. Larrain (eds.) Debt. Adjustment and Recovery. Basil
Blackwell.

Connolly, M. and C. Lackey (1983) "A Test of the Exchange Market Pressure
Model, Mexico 1955-1982," working paper, University of South Carolina.
Corbo, V. et al. (1986) "What Went Wrong with the Recent Reforms in the
Southern Cone," Economic Development and Cultural Change, 34: 607-40.

Dervis, K. and P. Petri (1987) "The Macroeconomics of Successful
Development: What Are the Lessons?" NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1987.
de Vries, M. (1968) "Exchange Depreciation in Developing Countries," B1E
Staff Papers, 15: 560-602.
Diaz-Alejandro, C. (1983) "Real Exchange Rates and Terms of Trade in the
Argentine Republic 1913-1976," in M. Syrquin and S. Teitel (eds.) Trade.
Academic
Stability. Technology and Eouity in Latin America. New York:
Press.

Dornbusch, R. (1974) "Tariffs and Nontraded Goods," Journal
Economics, 4: 117-85.

of International

50

(1980) Open Economy Macroeconomics, New York: Basic Books.

_________ (1982) "Equilibrium and Disequilibrium Exchange Rates,"
Zeitschrift fur Wirtschats und Sozialwissenshaften, 6: 573-99.
Edwards, S. (1984) "The Order of Liberalization of the External Sector,"
Princeton Essays on International Finance, No. 156, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

_________ (1989a) Real Exchange Rates. Devaluation and Adjustment: Exchange
Rate Policy in Develoving Countries. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
(forthcoming).

__________ (l989b) "Tariffs, Capital Control and Equilibrium Real Exchange
Rates," Canadian Journal of Economics (forthcoming).
__________ (1989c) "Temporary Terms of Trade Disturbances, Real Exchange
Rates and the Current Account," Economica (forthcoming).

(1989d) "Implications of Alternative International Exchange Rate
Arrangements for the Developing Countries," in H. Vosgeau (ed.) New
Institutional Arrangements for the World Economy; Berlin: Springer-

___________

Verlag.

__________ and F. Ng (1985) "Trends in Real Exchange Rate Behavior in
Selected Developing Countries," CPDTA Working Paper, World Bank.

Frenkel, J. (1978) "Purchasing Power Parity: Doctrinal Perspectives and
Evidence From the l920s," Journal of International Economics, 8: 169-91.
__________ (1981) "The Collapse of Purchasing Power Parity During the
1970s," European Economic Review 70: 145-65.

_________ and M. Mussa (1984) "Asset Markets, Exchange Rates and the
Balance of Payments," in R. Jones and P. Kenen (eds.) Handbook of
International Economics, vol. II, North Holland.
Cenberg, H. (1978) "Purchasing Power Parity Under Fixed and Flexible
Exchange Rates," Journal of International Economics 8: 247-76.

Cuihati, R., et al. (1985) "Exchange Rate Policies in Eastern and Southern
Africa: 1965-1983," World Bank Staff Working Paper 720, Washington, DC.
Harberger, A. (1981) "The Real Exchange Rate of Chile: A Preliminary
Survey," paper presented at a Conference on Economic Policy, Vina del
Mar, Chile (April).
(1983) "Welfare Consequences of Capital Inflows," paper presented
at a World Bank Conference (October).

Hooper, P. and J. Morton (1982) "Fluctuation in the Dollar: A Model of
Nominal and Real Exchange Rate Determination," Journal of International
Mpney and Finance 1: 39-51.

51

Houthakker, H. (1962) "Exchange Rate Adjustment,"

in Factors Affecting the

U.S. a1ance of Payments. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.

_________ (1963) "Problems of International Finance," Agricultural Policy
Review 3.

International Monetary Fund (1984) Exchange Rate Volatility
Washington, DC.
Isard, P. (1977) "How Far Can We Push the Law
Economic Review 67: 942-48.

of

and World Trade.

One Price?" American

"an Accounting Framework and Some Issues for Modeling How
__________ (1983)
Exchange Rates Respond to 'News'," in J. Frenkel (ed.) Exchane Rates and
International Macroeconomics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Katseli, L. (1984) "Real Exchange Rates in the 1970s," in J. Bilson and R.
Marston (eds.) Exchanze Rate Theory and Practice. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Keynes, .J.M. (1924) A Tract on Monetary Reform, as reprinted in J.M. Keynes,

Collected Writinzs Vol. IV. London: Macmillan.
(1930) A Treatise on Money. London: Macmillan.
Kravis, I. and R. Lipsey (1983) "Toward an Explanation of National Price
Levels," Princeton Studies in International Finance 52, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Krueger, A. (1978) Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:
Liberalization Attempts and Consequences. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.

__________ (1983) Exchanze Rate Determination. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Maciejewski, P. (1983) "'Real' Effective Exchange Rate Indexes: A ReIMF Staff
Examination of the Major Conceptual and Methodological Issues,"

pers 30: 491-541.
The Convertible
McKinnon, R. (1979) Money in International Exchange:
Currency System. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

__________ (1984) International Standard for Monetary Stabilization.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mundell, R. (1971) MonetarY Theory. Pacific Palisades, CA: Goodyear.

Mussa, M. (1979) "Empirical Regularities in the Behavior of Exchange Rates
and Theories of the Foreign Exchange Market" Carnegie Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy.

52

"The Theory of Exchange Rate Determination," in 3. Bilson
_________ (1984)
and R. Marston (eds.) Exchange Rate Theory and Practice. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Neary, P. (1988) "Exchange Rate Determination," American Economic Review,
June.

__________ and D. Purvis (1983) "Real Adjustment and Exchange Rate
Dynamics," in J. Frenkel (ed.) Exchange Rates and International
Macroeconomics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Officer, L. (1976) "The Productivity Bias in Purchasing Power Parity: An
Econometric Investigation." IMF Staff Paters 23: 545-79.

Purchastn Power Parity and Excharwe Rates: Theory.
__________ (1982)
Evidence and Relevance. Contemporary Studies in Economic and Financial
Analysis No. 35 JAI Press.
Viner, J. (1937) Studies in the Theory of International Trade. Clifton:
Kelley Publishers.

Trade and
Willet, T. (1986) "Exchange Rate Volatility, International
Resource Allocation: A Perspective on Recent Research," Journal of
International. Money and Finance, Supplement (March): 101-12.
Williamson, 3. (l983a) The ODen Economy and the World Economy. Basic Books.
__________ (1983b) The Exchange Rate System. Institute for International
Economics, MIT Press.

