                          NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT AS AN INVESTMENT




                                Bronwyn   Hall
                                Fumio Hayashi




                           Working Paper No. 2973




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  May 1989




We are grateful to Zvi Criliches for discussions and encouragement that led
to this paper being written. The first author thanks the Olin Foundation and
the Committee on Research, University of California, for support. Some of
the data preparation effort was supported by the National Science Foundation
(PRA 81-08635) and the National Bureau of Economic Research. Seung Hee Choi
provided able research assistance. This paper is part of NEER's research
program in Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #2973
                                        May 1989


                  RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT AS AN INVESTMENT


                                  ABSTRACT



       About 20 percent of the gross investment expenditures of U.S.
  manufacturing firms is expenditures on research and development. Like
  investment in physical capital, R&D also responds to news about future
  prospects of the firm, such as profitability, technological opportun-
  ities, or changes in factor prices. Using data from a panel of large
  U.S. manufacturing firms that was developed within the Productivity
  Program of the NBER, we investigate the differential responses of these
  two types of investment to changes in the value of the firm's assets as
  perceived by financial markets and the interaction of these responses.

       In order to study this topic empirically, we develop a stochastic
  dynamic programming model of a firm with two types of capital (physical
  and knowledge capital) which are used to produce profits. A feature of
  the model is the distinction between the accumulation of the two kinds
  of capital: expenditures on the physical capital stock are incurred one
  or more years before the capital actually becomes productive, whereas
  R&D capital is produced jointly as a function of current expenditure and
  the past technological position of the firm. Two individual firm-
  specific shocks are considered: one to the overall profitability of the
  firm, and one to the "productivity" of R&D. In the empirical estimates,
  we find that these two shocks account for about 20 percent of the total
  variance in net investment, 15 percent of the variance in the firm-leve1
  R&D to capital ratio, but only about 5 percent of the annual rates of
  return. The profitability shock is well described by a moving average
  process of order three, while the technology shock process is more
  nearly permanent: first order autoregressive with parameter near unity.




Bronwyn Hall                           Fumio Hayashi
NBER                                   Economics Department
204 Junipero Serra Blvd.               University of Pennsylvania
Stanford, CA 94305                     Philadelphia, PA 19104
              RESEARCH AND DEVELOPIENT AS AN INVESTMENT

                   Bronwyn H. Hall and Fuinio Hayashi1


1. Introduction

     Economists and policymakers have long been interested in the

response of firm-level investment to changes in the macroenvironnient.

In the recent past, studies relating investment to such variables as

output, anticipated or desired output, or the market value of a firm

have been carried out by many researchers. (See Chirinko 1986 for a

recent survey of investment models). Almost all of these studies--with

the notable exception of Epstein and Denny (1983), who use macro data and

Nadiri and his co-workers, who use firm-level data- -have focused on a

single type of investment, usually an aggregate of plant and equipment

expenditure. Although the physical capital stock of a firm may be the

most important generator of net cash flows and hence profits or returns

to the holders of equity in the firm, other forms of capital are also

capable of generating these returns and may in fact be more likely to




                                   1
generate more long-lasting, supranormal returns.

    An important type of capital of this sort, at least for a large

part of the manufacturing sector, is knowledge or R&D capital--the

accumulated know-how, technical expertise, trade secrets, patents, etc.,

that are embodied in the firm and its employees. Investment in this

type of capital by industry has become an increasingly large component

of total industrial investment in the post-war period (see Table 1).

The level of R&D capital held by firms is also an important component of

the market value of those firms (Griliches 1981, Hall 1987). There has

recently been considerable discussion (e.g., Mansfield 1986; Eisner,

Albert, and Sullivan 1986) over whether the level of R&D investment by

firms is sufficiently high, even considering only the private rate of

return, and whether tax credits are the appropriate tool for subsidizing

it (on the grounds that the social rate of return is even higher) .    We


are therefore prompted to ask whether R&D investment at the firm level

behaves like ordinary investment in the level and timing of its response

to changes in the firm's environment signalled by changes in the market

value of the firm. We also investigate how this type of investment

 interacts with the investment in physical capital, since presumably

 substitution possibilities do exist for the firm engaged in maximizing

 the returns generated from both types of capital.

      In previous work, we and others have used a traditional Tobin's Q

 approach to value the existing stocks of capital in the manufacturing
 firms in our sample (Griliches 1981, Criliches and Cockburn 1988, Hall

 1987, Hall 1988). This methodology yields coefficients that may be

 interpreted as the average shadow value of capital of a certain type in

 a firm that also has average levels of the other types of capital.     As


 emphasized by Hayashi (1982) and others, finding that these coefficients



                                    2
are less than unity may or may not signal that disinvestment should take

place, since investment decisions should be based on the marginal value

of new capital, not the average value of old capital, and these two

could differ widely. This phenomenon is probably what explains the

paradoxical result that the current level of R&D spending is valued

twice as highly as the associated capital stock, even allowing for the

conversion of a stock into a flow (see Hall 1988). Under the assumption

of present value maximizing behavior on the part of the firm, the value

of R&D capital is the value of the knowledge produced by past

investments plus the value to the firm of the optimal trajectory of

future R&D investments. Because of the random-walk nature of R&D

spending (Hall, Griliches, and Hausman 1987), current expenditures on

R&D are a good measure of the whole trajectory; when they are converted

from a flow to a stock, they perform better in the regression than the

stock that has been created from the past history of investments.

     This empirical finding is an example of how the value function has

to do double duty empirically, in that it must simultaneously value the

future revenues to be obtained from the old capital and the revenues to

be obtained from investments not yet undertaken by the firm. Firms that

do not execute the optimal decision path should see their values decline

in the next period, other things equal, but we have no way of separating

this effect from the effects of bad news about the firm's prospects in

the next period. We must simply assume that, on average, firms make the

right descisions so that our coefficients measure the true shadow

prices. The use of stock price data as an indicator of the value of a

firm's investment program requires that one assume both market

efficiency (so that the measured value is correct) and optimizing




                                   3
behavior on the part of the firm (so that we can solve for the value

function using dynamic programming techniques).

     The approach of Fakes (1985), among others, sidesteps some of the

difficulties of distinguishing marginal and average values of capital by

focusing on the marginal responses of investment to news in market

value. By holding the capital stocks fixed for a short interval, we can

identify changes in market value entirely with news about demand,

technology, etc., which influences future development. This is the

approach followed in this paper: we measure the magnitude and timing of

the changes induced in irvestment spending by shocks to the market value

of the firm. The model is that of a firm buffeted by shocks to the

macroeconomy, its industry, the (non-forecastable) behavior of

competitors, factor prices, and, in particular, the output of its R&d

program. These shocks cause changes in the market value of the firm and

thus in Tobin's Q. The firm responds to this shocks by adjusting the

level of spending on the two types of capital, physical and research and

development.

     Recent work by Lach and Schankerman (1988) investigated some of the

interactions between the two kinds of investment (i,r) and the one-

period rate of return (q) to the firm using dynamic factor methods and a

dataset that overlaps considerably with ours. Their model is explicitly

non-structural, but informative as to timing, and provides an interest-

 ing descriptive summary of the stylized facts. They found that the data

 are adequately described by three factors, one of which is idiosyncratic

 to q, one of which affects both i and r rapidly and permanently, and one

 of which is a transitory factor that is idiosyncratic to i.   Neither of

 the two investment factors is an important explanator of the variance in

 q (they account for at most 5 percent of that variance), and the



                                    4
factors cannot be identified exclusively with shocks to demand or to

factor prices.

     Using a slightly different but essentially equivalent methodology,

Griliches, Hall, and Fakes (1987) have found three factors linking

sales, investment, R&D, patents, and q for a similar sample of firms.

In addition to the idiosyncratic factor in q (again accounting for about

95 percent of the variance), there is one factor that we label demand

linking sales, investment, and R&D and a much weaker factor that we

interpret as shifts in technological opportunity linking R&D, patents,

and q. This second factor may also appear very weakly in investment,

but it then becomes doubtful to identify it with technological shocks.

Our results are inconsistent with Lach and Schankerman's since we do

find it necessary to include a second factor that is not in investment

and sales to explain the movements of R&D expenditures. Also, the

additional identifying power we hoped to bring to bear on the problem

via patents turned Out to add almost no information to the problem in a

panel data (within-firm) setting so that the inclusion of the second

factor is not caused by the presence of patents in the model.

     This paper takes a different approach to the problem from the two

just described in an effort to provide interpretation of the observed

stylized fact within the context of an explicit optimizing model of the

investment behavior of the firm. To do this, we must confront the

problem that although work on theoretical models of investment decision

where there is more than one type of capital stock has existed at least

as far back as Lucas (1967), it is difficult to extract from these

models a closed-form solution for the investments as a function of the

various prices and initial conditions. Thus there has been relatively




                                   S
little empirical investigation of such models, partly due to their

complexity in all but simple cases. Such work as does exist is in the

cost or profit function framework, which takes output as predetermined,

and introduces lags in investment via adjustment costs (Bernstein and

Nadiri 1982), owing to the relative tractability of that type of model.

Our model is of a different kind since it takes the firm's output and

price-setting behavior as endogenous by focusing on the present

discounted value of the profits yielded by the capital assets of the

firm without being specific about the type of market in which the firm

operates. The profits the firm earns from its choice of assets may be

due either to specific factors, know-how, some level of market power

arising from an oligopolistic structure, or to a combination of all of

these. Although this kind of model cannot be used to investigate market

structure and the competitive behavior of firms, it is useful for

interpreting the timing and interaction of investment decisions without

having to impose a particular kind of competition.

     In the simple flexible accelerator model or the q model of

investment, investment is assumed to respond to shocks in the environ-

ment that shift the level of desired output (and in the case of the q

model, to other shocks such as changes in the relative price levels of

 inputs or outputs). The models are silent on the origin of these

 shocks, whether demand or supply (technological). The purpose of the

more elaborate model presented in this paper is to identify the relative

 importance of technological shocks in influencing investment decisions

 using a comprehensive panel dataset of publicly traded manufacturing

 firms.

      In performing this analysis, our identifying assumption is that

 shifts in technological opportunity appear first in the investment



                                    6
choices of the firm and only later in increased output. That is, there

is a gestation lag between the expenditure on investment and the

movement of the capital thus obtained into productive use. because we

use a specific functional form for the profit function (corresponding to

a constant returns Cobb-Douglas for the production function), we are

able to distinguish profitability shocks (which appear first in sales and

only later in the productive capital) from those shocks that are

unrelated to current sales but cause contemporaneous changes in capital

spending and R&D investment. We call this kind of shock a

"technological opportunity" shock since it appears in the model as a

revaluing of R&D capital. Because R&D and physical capital are used

jointly to produce profits, this shock affects both types of investment.

    Note that it is not possible to identify either of our two shocks

as demand or supply (a la Lach-Schankerman), since the profitability

shock represents news in demand or in factor prices, which affects the

optimal choice of capital with a lag, whereas the technological shock

embodies all the factors that force a revaluation of R&D capital,

including those that are demand-related. The interpretation of our

factors is only really possible in the framework of our specific model

of the firm.

     Griliches, Hall, and Pakes (1986) used patent data to identify this

supply shock to the productivity of R&D explicitly and found that its

relative importance in the variance of q is anywhere from one percent to

seventy percent (in the drug industry) of demand-related shocks to q and

very poorly measured. In this paper, we are using evidence on the

timing of R&D and capital expenditures relative to sales to disentangle

the technological and non-technological effects.




                                   7
2. Model

      In building a model of two kinds of investment (in R&D and physical

capital), we chose not to use the full adjustment cost methodology

familiar from the investment literature but instead introduce gestation

lags into both R&D and investment decisions along with an intertemporal

link for R&D investment. This is more tractable than an adjustment cost

model involving two capital stocks but still preserves the determinancy

of firm size and the relationship between investment and lagged sales

that are requirements imposed by the data.

      Our model posits a price-taking firm that maximizes the present

discounted value of the cash flow (profits) generated by the two assets

Kt (physical capital) and G (knowledge capital).      We write profits in

period t as a function of the quasi-fixed factors (variable factors have

already been solved Out):


             — ,r
(1)                 (K,Ge,u)
where      and      denote stocks at the end of period t and r and 9 are

gestation lags. That is, the capital stock that determines profits in

period t was chosen, and the appropriate investment performed r years

prior.

        In constructing this model of the firm choosing two kinds of

 investment, a stylized fact we wish to interpret is the distinctive

 behavior of R&D investment dynamics as opposed to those of investment in

 physical capital. This is the fact alluded to above, that the growth

 rates of investment have a sample variance much larger than that of R&D

 expenditures (Mairesse and Siu 1984, Lach and Schankerman 1988).

 Although it may be due to a large difference in adjustment costs for the




                                       8
two kinds of capital, we believe that it may also be due to a difference

in the way the two kinds of capital are produced. That is, the

production of R&D or knowledge capital is intrinsically different from

the procurement and installation of capital goods within the firm since

it is likely to involve projects of duration longer than one year that

cannot be speeded up greatly without a considerable increase in cost per

unit of output. Ten man-years of R&D engineers may not have the same

productivity when considered as two men for five years as when it is

five men for two years.

      We capture this idea by assuming the conventional form of capital

accumulation for physical capital:


(2)            —    + (1-6) Ktl


but assuming a Cobb-Douglas form for R&D capital:


(3)            — R G11
where


           — physical investment,

        R —    R&D investment, and

           —   technological   shock.


Both equations (2) and (3) are homogeneous of degree one, but the first

has a marginal product of investment equal to unity, while for the

 second the marginal product depends inversely on the rate of investment

 (oG1/Rt). so there are diminishing returns to R.       If we consider the

 problem of maximizing the amount of capital stock available at time t

 subject   to a fixed level of investment I (with non-negative investment

 in all years), the first formulation will yield an optimal investment



                                        9
pattern of (0, 0, 0,... I), whereas the second will in general yield a

pattern that is spread across all the years (if a<l).

     The firm's problem is to choose two decision rules at time t, h1

and hR. that maximize the expected discounted present value of the cash

flows generated by those investment paths:



                                                                bjR+.)
                                        -                   -
(4) max Vt — Et
                       j-0



subject to the profit function (1) and the capital accumulation

constraints (2 and 3). We now proceed to attempt a solution to the

firm's problem that can be expressed in terms of the observable

quantities, which are the stock of physical capital, the market value of

the firm, the output (sales), and the investment in research and

development. Note that an important difference between our two types of

capital is that only the stock of physical capital is observable

 independently from the investment history (in principle). Although we

 could construct a stock of knowledge capital from the history of R&D

 expenditures, this would add no new information to the problem.

 Accordingly, in the search for tractable estimating equations, we will

 need to eliminate C from the model.

      Since there are no adjustment Costs in K, Vt can be written as


 (5) Vt —   a(l&)Kt1         + Et           lJxt+j t+jrCt+j.ut÷j) +

 where


                                                                  u           -C               -b
 (6) Wt —   E
                t            [i1w       .(K
                                    t+r+J t+j
                                              .   C
                                                      t+j-(8-r)
                                                        .
                                                                   t+r+j
                                                                         .)          .K    .

                                                                                   t+j t-i-j        t+j.R t+j
                    j —0
 and c is the user cost of capital:




                                                  10
(7) c —   a   -
                  (1-6)   Et (a+1)

The second term in Vt represents the profits still to be earned by the

physical capital stock that has already been chosen and over which the

firm has no control. This is a consequence of the gestation lag

assumption. If we assume that 9           r, (Gee,
                                                               G l will
also be beyond control of the firm at time t, and this term will be

exogenous to the firm at time t.

     Thus we have eliminated the investment from the optimization

problem in (4) and reduced the problem to one of choosing K (for

production in period t+r) and a stochastic R&D investment program

that maximizes W subject to the accumulation constraint (3)•2 The

first order condition for           is easily obtained:




(8) E[ (3(KC (9 )U                    ))/3K] — c
Characterization of the optimal decision rule for Rt is less

straightforward. If 6-T > 0, not only Gtl (which shows up in the R&D

accumulation constraint) but also [G2,... C(9)J influence W




2. Note here that the role of R&D capital stock in this model is crucial
since in its absence the value function would be a linear function of
the Ks (under the constant returns assumption of equation 10) with

weights equal to            -c
                      t+r        t. The optimal plan in any period would be
either to increase the capital stock infinitely or to set it to zero,
depending on whether the it earns more or less than its rental rate.
This is a consequence of the no-adjustment cost assumption. In our
model, since R&D capital is jointly produced over several periods and
there is substitution between the two kinds of capital, the size of the
firm is determinate.




                                         11
                                                   This will create difficulties for
because they enter t+r'           't+8-F
estimation due to the non-observability of                      and so we set e-r —        0,

                                                           and the investment path (R}.
which implies that W depends on Kt, Gui.

Kt and the optimal investment path (Re) (conditioned on information

available to the firm at time t) are functions in turn of                          after


solution of the first order conditions for equation (4). A familiar

property of the value function (see. e.g., Sargent 1986, chapter 1, or

Duffie 1988, pp. 196-97) implies that



              aw(G1)             aRt
(9        —            — -b
                               t ,,            t
                                           G —coflst.



                                       R
                                           t
                       —   b
                                       C
                                        t-1


      To obtain an explicit solution to these first order conditions, we
                                                            with constant returns to
 assune that the technology is Cobb-Douglas

 scale. Then nominal sales are proportional to profits, and profits are


 (10) 1r(K.G,u+T) —        ut+KGa
 so that the first order condition (8) becomes



  (11) Et (u+ (K/G)a
                            1) —
                                      ctTal
 Now we use the fact that a constant fraction (.)                     of   sales is profits

                                                                           the logs of S, K, C,
  and take logs of (10), (11), (3), and (9), denoting

  and R by lower case letters and the individual firm observations by i:


  (12) sit -       —   ln          -                              +



  (13)   k.   -   — (1-a.)      1jln Etu•t+r -          In c + In


                                                      12
(14) gft -                — in              +             -




(15) nt -        g.1      —   -in       -   in   ((i-a)/o) +              in

There are two remaining problems with this formulation. First,                                             is

not observable, as noted before, and the marginal value product of g.,

       is also unobservable. The first problem is solved by eliminating

       and           from equations (12) - (15).



(16) s.
       it
             -
                 k.it-r   —   ln    (u.
                                      it)
                                            - in     E
                                                         t-r(u.
                                                              it)
                                                                          + firm & time dummies


(17) k.      -
                 k.i      —   in            + a in it


                     + (l-a.)[1n
                           1
                                 E u.
                                                 t              -    in   E      u.
                                                                              t-1 i,t+i,—1•
                                                                                              4- time   dummies
                                                     i,t+r


(18)    nit -    ki       —   in            -
                                                 (i-at)
                                                           -i                          -
                                                                    in (Eiu t+r-I + time dummies


        Equation (16) specifies that the capital-output ratio in period t

is equal to an individual firm constant pius year effects that reflect

changes in the macro-environment plus the idiosyncratic news in the

firm's demand, which arrived since the capital stock was chosen (at t-

r). Equation (17) describes the choice of the capital stock made in

year t that will be used for production at year t+r: it depends on the

shock to the R&D accumulation equation at year t, the shadow price of

R&D capital at year t, and the expected change in demand between year

t+r-l and year t+r as weil as on a Set of time dummies. Finally,

equation (18) describes the optimal choice of R&D intensity in the same

year, which is a function of time and firm dummies, the shadow price of

R&D capital p.r, and the expected demand r periods hence.

        Now we confront the problem of how to measure the shadow price of



                                                              13
R&D capital jt' which is unobservable. If we specify the stochastic

processes that generate uft and cit' then in principle the model could

be solved to obtain an expression for W., the value of the firm's

problem from t+r onward as a function of Giti and the distribution of

(ui) and tit However, there does not exist a closed-form solution

of this kind. We therefore adopt the following strategy. First, assume

that ln(u.) and                             follow mutually uncorrelated moving average
                  3
processes:


(19) ln(u) — .X0Xi                    + .    +
                                                 n'i,t-n

(20) ln(e) —                  '&it +         + 6m'i,t-m


Then          depends              on ,            xi, and Y••• i,t-m but not on
x.                    .   . . x.        since the probability distribution of
 i,t+r-tr-l                     1,t-n
u.     ...   u.                    does not affect W.
                                                     it
                                                            Then use a loglinear
 it           i,t-+-r-l

approximation for


                          —           + ... +               + 0"it +
(21) in                       t7x1                x.+                     + 7m'i,t-m

                              ÷ firm and time dummies.


        When equations (19)-(20) are substituted into equations (l6)-(18),

we obtain a system of equations for the output capital ratio, the growth

in net capital stock, and the R&D-capital ratio in terms of the

unobservable shocks tx.), (y.}, and firm and time dummies. For



3. Note that because of the shortness of our panel, this specification is
general enough to accommodate any ARMA process, not just moving average.
We simply need n and m greater than the number of lags in the data to
allow for an AR process, Later on we present evidence that an AR(l)
process is a more parsimonious specification for




                                                           14
estimation and identification purposes, we augment these equations with

an equation for the one-period rate of return to the firm's conunon

stock. The use of this variable is based on an idea in Pakes (1985):

although we cannot explicitly solve for the value of the optimal

investment program in this model, we do know that changes in this value

should depend only on the "news" that arrives between period t and

period t-l, under the assumption of efficient stock markets and optimal

behavior by the firm. This leads us to write the one-period rate of

return to equity (the news in market value) as a linear function of the

contemporaneous shocks:


(22) q.
     it —timedummies+cx.
                    x it +cy.
                          y it
                               +oz.
                                 Z it

where Var[x.) —              —             — 1, and x, y, and z are mutually
                   Var[y.}       Var[z.]
uncorrelated. z.       is the part of the excess rate of return that is not
                  it

related to news in demand or the "technology production function."

     In the next section, we discuss the data we will use for

estimation of this model. This will lead us to modify the specification

just derived slightly before estimating the model in section 4.



3. Data and Preliminary Results

     The data come from the Compustat files, cleaned and merged as

described in Hall et al. (1988). The universe from which we draw our

sample consists of all the manufacturing firms that existed for at least

four years between 1936 and 1985 on the Annual Industrial or Over-the-

Counter file, which includes all firms traded on the major stock

exchanges and NASDAQ.

     In constructing the samples used in this paper, we removed firms




                                     15
that experienced major mergers or other reorganizations or whose Capital

stock changed in any one year by more than one hundred percent during

the periods we were examining (1973 to 1981, or 1977 to 1985). We also

removed firms for which we could not construct a stock market rate-of-

return that coincided with their fiscal year, usually because they did

not appear on the Quarterly Compustat file.    Finally, we required that

each panel be balanced so that sales, capital stock, q, and R&D were

available for all nine years from 1973 to 1981 or 1977 to 1985. Only

the last requirement (on R&D) caused us to lose a significant number of

firms that did not enter or exit during the period. It was obviously

necessary since our model is about firms that have R&D programs, which

are over half of those in the sample.

       Table 2 exhibits some summary statistics for the two samples. The

variables of interest are sales; the stock of physical capital, measured

at the end of the period (as in our model) and adjusted for the effects

of inflation as described in Hall et al. (1988); research and

development expenditures; and the one-period rate of return to holding a

share of the firm's common. This latter variable is defined as


(23)        —      - pit-i   +


where p. is the price at the beginning of period t and       are the

dividends paid during period t; and all quantities have been adjusted

for splits, stock dividends, etc.4 The other variables shown in the



4. The alert reader will note that this definition of       implies   a timing

convention where news arrives during the previous period (t-1) and
investment plans are made at the beginning of year t. This convention
was also followed in Fakes (1985), Criliches, Hall, and Fakes (1987), and
Lach and Schankerman (1988) for the following reason: the data indicate
that the strongest correlations between investment variables and q are



                                        16
table are the growth rates of sales, net capital, R&D investment, and

gross investment, the log of the sales-capital ratio with r set to one,

s. -k              and the log of the R&D-capital ratio r..ki       These
 it     i,t-..,,                                        3.      .
variables      exhibit the usual characteristics of growth rates and ratio

variables in the panel data of firms: most of the variance of the growth

rates is within firm, while most of the variance of the ratios is

between firms (see the last row of each section of the table).5 Note

in particular the large amount of unexplained variance in the annual

stock market rate of return, corresponding to a standard deviation of

forty percent.

        Although our model is in terms of real variables, we use (the logs

of) nominal variables for estimation and include a set of free time

dwmuies and a set of twenty industry dummies at the roughly two-digit

level in each equation; the only remaining deflation that has not been

performed is that which is firm-year specific. Thus the variance and

covariance relationships which we will be fitting are based on the row

of Table 2 labelled "Var. within year & md."

        Before attempting to estimate a model like that in equations (16)-

(18) and (22), in Table 3 we examine the variances and covariances of



between this year's investment and last years q. Of course, some of
last year's investment might also be a response to news in q last year
but the contemporaneous q also includes news to which investment in the
first part of the year is unable to respond. The necessity for a choice
of timing convention arises from the time aggregation inherent in this
kind of data.

5. See Mairesse (1987) for further discussion of this phenomenon and more
examples.




                                       17
the data in an effort to ascertain the model's plausibility and the

likely values of r, n, and m. We use a smaller subset of the firms

(those with data from 1973 through 1985) in Table 3 so that we can look

at the covariances over a longer period (out to six lags); the results

were also checked on the two slightly larger samples on which Table 2 is

based. From evidence cited in Kydland and Prescott (1982) and R. E.

Hall (1977), the most reasonable choices of r seem to be somewhat less

than one for equipment (two quarters) and about two for plants. Our

capital stock figure combines both types of stocks; in the manufacturing

sector as a whole, equipment forms about two-thirds of the capital stock

(BLS 1979), so that a r of about one would be the most reasonable.

Using a completely different methodology and data similar to ours, Pakes

and Griliches (1984) find that the response of profits to investments

made in prior years increases to about lag three and then is level for

several years thereafter. This would imply an average gestation lag of

about two years or slightly more. Of course, it is much more likely

that capital moves into production with a lag that varies across

industry and across the cycle, but this is difficult to model (see

Chirinko (1988)), so we choose instead to compare the use of a fixed

value of r equal to 1, 2, or 3 in our estimation. For the presentation

of the variances and covariances in Table 3 we have chosen r equal to

one (capital stock acquired this period is used in production next

period).

     The analysis of variance in Table 2 and set of auto-covariances and

cross-covariances in Table 3 reveal several interesting facts. First,

as mentioned in the introduction, the variance of the growth rate of

gross investment is much larger than that for R&D investment. Going

within firm increases this effect, implying that R&D is somewhat more



                                      18
persistent than investment. Second, the logs of the sales-capital ratio

and R&D-capital ratio vary little within each firm over time; most of

the variation is permanent and across firms. This can be seen both in

the analysis of variance in Table 2 and in the persistence of the auto-

covariances at long lags in Table 3. From the point of view of our

model specification, this means that firm-specific effects are likely to

be important in these equations.

     Recalling the derivation of the model, the firm-specific effects

will arise from the following sources: differences in the firms'

production or profit functions of the two capitals, a.; differences in

the firms' profit-sales ratios, due to differences in value added for

market power,     differences across firms in the mean of the demand

shock u.; and differences across firms in the mean of the technological

shock or R&D productivity          Both u. and       appear only in

logarithmic transformation so their overall levels for each firm do not

matter. It is plausible to assume that u., which is the unexpected

return to capital under the Cobb-Douglas linear homegeneity assumption

of equation (10), has an expected value that is roughly equal across

firms. Similarly, the expected value of the news in the R&D

productivity shock is probably the same across firms. However, these

firms come from many different industries        1 perform quite different

activities, so it is reasonable to assume          there are permanent

differences in the shares of capital, R&D capital, labor, and raw

materials devoted to the production of output and hence differences in

a. and ..
 1      1

     Under these assumptions, the firm specific effects are the

following:




                                    19
(24) sk:   4'.   - in a.
                    -l
     k: (l-a) (lnEu                           t+r...i+inct..iinct)


      rk: lnEtMt

Note that we expect the expected value of M.t. the shadow value-of an

additional unit of R&D capital, to vary across firms since it depends on

a., so we denote this expected value by Mi. The evidence in Table 3

suggests that while the first and third of these firm effects have good-

sized variances across the sample of firms, the variance of the second

is small, which is not surprising since it is a function of the

differences between two adjacent periods of the expected net return to

capital in excess of its rental rate.

     The easiest predictions of the model to check are those involving

q, since it contains only contemporaneous shocks. The first implication

of this is that q should exhibit no serial correlation, but the table

shows a small amount of negative serial correlation at most lags. This

may be due either to measurement error in the stock prices (which is

likely to affect a small number of q values), or to some sort of mean-

reverting behavior of the type documented by Fama and French (1987) or

Poterba and Summers (1987). Since the effect is small (in fact, the

joint hypothesis that all lagged covariances are zero yields an

F(6,l4903) —     2.36) and other research in this area using different
periods has found even smaller effects of this kind (Fakes 1985;

Griliches, Hall, and Fakes 1986; Lach and Schankerman 1987), we chose to

 ignore this in what follows.

      The second implication of the efficient mar,ets assumption together

 with the moving average shocks is that the covariances of q with lagged



                                         20
values of sk, tk, and rk should all be zero but that its covariance

with the leading values of sk, Ak, and rk should be non-zero out to the

order of the moving average processes. Because of the time aggregation

problem alluded to before, we do not really expect this to hold for the

covariance of q with the first lag of each variable (since q is the rate

of return in the year before t). Joint tests of the hypotheses that the

covariances of q with the second through sixth lags of sk, Ak, and rk

were conducted and all were easily accepted. With the exception of sk,

the tests were also accepted when the first lag was included. This

provides support for the idea that investment plans are made early in

the year and tend to lag behind the news in q.

     For sk, the sharp gestation lag assumption implies that its

covariances with q should drop to zero after r-l periods (or after r

periods,   allowing for time aggregation). There is a sharp drop in the

covariances from lead 2 to lead 3, and the auto-covariances of sk also

appear to reach their permanent level by lag 3, so r2 appears to be the

best choice. The forward covariances of q with Ak and rk are less

conclusive: those with Ak appear to die away after about two lags,

while those with rk are somewhat more persistent, but small, for all

three of the samples.6 It is likely that at least one of the two




6. This persistence is another demonstration of the time series
characteristics of R&D investment that were noted in Griliches, Hall,
and Fakes (1987): the logarithm of R&D expenditures for any firm can be
well aproximated as a random walk with a small error variance. This
implies that the shocks to r are permanent and would suggest an
autoregressive specification for lnft rather than moving average.

 In fact, our preliminary estimates suggested this was the case and we
 modified our model to take account of this in Section 4.




                                   21
processes inuft or lnft is of high order.

       Finally, note that the covariance pattern of sk and rk is

consistent with permanent differences in the R&D-to-sales ratio coupled

with a gestation lag of 2 on the capital stock. This is because sk is a

moving average of the shocks x of order r plus a permanent firm effect

so that the covariance of sk and rk should be a constant (arising from

permanent differences across firms) after the first r-l lags. Allowing

for some spillover due to time aggregation implies a r of two. The same

is not true for the covariances of sk and k which persist Out to the

longest lag shown. One possibility is that the model for the capital

stock k should be augmented to include measurement error, both for this

reason and on a priori grounds, since this is the variable that we

expect is most poorly measured in our dataset.     The most natural way to

do this is to assume that the growth of the capital stock from year to

year contains a serially uncorrelated measurement error:


(25)           —       +

                   2
where Var(] —          and E[tc51 — 0 for st. This will imply a
cumulative measurement error in sk and rk, which are in levels, and this

is approximately consistent with the observed variances over time (not

shown). In practice we found that the model fit much better when this

type of measurement error was included. However, a disadvantage of this

kind of formulation is that a stationary measurement error on growth

rates induces nonstationary behavior of the variances and covariances of

the level variables. This fact plus the importance of the permanent

 firm effects leads us to rewrite our model in terms of first differences

 (growth rates) before estimating it in the next section.




                                         22
4. Estimation of the Model

        The model we estimated is based on that given in equations (16)

through (18) and (23), with the addition of measurement error in the

capital stock growth rate as discussed above. In order to eliminate the

firm-specific effects and to create a model whose variances and

covariances are stationary over time, we rewrite the equations for sk

and rk in terms of the growth rates of the variables:


(26) sj —      tlnu + (e1/(la))                      (lflEt.,.ujtlnEtiuiti)
               +   ln.i,t-r        +   amp.           +   time   dummies


(27) k1 ln +                 aln         +   (l/(l-Q.))        (iflEtUjt+rlflEt1ujt+r1)
               + C.
                    it
                         +    time     duiriniies




(28)           ln,1 + 1np                    +   (c-i)               + time   dununies



        The model of Section 2 assumed moving average processes of low

order for both lnu, and lne. (and therefore for in.) but our

preliminary estimates for                           (not shown) suggested an order at least

as high as the number of lags of data observed. The coefficients for

lnu on the other hand appeared to imply a moving average process of

order less than or equal to 3. Thus we were lead to model                                as an

autoregressive process of order one, which we write


(29) ln1 —      plne         t-1
                                   +
                                       6Oit
where        is normalized to have a unit variance. Thus, current                                is

a sufficient statistic for the joint distribution of future me's, and

since lnp. depends on current and past values of y only through
                                                                                         lnC.,



                                                          23
we assume that lntft also evolves as an AR(l) process in y. (and that the

processes are proportional):



(30) lnP —              +      +               + -xlnE + firm dummies



For the present, we assume that the firm dummies are small after

differencing (since the long lag covariances are small). Under these

assumptions, the equations of the estimating model may be expressed as

functions of the x process, the y process (lne) and two idiosyncratic

sources of error,            and    (assuming that overall year means have

been removed from the growth rates, so time dummies are no longer

needed).


 (31) q.  a x. + a y. + a zz.it
      it — x it   y it

 (32) ts. — A0x.  + (A 1-A0 )x.    +            .   .+   (A r-1-Ar-2 )x.
       it      it            i,t-l                                     i,t-r-+-l



              + (PA11+a?J7)x t-r
                                      +
                                               7+17+7÷i)x,71 +
              + ($nPn1+ai7n)xi t-n -       fnXi,tnl         + (l+a0) ln7

 (33)   Ak.   —
                     rrit      +                                 +


              + (fi
                     n-$n-l+a, n)x.
                                 i,t+r-n
                                           -
                                               finx.i,t+r-n-l + (l+c-y0 ln€.i,t
                                                                           )




              + C.
                  it


 (34) Ar1 —              +   (nr+l0l)r)xi,tl +              .   .+

              + (Cl)7?nXi t+r-n-l + (l+-y0p+(a-l)i0)lne1 ÷




                                          24
there      —   (1-a)   A, ...   fi — (l-a)    A.
From the fact that the covariogram of              is equal to

p8/(l-p2), p26/(l-p2)       .   , we can derive the implied
covariances of                      and hr..

        Equations (31) through (34) imply variances and covariances for q

and the observed growth rates of sales, capital, and R&D, and their lags

as functions of the unknown parameters and variances of the factors x,

y, z, and c. We use a minimum distance method described in Appendix A

to estimate the parameters of the model from the variances and

covariances of the data. The method uses the sample fourth moments of

the data to form an estimate of the variance of these second moments and

hence is robust to non-normality and serial correlation across lags.

       We used the three overlapping data samples described earlier for      -




estimation:    496 firms with data from 1978 through 1981 plus four lags,

539 firms with data from 1982 through 1985 plus four lags, and 367 firms

with    data from 1980 through 1985 plus six lags (as a check on our

specification of the order of the x and y processes). All three samples

produced qualitatively the same results.

        Table 4 shows estimates of our model for gestation lags r equal to




7. Note that we have now assumed e, the share of physical capital in the
total capital stock, to be the same across all firms for tractability.
The consequence of this assumption is -undoubtedly to underestimate the
contribution of the x factor to the variance in the As and Ak equations.




                                         25
2 and 38 Changing the gestation lag changes the implied restrictions

on the coefficients in a non-nested way so it is difficult to test the

two models against each other directly, although one can compare their

performance under the implied restrictions. In fact, the i-—3 model,

which has fewer parameters, actually fits quite a bit better, in spite

of the discussion in the previous section. Since capital is measured at

the end of the period in our model, this result implies that the sales

capital ratio takes at least two years and closer to three years to

respond to demand or profitability shocks completely. It is more

consistent with the results of Pakes and Griliches cited earlier, which

are based on similar data, than it is with the survey data. This is

partly because we are measuring the upper bound on the length of time it

takes to adjust the capital stock to shocks, while the survey-style

results cited give the average length of time. An additional problem

with the r'2 results is that the coefficients of the technological

accumulation shock process        are very poorly determined and unstable

across the different samples.

     Focusing on the r.3 estimates, we can see that although many of

the coefficients have plausible values, even this relatively simple

structural model is hard to identify in the data. The most disturbing

 (but interesting) result is that the autoregressive coefficient (p) for

 the technology process is near unity. Only in the longer sample were we




 8. Estimates for rl were uniformly far worse than the others in terms of
 the trace criterion and frequently failed to converge, so these are not
 shown.




                                 26
even able to estimate this coefficient; in the shorter samples it tended

to go toward one when it was freed up. Thus we have two processes

driving sales, investment, and R&D: a transitory profitability

(demand?) shock which is third order moving average- -that is, it
                                                                    decays
rather quickly- -and a technology shock which is nearly permanent. The

transitory shock is identified by the fact that it dies out quickly in

the investment and R&D processes: because the shock lasts only slightly

longer than the gestation lag of capital, capital and R&D respond only

to the changes implied by the last couple of lags in the moving average

process. The technology shock, on the other hand, is highly persistent

and is used by the model to explain the slowly moving individual trends

in the growth rates of sales, capital stock, and R&D.

     The estimated coefficients on the x process are quite reasonable:

all are positive and they imply that news about the profitability of the

firm peaks in the first two years and becomes close to zero by year four

(for example, $3 equal to 0.005 in the last column implies
                                                             A3 roughly
equal to 0.001, if we assume that the average a is 08). The

coefficients on y are another matter: again looking at the last column,

imagine a technology-associated shock to the firm's value which is equal

to the standard deviation of y. That is, the market value of the firm

rises 2.5 percent due to this shock. Through ôo this will translate

into a 21.5 percent fall in the productivity of existing R&D capital,

and through m   into   a 20 percent increase in the shadow value of the R&D

capital to the firm           This latter effect is not unreasonable

(since the sign of the value effects is the same), but the former is a

bit mysterious and suggests problems in our specification. It may be

plausible that declines in the amount of R&D capital obtained for a

given investment be associated with an increase in its value, but it is



                                       27
not obvious why this should be true.

        At the beginning of this investigation, the structural parameter in

which we had the most interest was a, the "adjustment cost" parameter

for knowledge capital. a specifies how R&D investments combine from

year to year to produce an intangible capital stock for the firm. Since

it is the parameter of a constant returns Cobb-Douglas specification for

capital, it should lie between zero and one. Our results for a turn out

to be somewhat inconclusive: the gestation lag assumption makes a large

difference in the estimated value of a, from near zero for r—2 to unity

when r—3.

        This latter estimate (from our preferred set of estimates) may not

be as unreasonable as it first appears and can be interpreted in the

following way: An estimate of a equal to unity means that the R&D

expenditures made in the most recent year are all that matter for

determining C, the stock of R&D capital that enters the profit

function. Now assume that R&D expenditures are constant in real terms

over time within the firm and           does not vary much. Then the

 function would simply be a multiple of current R&D expenditures,

 regardless of the value of a:


 (35)      G —

               —          (1.0)2)   -    R



 If a were unity, the same property would hold, independent of the pattern of

 R&D expenditure. Since in fact we know that the R&D for each firm does

 not vary much over the short time periods in this data (see the evidence

 in Hall, Criliches, and Hausman 1986 on the small within to total

 variance ratio for the logarithm of R&D expenditures), we do not have




                                        28
much power in the data to identify a, and a value of unity does as well

as anything else. Again, we have the finding that current R&D

expenditure suffices to describe the level of technological activity of

the firm once permanent firm differences have been removed (again,

compare the evidence in Hall, Griliches, and Hausman 1986 on the patent

productivity of R&D).

     The model and estimates here also allow us to say something about

the sources of the variance in the growth of sales, capital, and R&D

expenditures across firms. The allocation of these variance components

implied by the i-—2 and r=3 estimates on the longer sample is shown in

Table 5. As we have mentioned before, the results on q are basically

consistent with those of previous authors, although the variance

attributed to the profitability shock is a bit low when i--2.   The

interesting result is the allocation of the within-firm variance of the

growth of capital stock and R&D investment: most of the variance in the

growth of net capital stock can be attributed to measurement error

(since the associated shock is neither persistent nor correlated with

those in the other variables), and what remains is evenly distributed

across profitability and technology shocks. On the other hand, most of

the variance in the growth of R&D investment comes from the shock we

have labelled technological. The identification of this factor comes

from the transitory movements linking q, net investment, and R&D but is

not associated with immediate changes in the output-capital ratio. It

represents the part of changes in expectations about the future of the

firm that is orthogonal to changes in current profitability, and it

seems natural to label these as shifts in technological opportunity or

in the productivity of R&D.




                                      29
5. Conclusions

     In this paper, we have attempted to specify and estimate a

structural economic model of a forward-looking manufacturing firm

making investment decisions on two interrelated margins, so that we

could characterize the observed dynamics of sales, investment, R&D, and

market value in an interpretable fashion. Although the project has not

been a complete victory for the structural approach, we can draw a few

conclusions from the results. First, these manufacturing firms do

experience shocks to their environment that do not immediately affect

current output but which cause changes in R&D investment and investment

in physical capital that are effectively permanent. These shocks are

important in explaining the variance in the R&D growth rate, accounting

for over 90 percent of it. However, they are associated with at most

one-half of one percent of the variance of the year-to-year fluctuations

in the stock market value of the firms. The association is initially

positive for R&D: a technology-associated shock in the rate of return to

the firm is associated with much larger increase in current R&D spending

holding capital stock constant and with a slight (but insignificant)

decrease in net capital stock. Although there is a large burst in R&D

growth rates in the first year (on the order of eight times the growth

rate in market value), this is followed by very small declines in the

growth rates every year (since the shock is essentially permanent); by

about 25 years out, the actual change in R&D spending is zero, and then

the growth rate goes negative. But since the longest time period in our

data is about 12 years, this result is based on very tenuous

extrapolation of the time series process and is not reliable.

     The effects of the profitability shock are more sensible: When




                               30
there is good news in sales, this immediately causes increases of roughly

the same order of magnitude in the net capital stock and R&D
                                                               spending
which will be used to produce output in three years; these increases are

transitory in the sense that they work rather quickly. The puzzling

fact that the technology shock appears to produce small but permanent

declines in the growth of net capital and R&D spending can perhaps be

understood by recalling that the shock in question is only that part of

technology news which is not correlated with current output. Most of

such news may indeed be output related and so we are not identifying it

separately.

     How do our results compare to those of Lach and Schankerman (1988)?

Like them, we have transitory factors idiosyncratic to q and investment

(growth in net capital stock). The difference is that we require two

factors to explain the correlations between q, net capital growth, and

R&D investment growth; one factor is permanent like theirs and the

second one is transitory (and larger than the first) .   Although   the

response of R&D to the permanent factor (y) is similar in both our

estimates, they have investment responding more slowly but positively,

while we have net capital stock declining very slowly. Because we have

chosen a fundamentally different decomposition of the variables, further

comparisons become meaningless. Nevertheless, the interesting fact

remains that our model, like theirs, accounts for about 5 percent of

the total variance in year-to-year movements in the market value of the

firms.

     A second and distinct finding is that the upper bound on the

gestation lag of physical capital appears to be closer to two and one

half years than to one and a half year. Here, however, we must note a




                                     31
difficulty with our model's treatment of the gestation lag: the

assumption of a very precise integer gestation lag leads to clear

identification of the length of that lag from the covariances of s-k

and    under the assumption of constant returns. This identification

comes from the fact that the current capital-output ratio must contain

only the demand news that arrived since that capital was chosen (once

the permanent firm effect has been removed). If there is any smearing

across years in the purchase and installation of desired capital, this

sharp identification will break down, and sk will appear to Contain more

lags of the demand shock x, no matter what r we choose. This is what

happens in our data, and it cannot be accommodated in the existing

model, which makes estimation of r   very   difficult in our framework.




                                        32
                              TABLE 1

  THE IMPORTANCE OF R&D INVESTMENT IN THE U.S. MANUFACTURING SECTOR


        Total Manufacturing Sector                       Total Sample

Years P&E mv. R&D mv. Priv. R&D Rh              P.R/I   mv.      R&D   R/I

1951-55 12.02       4.11    2.33          .34     .19

1956-60 15.39       8.57    3.74          .56     .24

1961-65 19.09       12.54    5.46         .66     .29

1966-70 33.84       17.15    8.85         .51     .26

1971-75 43.50       21.24   13.16         .49     .30     63.0     14.5      .23


1976-80 82.57       34.57   23.07         .42     .28    124.0     23.5      .20

1981-85 130.93      63.87   43.44         .49     .33    173.0     42.0      .24



Variables:

P&E mv.: investment in plant and equipment by the manufacturing
sector, from the Economic Report of the President, 1986, Table B-Si.

R&D mv. and Private R&D mv.: Research and development expenditures
by the industrial sector, total and privately funded, from Science
Indicators, 1985.

The sample is all publicly traded manufacturing firms and is described
in Hall et al. (1985). For the sample, mv. is the total capital
expenditures (including structures), and R&D is the total R&D
expenditure for those firms that report.

All variables are five-year moving averages and are shown in current $.




                                     33
                                      TABLE 2

                   SIMPLE STATISTICS FOR THE VARIABLES

                                1974-1981: 496 Firms

Statistic                       As          Ak           Ar                         sk     rk
    *
Mean               0.18         108         .131         .119             .114    3.48    .045

Minimum            -0.87        -0.93       -0.92        -3.01        2.51        0.36    .001

Maximum             2.83        0.96         0.82        2.88         2.82        107.    9.16

Variance           .2703        .02 05      .0199        .083 3           2894     .366   1.57

Variance ratios:

within year/tot        .66        .88         .96          .99            .97       .99   1.00

within year- md/tot .65           .86         .95          .99            .97       .75    .57


within yr. -firm/tot .59          .71         .73           .88           .92       .09    .06



                                1978-1 985: 539 Firms

Mean                   0.20        .080       .110          .117          .096    3.203   .054

Minimum             -0.76        -0.87       -0.93        -3.01       -   2.45    0.28    .001

Maximum                2.94       0.96        0.92         2.71           3.93    53.0    5.62

Variance               .1825     .0251       .0249        .0776       .   2991    .381    1.53

Variance ratios:

within-year/tot          .88         .84           .94          .98        .96     .96    1.00

within year-md/tot        .87         .83          .92          .97         .96    .74      .55


within yr. -firm/tot      .79         .71          .73          .85         .92    .10      .07




Notes:
*
  For sk and rk, the geometric means of. the ratio variables s/k and r/k
 are shown. All other variables are growth rates.

 The row labelled "within/total" shows the ratio of the within year and
 industry variance to the total variance. The row labelled "within
 firm/total" shows the ratio of the within year and firm variance to the
 total variance.



                                              34
                                        TABLE 3

                         COVARIANCES OF THE SAMPLE DATA


                 367 Firms,   1980-1985     (with lags back to 1974)

                                 Auto Covariances

Lag                                 it 1
                               s. -k.
                                it      -
                                                    k.it               it it-i
                                                                   r. -k.


0           .1281 (.0070)     .227 (.009)          .0223 (.0013)   .602 (.021)

-1.         .0013 (.0037)     .208 (.009)          .0044 (.0005)   .558 (.019)
-2       -.0077 (.0032)       .195 (.009)          .0013 (.0005)   .529 (.019)
-3       -.0049 (.0034)       .184 (.008)       - .0004 (.0005)    .512 (.018)

-4       -.0042 (.0037)       .180 (.008)          .0006 (.0005)   .502 (.018)

-5          -.0057 (.0034)    .179 (.008)           0005 (.0005)   .489 (.018)

-6           .0025 (.0033)    .176 (.008)          .0010 (.0005)   .473 (.017)

First lag          1               3                       2             6
— 0 or conSt



Notes:

Covariances are estimated by methods due to MaCurdy (1985). Standard
errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity are shown in parentheses.

Tests were conducted for the hypothesis that the lagged covariances were
zero (columns 1 and 3) or equal (columns 2 and 4). The first lag for which
the test was accepted is shown in the table.




                                              35
                                  TABLE 3 (continued)


                                      Cross CovarianceS

                       g,k             g,rk           sk,tk         sk,rk        Ak,rk
Lag+   g,sk
                       - .0001         - .0064        - .0021        .117         .0073    *
-6        .0080

                       - .0015         - .0076        - .0024        .121         .0070    *
-5        .0055

                       - .0010         - .0060        - .0029        .124         .0081    *
-4        .0034

          .0019        - .0004         - .0059        - .0051   *    .124         .0070    *
-3

          .0032        - .0053    *    - .0132   *    - .0037        .130    *    .0094    *
-2

          .0208    *    .0017          - .0006        - .0021        .137    *    .0135    *
-1

0         .0296    *     .0116    *      .0128   *     .0160    *    .153    *     .0188


+1        .0206    *     .0080    *      .0111   *      .0114   *     .138   *   - .0003

+2        .0173    *     .0061    *      .0100   *      .0087   *     .128   *     .0016


+3        .0081          .0029           .0017          .0054   *     .120         .0016


+4        .0086          .0006           .0094          .0046 *       .117         .0047


+5        .0063         - .0005          .0042          .0049   *     .116         .0036

 +6        .0085         .0004           .0041          .0055 *       .111         .0023



 Notes:
 +
   The lag shown is for the second variable in each column. That is. the
 first entry in the first column is the covariance of q and sk(-6).
 *
   The starred covariances are significantly different from zero (a robust'
 t-statistic greater than 2). In column 5 (rk,sk), the t-statistic is for a
 difference from a "permanent" covariance of around 0.12.




                                                 36
                        TABLE 4: DYNAMIC FACTOIt MODEL ESTIMATES


                        Gestation lag(r) — 2                             Gestation lag(i) —          3


Sample*        78-81               82-85         80-85           78-81            82-85            80-85

a      -   .Oll(.3l0)        • 286( .098)    .081( .141)     l.08(.35)         l.08(.l4)         1.01(.1l)

A0         .084(.012)        .071( .005)     .063(.004)     .044(.021)         .l18( .003)       .111( .003)


A1         .159(.011)        .109( .004)     .099(.004)     .l78( .012)        •105( .005)       .099( .005)

                                                            .099( .020)        .068( .005)       •072( .005)
A2
           .027(.006)        •026( .003)     .025( .003)

           .02l(.008)        .017( .003)     .027(.003)      0l2(.007)         .002( .003)       .O05(.002)

           .0l7(.005)        .019( .007)     •008(.006)

           .0l7(.005)        .042(.007)      .027( .007)     .0l9( .005)       .040(.006)        •046(.006)
'13


10          27.(225.) -3.31(1.07) -9.41(12.43)- .902( .208)                -
                                                                               .909(.l19)    -
                                                                                                 .977(.lOS)
           .006(.053)    -
                             .063(.021)     -.022(.029)     -.l93(.063)    -
                                                                               .232(.032)    -
                                                                                                 .215(.025)
0(x)       .0l6(.019)        .070(.Oll)      .037( .010)     .025( .019)       .100( .010)       .071( .009)

c(y) .049(.0l3)              .035( .010)     .022( .008)     .043( .012)       .025(.009)        .025(.008)

0(z) .406(.012)              .288( .011)     .296( .009)     .411( .012)       •297( .011)       .303( .008)

0(c) .184(.OlO)              .l21(.004)      .lOS( .003)     .l67( .010)        126( .004)       .1l4( .003)
 **
p            .995               .995         •988( .006)        .995               995           .998( .002)

Trace 218.7                    372.5          396.2             213.2             332.7            367.1

#params 16                        16             17              15               15               16

#obs.         1984               2156           2202           1984               2156            2202


Notes to Table 4

x and y are the two common factors. z is the idiosyncratic factor in q,
and c is the idiosyncratic factor in tk. All estimates were obtained by
the generalized method of moments (see Appendix A for a description).
*
  The samples are defined in Tables 2 and 3. The 78-81 and 82-85 samples
have four lags, while the 80-85 sample has six.
**
   Estimates of p with no standard error were obtained by searching and
then fixing p, owing to convergence difficulties in the shorter samples.



                                                       37
                                 TABLE 5

                        VARIANCE DECOMPOSITION

                          367 Firms, 1980-1985


Var   r    Profitability Shock        Technology Shock    Measurement Error

             Variance                  Variance     %       Variance      %


      2       .0014        1.5             .0005   0.5       .0876      97.9
q

      3       .0050        5.2             .0006   0.6       .0918      94.2

As    2       .0114       90.8             .0012   9.2

                          92.6             .0020   7.4         --
      3       .0254

Ak    2        .0014       9.8             .0012   8.1       .0117      82.0

      3        .0027      15.1             .0020   11.4      .0130      73.5

Ar    2        .0011       2.3             .0454   97.7

                           4.3             .0468   95.7        --
       3       .0021



     The columns labelled percent show the fraction of the total
variance of year-to-year growth rates which is accounted for by the
factor (x, y, and the measurement errors z and £ in the last column).




                                     38
                                      APPENDIX A

                 MINIMUM DISTANCE ESTIMATION OF NONLINEAR

                         MODELS OF A COVARIANCE MATRIX


     The MOMENTS User's Manual (Hall 1987) describes how to estimate

models   of the form

           A(O)Y — B(8)X


where X — MVN (0,1) andY is an observed data matrix (T by N), by the

method of maximum likelihood. If the distribution of X is truly

multivariate normal, this method produces consistent, efficient, and

asymptomically normal estimates. However, if the normalizing

assumption fails, we might wish to use a more robust method such as

minimum distance. Another reason why a different estimating method

might be preferred is the following: The ML method maximizes a

likelihood of the form


            log L —    logO(6))   +   tr[M Q(O)J

where U(6) —   A1(8)    B(G) 1(0) B'(O) A'1(6), and H is the sample covariance

of Y. If N is large (greater than about 10), the determinant and

inversion routines necessary to evaluate the likelihood may easily

encounter numerical difficulties. Using a minimum distance method

overcomes this drawback also. Finally, the minimum distance method of

estimating this model may be easily implemented in TSP and, in fact,

involves only SUR estimation with a single observation, once the correct

covariance (weighting) matrix has been formed. This property arises




                                         39
from the fact that M —           (l/T)Y'Y   is a sufficient statistic for the data

under normality and hence may be used to estimate the second moments of

the model, although fourth moments are required to obtain correct

standard errors. The methodology used here is due to Chamberlain (1982)

and MaCurdy (1981, 1985) and is related to that of Hansen (1982).

       To use minimum distance on this model, we set up a series of equations

that are nonlinear in the parameters, using the theoretical model for Y

as a guide:


              vecE[Y'Y]" vecfl(9)


Then substitute the sample covariances of '1 for the expectation

 (population moment):


                                     —   vecE[Y'Y]+       — vecc)(8) + C
                  mt —   vec(YY')                     C



      is   an N by 1 vector, and             vecfl, and      are P—N(N+1)/2 by 1

 vectors. The properties of                 are that it is independent and

 identically distributed with mean zero and covariance matrix .                         The

 minimum distance method suggests that we minimize m -                     vecfl(9)   in the

 metric of its inverse variance, which is E. A consistent estimate of

 the variance of C may be obtained from the sample variance of

 m:
  t

                                 T
                  E —    (lIT)           vecM)(m vecM)'
       A
 where E is a P by P matrix and E(E) —
                  A
           Once       is obtained (which may be done once for any particular

 dataset Y), the parameter vector B may be estimated consistently and

 asymptomically efficiently by




                                                40
                                  T
              — argmin
                              (l/T)(m vec(9))' E(m vec())

The FOC for this problem is


          (vecM -
                                  A1
                        vecC(9))' E (8vecO(9)/39) —        0


This is also the FOC for the problem


              — argmin (vecM -        vecf(O))'
                                                  A1
                                                  E    (vecM -   vecU(8))
                    a


So in this case the method of moments and minimum distance will

coincide. Note that the second minimization depends only on the sample
                                                   A
covariance matrix vecM and its estimated covariance E. Depending on
the order of magnitude of the problem, this can create a considerable

savings in computation time. Note also that the trace criterion for the

second problem


          S   — (vecM     -   vec(8)) A1 (vecM         vec(8))


is precisely equal to the trace criterion for the first problem, multiplied

by T, the number of observations. This implies that the standard errors

resulting from minimizing S will need to be adjusted by a JT factor so they

have the correct order of magnitude. This is best done by dividing the
          A
estimated   by T before estimation.




                                           41
                                R.EFERNCES


           Jeffrey I., and H. Ishaq Nadiri. 1986.   "Research and
Bernstein,
     Development and Intraindustry Spillovers: An Emprical Application
     of Dynamic Duality." New York University. Photocopied.

Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1979. Capital Stock Estimates for
     I/O Industries: Methods and Data, Bulletin No. 2034. Washington,
     D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Chirinko, Robert. 1986. "Will the Neoclassical Theory of Investment
     Please Rise?: The General Structure of Investment Models and Their
     Implications for Tax Policy." University of Chicago and National
     Bureau of Economic Research. Photocopied.

Chirinko, Robert. 1987. "Investment, Tobin's Q, and Multiple Capital
     Inputs." University of Chicago and NBER. Photocopied.

Duffje, Darrell. 1988. Security Markets: Stochastic Models. New York:
     Academic Press.

Epstein, L. C., and M. G. S. Denny. 1983.   "The Multivariate Flexible
     Accelerator Model: Its Empirical Restrictions and an Application
     to u.s. Manufacturing." EconometriCa 51: 647-674.

 Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. 1987. "Permanent and Temporary
      Components of Stock Prices." Chicago: Center for Research in
      Security Prices Working Paper Number 178 (July).

 Griliches, Zvi.     1981. "Market Value, R&D, and Patents." Economics
      Letters 7.

 Griliches, Zvi, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Ariel Pakes. 1986. "Is There a
      Second (Technological Opportunity) Factor?" NBER. Photocopied.

 Hall, Bronwyn H. 1986. MOMENTS User's Manual. Palo Alto, CA:
      TSP International.

             1987. "The Relationship Between Firm Size and Firm
 _______
      Growth in the U.S. Manufacturing Sector." Journal of Industrial
      Economics 35: 583-606.

             1988. "Research and Development Investment and the Evolution
 _______
      of the U.S. Manufacturing Sector Econometric Studies at the Firm
      Level." Ph.D. diss., Stanford University.

 Hall, Bronwyn H., Clint Cummins, Elizabeth S. Laderman, and Joy A.
      Mundy. 1985; revised 1988. "The R&D Master File: Documentation."
      NEER. Photocopied.




                                        42
Hall, Bronwyn H., Zvi Griliches, and Jerry A. Hausman. 1986. "Patents
     and R&D: Is There a Lag?" International Economic Review 27: 77-106.

Hall, Robert E. 1977. "Investment, Interest Rates, and the Effect of
     Stabilization Policies." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

Hayashi, Fumio. 1982. "Tobin's Marginal q and Average q: A Neo-
     classical Interpretation." Econometrica 50: 556-69.

Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott. 1982. "Time to Build and
     Aggregate Fluctuations." Econometrica 50(6): 1345-71.

Lach, Saul, and Mark Schankerman. 1988. "The Interaction Between
     Capital Investment and R&D in Science-Based Firms." Journal of
     Political Economy, forthcoming.

Lucas, Robert E. 1967. Optimal Investment Policy and the Flexible
     Accelerator." International Economic Review 8: 78-85.

MaCurdy, Thomas E. 1985. "A Guide to Applying Time Series Models to
     Panel Data." Stanford University. Photocopied.

Mairesse, Jacques. 1987. "Le lois de la production ne sont plus ce
     qu'elles etaient: une introduction a l'econometric des panels."
     Revue economigue l(janvier 1988): 225-71.

Mairesse, Jacques, and Alan K. Siu. 1984. "An Extended Accelerator
     Model of R&D and Physical Investment," in R&D, Patents, and
     Productivity, Zvi Griliches, ed. Chicago: University of Chicago
     Press.

National Science Board. 1985. Science Indicators: The 1985 Report.
     Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Pakes, Ariel. 1985. "On Patents, R&D, and the Stock Market Rate of
     Return." Journal of Political Economy 93(2): 390-409.

 Pakes, Ariel, and Zvi Griliches. 1984. "Estimating Distributed Lags in
      Short Panels with an Application to the Specification of
      Depreciation Patterns and Capital Stock Constructs." Review of
      Economic Studies Vol. LI(2), No. 165.

 Poterba, James M., and Lawrence H. Summers. 1987. "Mean Reversion in
      Stock Prices: Evidence and Implications." NBER Working Paper No.
      2343.

 Sargent, Thomas. 1986. Dynamic Macroeconomic Theory. New York:
      Academic Press.

 Standard and Poor. 1985. Compustat Annual Industrial Data File.
      New York: Standard and Poor Corporation.

 U.S. President. 1986. Economic Report of the President. Washington,
      D.C. : U.S. Government Printing Office.




                                      43
