                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   WHEN ARE CONTRARIAN PROFITS DUE TO
                        STOCK MARKET OVERREACTION?




                               Andrew W. Lo

                            A Craig MacKinlay




                          Working Paper No. 2977




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  May 1989




We thank Andy Abel, Mike Gibbons, Don Keim, Bruce Lehmann, Rob Stambaugh a
referee, and seminar participants at Harvard University, University of
Maryland, University of Western Ontario, and the Wharton School for useful
suggestions and discussion. Research support from the Ceewax-Terker Research
Fund (MacKinlay), the National Science Foundation, the John M. Olin
Fellowship at the NEER (Lo), and the Q Group is gratefully acknowledged.
This paper is part of NBER's research program in Financial Markets and
Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper p2977
                                              May 1989


                       WHEN ARE CONTRARIAN PROFITS DUE TO
                            STOCK MARKET OVERREACTION?


                                        ABSTRACT




 The profitability of contrarian investment strategies need not be the result of stock mar-
 ket overreaction. Even if returns on individual securities are temporally independent,
 portfolio strategies that attempt to exploit return reversals may still earn positive ex-
 pected profits. This is due to the effects of cross-autocovariances from which contrarian
 strategies inadvertently benefit. We provide an informal taxonomy of return-generating
 processes that yield positive [and negative expected profits under a particular contrar-
 ian portfolio strategy, and use this taxonomy to reconcile the empirical findings of weak
 negative autocorrelation for returns on individual stocks with the strong positive auto-
 correlation of portfolio returns. We present empirical evidence against overreaction as
 the primary source of contrarian profits, and show the presence of important lead—lag
 relations across securities.




Andrew W. Lo                                   A. Craig MacKinlay
Sloan School of Management                     Department of Finance
M.I.T.                                         Wharton School
50 Memorial Drive                              University of Pennsylvania
Cambridge, MA 02139                            Philadelphia, PA 19104
1. Introduction.
     Since the publication of Louis Bachelier's thesis Theory of Speculation in 1900,
the theoretical and empirical implications of the random walk hypothesis as a model
for speculative prices have been subjects of intense interest to financial economists.
Although first developed by Bachelier from rudimentary economic considerations of
 "fair games," the random walk has received broader support from the many early
empirical studies confirming the unpredictability of stock price changes.1 Of course, it
is by now well-known that the unforecastability of asset returns is neither a necessary
nor a sufficient condition of economic equilibrium.2 And, in view of recent empirical
evidence, it is also apparent that historical stock market prices do not follow random
walks.3
     This fact surprises many economists because the defining property of the random
walk is the uncorrelatedness of its increments, and deviations from this hypothesis nec-
essarily imply forecastable price changes.4 Several recent studies have attributed this
forecastability to what has come to be known as the "stock market overreaction" hy-
pothesis, the notion that investors are subject to waves of optimism and pessimism and
therefore create a kind of "momentum" which causes prices to temporarily swing away
from their fundamental values.5 Although such a hypothesis may be intuitively appeal-
ing, and does yield predictability since what goes down must come up and vice-versa,
a well-articulated equilibrium theory of overreaction with sharp empirical implications
has yet to be developed. But common to virtually all existing "theories" of over-
reaction is one very specific empirical implication: price changes must be negatively
autocorrelated for some holding period.6 Therefore, the extent to which the data are
consistent with stock market overreaction, broadly defined, may be distilled into an
    See, for example, the papers in Cootner (1964), and Fama (1965, 1970).
   21n particular, see Leroy (1973) and Lucas (1978).
   3See, for example, Lo and MacKinlay (1988). Our usage of the term "random walk" differs slightly from the classical
definition of a process with independently and identically distributed increments. We are interested primarily in the
unconelatedneu of increment., and not in either independence or identically distributed innovations. Therefore, a process
with uncorrelated but heteroscedastic first-differences would fall into our definition of a random walk; see Lo and MacKinlay
(1988) for the exact statement of the random walk hypothesis that we implicitly use here.
   4flowever, our surprise must be tempered by the observation that forecasts of stock returns are still subject to random
fluctuations, so that profit opportunities are not immediate consequences of forecastability. Nevertheless, recent studies
maintain the possibility of significant profits, even after controlling for risk in one way or another.
   6For example, see DeBondt and Thaler (1985, 1987), Dc Long et. al. (1989), Lehmann (1988), Poterba and Summers
(1988), and Shefrin and Statman (1985).
    For example, DeBondt and Thaler (1985) write: "If stock prices systematically overshoot, then their reversal should
be predictable from past return data alone . . ." Other studies that consider overreaction also assume this either explicitly
or implicitly.




3.4                                                       —1—                                                          5.89
empirically decidable question: are return reversals responsible for the predictability
in stock returns?
     A more specific consequence of overreaction is the profitability of a contrarian
portfolio strategy, a strategy that exploits negative serial dependence in asset returns
in particular. The defining characteristic of a contrarian strategy is the purchase of
securities that have performed poorly in the past and the sale of securities that have per-
formed well.7 Selling the "winners" and buying the "losers" will earn positive expected
profits because current losers are likely to become future winners and current winners
are likely to become future losers when stock returns are negatively autocorrelated.
Therefore, it may be said that an implication of stock market overreaction is positive
expected profits from a contrarian investment rule. It is the apparent profitability
of several contrarian strategies that has led many to conclude that stock markets do
indeed overreact.
    In this paper we question the reverse implication that the profitability of contrar-
ian investment strategies is evidence of stock market overreaction. Whereas return
reversals may be sufficient to yield positive expected profits from a contrarian strat-
egy, they are not necessary. Indeed, as an illustrative example we construct a simple
return-generating process in which each security's return is temporally independent,
and yet will still yield positive expected profits for a portfolio strategy that buys losers
and sells winners. This seemingly counterlntuitive result is a consequence of positive
cross-cut ocovarsances across securities, from which contrarian portfolio strategies inad-
vertently benefit. For a single security in isolation, negative serial correlation is indeed
necessary and sufficient for the contrarian investor to earn positive expected profits.
However, when there are many securities to choose from the complex cross-effects
among the distinct assets break this link. Therefore, the fact that some contrarian
strategies have positive expected profits need not imply that stock markets overreact.
In fact, for the particular contrarian strategy we examine, over half of the expected
profits is due to cross-effects and not to negative autocorrelation in individual security
returns.
     However, the most striking aspect of our empirical findings is that these cross-
effects are generally positive in sign and have a pronounced lead—lag structure: the
          p.rformanc. I. d.fned and for whatlength of tim. generates as many different kinds of contrarian strategies as
there ar theories of overreaction.




 3.4                                                    —2—                                                       5.89
returns of large capitalization stocks almost always lead those of smaller stocks. This re-
sult, coupled with the observation that individual security returns are generally weakly
negatively autocorrelated, indicates that the recently documented positive autocorrela-
tion in weekly returns indexes is completely attributable to cross-effects. By exploiting
our contrarian strategy framework, we show that these cross-autocorrelations are incon-
sistent with a return-generating process that is the sum of a positively autocorrelated
common factor [which generates positive index autocorrelation] plus an idiosyncratic
bid-ask spread process [which yields weak negative serial dependence in individual re-
turns]. Although this is a negative result, it does provides important guidance for
theoretical models of equilibrium asset prices attempting to explain positive index au-
tocorrelation via time-varying conditional expected returns. Such theories must be
capable of generating lead—lag patterns, since it is the cross-autocorrelations that is
the source of positive dependence in stock returns.
     Since we focus only on the expected profits of the contrarian investment rule and
not on its risk, our results have implications for stock market efficiency only insofar as
they provide restrictions on economic models that might be consistent [or inconsistent]
with the empirical results. We do not assert or deny the existence of "excessive"
contrarian profits. Such an issue cannot be addressed without specifying an economic
paradigm within which asset prices are rationally determined in equilibrium.8 However,
we have found the contrarian investment strategy to be a convenient tool in exploring
the autocorrelation properties of stock returns. Moreover, our analysis of the nature
of expected profits does point to more specific sources of risk for contrarian strategies
that must be weighed in assessing market efficiency. We leave this more ambitious task
 to future research.
      In Section 2 we provide a summary of the autocorrelation properties of daily,
 weekly and monthly returns, documenting the positive dependence in portfolio returns
 and the negative autocorrelations of individual returns. Section 3 presents a formal
 analysis of the expected profits from a specific contrarian investment strategy under
 several different return-generating mechanisms, and shows how positive expected profits
 need not be related to overreaction. In Section 4 we attempt to empirically quantify
 the proportion of contrarian profits that may be attributed to overreaction and find
   8Some have accounted for rick in one way or another with mixed result.. For example, Chan (1988) claims that
 DeBondt and Thaler's (1985) excess profits are minimal after properly adjusting for risk, whereas Lehmann (1988) uses a
 continuous-time argument to conclude that his weekly trading strategy is excessively profitable.



 3.4                                                     —3—                                                       5.89
that a substantial portion cannot be. We show that a systematic lead—lag relation
among returns of size-sorted portfolios is the primary source of contrarian profits and
positive index autocorrelation. In Section 5 we provide some discussion of our use of
weekly returns in contrast to the much longer-horizon returns used in previous studies
of stock market overreaction, and we conclude in Section 6.



2. A Summary of Current Findings.

     In Table la we report the first four autocorrelations of weekly equal-weighted and
value-weighted returns indexes for the sample period from 6 July 1962 to 31 December
1987, where the indexes are constructed from the CRSP daily returns files.9 For this
sample period the equal-weighted index has a first-order autocorrelation of approx-
imately 30 percent. Since its heteroscedasticity-consistent standard error is 0.046, this
autocorrelation is statistically different from zero at all conventional significance lev-
els. The sub-period autocorrelations indicate that this significance is not an artifact of
any particularly influential sub-sample; equal-weighted returns are strongly positively
autocorrelated throughout the sample. Higher order autocorrelations are also posi-
tive although generally smaller in magnitude, and the decay rate is somewhat slower
than the geometric rate of an AR(1) [for example, is 8.8 percent whereas /2 is 11.6
percentj.
    To develop a sense of the economic importance of the autocorrelations, recall that
the R2 of a regression of returns on a constant and its first lag is the square of the slope
coefficient which is simply the first-order autocorrelation. Therefore, an autocorrelation
of 30 percent implies that 9 percent of weekly return variation is predictable by using
only the preceding week's returns. In fact, the autocorrelation coefficients implicit in
Lo and MacKinlay's (1988) variance ratios are as high as 49 percent for a sub-sample
of the portfolio of stocks in the smallest size quintile, implying an R2 of about 25
percent. This degree of predictability suggests that a profitable trading strategy might
be to switch from stocks to bonds when this week's predicted index return falls below
the risk-free rate, and vice-versa when it is above. With no transactions costs, the
profitability of such a trading rule may be readily verified.
   Unles. stated otherwise we take returns to be simple returns and not continuously-compounded. Our conitniction of
weekly returns is described in Lo and MacKinlay (1988).



34                                                    _4_.                                                    5.89
     It may therefore come as some surprise that individual returns are generally weakly
negatively autocorrelated. Table 2a reports the cross-sectional average of autocorrela-
tion coefficients across all stocks that have at least 52 non-missing weekly returns during
the sample period. For the entire cross-section of 4786 such stocks, the average first-
order autocorrelation coefficient, denoted by         is —3.4 percent with a cross-sectional
standard deviation of 8.4 percent. Therefore, most of the individual first-order auto-
correlations fall between —20 percent and 13 percent. This implies that most R2's of
regressions of individual security returns on their return last week fall between 0 and
4 percent, considerably less than the predictability of equal-weighted index returns.
Average higher-order autocorrelations are also negative, though smaller in magnitude.
The negativity of autocorrelations may be an indication of stock market overreaction
for individual stocks, but it is also consistent with the existence of a bid-ask spread.
We discuss this further in Section 3.
     Table 2a also reports average autocorrelations within size-sorted quintiles.'° The
negative autocorrelations are stronger in the smallest quintile but even the largest
quintile has average autocorrelations less than zero. Compared to the 30 percent auto-
correlation of the equal-weighted index, the magnitudes of the individual autocorrela-
tions indicated by the means [and standard deviations] in Table 2a are generally much
smaller.
     For completeness, we also report autocorrelations for returns on daily and monthly
indexes in Tables lb and ic; cross-sectional averages of autocorrelations for daily and
monthly returns on individual stocks are given in Tables 2b and 2c. Similar patterns
are observed: autocorrelations are strongly positive for index returns [35.5 and 14.8
percent p31's for the equal-weighted daily and monthly indexes respectively], and weakly
negative for individual securities [—1.4 and —2.9 percent 3's for daily and monthly
returns respectively].
     The general tendency for individual security returns to be negatively serially de-
pendent and for portfolio returns such as those of the equal- and value-weighted market
to be positively autocorrelated raises an intriguing issue. We mentioned earlier that
because the equal-weighted index exhibits strong positive autocorrelation, a profitable
investment strategy would be to allocate assets into equity when equity returns are high
  '°AIl eiie-socted portfolio. are conitructed by .orting only once ueing market va1ue of equity at the middle of the
.ample period], hence their compoeition doe. not change over time.




3.4                                                     —5—                                                   5.89
and into bonds when equity returns are low. This, however, is at odds with virtually
any contrarian strategy since it involves buying winners and selling losers. And yet
several contrarian strategies have also been shown to yield positive expected profits,'1
even though movements in the aggregate stock market do not support overreaction and
the returns of individual stocks are generally only marginally predictable. Is it possible
that contrarian profits are due to something other than overreacting investors? We
answer these questions in the next two sections.



3. Analysis of Contrarian Profitability.

     To reconcile the profitability of contrarian investment strategies with the posi-
tive autocorrelation in stock returns indexes, we examine the expected profits of one
such strategy under various assumptions on the return-generating process. Consider a
collection of N securities and denote by Rt the Nxl—vector of their period t returns
     • . . Ry]'. For convenience, we maintain the following assumption throughout this

section:

       (Al) R is a jointly covariance-stationary stochastic process with expectation
              E[R] =                 ••, N1' and autocovariance matrices E[(Rt.....k —
                     —      = r where, with no loss of generality, we take k 0 since
                 rk = r'_k.12

 In the spirit of virtually all contrarian investment strategies, consider buying stocks at
 time t that were "losers" at time t — k and selling stocks at time t that were "winners"
 at time t — k, where winning and losing is with respect to the equal-weighted return
 on the market. More formally, if w2(k) denotes the fraction of the portfolio devoted to
 security i at time t, let:
   "For .xaznpl., D.Bondt and Thaler (1985, 1987) and L.hmann (1988).
   t2Auuznption (Al) 1. made for notational simplicity, since joint covariance.stationaxity allows us to eliminate time-
 indexes from population moments such as and re; th. qualitative features of our results will not change under the
 weaker assumptions of weakly dependest heterogeneously distributed vectors R,. This would merely require replacing
 expectations with corresponding probability limits of suitably defined time-averages. For the results in this section, the
 added generality does not outweigh the expoaltiorial complexity that a weakei set of assumptions requires. However, the
 empirical result, of Section 4 are based on these weaker assumptions; interested reader. may refer to conditions (A2)—(A4)
 in Appendix 2.




 3.4                                                      —6—                                                         5.89
                        w2(k) =           —
                                              (Rit_k
                                                            —
                                                                Rmt_k)                                                (3.1)



where R...k                    Rjtk/N is the equally-weighted market index.13 If, for example,
k = 1 then the portfolio strategy in period t is to short the winners and buys the losers
of the previous period, t — 1. By construction, t(k) [.i(k) w2t(k) •.. wNt(k)]' is
an arbitrage portfolio since the weights sum to zero. Therefore, the total investment
long [or short] at time t is given by It(k) where:



                                            It(k)           Iw2t(k)l .                                                 (3.2)



Since the portfolio weights are proportional to the differences between the market
index and the returns, securities that deviate more positively from the market at time
t — k will have greater negative weight in the time t portfolio, and vice-versa. Such a
strategy is designed to take advantage of stock market overreactions as characterized,
for example, by DeBondt and Thaler (1985): "(1) Extreme movements in stock prices
will be followed by extreme movements in the opposite direction. (2) The more extreme
the initial price movement, the greater will be the subsequent adjustment." The profit
ir(k) from such a strategy is simply:

                                                              N
                                            irt(k) =        w(k)Rjt .                                                  (3.3)




Re-arranging (3.3) and taking expectations yields the following:14
  '3Thie is perhaps the simplest portfolio strategy that captures the essence of the contrarian principle. Lehmann (1988)
also consaders this strategy, although he employs a more complicated strategy in his empirical analysis in which the portfolio
weights (3.1) are re-normalised each period by a random factor of proportionality so that the investment is always one
dollar long and short. This portfolio strategy is also similar to that of DeBondt and Thaler (1985 1987) although in
contrast to our us of weekly returns they consider holding periods of three years. See Section 5 for further discussion.
  "The relatively straightforward derivation of this equation is included in Appendix 1 for completeness. This is the
population counterpart of Lehmann's (1988) sample moment equation (5) divided by N.




3.4                                                        —7—                                                          5.89
               E[irt(k)] = ____ —           tr(1')   —
                                                         1
                                                                     —
                                                                         )2        (34)



where sum             = sit/N and tr(.) denotes the trace operator. The first term
of (3.4) is simply the k-th order autocovariance of the equally-weighted market index.
The second term is the cross-sectional average of the k-th order autocovariances of the
individual securities, and the third term is the cross-sectional variance of the mean
returns. Since this last term is independent of the autocovariances 1'k and does not
vary with k, we define the profitability index Lk = L(rk) and the constant a2() as:



                                                              1
               ____   —
                            tr(rk)                                ::(su —     .    (3.5)



thus,
                             E[irt(k)1 = Lk      —
                                                     c2(su)   .                    (3.6)


For purposes that will become evident below we re-write Lk as the following sum:


               =       [t'rt tr(rjj}
                             —          —
                                             (V 1) tr(rk)                Ck + °k   (3.7)


where:




         Ck         [t'rkt—tr(rk)J      ,                    — (N_i) .tr(rk)       (3.8)



hence:


                          E(rt(k)] =    Ck   + °k —      a2(su) .                  (3.9)


3.4                                      —8—                                        5.89
Written this way, it is apparent that expected profits may be decomposed into three
terms, one [Ck] depending on only the off-diagonals of the autocovariance matrix rk, the
second [Ok] depending on only the diagonals, and a third [c2(z)] which is independent
of the autocovariances. This allows us to separate the fraction of expected profits due
to the cross-autocovariances Ck, versus the own-autocovariances °k of returns.
     From (3.9), it is clear that the profitability of the contrarian strategy (3.1) may
be perfectly consistent with a positively autocorrelated market index and negatively
autocbrrelated individual security returns. Positive cross-autocovariances imply that
the term Ck is positive, and negative autocovariance for individual securities implies
that °k is also positive. Conversely, the empirical finding that equal-weighted indexes
are strongly positively autocorrelated and that individual security returns are weakly
negatively serially dependent implies, through (3.7), that there must be significant
positive cross-autocorrelations across securities. To see this, observe that the first-
order autocorrelation of the equally-weighted index Rmt is simply:

                                                      — tr(ri)
             Cov[R,,_1, RJ       —
                                 —   _____   —                   + tr(r1)   .       3 10
                 Var[R]

The numerator of the second term of the right-hand side of (3.10) is simply the sum
of the first-order autocovariances of individual securities which, if negative, implies
that the first term must be positive in order for the sum to be positive. Therefore,
the positive autocorrelation in weekly returns may be attributed solely to the positive
cross-autocorrelations across securities.
     The expression for Lk also suggests that stock market overreaction need not be the
reason that contrarian investment strategies are profitable. To anticipate the examples
below, if returns are positively cross-autocorrelated then a return-reversal strategy
will yield positive profits on average, even if individual security returns are temporally
independent! That is, if a high return for security A today implies that security B's
return will probably be high tomorrow, then a contrarian investment strategy will be
profitable even if each security's returns are unforecastable using past returns of that
security only. The intuition for such a result is straightforward. Suppose there are
only the two stocks, A and B; if A's return is higher than the market today, we sell it
and buy B. But if A and B are positively cross-autocorrelated, a higher return for A


3.4                                      —9--                                        5.89
today implies a higher return for B tomorrow [on averages, thus we will have profited
from our long position in B [on average. Nowhere do we require that the stock market
overreacts, i.e., that individual returns are negatively autocorrelated. Of course, the
presence of stock market overreactions enhances the profitability of the return-reversal
strategy, but it is not necessary.
     To organize our understanding of the sources and nature of contrarian profits,
we provide four illustrative examples below. They are highly stylized special cases,
nevertheless they yield a useful informal taxonomy of conditions necessary for the
average profitability of the investment strategy (3.1).


3.1. The I.LD. Benchmark.
    Let returns Rt be both cross-sectionally and temporally independent. In this case
rk = 0 for all non-zero k hence:

                                        Lk=Ck=Ok=O                                                              (3.11)


                                      E[irt(k)]     =       —
                                                                c2(j) < 0.                                      (3.12)




Although      returns are both temporally and cross-sectionally unforecastable, the ex-
pected profits are negative as long as there is some cross-sectional variation in expected
returns. This is a result of the fact that our strategy is shorting the higher and buy-
ing the lower mean return securities respectively, a losing proposition even when stock
market prices do follow random walks.15 Since o2(iz) is generally of small magnitude
and does not depend on the autocovariance structure of Rt, we will focus on Lk and
ignore o2(i) for the remainder of Section 3.


3.2. Stock Market Overreaction and Fads.
    Almost any operational definition of stock market overreaction implies that indi-
vidual security returns are negatively autocorrelated over some holding period, so that
  'This provides a simpi. count.rexaznpl. to th. somewhat surprising implication that on. cannot sy,tematicafly lose
money   in th. stock market if price, follow random walks land there ar. no transactions costs). Multiple securities with
distinct mean. imply the exist.nc. of portfolio strategies with positive and negativ, expected returns.



3.4                                                     —   10   —                                                 5.89
"what goes up must come down" and vice-versa. If we denote by (k) the i,j-th
element of the autocovariance matrix rk, the overreaction hypothesis implies that the
diagonal elements of rk are negative, i.e., y(k) <0, at least for k = 1 when the span
of one period corresponds to a complete cycle of overreaction.'6 Since the overreaction
hypothesis generally does not restrict the cross-autocovariances, for simplicity we set
them to zero, i.e., -y3(k) = O,i j. Hence, we have:

                                         -y,1(k)       0        ...
                                                   y22(k)
                                                                                      (3.13)
                           Fk
                                 =(        0           0
                                                                                 ).
                                                                       '7NN(k)

The profitability index under these assumptions for R is then:



          =           = (N_l)t(r) = (N_1)(k) > 0                                      (3.14)



where the cross-autocovariance term Ck is zero; the positivity of Lk follows from the
negativity of the own-autocovariances, assuming N > 1. Not surprisingly, if stock
markets do overreact the contrarian investment strategy is profitable on average.
     Another price process for which the return-reversal strategy will yield positive
expected profits is the sum of a random walk and an AR(1), which has been recently
proposed as a model of "fads" and "animal spirits."17 Specifically, let the dynamics
for the log-price X1 of each security i be given by:


                                                   =Y+Z                               (3.15)

where

                                         =i+                    + Lt                  (3.16)


                                         = pjZj.1 + z.'               0 <p < 1        (3.17)
  We dicuu thu further in Sectio 5.
  'TSee for exarripte,. Summer, (I86).

 3.4                                               —   11   —                           5.89
and the disturbances {jt} and {i.'} are temporally, mutually, and cross-sectionally
independent at all positive leads and lags.18 The k-th order autocovariance for the
return vector R is then given by the following diagonal matrix:


                        = diag [       _iP101                                  N'N ]                .         (3.18)



The profitability index follows immediately:



                                                                N—i
        =            = — (N_i) .tr(rk)                                   .p_1+;tc1 > 0 (3.19)

Since the own-autocovariances in (3.18) are all negative this is a special case of (3.13)
and may therefore be interpreted as an example of stock market overreaction. However,
the fact that returns are negatively autocorrelated at all lags is an artifact of the first-
order autoregressive process and need not be true for the sum of a random walk and a
general stationary process, a model that has been proposed for both stock market fads
and time-varying expected returns.'9 For example, let the "temporary" component of
(3.15) be given by the following stationary AR(2) process:


                                          = z_1             —              + zij .                             (3.20)


It is easily verified that the first-difference of Z is positively autocorrelated at lag 1
implying that L1 < 0. Therefore, stock market overreaction necessarily implies the
profitability of the portfolio strategy (3.1) [in the absence of cross-autocorrelation[, but
stock market fads do not.
  "This last assumption requires only that e, is independent of c,.+.k for k   0. hence the disturbance, may be contem-
poraneously cross-sectionally dependent without loss of generality.
  '5For example, see Fazna and French (1988) and Summers (1986).




3.4                                                     —   12 —                                                 5.89
3.3. Trading on White Noise and Lead—Lag Relations.
       Let the return-generating process for Rt be given by:


                R.it   =p   + /31At_ + Et ,                      f3 > 0   ,         (3.21)


where At is a temporally independent common factor with zero mean and variance
    and the €t'5 are assumed to be both cross-sectionally and temporally independent.
These assumptions imply that for each security i, its returns are white noise with drift]
so that future returns to i are not forecastable from its past returns. This temporal
independence is certainly not consistent with either the spirit or form of the stock
market overreaction hypothesis. And yet it is possible to predict i's returns using past
returns of security j, where 5 < i. This is obviously an artifact of (3.21) in which the
return on the i-th security depends positively on a lagged common factor, where the
lag is determined by the security's index. This implies that the return of security 1
leads that of securities 2, 3, etc.; the return of security 2 leads that of securities 3,
4, etc.; and so on. Alternatively, observing the return on security 1 today will help
forecast the return on security 2 tomorrow, but today's return on security 2 provides
no information for how security 1 will fare tomorrow. This lead—lag relation will induce
positive expected profits for the contrarian strategy (3.1). To see this, observe that:


                             o   /31/32        0         0 ...            ()
                             o     0          /32/33 0 •..                0
                       =                                 :        ..                (3.22)
                                                         0 ...
                             o
                             o
                                   o
                                   0           0 0" 0
                                               0                       13N-113N




                             0 0 /31/33              0           ...          0
                             00           0        132/34                     0
                                                                 •..
                   I'2 =      00          0          0
                                                                                    (3.23)

                              00 0
                              00 0                   0
                                                     0
                                                                       13N—313N—1
                                                                               0
                                                                               0



 3.4                                            —   13       —                        5.89
and, more generally, when k < N then rk has zeros in all entries except along the
k-th super-diagonal, for which ji+k = cI3I3+k. For future reference, observe that a
characteristic of the lead—lag model is the asymmetry of the autocovariance matrix rk.
The profitability index in this case is:


                                                         I3I3+i > 0.               (3.24)



From this example the importance of the cross-effects is evident; although each security
is individually unpredictable, a contrarian strategy may still profit if securities are
positively cross-correlated at various leads and lags. Moreover, it should be apparent
that less contrived return-generating processes will also yield posilive expected profits
to contrarian strategies as long as the cross-autocovariances are sufficiently large. One
source of such cross-effects may be non-synchronous trading, as in the models of Scholes
and Williams (1977) and Cohen et. a!. (1986). For example, the non-trading process
proposed by Cohen et. a!. induces the following time series properties in observed
returns when true returns are generated by the market model:20

 1. Individual returns are negatively autocorrelated.
 2. A market index composed of observed returns to securities with positive betas will
      exhibit positive serial dependence.
 3. Cross autocorrelations of returns for securities i and j will be non-zero, and of the
    same sign as f3f3.


If securities' betas are generally of the same sign, then non-trading induces positive
cross-effects; coupled with the negative individual autocorrelations, this yields positive
expected profits for a contrarian investment strategy. However, Lo and MacKinlay
(1989) show that the magnitudes of cross-effects documented in Section 4 cannot be
completely attributed to non-synchronous trading biases.
 2o Chapter 6 of Cohen et. al. (1986).




3.4                                         —   14   —                               5.89
3.4. A Positively Dependent Common Factor and the Bid-Ask Spread.
     One plausible return-generating mechanism that is consistent with positive index
autocorrelation and negative serial dependence in individual returns is to let each Rj be
the sum of three components: a positively autocorrelated common factor, idiosyncratic
white noise, and a bid-ask spread process.21 More formally, let:


                                   R2                + /3At + rit         + jt                               (3.25)


where:

                           EEAt] = 0              EIAtAt+k]              y(k) > 0                            (3.26)



                                              = E[ti2]               0     V    i,t                          (3.27)




                             E[€1tE2t+k] = { o
                                                          or if k = 0 and i = j.                             (3.28)
                                                                   otherwise.


                            E[tt+k1 = { — if k = 1 and i = j.
                                        o otherwise.
                                                                                                              (3.29)




We have implicitly assumed in (3.29) that Roll's (1984) model of the bid-ask spread
obtains so that the first-order autocorrelation of 17j is the negative of one-fourth the
square of the percentage bid-ask spread s, and all higher-order autocorrelations and
all cross-correlations are zero. Such a return-generating process will yield a positively
autocorrelated market index since averaging the white-noise and bid-ask components
will trivialize them, leaving the common factor At. Yet if the bid-ask spread is large
enough, it may dominate the common factor for each security, yielding negatively
autocorrelated individual security returns.
 21 Thu   is suggted in Lo and MaKinlay (1988). Conrad, Kaul, and Nimalendran (1988) investigate a similar speciflca-
tion.




3.4                                                   —   15   —                                                5.89
      The autocovariance matrices for (3.25) are given by:



                          =                 — diag[s 4, ..., sq]                   (3.30)



                      rk = (k)j33'            k> 1                                 (3.31)



where 13   [i3. /2    I3NY• In contrast to the lead—lag model of Section 3.3, the au-
tocovariance matrices for this return-generating process are all symmetric. This yields
an important empirical implication that distinguishes the common factor model from
the lead—lag process and will be exploited in our empirical appraisal of overreaction.
     Denote by 13m the cross-sectional average Ei /31/N. Then the profitability index
is given by:



                                                                                    (3.32)
                    L1        _pr1)(13i_13m)2 + N1fç
                                  7A(k)                  k> 1.
                    Lk        —           >(i — 13m)2                               (3.33)



From (3.32), it is evident that if the bid-ask spreads are large enough and the cross-
sectional variation of the /3k' is small enough, the contrarian strategy (3.1) may yield
positive expected profits when using only one lag [k = 1 in computing portfolio weights.
However, the positivity of the profitability index is due solely to the negative autocorre-
lations of individual security returns induced by the bid-ask spread. Once this effect is
removed, which is the case when portfolio weights are computed using lags 2 or higher,
relation (3.33) shows that the profitability index is of the opposite sign of the index
autocorrelation coefficient -IA(k); since -y(k) > 0 by assumption, expected profits are
negative for lags higher than 1. In view of our empirical analysis of Section 4 which
shows that Lk is still positive for k > 1, it seems unlikely that the return-generating
process (3.25) can account for the weekly autocorrelation patterns of Lo and MacKinlay
(1988).
3.4                                          —16—                                     5.89
4. An Empirical Appraisal of Overreaction.
     To examine the extent to which contrarian profits are due to stock market over-
reaction, we estimate the expected profits from the return-reversal strategy of Sec-
tion 3 for several samples of CRSP NYSE—AMEX securities. Recall that E[irt(k)] =
Ck + 0k — a2 (hz) where Ck depends only on the cross-autocovariances of returns and °k
depends only on the own-autocovariances. Table 3a presents estimates of E[7rt(k)], Ck,
°k' and a2(j) for the 551 stocks that have no missing weekly returns during the entire
sample period from 6 July 1962 to 31 December 1987. Estimates are computed for
the sample of all stocks and for three size-sorted quintiles. We develop the appropriate
sampling theory in Appendix 2, in which the covariance-stationarity assumption (A2)
is relaxed and replaced with assumptions (A2)—(A4) that allow for weakly dependent
heterogeneously distributed returns.
      Consider the last three columns of Table 3a which report the magnitudes of the
three terms Ok, 0k' and a2() as percentages of expected profits. At lag 1 half the
expected profits from the contrarian strategy is due to positive cross-autocovariances.
In the cential quintile about 67 percent of the expected profits is attributable to these
cross-effects. The results at lag 2 are similar; positive cross-autocovariances account
for about 50 percent of the expected profits, 66 percent for the smallest quintile.
     The positive expected profits at lags 2 and higher provide direct evidence against
the common component/bid—ask spread model of Section 3.4. If returns contained a
positively autocorrelated common factor and exhibited negative autocorrelation due to
 "bid-ask bounce," expected profits can be positive only at lag 1; higher lags must exhibit
negative expected profits as (3.33) shows. Table 3a shows that estimated expected
profits are significantly positive for lags 2 through 4 in all portfolios except one.
     The z-statistics for Ck, Ok, and Elirt(k)] are asymptotically standard normal under
the null hypothesis that the population values corresponding to the three estimators are
zero. At lag 1 they are almost all significantly different from zero at the 1 percent level.
At higher lags, the own- and cross-autocovariance terms are generally insignificant.
However, estimated expected profits retains its significance even at lag 4, largely due to
the behavior of small stocks. The curious fact that E[irt(k)] is statistically different from
zero whereas Ck and °k are not suggests that there is important negative correlation




3.4                                       —   17   —                                    5.89
between the two estimators Ck and Ok.22 That is, although they are both noisy
estimates, the variance of their sum is less than each of their variances because they
co-vary negatively. Since Ck and Ok are both functions of second moments and co-
moments, significant correlation of the two estimators implies the importance of fourth
co-moments, perhaps as a result of co-skewness or kurtosis. This is beyond the scope
of our paper, but bears further investigation.
     Table 3a also reports the average long [and hence short] positions generated by
the return-reversal strategy over the 1330-week sample period. For all stocks the aver-
age weekly long/short position is $152, corresponding to profits of $1.69 per week on
average. In contrast, applying the same strategy to a portfolio of small stocks yields
an expected profit of $4.53 per week, but requires only $209 long and short each week
on average. The ratio of expected profits to average long investment is 1.1 percent
for all stocks, and 2.2 percent for stocks in the smallest quintile. Of course, in the
absence of market frictions such comparisons are irrelevant since an arbitrage portfolio
strategy may be scaled arbitrarily. However, if the size of one's long/short position is
constrained, as is sometimes the case in practice, then the average investment figures
reported in Table 3a suggest that applying the contrarian strategy to small firms would
be more profitable on average. Alternativel', this may imply that the behavior of small
stocks is the more anomalous from the perspective of the efficient markets hypothesis.23
     Using stocks with continuous listing for over twenty years obviously induces a
survivorship bias that is difficult to evaluate. To reduce this bias we perform similar
analyses for two sub-samples: stocks with continuous listing for the first and second
halves of the 1330-week sample respectively. These results are reported in Tables 3b
and 3c. The patterns are virtually identical. In both sub-periods positive cross-effects
account for at least 50 percent of expected profits at lag 1, and generally more at higher
lags.
     To develop further intuition for the pattern of these cross-effects we report in
Table 4 cross-autocorrelation matrices 'k for the vector of returns on the five size-
sorted quintiles and the equal-weighted index using the first sample of 551 stocks.
Specifically, let Zt denote the vector [Rit R2g R3 R4f R5t Rm]' where R.t is the return
    We hay. investigated the unlikely possibility that g2() is responsible for this anomaly; it is not.
    Of course we cannot infer from this that the market for small capitalization equity is less efficient than the market for
larger stocks sinc, smaller stocks may be more rj,ky. Moreover, no attempt has been made to control for market depth.
Thu. two factors rmght explain the differential in expected profits per dollar long/short between size-sorted portfolios.




3.4                                                      —18—                                                         5.89
on the equal-weighted portfolio of stocks in the i-th quintile and Rmtis the return on
                                                                                     —
the equal-weighted portfolio of all stocks. Then we let Tk D_h/2E[(Zt_k —
j)']D'/2 where D diag[c,. . .                and       E[Z]. By this convention, the
i,j-th element of Tk is the correlation of R1t_k with R3. The estimator Tk is the
usual sample autocorrelation matrix. Note that it is the upper left 5x5 partition of
Tk that corresponds to our definition of rk, since the full matrix Tk also contains
autocovariances between portfolio returns and the equal-weighted market index Rmt 24
    An interesting pattern emerges from Table 4: the entries below the diagonals of
    are almost always larger than those above the diagonals [excluding the last row
and column, which are the autocovariances between portfolio returns and the marketi.
This implies that current returns of smaller stocks are correlated with past returns of
larger stocks, but not vice-versa. This is strong evidence in favor of a distinct lead—lag
relation: the returns of large stocks tend to lead those of small stocks. For example,
the first-order autocorrelation between last week's return on large stocks {R5t_ i] with
this week's return on small stocks [Ru] is 27.6 percent, whereas the first-order autocor-
relation between last week's return on small stocks [Rit_i1 with this week's return on
large stocks [R5t] is only 2.0 percent! Similar patterns may be seen in the higher-order
autocorrelation matrices, although the magnitudes are smaller since the higher-order
cross-autocorrelations decay. The asymmetry of the tk matrices implies that the au-
tocovariance matrix estimators rk are also asymmetric. This provides further evidence
against the return-generating process (3.25) of Section 3.4, since that model implies
symmetric autocovariance matrices.
     The results in Tables 3 and 4 point to the complex patterns of cross-effects among
securities as significant sources of positive index autocorrelation as well as expected
profits for contrarian investment rules. Moreover, the presence of these cross-effects has
important implications irrespective of the nature of contrarian profits. For example,
if such profits are genuine, the fact that at least half may be attributed to cross-
autocovariances suggests further investigation of mechanisms by which aggregate shocks
to the economy are transmitted from large capitalization companies to small ones.



  34We include the market return in our autocovariance matricee so that thoee who are interested may compute portfoUo
betas and market volatilities from our tables.




 3.4                                                  —   19   —                                               5.89
5. Long Horizons Versus Short Horizons.

     Since many recent studies have employed longer-horizon returns in examining con-
trarian strategies and predictability of stock returns, we should provide some discussion
of our choice to focus exclusively on weekly returns. Because our analysis of the con-
trarian investment strategy (3.1) uses only short-horizon returns, we have little to say
about the behavior of long-horizon returns. Distinguishing between short and long
return horizons is important, as it is now well-known that weekly fluctuations in stock
returns differ in many ways from movements in three- to five-year returns. There-
fore, inferences concerning the performance of the long-horizon strategies cannot be
drawn directly from short-horizon results such as ours. Nevertheless, some suggestive
comparisons are possible.
      Statistically, the predictability f short-horizon returns, especially in weekly and
monthly returns, is stronger and more consistent through time. For example, Blume
and Friend (1978) have estimated a time series of cross-sectional correlation coefficients
of returns in adjacent months using monthly New York Stock Exchange data from 1926
to 1975, and found that for 422 of the 598 months the sample correlation was negative.25
This proportion of negative correlations is considerably higher than expected if returns
are unforecastable. Moreover, in their framework a negative correlation coefficient
implies positive expected profits in our equation (3.4) with k = 1. Jegadeesh (1988)
provides further analysis of monthly data and reaches similar conclusions.
      The results are even more striking for weekly stock returns. For example, Lo and
MacKinlay (1988) show evidence of strong predictability for portfolio returns using
 New York and American Stock Exchange data from 1962 to 1985. Using the same
 data, Lehmann (1988) shows that the profits of a contrarian strategy similar to (3.1)
 is virtually always profitable. Not surprisingly, such profits are sensitive to the size
of the transactions costs; for some cases a one-way transactions cost of 0.40 percent
is sufficient to render them positive half the time and negative the other half. The
importance of Lehmann's findings obviously hinge on the relevant costs of turning over
  35Sp.cifically, for every pair of adjacent month. t — 1 and t, Blum. and Friend (1978) compute the following statistic p,:

                                                  E,(Rj,..., — R,.,_1)(R, —
                                  p.
                                                        — R,u.*—i)2 /31(R1, —

where   R, = .     Rfl/N, and N, is the number of securities with non-missing returns in months — 1 and t. Note that p
is proportional to the profits (3.3) of the contrarian strategy (3.1) [where the factor of proportionality is always negative[.




3.4                                                       —   20 —                                                       5.89
securities frequently, an issue that is not considered in this paper. However, the fact
that our Table 3a shows the smallest firms to be the most profitable on average [as
measured by the ratio of expected profits to the dollar amount long[ may indicate that
0.80 percent roundtrip transactions costs are low. In addition to the bid-ask spread,
which is generally $0.125 or larger and will be a larger percentage of the price for
smaller stocks,26 the price impact of trades on these relatively thinly traded securities
may become important.
     Evidence regarding the predictability of long horizon returns is somewhat mixed.
Perhaps the most well-known studies of a contrarian strategy using long horizon returns
are those of DeBondt and Thaler (1985, 1987) in which winners are sold and losers
are purchased, but where the holding period over which "winning" and "losing" is
determined is three years. Based on data from 1926 through 1981 they conclude that
the market overreacts since the losers outperform the winners. However, Chan (1988)
challenges their conclusion and finds that the performance differences can be largely
explained by differences in risk. Moreover, the behavior of DeBondt and Thaler's
(1985) cumulative average residual plots, and the results of Lehmann (1989), suggest
that short-horizon return reversals may be responsible for the long-horizon effect.
     Fama and French (1988) and Poterba and Summers (1988) have also examined
the predictability of long horizon returns in a portfolio context, and conclude that
there is negative serial correlation in long horizon returns — a result which is consistent
with those of DeBondt and Thaler. However, this negative serial dependence is quite
sensitive to the sample period employed and may be largely due to the first ten to twenty
years of the 1926 to 1989 samp1e. Furthermore, the statistical procedure on which
the long-horizon predictability is based has been questioned by Richardson (1988).
Richardson has shown that properly adjusting for the fact that multiple time horizons
[and test statisticsl are considered simultaneously yields serial correlation estimates
that are statistically indistinguishable from zero.
     These considerations point convincingly to short-horizon returns as the more im-
mediate source from which evidence of predictability and stock market overreaction-
might be culled. Of course, this is not to say that nothing may be gleaned from a
careful investigation of returns over longer time spans. Indeed, it may be only at these
 26SmaIler itock. tend to have lower price..
 See Kim, Nel.on, and Start. (1988).




3.4                                            —   21   —                             5.89
lower frequencies that the impact of economic factors such as the business cycle is
detectable. Moreover, to the extent that transaction costs are greater for strategies
exploiting short-horizon predictability, allowing the predictability to persist without
representing any unexploited profit opportunities, long-horizon predictability may be
the more significant issue.



6. Conclusion.
      Traditional tests of the random walk hypothesis for stock market prices have gen-
erally focused on either the returns to individual securities or to portfolios of securities.
In this paper we show that the cross-sectional interaction of security returns over time
is an important aspect of stock price dynamics. As an example, we document the fact
that stock returns are often positively cross-autocorrelated, which reconciles the nega-
tive serial dependence in individual security returns with the positive autocorrelation
 in market indexes. This also shows that stock market overreaction need not be the sole
 explanation for the profitability in contrarian portfolio strategies. Indeed, the empirical
 evidence suggests that less than 50 percent of the expected profits from a contrarian
 investment rule may be attributed to overreaction; the majority of such profits is due
 to the cross-effects among the securities. We have also shown that these cross-effects
 have a very specific pattern for size-sorted portfolios: they display a lead—lag relation,
 with the returns of larger stocks generally leading those of smaller ones.
       The tantalizing question remains: What are the economic sources of positive cross-
  autocorrelations across securities? One possibility that is consistent with lead—lag be-
  havior is that different sectors of the economy have different sensitivities to macroe-
  conomic shocks, sensitivities that may be determined by factors such as the degree of
  vertical and horizontal integration, concentration, market share, etc. Why this should
  manifest itself in size-sorted portfolios is still a mystery and remains to be investigated.




  3.4                                       —   22   —                                   5.89
                Appendix 1 — Derivation of (3.4)




                  N                                      N
    irt(k) =                           = — ,j(Rt_k—R,t_k)R.jt               (A1.i)
                                                        i=1


            --
            —         1
                           N
                          >RitkRit + >Rmt_kRtt
                          i=1
                           N
                                                         N

                                                         i=1
                                                                            (A1.2)


            —
            —    -N   1
                                -it-kit + R,_kRmt                           (A1.3)
                          1=1


                          N
              1
E[irt(k)} = — —
              N 1=1 E[R1_E1•] + E[R,_kR]                                    (A1.4)

                          N
                      1
            =
                                {cov[1t_k, .ti +                    +
                 —

                          1=1

                                      {   COV[R,_k,R1 +,}                   (ALS)



            --
            —         1
                          tr(rk) —
                                          1
                                              N

                                              1=1
                                                    2
                                                         +
                                                               N2
                                                                        +   (A1.6)



                                                         N
E[irt(k)]
            —    ilrk     —     1
                                    tr(1'j) —                   —
                  N2                                                        (A1.7)
                                                         i=1




 3.4                                           —    23                         5.89
            Appendix 2 — Sampling Theory for Ok, 0k' and E{7rt(k)1


                                                                         we re-express
To derive the sampling theory for the estimators 0k Ok, and Eirt(kfl,
them as averages of artificial time series and then apply standard asymptotic theory to
those averages. We require the following assumptions:

    (A2)     For all t, 1, j, and k the following condition is satisfied for finite constants
              K> 0, 5 > 0, and r 0:


                                                                 < K < 00 .             (A2.1)


    (A3)      The vector of returns Rt is either a-mixing with coefficients of size 2r/ (r — 1)
              or 4-mixing with coefficients of size 2r/(2r — 1).


These assumptions specify the trade-off between dependence and heterogeneity in R
that is admissible while still permitting some form of the central limit theorem to
obtain. The weaker is the moment condition (A2), the quicker the dependence in R
must decay, and vice-versa.28 Observe that the covariance-stationaritY of R is not
required. Denote by C and O the following two time series:



                                                             —                      —
                   Ckt           Rmt_k1rnt —                                            (A2.2)



                                 - N-i (t_kt -                                           (A2.3)




 where j2 and      j
                  are the usual sample means of the returns to security i and the
 equally-weighted market index respectively. Then the estimators Ck, Ok, and 2(i2)
 are given by:
  21   Phillips (1987) and White (1984) for further diecusilon of this trade-off.



 3.4                                                    —   24   —                          5.89
                                   Ck =          T-k t=k+1 Ckt                 (A2.4)



                                   Ok       =
                                                 T—k        E
                                                           t=k+1
                                                                 °kt           (A2.5)

                                                      N
                                            =                  —       .       (A2.6)




Because we have not assumed covariance-stationarity, the population quantities Ck
and °k obviously need not be interpretable according to (3.8) since the autocovariance
matrix of R may now be time-dependent. However, we do wish to interpret Ck and
   as some fixed quantities which are time-independent, thus we require the following:

      (A4)   The following limits exist and are finite:
                                                  T
                                        1
                             lim                         E[Cj] =       Ck      (A2.7)
                                                t=k+ 1
                                                  T
                                        1
                           T-400T-k t=k+1 E[OJ
                             urn                                                (A2.8)



Although the expectations E[C1 and E[Okt] may be time-dependent, assumption
(A4) asserts that their averages converge to well-defined limits, hence the quantities
Ck and °k may be viewed as "average" cross- and own-autocovariance contributions
to expected profits. Consistent estimators of the asymptotic variance of the estimators
Ck and Ok may then be obtained along the lines of Newey and West (1987), and are
given by ôr and ô respectively, where:



                         =                                 + 2c5(q)C(j) }       (A2.9)
                              T-k {              k(O)




3.4                                               —   25   —                      5.89
                               =
                                       T— k        Ok(0)     + 2a(q)o(i) }      (A2.1O)
                                               {
                                                     1—
                                                             q±1'
                                                                    q<T


and 'Ck() and ok(j) are the sample j-th order autocovariances of the time series Ckt
and    O respectively, i.e.:



                                   =                         (C_—Ok)(Ckt—Ck)     (A2.11)
                                        T—k
                                                   t=k+j+1

                      10k(3)
                                   =                         (O — Ok)(Okt -      (A2.12)
                                        T—k
                                                   t=k+j+1


Assuming that q - o(T1/4), Newey and West (1987) show the consistency of & and
ô under our assumptions (A2)—(A4).29 Observe that these asymptotic variance esti-
mators are robust to general forms of heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation in the Ckt
and O time series. Since the derivation of heteroscedasticity- and autocorrelation-
consistent standard errors for the estimated expected profits E[irt(k)] is virtually iden-
tical, we leave this to the reader.




  291n our empirical work we choose q =   8.




 3.4                                                   —   26   —                     5.8
                                       References


Atchison, M., Butler, K. and R. Simouds, 1987, "Nonsynchronous Security Trading
   and Market Index Autocorrelation," Journal of Finance 42, 111—118.
Bachelier, L., 1900, Theory of Speculation, reprinted in P. Cootner (ed.), The Random
   Character of Stock Market Prices, M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, 1964.
Blume, M., and I. Friend, 1978, The Changing Role of the Individual Investor, John
      Wiley and Sons, New York.
Chan, K. C., 1988, "On the Return of the Contrarian Investment Strategy," Journal
      of Business 61, 147—164.
Cohen, K., Maier, S., Schwartz, R. and D. Whitcomb, 1986, The Microstructure of
      Securities Markets, Prentice-Hall, New Jersey.
Conrad, J., Kaul, G. and M. Nimalendran, 1988, "Components of Short-Horizon Secu-
  rity Returns," working paper, University of Michigan.
Cootner, P., ed., 1964, The Random Character of Stock Market Prices, M.I.T. Press,
  Cambridge.
DeBondt, W. and R. Thaler, 1985, "Does the Stock Market Overreact?" Journal of
      Finance 40, 793—805.
DeBondt, W. and R. Thaler, 1987, "Further Evidence on Investor Overreaction and
      Stock Market Seasonality," Journal of Finance 42, 557—582.
De Long, B., Shleifer, A., Summers, L. and R. Waldmann, 1989, "Positive Feedback
   Investment Strategies and Destabilizing Rational Speculation," NBER Working Pa-
   per No. 2880.
Fama, E., 1970, "Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work,"
   Journal of Finance 25, 383—417.
Fama, E. and K. French, 1988, "Permanent and Temporary Components of Stock
      Prices," Journal of Political Economy 96, 246—273.
Jegadeesh, N., 1988, "Evidence of Predictable Behavior of Security Returns," Anderson
   Graduate School of Management Working Paper #6—88, U.C.L.A.
Kim, M., Nelson, C. and R. Startz, 1988, "Mean Reversion in Stock Prices? A Reap-
  praisal of the Empirical Evidence," NBER Working Paper No. 2795.
Lehmann, B., 1988, "Fads, Martingales, and Market Efficiency," NBER Working Paper
   No. 2533, to appear in Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Lehmann, B., 1989, "Winners, Losers, and Mean Reversion in Weekly Equity Returns,"
   unpublished working paper.




3.4                                       —   27   —                             5.89
Leroy, S. F., 1973, "Risk Aversion and the Martingale Property of Stock Returns"
   International Economic Review 14, 436—446.
Lo, A. W. and A. C. MacKinlay, 1988, "Stock Market Prices Do Not Follow Random
   Walks: Evidence From a Simple Specification Test," Review of Financial Studies 1.
   41—66.
Lo, A. W. and A. C. MacKinlay, 1989, "An Econometric Analysis of Nonsynchronous-
   Trading," Sloan School of Management Working Paper No. 3003—89—EFA, Mas-
   sachusetts Institute of Technology.
Lucas, R. E., 1978, "Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy," Econometrica 46, 1429—
   1446.
Newey, W. K. and K. D. West, 1987, "A Simple Positive Definite, Heteroscedasticity
   and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix," Econometrica 55, 703—705.
Phillips, P.C.B, 1987, "Time Series Regression with a Unit Root," EconOrnetrica 55,
   277—302.
Poterba, J. and L. Summers, 1988, "Mean Reversion in Stock Returns: Evidence and
   Implications," Journal of Financial Economic8 22, 27—60.
Richardson, M., 1988, "Temporary Components of Stock Prices: A Skeptic's View,"
   unpublished working paper.
Roll, R., 1984, "A Simple Implicit Measure of the Effective Bid-Ask Spread in an
   Efficient Market," Journal of Finance 39, 1127—1140.
Scholes, M. and J. Williams, 1977, "Estimating Beta From Non-Synchronous Data,"
   Journal of Financial Economics 5, 309—327.
Shefrin, H. and M. Statman, 1985, "The Disposition to Ride Winners Too Long and
   Sell Losers Too Soon: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Finance 41, 774—790.
 Summers, L., 1986, "Does the Stock Market Rationally Reflect Fundamental Values?,"
   Journal of Finance 41, 591—600.
 White, H., 1984, Asymptotic Theory for Econometricians, Academic Press, New York.




                               .
 3.4                                   —28--                                    5.89
</ref_section>
Autocorrelation coefficients for the weekly equal-weighted (Panel A) and value-weighted (Panel B) CRSP NYSE—AMEX stock
returns indexes, for the sample period 6 July 1962 to 31 December 1987 and sub-periods. Means and standard deviations are also
reported (in percentages), and heteroscedasticity-consistentstandard errors for autocorrelation coefficients are given in parentheses.


                 Time Period         Sample      Mean       Std. Dev.                    h           P3          P4
                                      Size       x 100        x 100         (SE)        (SE)        (SE)        (SE)

               Panel A:

               620706 — 871231         1330      0.359        2.277         0.296       0.116       0.081       0.045
                                                                           (0.046)     (0.037)     (0.034)     (0.035)

               620706 — 750403         665       0.264        2.326         0.338       0.157       0.082       0.044
                                                                           (0.053)     (0.048)     (0.052)     (0.053)

                750404 — 871231        665        0.455       2.225         0.248       0.071       0.078       0.040
                                                                           (0.076)     (0.058)     (0.042)     (0.045)

                Panel B:

                620706 — 871231        1330       0.210       2.058         0.074      0.007        0.021     —0.005
                                                                           (0.040)     (0.037)     (0.036)     (0.037)

                620706 — 750403        665        0.135       1.972         0.055       0.020       0.058     -0.021
                                                                           (0.058)     (0.055)     (0.060)     (0.058)

                750404     871231      665        0.285       2.139         0.091       -0.003     —0.014       0.007
                                                                           (0.055)     (0.049)     (0.042)     (0.046)



3.2                                                                                                                              11.88
                                                              Table   lb

                                                                                                  CRSP NYSE—AMEX stock returns
Autocorrelation coefficientsfor the daily equal-weighted (Panel A) and value-weighted (Panel B)standard  deviations are also reported
                                                                 and sub-periods. Means and
indexes, for the sample period 3 July 1962 to 31 December 1987                                      are given in parentheses.
(in percentages), and heteroscedasticity-consistentstandard errors for autocorrelation coefficients


                                                 Mean      Std. Dev.                                P3          P4
                    Time Period      Sample
                                      Size       x 100       x 100         (SE)        (SE)        (SE)        (SE)


               Panel A:

                                                 0.073        0.811         0.355      0.088       0.088        0.104
               620703 — 871231        6408
                                                                           (0.038)    (0.041)     (0.033)      (0.027)

                                      3204       0.054        0.803         0.425      0.127        0.144       0.137
               620703 — 750428
                                                                           (0.033)    (0.032)      (0.029)     (0.029)

                                                 0.091        0.818         0.287      0.050        0.034       0.073
               750429 — 871231        3204
                                                                           (0.067)    (0.073)      (0.059)     (0.044)


                Panel B:
                                                                            0.200     —0.009        0.006      —0.001
                620703 — 871231       6408        0.043       0.842
                                                                           (0.028)     (0.040)     (0.031)     (0.019)

                                                  0.029       0.753         0.282       0.016       0.04 1      0.028
                620703 — 750428       3204
                                                                           (0.028)     (0.029)     (0.027)     (0.027)

                                       3204       0.057       0.922         0.146      —0.026      -0.017        0.021
                750429—871231
                                                                           (0.042)     (0.064)     (0.049)      (0.026)
Autocorrelation coefficients for the monthly equal-weighted (Panel A) and value-weighted (Panel B) CRSP NYSE—AMEX stock
returns indexes, for the sample period 31 August 1962 to 31 December 1987 and sub-periods. Means and standard deviations are also
                                                                                                             are given in parentheses.
reported (in percentages), and heteroscedasticity-consistentstandard errors for autocorrelation coefficients


                 Time Period         Sample      Mean       Std. Dev.                    h           P3          P4
                                      Size       x 100        x 100         (SE)        (SE)        (SE)        (SE)


               Panel A:

               620831 — 871231         305        1.293       6.193        0.148      —0.034      —0.011        0.003
                                                                          (0.060)     (0.061)      (0.054)     (0.060)

               620831 — 750430         153       0.889        6.560        0.145      —0.009        0.054       0.004
                                                                           (0.084)     (0.093)     (0.080)     (0.089)

                750530 — 871231        152        1.700       5.794         0.141     —0.087       —0.121      —0.046
                                                                           (0.079)     (0.069)     (0.066)     (0.064)


                Panel B:

                620831 — 871231        305        0.964       4.552         0.042     —0.051        0.020       0.014
                                                                           (0.065)     (0.063)     (0.065)     (0.058)

                620831 — 750430         153       0.678       4.363         0.055      —0.024       0.099       0.063
                                                                           (0.103)     (0.097)     (0.116)     (0.091)

                750530 — 871231         152       1.252       4.732         0.019      —0.089      -0.060      —0.058
                                                                           (0.082)     (0.178)     (0.068)     (0.070)



                                                                                                                                 11.88
 3.2
                                        Table 2a


Averages of autocorrelation coefficients for weekly returns on individual securities, for
the period 6 July 1962 to 31 December 1987. The statistic            is the average of j-th
order autocorrèlatiofl coefficients of returns on  individual  stocks that have at least 52
non-missing returns. The population standard deviation (SD) is given in parentheses.
Since the autocorrelation coefficients are not cross-sectionally independent, the reported
standard deviations cannot be used to draw the usual inferences; they are presented merely
as a measure of cross-sectional variation in the autocorrelation coefficients.




          Sample       Number of                     12          /3,3        34
                        Securities      (SD)        (SD)        (SD)        (SD)



        All Stocks        4786         —0.034      —0.015      —0.003      —0.003
                                       (0.084)     (0.065)     (0.062)     (0.061)

         Quintile 1        957         —0.079      —0.017      —0.007      —0.004
                                       (0.095)     (0.077)     (0.068)      (0.071)

         Quintile 3        958         —0.027      —0.015      —0.003      —0.000
                                       (0.082)     (0.068)     (0.067)      (0.065)

         Quintile 5        957         —0.013      —0.014      —0.002      —0.005
                                       (0.054)     (0.050)     (0.050)      (0.047)




  '.2                                                                                 11.88
                                          Table 2b


Averages of autocorrelation coefficients for daily returns on individual securities, for the
period 3 July 1962 to 31 December 1987. The statistic is the average of j-th order
autocorrelation coefficients of returns on individual stocks that have at least 52 non-missing
weekly returns. The population standard deviation (SD) is given in parentheses. Since the
autocorrelation coefficients are not cross-sectionally independent, the reported standard
deviations cannot be used to draw the usual inferences; they are presented merely as a
measure of cross-sectional variation in the autocorrelation coefficients.




          Sample        Number of
                        Securities
                                          h
                                         (SD)
                                                       ,
                                                      (SD)        (SD)
                                                                                ,5
                                                                              (SD)


        All Stocks         4786        —0.014        —0.016     —0.015       —0.006
                                        (0.101)      (0.041)     (0.036)     (0.034)

        Quintile 1         957         —0.093        —0.020     —0.017       —0.008
                                        (0.106)      (0.043)     (0.040)     (0.041)

        Quintile 3         958         —0.008        —0.015     —0.017       —0.005
                                        (0.094)      (0.042)     (0.038)     (0.035)

        Quintile 5         957           0.048       —0.015     —0.017       —0.008
                                        (0.065)      (0.033)     (0.029)     (0.028)




3.2                                                                                     11.88
                                         Table 2c


Averages of autocorrelatiOn coefficients for monthly returns on individual securities, for
the period 31 August 1962 to 31 December 1987. The statistic           is the average of j-th
order autocorrelation coefficients of returns on individual stocks that have at least 24 non-
missing monthly returns. The population standard deviation (SD) is given in parentheses.
Since the autocorrelation coefficients are not cross-sectionally independent, the reported
standard deviations cannot be used to draw the usual inferences; they are presented merely
as a measure of cross-sectional variation in the autocorrelation coefficients.




          Sample        Number of
                        Securities
                                          -
                                         (SD)
                                                      -
                                                      ,5
                                                     (SD)
                                                                   -
                                                                   P3
                                                                  (SD)
                                                                               -
                                                                               P4
                                                                              (SD)



         All Stocks        4472         —0.029      —0.017      —0.002       —0.001
                                        (0.111)     (0.100)      (0.098)     (0.094)

         Quintile 1         894         —0.055      —0.011      —0.007        0.005
                                        (0.131)     (0.115)      (0.113)     (0.107)

         Quintile 3         894         —0.019      —0.011        0.003       0.002
                                        (0.112)     (0.101)      (0.097)     (0.087)

         Quintile 5         894         —0.016      —0.028       —0.005      —0.004
                                        (0.084)      (0.079)     (0.079)     (0.077)




 3.2                                                                                    11.88
                                                            Table 3a

Analysis of the profitability of the return-reversal strategy applied to weekly returns, for the sample of 551 CRSP NYSE—
AMEX stocke with non-missing weekly returns from 6 July 1962 to 31 December 1987 (1330 weeks). Expected profits is gwen
by E(re(k)] = C, + O — c2(M), where Ck depends only on cross-autocovariances and O, depends only on own-autocovariances.
All s-stat,stics are asymptotically N(0,1) under the null hypothesis that the relevant population value is zero, and are robust to
heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation. The average long position I(k) is also reported, with its sample standard deviation in
parentheses underneath. The analysis is conducted for all stocks as well as for the five size-sorted quintiles; to conserve space,
results for the second and fourth quintilea have been omitted.




       Portfolio      Lag       O'          O'         c2(j1)'     EfT.(k))'     I(k)'       %-Ok       %-O        %2()
                       k      (!-stat)     (a-stat)                 (a-stat)     (SD')


      All Stocks       1       0.841       0.862        0.009        1.694        151.9       49.6       50.9        —0.5
                               (4.95)      (4.54)                   (20.81)      (31.0)
      Quintile 1       1       2.048       2.493        0.009        4.532       208.8        45.2       55.0        —0.2
                               (6.36)       (7.12)                  (18.81)      (47.3)
      Quintile 3       1       0.703        0.366       0.011        1.058        138.4       66.5       34.6        —1.0
                               (4.67)       (2.03)                  (13.84)       (32.2)
      Quintile 5       1       0.188        0.433       0.005        0.617        117.0       30.5       70.3         —0.8
                               (1.18)       (2.61)                  (11.22)       (28.1)


      All Stocks       2       0.253        0.298       0.009        0.542        151.8       46.7       54.9        —1.6
                               (1.64)       (1.67)                  (10.63)       (31.0)
      Quintile 1       2       0.803        0.421       0.009        1.216        208.8       66.1       34.7        —0.7
                               (3.29)       (1.49)                   (8.86)       (47.3)
      Quintile 3       2       0.184        0.308       0.011        0.481        138.3       38.3       64.0        —2.3
                               (1.20)       (1.64)                   (7.70)       (32.2)
      Quintile 5       2       —0.053       0.366       0.005        0.308        116.9      —17.3       118.9       —1.6
                               (—0.39)      (2.28)                   (5.89)       (28.1)


      All Stocks       3       0.223       —0.066       0.009        0.149        151.7      149.9      —44.0        —5.9
                               (1.60)      (—0.39)                   (3.01)      (30.9)
      Quintile 1       3       0.552        0.038       0.009        0.582       208.7       94.9         6.6        —1.5
                               (2.73)       (0.14)                   (3.96)      (47.3)
      Quintile 3       3       0.237       —0.192       0.011        0.035        138.2      677.6      —546.7       —30.9
                               (1.66)      (—1.07)                   (0.50)      (32.1)
      Quintile &       3       0.064       —0.003       0.005        0.056       116.9       114.0       —5.3        —8.8
                               (0.39)      (—0.02)                   (1.23)      (28.1)


      All Stocks       4       0.056        0.083       0,009        0.130        151.7       43.3       63.5        —6.7
                               (0.43)       (0.51)                   (2.40)      (30.9)
      Quintile 1       4       0.305        0.159       0.009        0.455       208.7        67.0       34.9        —1.9
                               (1.53)       (0.59)                   (3.27)      (47.3)
      Quintile 3       4       0.023       —0.045       0.011       —0.033        138.2                   .&           .b

                               (0.18)      (—0.26)                  (—0.44)      (32.0)
      Quintile 5       4       —0097        0.128       0.005        0.026        116.8     —374.6       403.4       —18.8
                               (—0.65)      (0.77)                   (0.52)      (28.0)




'Multiplied by 10000.
  Not computed when expected profits are negative.



3.3                                                                                                                          11 88
                                                             Table 3b

                                                              applied to weekly returns, for the sample of 949 CRSP NYSE—A.MEX
Analysis of the profitability of the return-reversal strategy
stocks with non-missing weekly returns during the period 6 July 1962 to 3 April 1975 (665 weeks).          Expected profits is given
              = Ct + Ok —  a(M),  where  Ct  depends only on crossautocovariaflC       and O depends only on own.autocovariances
by E[irg (k)1                                                           that the relevant population value is zero, and are robust to
All s-statisticS are asymptotically N(O1) under the null hypothesis
heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation. The average long position I(k) is also reported, with its sample standard deviation ri
parentheses underneath. The analysis is conducted for all stocks as well as for the five size-sorted quintiles to conserve space,
results for the second and fourth quintiles have been omitted.




       [ortfolio         Lag                    Ok                                  ,(k)        %-Ot      %-Ot
                                   (s—st at)   (s_stat)                 (s_stat)     (SD5)



                                                           0.019         2.366       164.0       50.5       50.3        —0.8
         All Stocks        1        1.194      1.191
                                    (5.34)     (4.61)                   (15.36)      (35.3)
                                               3.533       0.020         5.923       221.8       40.7       59.7        —0.3
          Quintile 1       1        2.409
                                    (6.73)     (8.84)                   (16.63)      (49.0)
                                               u.445       0.020         1.621        154.4      73.8       27.5        —1.3
          Quintile 3       1         1.196
                                    (5.10)     (1.50)                   (10.85)      (35.4)
                                                           0.015         0.668        119.8      45.2       57.0        —2.2
          Quintile 5       1         0.302      0.380
                                    (1.53)     (1.64)                    (9.82)      (28.5)



                                                0.192      0.019         0.739        164.0      76.6       26.0        —2.6
          All Stocks       2         0.566
                                     (2.80)     (0.86)                   (9.16)       (35.3)
                                                0.305      0.020          1.413       221.8      79.8       21.6        —1.4
          Quintile 1       2         1.128
                                     (3.83)     (0.86)                   (7.71)       (49.1)
                                                0.164      0.020         0.682        154.3      78.9       24.0        —3.0
          Quintile 3       2         0.539
                                     (2.59)     (0.73)                   (6.46)       (35.4)
                                                0.248       0.015         0.382        119.8     38.9       65.0        —3.9
           Quintile 5      2         0.149
                                     (1.09)     (1.47)                   (5.52)       (28.6)


                                                                          0.232       163.9      135.2      —26.9        —8.3
          All Stocks        3        0.314      —0.062      0.019
                                     (1.42)     (—0.24)                   (3.02)      (35.3)
                                     0.583       0.156      0.020         0.719       221.7       81.1      21.7         —2.7
           Quintile 1       3
                                     (2.06)      (0.45)                   (4.06)      (49.1)
                                                                          0.190        154.2     202.1      —91.4       —10.7
           Quintile 3       3         0.385     —0.174      0.020
                                     (1.61)     (—0.61)                   (1.83)      (35.4)
                                                            0.015         0.168        119.7     134.7      —26.0        -8.8
           Quintile 5          3      0.227     —0.044
                                     (1.05)     (—0.17)                   (2.73)      (28.6)



                               4      0.149      0.030      0.019         0.159       163.8       93.2       19.0        —12.1
           All Stocks
                                      (0.78)     (0.13)                   (2.18)      (35.2)
                               4      0.347      0.103      0.020         0.430       221.6       80.8       23.8        —4.6
           Quintile 1
                                      (1.17)     (0.27)                   (2.64)      (49.1)                   b
            Quintile 3         4      0.169      —0.152     0.020         —0.)4        154.0
                                      (0.84)     (—0.62)                  (—0.04)     (35.1)
                                                                          0.035        119.6      —71.4      213.2       —41.8
            Quintile 5         4     -0.025      0.075      0.015
                                     (—0.14)     (0.38)                   (0.69)      (28.6)




   '   Multiplied by 10,CX)O.
       Not computed when expected profits are negative.



                                                                                                                                  1188
   3.3
                                                              Table 3c

Analysis of the profitability of the return-reversal strategy applied to weekly returns, for the sample of 1172 CRSP NYSE—
AMEX stocks with non-milling weekly returns during the period 4 April 1975 to 31 December 1987 (665 weeks). Expected
profits is given by EIs's(k)] = Ck + Ok o-2(M), where C depends only on cross-autocovariances and O& depends only on
own-autocovariance,. All v-statistics are asymptotically N(0,1) under the null hypothesis that the relevant population value
is vero, and are robust to heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation. The average long position 16(k) is also reported, with its
sample standard deviation in parentheses underneath. The analysis is conducted for all stocks as well as for the five live-sorted
quintiles; to conserve space, results for the second and fourth quintiles have been omitted.




       Portfolio    Lag
                     k
                              Oj'          ô'        c2()'        Ets(k)]'     [t(k)'      %-Ok         %-O        %-o(j)
                             (r.stat)    (v-stat)                   (a-stat)   (SD')


      All Stocks      1       1.022        1.105      0.026         2.101       167.7       48.7         52.6        —1.2
                              (3.16)      (3.10)                    (17.05)    (31.5)
      Quintile 1      1       1.897       2.873       0.031          4.739     217.8        40.0         60.6        —0.6
                              (3.83)      (5.18)                    (15.25)    (47.2)
      Quintile 3      1       1.038       0.689       0.031          1.696      161.4       61.2         40.6        —1 8
                              (3.10)      (1.88)                    (12.43)    (31.7)
      Quintile 5      1       0.465       0.368       0.014         0.819       128.9       56.7         44.9        —1.7
                              (1.77)      (1.47)                    (9.58)     (28.8)


      All Stocks     2        0.211       0.438       0.026         0.622      167.5        33.8         70.4        —4.2
                             (0.75)       (1.36)                    (8.38)     (31.4)
      Quintile 1     2       0.788        0.665       0.031         1.422      217.7        55.4         46.7        —2.2
                             (1.92)       (1.57)                    (7.72)     (47.2)
      Quintile 3     2       0.220        0.237       0.031         0.426      161.2        51.7         55.6        —7.4
                             (0.79)       (0.68)                    (3.65)     (31.5)
      Quintile 5     2       —0.083       0.317       0.014         0.220      128.9       —37.8        144.0        -6.2
                             (-0.33)      (L09)                     (3.04)     (28.8)


      All Stocks     3       0.277       —0.025       0.026         0.225      167.4       122.9        —11.3       —11.6
                             (1.30)      (—0.10)                    (3.22)     (31.2)
      Quintile 1     3       0.816       —0.178       0.031         0.608      217.5       134.3        —29.3        —5 1
                             (3.05)      (—0.54)                    (3.69)     (47.1)
      Quintile 3     3       0.277        0.109       0.031         0.354      161.0        78.2        30.7         -8.8
                             (1.19)       (0.39)                    (3.83)     (31.2)
      Quintile 5     3       —0.028       0.042       0.014         0.000      128.8      —7949.7     11873.6      —3823.9
                             (—0.13)      (0.18)                    (0.01)     (28.7)


      All Stocks     4        0.098       0.088      0.026          0.160      167.3        61.2        55.2        —16.4
                              (0.45)      (0.34)                    (2.09)     (31.1)
      Quintile 1     4        0.407       0.063      0.031          0.439      217.5        92.8        14.2         —7.0
                              (1.50)      (0.19)                    (2.57)     (47.2)
      Quintile 3     4        0.124      —0.054      0.031          0.038      160.9       324.3       —142.2       —82.0
                              (0.55)     (—0.20)                    (0.38)     (31.0)
      Quintile 5     4       -'0.034      0.104      0.014          0.056      128.7       —61.1        185.3       —24.1
                             (—0.15)      (0.42)                    (0.84)     (28.7)




 Multiplied by 10,000.




3.3                                                                                                                         11.88
                                                        Table 4

Autocorrelatiofl matrices of the vector Z [R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 Rmt]' where .R, is the return on the
portfolio of stocks in the i-th quintile, i = 1,. . , 5 and Rmt is the return on the equal-weighted index, for
                                                    .

                                                        returns from 6 July 1962 to 31 December 1987 (1330
the sample of 551 stocks with non-missing weekly
observations). Note T D"2E1(Zt_k — ,A)(Zt
                                                        —
                                                            )']D"2, where D diagcr,. .. ,o,= 0.027.Asymptotic
standard errors for the autocorrelatiOns under an i.i.d. null hypothesis are given by —



                                                                      0.830     0.747      0.918
                    R           1.000      0.919
                                           1.000
                                                         0.857
                                                         0.943        0.929     0865       0.976
                    R2          0.919
                                           0.943         1.000        0.964     0.925      0.979
                    R3          0.857
         T0 =       R4          0.830      0.929         0.964        1.000     0.946      0.974
                                           0.865         0.925        0.946     1.000      0,933
                    R5          0.747
                                           0.976         0.979        0.974     0.933      1.000
                    Rrr,        0.9 18


                                                             R3        R4         R5        Rm
                                 R1         112
                                           0.244            0.143     0.101      0.020     0.184
                    R1          0.333
                                           0.252            0.157     0.122      0.033     0.195
                    112         0.334
                                                                                 0.051     0.207
         T1 —       R           0.325      0.265            0.175
                                                            0.177
                                                                      0.140
                                                                      0.139      0.050     0.204
                    R4          0.316      0.262
                                                                                 0.044     0.178
                    R           0.276      0.230
                                           0.262
                                                            0.154
                                                            0.168
                                                                      0.122
                                                                      0.130      0.041     0.202
                    Rm          0.333


                                  R          112             R3         114       R5        R,,
                                0.130      0.087            0.044     0.022      0.005      0.064
                    R1
        .                       0.133      0.101            0.058      0.039     0.017      0.076
                    112
                                0.114      0.088            0.046      0.027     0.002      0.061
                —   113
            2   —
                                0.101      0.085            0.048      0.029     0.008      0.059
                    R4
                                                                                            0.031
                    R           0.067       0.055           0.020
                                                            0.045
                                                                       0.008
                                                                       0.026
                                                                                —0.012
                                                                                 0.004      0.061
                    Rm          0.115       0.087


                                   R         R2               R3        R4         R        Rm
                                 0.089      0.047            0.015     0.013    —0.005      0.036
                     R1
                                 0.094      0.066            0.038     0.041     0.018      0.056
                     112
                                            0.079            0.059     0.061     0.041      0.072
                —
                —
                     1?
                                 0.084      0.067            0.047     0.049     0.031      0.059
                     R4
                                                                                 0.015      0.038
                     R           0.053      0.044            0.031
                                                             0.038
                                                                       0.034
                                                                       0.040     0.020      0.054
                     Rm          0.087      0.063


                                    R1        112              113       R4        R5       Rvn
                                                                                          —0.002
                         R         0.050     0.001          —0.014
                                                            —0.002
                                                                      —0.029
                                                                      —0.012
                                                                                —0.030
                                                                                —0.020      0.014
                          112      0.064     0.023
                                   0.065     0.029            0.006   —0.002    —0.017      0.019
                          113
                                   0.072     0.042            0.017     0.005   —0.008      0.029
                          114
                                   0.048     0.023            0.002   —0.007    —0.022      0.011
                          R5
                                                              0.001    0.010    —0.021      0.014



                                                                                                           11.88
  3.3
