                       NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   MEASURING NONTARIFF TRADE POLICIES




                            Robert E. Baldwin




                          Working Paper No. 2978




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  May 1989




                                                 International Studies. Arty
This paper is part of NBER's research program in
opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                    NBER Working Paper #2978
                                    May 1989


                  MEASURING NONTARIFF TRADE POLICIES


                               ABS TRAcI


    This   paper surveys and critiques various methods of
measuring nontariff trade measures (NTNs) for the purpose of
determining which seem most promising for facilitating the

process of reducing the trade—distorting effects of such policies
through multilateral negotiations. Four measurement methods are
analyzed: price—impact measures, quantity—impact measures,
frequency—type measures, and welfare measures.         The general

conclusion is that, despite a host of difficulties, theoretical

and empirical analysis has progressed sufficiently far to enable
reasonable measures of nontariff policies to be made that are
useful for assessing relative sectoral protection across

countries and monitoring changes in protection and subsidization
levels over time. Tariff and subsidy equivalents, preferably

determined by directly comparing distorted and non-distorted
prices, are the most useful forms of measurement, since they

focus on the price—distorting effects of NTNs and are also
concepts with which public and private officials are already
familiar. However, the various other types of measures can be
valuable in supplementing the information obtained from tariff

 and subsidy equivalents.
                                       Robert E. Baldwin
                                       Department of Economics
                                       University of WisconsiflMad1S0l
                                       Madison, WI 53706
I. Introduction
     International trade is presently distorted by a wide variety

of government measures other than tariffs.   A study for the World

Bank (Olechowski, 1987) estimates that in 1984 about 15 percent

of the import product categories of the major developed
countries, accounting for 18 percent of the value of their
imports, were subject of non—tariff measures (NTMs).   Compared to

1981, this represented an increase in import coverage of 2.4

percent.
     A concern that these measures may undermine the
international benefits achieved from the significant tariff

liberalization in the post-World War II period has stimulated
interest in measuring non—tariff trade policies by means other

than simply determining their product and value coverage.' This

paper surveys various measurement methods that have been proposed
with the aim of determining which seem most promising for
facilitating the process of reducing the trade-distorting effects
of NTNs.2 Part I briefly contrasts the problem of measuring
tariffs versus non-tariff policies, while Part II presents a

background analysis of the price and quantity effects of NTMs.
 The merits and drawbacks of various types of measures are then

 discussed in Parts III through VII. Conclusions are set forth in

 Part VIII.
 II. MeasurinQ Tariffs Versus Non—Tariff Policies
      When tariffs were the major trade—policy instrument, there
 was general agreement that the most appropriate way of measuring

 the extent to which governments regulated international trade
                                                                  2


was by calculating the rate at which imports were taxed. But
both researchers studying patterns of protection and negotiators
engaged in tariff-reducing multilateral negotiations realized the
imperfect nature of this measure. The tariff rate is also only

one part of the information needed to assess the impact of
                                    economic variables as the
reducing an import duty on such key
domestic price of the imported good, the price of the domestic
substitute for the imported good, the volume of imports, the
volume of output of the domestic substitute, the change in value-
added in the domestic industry, and domestic employment. To
determine these effects, it is necessary to know such
relationships (and their behavior over time) as the direct and
cross—price elasticities of demand for imports and the domestic

 substitute, the elasticities of supply for imports and the
 domestic good, the share of intermediate inputs used in producing

 the domestic good, and the number of person—years used per unit
 of output. Furthermore, if the duty cut is part of a general
 process of tariff reductions in which interactive effects are
                                    model is needed to trace out
 significant, a general equilibrium
 the various indirect price, output, and employment effects.
      Despite the limitations of measuring tariff protection as

 the rate at which imports are taxed, governments have been (and
                                             tariff reductions
 still are) prepared to negotiate reciprocal
 using changes in this measure as an index of the duty cuts they
 received and granted. For example, in the Kennedy Round of
                                              when a 50% tariff-
 multilateral trade negotiations (1962—1967),
                                                                  3


cutting formula was agreed upon by the participants, equal cuts
in tariff rates among countries were regarded as achieving an
approximate balance of concessions. In effect, trade negotiators
were willing to assume that the differences among commodities and
countries in such response indicators as demand and supply
elasticities tended to even out when tariffs were cut on a wide

range of goods.3
     Non—tariff trade policies are expressed in many forms. In

one major category, quantitative restrictions, the volume or
value of imports or exports is limited, either on a global or a
country—selective basis. In another important group, subsidies,
the government provides direct financial assistance to producers

or factors of production or supplies intermediate goods and
services to finns at below their economic cost.    In still

another category, the government establishes standards and
regulations relating to health, safety, packaging, labeling, and
so forth that may inadvertently or deliberately discriminate

against foreign suppliers. Illustrations of other trade-
distorting measures are government purchasing policies that treat
 domestic suppliers preferentially, variable import levies,
 arbitrary customs procedures that restrict imports, and tied aid
 programs. Because of these many different ways in which NTMs are
 expressed, there is, unlike in the case of tariffs, no one

 obvious means of comparing non-tariff policies.

 III. Price and quantity Effects of Non-Tariff Trade Policies
                                                                   4

                               non—tariff measures is to focus on
     One approach to comparing
                             introduce between the world price of
the various wedges that they
an imported or exported good or service, the prices domestic
consumers pay for the imported product and its domestically
produced substitute, and the price received by the domestic

producers of this latter good. A quota, for example, like a
tariff, introduces a wedge (beyond that associated with any
                                      costs, and other markups)
tariff on the product, transportation
between the price received by foreign producers for the imports
                                    domestic consumers for these
they supply and the price charged
imports. This similarity between tariffs and quotas is
                                         country's demand curve
illustrated in Figure 1, which depicts a
for imports (DM) and the supply curve of imports from foreign
countries (SF) that it faces under perfectly competitive
conditions. In the absence of any protection, imports are oq0
and the domestic and the world prices are both op0. If an
valorem tariff is levied on imports, the import-supply curve,

which indicates the price importers charge consumers after paying
their own government the import duty, shifts upward to S,
thereby yielding a new equilibrium import quantity and price of
                             The tariff creates a wedge between
oq1 and op1, respectively.
the price consumers pay for imports, op1, and the foreign price
                                                  collects the
of the import good, op3. The domestic government
 difference, p1LMp3 as tariff revenue.
      A similar wedge is created if a policy is introduced

 limiting the quantity of imports to oq1. The foreign-supply
                                                                    5

curve, SFQ, becomes vertical at oq1   and above op3, with the price

paid by domestic consumers again rising to op1.   If the quota

rights are allocated to domestic importers, they will reap the
windfall gain of p1LMp3 by being able to buy abroad at a price of

op3 and sell at home at a price of op1. In contrast, if the
quota rights are allocated to foreign exporters, as is the case
with most voluntary export restraint agreements, these exporters
gain this rent.
     The price effects of restricting imports by such non-tariff
means as using variable levies or foreign exchange controls can
be analyzed in much the same way as tariffs and quotas. Suppose,
for example, that op1 is the target price below which the
government does not want the domestic price to fall.    Given the

initial domestic—demand and foreign import—supply curves, an
import levy of p1p3 per unit accomplishes this goal. If the
foreign import—supply curve declines, the government will raise
the levy, while it will lower the per-unit levy if the domestic-
demand curve increases. Unlike quotas, with variable levies the

quantity of imports varies, while the price remains fixed when
domestic demand shifts.
     Even the price effects of a discriminatory technical barrier
can be analyzed with the aid of Figure 1. Suppose, for example,

that the product supplied by foreigners satisfies in some
objective sense the health or safety standards imposed on the

product by the importing country, but that this country requires
certain costly modifications in the foreign product because
                                                                      6


technically it is not exactly the same as the domestic

substitute.     By raising foreign costs, this requirement shifts
                                      to Sf+t and produces the same
the foreign import—SUPPlY curve up
                                     effects as a tariff.
price-raising and import—reducing
     Officials in the importing country are concerned not only

with a trade_restricting policy's price and quantity effects on
imports but also with its price and output effects on the
domestic product with which imports compete.     If imports and
                                              the effects are
domestic products are perfect substitutes,
straightforward. The price of that proportion of output produced
domestically rises to the same level as the domestic price of
                                  consumption of the goods but
imports, thereby reducing total
increasing the amount supplied domesticallY. In manufacturing,
                                tariff line are similar but not
however, many products within a
identical. They are differentiated fl some way from each other

by the firms producing them, making the assumption of perfect
substitutability between imports and domestic production
 inappropriate. In this case, the increase in the price of
 imports due to the introduction of a ade-reStriCting policy can

be viewed as increasing the demand curve for the domestic variety
as domestic consumers substitute the domestic version for higher—
 priced imports. Given an upward-sloping (but not vertical)
 domestic-supply curve, this shift will, in turn, result in an

 increase in the price and output level of the domestic
 substitute .

      In   contrast to quantitative restrictions and other non-
                                                                    7

tariff policies impinging directly on the domestic price of

imports and indirectly on domestic producer prices, trade—
distorting government subsidies directly affect the prices
domestic producers receive for their products. The impact of a
domestic production subsidy, when the good is being imported, is

shown in Figure 2. The curve S0 is the domestic-supply curve

prior to the production subsidy, SF is the foreign-supply curve,
and ST is the horizontal sum of these two curves. The curve D0
is the domestic demand for the home and foreign product, assumed

to be identical. The equilibrium price and consumption level are

op0 and 0%, respectively, with oq1 supplied by domestic producers
and q1q0 imported.
       A fixed per-unit subsidy shifts the domestic-supply curve to
SDS and the sum of this curve and the foreign—supply curve to
ST$. The increased total supply reduces the domestic price to
op1, increases domestic supply to oq3, and increases consumption
to oq2. Domestic producers now receive op3 per unit of output
they produce; op1 of this is covered by the price consumers pay
for the product and p1p3 comes from the government as a subsidy.
       A subsidy that is not tied to output-producing activities,
for example, a subsidy to existing capital services (in contrast
to a subsidy that is used in acquiring new plant and equipment),
has no effect on output, prices, and trade and is just an income-

 redistributing policy.

 iv.   Frequency—Type Measures
                                                                   8


    As the preceding analysis indicates, non-tariff trade
policies can be measured either by their price or quantity
effects. As mentioned in the introduction, another obvious
method, which will be discussed in this section, is simply to

measure these policies in terms of their numbers and trade

coverage.5
     Frequency—type measures record the number, form, and trade

coverage of non—tariff trde policies as determined from special
surveys, frequency of complaints by trading partners, and
government reports. The best—know effort involving this approach
is a joint World Bank-UNCTAD study (Nogues, Olechowski, and
Winters, 1986 and Olechowski, 1987) of governmental commodity-
specific border measures affecting the imports of sixteen
industrial countries in the period 1981-1984. The data are

derived from various official national publications and
information supplied by governments to the GATT. Three indices
of the prevalence of selected non—tariff trade policies (mainly

ones with obvious quantity or price effects) are constructed in
this study. The first uses a country's own import weights to
determine the proportion of imports from its trading partners
 affected by these policies, and the second employs world import

weights. For the last index, the extent of non-tariff trade
 policies is measured simply by the number of commodity trade
 flows between a country and its trading partners that are

 affected by these policies.
      Since many national governments and other international
                                                                  9

organizations besides the World Bank and UNCTAD (for example, the

International Monetary Fund (IMF] and the GATT) maintain lists of
non—tariff policies affecting current trade flows, the trade—

coverage approach has the advantage of being relatively easy to
implement. Figures cited in the World Bank-UNCTAD study
indicating that in 1984 18 percent of the imports of the major
industrial countries were affected by non—tariff border policies

have also alerted public officials about the pervasiveness of
these policies. But there are obvious disadvantages to measuring
non-tariff policies in this manner; the most serious is the

failure to distinguish among different types of non-tariff
policies or forms of a particular policy in the degree to which

they affect import prices and quantities and other variables of
interest. Another drawback is the sensitivity of frequency-type

measures to the degree of country and product-line disaggregation
used by the investigator. For these and other reasons, most

governments do not accept frequency-type indices as meaningful

measures of non—tariff policies.

V. price—Impact Measures
     Given public and private officials' familiarity with
measuring tariffs in percentage terms, a strong case can be made
for favoring price over quantity measures of non-tariff trade-
distorting policies. The existence of a wedge between the

domestic and foreign price of imported products, as in the case
of a tariff, would also seem to simplify the measurement problem
                                                                            10

compared to quantitative estimates.            Most empirical measurement

efforts have, in fact, focused mainly on this approach. Three

types of price—impact measures are considered in this section:
tariff equivalents, subsidy measures, and the effective rate of
protection or assistance.

A. Tariff Equivalents and Their Estimation
         The tariff equivalent (tn) of import-restricting non-tariff
policies (also called the implicit rate of protection) measures
the rate by which the domestic border price (ps) of the imported

good exceeds the price (p1) paid by domestic importers to foreign
exporters, inclusive of transport costs to the importing country
and any tariffs levied by this country. specifically,
               -                This measure is termed a "tariff equivalent"
t,., =   (Pm       p1) / p1.6
because under perfectly competitive conditions, an ad valorem
tariff at this rate would yield the same wedge between the

domestic and import prices.
         As Moroz (1985) points out, there are two basic methods of
estimating tariff equivalents. One is directly to observe the

world price of the imported product and the domestic price at
which it is sold, taking account of wholesale and retail margins
as well as tariffs and transport costs; the other is to use
information on the quantity changes resulting from a non-tariff
measure and data on relevant demand and supply elasticities to

estimate the price wedge.
         i) ComDarative Price Analyses
         The price-comparison method is clearly the most straight-
                                                                 11

forward way of estimating the tariff equivalents of non-tariff
measures. This is one of the methods used by the Commission of
the European Communities in estimating the effects of removing
existing barriers among members of the European Communities by

1992 (CommisSion of the European CommunitieS, 1988).   The price

data utilized were collected by the Statistical Office of the

European Communities (Eurostat), in cooperation with the
statistical services of the Member States, as part of its program

of calculating purchasing power parities and comparing gross
domestic product in real terms between Community countries. For

1985 Eurostat obtained price information from Member countries on
household consumption items and equipment goods for 215 basic

headings comprising nearly 3,000 products (Eurostat, l988).
Other studies relying on the price—comparison approach include
Dardis (1967), Roningen and Yeats (1976), Baldwin (1975), and

Bhagwati and Srinivasan (1975).
     There are numerous data and interpretation problems with the
price comparison method, however. First there generally is no
direct information on the prices that importers pay foreign
suppliers.8 It is usually necessary to try to obtain price data
 from third-country markets for the identical product whose

quality and price are unaffected by the NTMs.9 If this effort is
 successful, the costs of delivering this good to the domestic

market, including the payments of any import duty, must be
 estimated. Finally, if this imported good is resold on an open
 domestic market and the margins involved in shipping the good
                                                                 12

from its port of entry to this market can be identified, the
price wedge due to non-tariff trade-distorting policies can be

determined.
     The import good usually varies in quality from the domestic
substitute with which it competes.1°   Domestic price data

usually do not distinguish between domestically produced and
imported goods, however. Using the available price series, which
typically are an average of the prices of these goods, tends to
underestimate the price wedge caused by the trade barrier,
especially if imports are a small part of total consumption. As
experience with quantitative restrictions on automobiles,
footwear, and textiles has demonstrated, quality upgrading also
tends to occur when imports are limited by physical quotas in
contrast to ad valorem tariffs. To separate the domestic price-
increasing effects due to improved quality from those due to a
smaller import volume of a given quality requires the use of
hedonic regression techniques (Feenstra, 1984) or estimations of
the price elasticities of various qualities of the product

 (Levinsohn, 1988).
      It is not easy, furthermore, to separate the different
 possible causes of the wedge between domestic and foreign prices,
 once it has been estimated as accurately as possible.   The price

 difference is often due to a number of different non-tariff
 policies, some of which may not be observable. In imperfectly
 competitive markets, part of the price wedge may also represent
 producer-profit margins that are above those in perfectly
                                                                 13

competitive markets.
     One situation in which price differentials due to a specific
non—tariff policy can be estimated quite accurately is when
export-quota rights are sold in an open market with registered

prices. Such is the case for quota rights on clothing products
in Hong Kong and India and was the case for a short period in
Taiwan. Using this information, Hamilton (1986, 1988) has
calculated tariff equivalents for the non—tariff barriers imposed

by various industrial countries against clothing exported by both
Hong Kong and Taiwan. Australia and New Zealand also have

instituted systems for auctioning quotas for several commodities
(see Bergsten, Elliot, Schott, and Takacs [1987]).
     When non—tariff trade restrictions are applied on a country-
specific basis, as in the case of textiles and apparel, the

estimated price wedge applies only to imports from a particular
country or small group of countries. If an average tariff
equivalent for total imports of the product is desired, the
tariff equivalent estimated for the restricted exporters must be
reduced to take into account the increase in imports from non-
controlled suppliers resulting from the imposition of the

country—selective import barrier.
     Another problem with measuring the effect of non-tariff

policies by comparing foreign and domestic prices is the
variability of this measure due to fluctuations in nominal

exchange rates. An appreciation of a country's currency, for
example, will increase the ad valorem equivalent of a
                                                                  14

quantitative import restriction as the domestic currency price of
                                   decreases12. The rate of
the foreign product to importers
assistance provided by a specific production subsidy (or specific
import duty) will also increase as a consequence of the

appreciation of a country's currency, whereas the rate of

assistance or protection associated with an ad valorem tariff or
production subsidy is unaffected by exchange rate changes.

Because of the volatility of exchange rates in recent years, some
have suggested in OECD discussions of measuring agricultural
assistance that averages of rates of assistance based on more

than a single year should be calculated for trade—distorting
measures that are sensitive to exchange rate changes.

     In summary, the price—comparison method of measuring the ,

yprem   equivalent of non-tariff trade policies is

straightforward and logically appealing, but difficult
measurement problems are often encountered in estimating and

interpreting differences in foreign and domestic prices. Careful
and often costly studies are required to deal with these problems
in a satisfactory manner. Nevertheless, as was the case with the
Community's study of the effects of removing barriers among
Member States or the OECD work on quantifying agricultural

 assistance, the price—comparison method should be an important
 component of any effort to measure the effects of non-tariff

 trade-distorting policies.
      ii) Inferring Price Changes from Quantity Changes

      Probably the most widely used non-tariff trade-distorting
                                                                  15

policy is quantitative restrictions. A government decides that
imports from all or a subgroup of suppliers will be reduced by a
specified amount or market share. The price wedge that would

produce this quantitative decline in imports can be calculated,
given estimates of import-demand and import-supply elasticities

and, if imports are imperfect substitutes for domestic
production, of domestic—demand and domestic—supply elasticities
together with the relevant cross-price elasticities. Since the
tariff equivalents of quantitative restrictions vary as the
demand for imports increases over time, an estimate of the rate

at which the demand for imports grows is also needed to keep the
tariff equivalents up-to-date. Among the investigators using
this approach to estimate tariff and subsidy equivalents are

Morici and Megna (1983) and Moroz (1985).
     When direct observations on changes in imports are not
available, information on the market share of imports prior to

the imposition of the non-tariff barrier can sometimes be used to
estimate quantity reductions. Relevant elasticities can be

applied to these quantity changes to infer the price wedge
associated with the restriction. Other more elaborate approaches
 for estimating quantity effects of non-tariff policies are also

available, such as using sector—specific or applied general
equilibrium models. These will be discussed in Part V1 which is

 devoted entirely to quantity—impact measures.
     While considerable effort is required to obtain good

 estimates of the parameters needed to measure the tariff
                                                                  16

equivalents of quantitive trade restrictions, this approach
should be used to supplement the information obtained from the

price-Comparison method.
     iii) SurveV
     Another estimating method that can compliment those already

discussed is to survey those who have been affected by NTMs. In

the Community study cited above, the technique of asking firms to
estimate the price and quantity impact on them of various
technical regulations was used as an additional method of

estimating the cost effects of removing these trade barriers.

surveying governments and private firms in countries whose
exports have been adversely affected by foreign trade
restrictions can also yield useful information about the price
effects of these measures. In interpreting the results of such
surveys, we must, of course, recognize that it may be in the
economic interests of some respondents to either exaggerate or
                                                                  B.
minimize the importance of particular non—tariff policies.
Subsidy Measures and Their Estimation
      i) Subsidy Equivalents
     As noted in Part II, unlike import controls, trade—
 distorting government subsidies directly increase the per-unit

 receipts of domestic producers (Pr) for their output. The most
 common way of measuring these subsidies is to express them as a
 percentage of the per-unit sales value (ps) of the product.
 Specifically, the ad vplorem subsidy equivalent (s) can be

 expressed as follows:
                                                                    17

       S    (Pr -   P)   / PC.

       Under this definition, tariff equivalents of non-tariff
policies (ta) and subsidy equivalents (s) are not directly
comparable; one measure relates to imports and the other to
production of the domestic substitute. But if imports and
domestic production are perfect substitutes, there is a simple
relationship between the two measures on the production side.

With perfect substitutes, the domestic price of imports (Pm) will
be the same as the consumer price of the domestically produced

good (p)• Ignoring transport costs,
       PmPj (l+t) =p( l+t) (              l+t),
where p1 is the tariff-inclusive price paid by the domestic
importer and p is the world price, and t is the ad valorem



Pr =   '
tariff, therefore, it follows from the relationship,

           (1 + s ),     that PrPw (1 + t )   (1   + t) (1 + s ).

Using estimates of elasticities of domestic supply, foreign
supply, and domestic demand, it is also possible to determine the
tariff equivalent that directly reduces imports by the same
quantity that a domestic subsidy does indirectly.

       Estimating subsidy equivalents generally is an easier task
than estimating tariff equivalents, since data on public
subsidies usually are published in government budgets. The main
problem is identifying the amounts that various industries

receive when the subsidy is not industry-specific or the
disbursing agency does not have records on the industries

receiving the subsidy.
                                                                 18


     ii)   producer Subsidy Equivalents
     The OECD (1987) and various national governments have
undertaken significant work in recent years in measuring the

extent of agricultural support: The measurement concept that has
been developed, the producer subsidy equivalent (PSE), is defined

as the payment or subsidy required to compensate producers for
the removal of government agricultural assistance programs and is
usually expressed as a percentage of the total value of output. A
related concept, consumer subsidy equivalents (CSEs), measures
the implicit tax on consumption from agricultural policy measures
(the market support element of PSE) and any subsidies to
consumption. Direct price comparisons play an important role in
estimating both PSE5 and CSE5.
     Four types of measures are included in calculations of PSEs:

market price supports, direct income supports, indirect income
supports, and other supports. Domestic price support programs,
tariffs, and quotes are examples of the first set of measures,

while deficiency and disaster payments illustrate those in the
second group. Indirect income supports include capital grants,
concessional credit, and input subsidies. In the group of "other

supports" are research, advisory, training, and inspection
services supplied by the government, as well as taxation and
transportation concessions. PSES and CSEs have been estimated
for all twenty—four members of the OECD. They have been valuable

 in monitoring trends in agricultural support across countries and
also have been used as an input into the GATT negotiations on
                                                                     19

agriculture in the Uruguay Round.

     iii) Trade Distortion Equivalents
    An alternative measure to the PSE proposed by the Canadian

government for use in the agricultural sector is the trade
distortion equivalent (TDE). Like subsidy equivalents, it
differs from the PSE by focussing on the trade distorting effects
of policies rather than their income supporting effects.     There

are some agricultural programs such as government research,
training and the provision of market information that are assumed

to have an insignificant impact on current production and prices
received by producers and thus are omitted from TDE calculations.
     Production subsidies in agriculture are also sometimes tied

to a reduction in productive capacity. As Whalley and Wigle
(1988) find from analyzing the pre-1985 U.S. wheat program in a
general equilibrium framework, eliminating such subsidies and the
related capacity—reduction requirement can actually increase
output in contrast to what would be expected if the production
subsidy alone is considered. Josling and Tangermann (1987) point
out that the appropriate calculation for explaining the
production effect of such programs is to estimate the production
subsidy (or production tax) that would have called forth the

actual production in the absence of supply controls. TDE
estimates attempt to do this by including a corrective factor

that reduces PSE and subsidy equivalent calculations when
subsidies that increase producer prices are tied to supply

controls.
                                                                 20

C. The Effective Rate of Assistance or Protection
     The effective rate of assistance or protection, a concept

refined by Corden (1966) and Balassa (1965), measureS the
percentage by which the value added in an industry changes due to
                            subsidization policies compared to its
government protection and
value under conditions of free trade and the absence of

government production-related subsidization programs.
specifically, the effective rate of assistance (ERA) is:

     ERA = (VA'-VA)/VA
where VA' and VA are value added with and without, respectively,
                                               added is the
trade-distorting government policies. Value
difference between the total value of an industry's (or firm's)

output and the costs of the intermediate inputs used in producing
the final product, for example, raw materials, energy, and
transportation, it measures the change in the return to the
capital and labor employed directly in an industry or firm.
     If it is assumed that all inputs and outputs are traded

under perfectly competitive conditions, all foreign supply and
demand curves are infinitely elastic, imports and domestic
production in an industry are perfect substitutes, and
intermediate inputs are used in fixed proportions, calculation of

the change in value added is quite straightforward.    Under these

conditions, tariffs and non—tariff policies affecting imports

raise the domestic price of imports and the domestic substitute
by the ad valorem equivalents of these policies, while production
subsidies raise the price received by producers above the
                                                                  21

domestic price by their subsidy equivalents. Subsidies or import
restrictions on intermediate inputs lower or raise input prices

to producers by their subsidy or tariff equivalents. More
specifically, VA1, the value added resulting from various
government policies, is measured by the existing value added in
an industry, while this industry's value added under free trade
is estimated by deducting from VA1 the revenue equivalents of the

tariff and non-tariff barriers affecting the industry's output,
the revenue equivalents of production subsidies, the revenue
equivalents of input subsidies, and adding the revenue
equivalents of tariff and non-tariff barriers affecting
intermediate inputs used in production. The difference between
VA1 ans VA expressed as a percentage of VA is the effective rate
of assistance. Among the many studies of effective rates of
assistance or protection are those by Balassa (1965), Baldwin
(1970), Wilkinson and Norrie (1975), and Pitt (1981).
     The effective rate of assistance brings out the significance
of a product's value-added share under free trade in determining

the effects of protection. Making the simplified assumptions
cited above, contrast the degree of protection on a simply
processed good that sells for $1 per unit under free—trade
conditions, in which the cost breakdown consists of $.90 of
traded intermediate inputs and $.10 of value added by primary

factors, with that on a more elaborately processed good also
selling for $1 but whose cost components consist of $.50 of
traded intermediates and $.50 of value added by primary factors.
                                                                 22


A five per cent duty on the imports of each good will raise the
price of each to $1.05.   Since free—trade conditions still

prevail for the intermediate inputs used in producing both goods,

the costs of these inputs remain unchanged. consequently, the
$.05 increase in the domestic value of the final goods will go to

the primary factors. This raises the return to the primary
factors used in producing the first good by $.05/$.l0 or 50
percent but to the primary factors used in making the second good

by only $.05/$.50 or 10 percent.
                                   Thus, a low nominal tariff on a

simply processed good with a low value-added component can yield
a high effective rate of assistance or protection.
     Modifying the assumptions of the simple model by
introducing, for example, less than perfectly elastic supply

curves and imperfect substitution between imports and domestic
production makes the calculation of effective rates of assistance

 considerably more difficult, just as dropping these assumptions
 makes the calculation of tariff and subsidy equivalents more

 difficult. It is a comparatively easy step, however, to
 calculate effective rates of assistance once tariff and subsidy

 equivalents have been estimated, especially if a standardized
 input-output table (or one for developed and another for
 developing countries) is used to determine the shares of various

 intermediate inputs used in production.


 VI. Quantity-Impact Measures
                                                                 23

    Quantity impact measures focus on changes in the volume of

imports and domestic production caused by various non—tariff
policies. As Jager and LanjoUW (1977) point out, a case can be
made that trying to measure quantitative changes in imports and
domestic output is more relevant for negotiators and domestic
producers than trying to estimate price wedges. Quantitative
measures can be aggregated across commodities and compared across
countries by expressing the decrease or increase in trade

attributable to trade policies as percentages of estimated trade
or domestic production in the absence of those policies.
     Besides inferring quantity changes from the simple methods
discussed in Part IV, as Hufbauer, Berliner, and Elliot (1986)
have done, investigators have analyzed the effects of policy

changes on particular industries by using both sector—specific

and general equilibrium models.
A. Sector-Specific Models
     Instead of attempting to capture all the interrelationships
that determine the effects on an industry of changes in non-

tariff policies, those using sector—specific models examine only
the most significant of these relationships. Though they require
considerable effort to implement, such models are much less time-

consuming to build than general equilibrium models and have the
benefit of not having to rely, as is often the case under simple

methods or applied general equilibrium models, on parameter
values for elasticities that are based on out—of-date studies.
     Among those who have used this approach to analyze trade
                                                                 24

                                                       steel
policy issues are Grossman (1986), who models the U.S.
industry, Moroz and Salembier (1985), who study the effects of

Canada's footwear import quotas, and Pelzmafl (1986), who develops
                                                               the
a model of the u.s. textile and apparel market. By estimating

reduced-form equation for employment using monthly observations

over a ten-year period, Grossman obtains elasticity parameters
that can be used to estimate the effects on employment, output,
domestic prices of such policy changes as reducing the level of

duties on steel imports. For certain key sectors that are highly
protected or subsidized and for which the accuracy of existing
elasticity values is doubtful, sector-specific studies are highly
desirable. The results from such studies are, however, very

sensitive to the particular way the model is formulated by the

investigator.
B. General Eauilibrium Approaches
     i) Multi—Good. Multi-Country Trade Models
     As Deardorff and Stern (1985) note, one general approach to

 measuring the quantitative effects of non-tariff trade policies
                                                      model to
 is to develop a multi-good, multi—country regression
 explain actual trading patterns on the basis of factor endowments
 and various trade—resistance factors such as distance. The
 general relationships obtained are then used to estimate a
 particular country's trade with other countries from its unique

 set of factor endowments and resistance factors.   The deviations

 between the country's actual and estimated trade patterns are

 taken to measure quantitatively the extent to which its trade
                                                                  25

policies are more or less restrictive than the collection of
countries used to obtain the general relationships.

    Notable applications of this technique by Saxonhouse (1983,
1988), Balassa (1986), and Lawrence (1987) have attempted to
ascertain if Japan's trade structure is consistent with its
resource endowment. The results are inconclusive. Learner (1988)
uses this approach in trying to determine whether trade in
individual products is distorted by unusually restrictive or
export—promoting government policies. He concludes that the

technique is too imperfect in explaining actual trading patterns
on the basis of real variables such as factor endowments to
isolate the effects of various trade measures.
    ii) ApDlied General Equilibrium (AGE) Models
     When major changes in protection and subsidy levels occur
across industries and countries, the impact—effect measures
obtained from sector-specific or other partial-equilibrium

approaches may be misleading. An applied general equilibrium
model is needed to take account fully of all the feedback effects
from such changes. Among the AGE models that have been specially
developed to examine trade policy issues are those constructed by
Deardorff and Stern (1986), Dixon, Parmenter, Sutton, and Vincent
(1982), Harris and Cox (1983), Whalley (1985), and Tarr (1988).
In the more elaborate of these models, the effects of changes in
non-tariff policies across industries and countries on such

variables as imports, exports, domestic production, employment,
relative prices, and value added can be determined under a wide
                                                                  26

                                                 flexibility of
variety of assumptions about exchange rates, the
wages, and the mobility of labor and capital.
     The usefulness of AGE models for policy analyses seems
                                                        extended
highly promising as they become more disaggregated, are
to more countries, and are based on more reliable parameter
                                 But until there is greater
estimates of key relationships.
agreement among the builders of these systems on the appropriate
                                                     relationships
way to model the key price and quantity_determiflthg
                          in industry detail, they are likely to
and greater comparability
serve more as useful checks on non—tariff policy measures
obtained by the other methods than as the basic measurement

 approach.

   viii. Welfare Measures
      In measuring the impact of tariff or non—tariff policies,
 economists naturally think in terms of the comparative welfare
                                            viewpoint is usually
 effects of such policies. An economy—wide
 adopted, but the effects on world welfare can also be estimated.
                                          that utilize various
 The methodologies previously described
 direct and cross-price elasticities to arrive at price or
 quantity measures of non-tariff policies already provide all the
 information needed for calculating consumer—surplus and producer
 surplus measures of economic welfare.     In the recent EC study of
                                          non—tariff barriers among
 the effects of removing the remaining
 Member States, the purpose of obtaining price and quantity
 measures of these barriers was so that they could be used for
                                                                 27

calculating the welfare gains from completing the Common Market.
Other studies of the welfare effects of non—tariff trade policies

using a partial equilibrium approach are those by Tarr and Morkre
(1984), Hickok (1985), and Hufbauer, Berliner, and Elliot (1986).

With AGE models, welfare changes are usually measured by using
the Hicksian concept of equivalent variation, that is, the income
that it would be necessary to provide members of the economy in
the pre—policy-change situation to make them as well-off as they

are after the policy change.

VII. Conclusions
     There are a number of techniques for measuring non-tariff
trade policies, none of which, unfortunately, is as simple to
implement as measuring tariffs. As numerous studies indicate,

however, taken together they provide a practical and feasible
means of obtaining measures of non—tariff policies that can be

used for assessing relative sectoral protection across countries

and monitoring changes in protection and subsidization levels

over time.
     Tariff and subsidy equivalents of non-tariff policies are
the measures with which public and private officials concerned
with trade issues are most familiar and, therefore, are the most

useful forms of measurement. Comparing foreign and domestic
prices is the most direct means of obtaining tariff equivalents,

but estimates based on known quantity changes, coupled with
relevant price-elasticity estimates, and on sector—specific
                                                                   28

studies are also useful as a check on the results from
                              When good estimates of tariff and
comparative price analysis.
                                   they can also be used to
subsidy equivalents are available,
calculate the effective rate of assistance, since this measure

indicates the impact of trade distortions on the returns to
domestic capital and labor more sharply than tariffs and subsidy

equivalents alone.
     Estimates of the quantitative effects of non-tariff policies

are a valuable supplemental measure.   In some instances, the

technique used to estimate tariff and subsidy equivalents

involves obtaining prior estimates of quantity
                                                 changes so this

information is readily available. Such is the case when demand
and supply elasticities for traded and domestic goods are used

along with the data on quantitative changes to infer tariff
 equivalents, as well as when sector—specific and AGE models are

 used. These latter models provide useful checks on other non—
 tariff measures and will become even more useful as greater

 uniformity in modeling specification and broader country and more
 detailed industry coverage is achieved.
      Lists of non-tariff policies and the magnitude of the trade
 affected by these policies have proved to be helpful in alerting
 government officials and others to the pervasiveness of non—

 tariff trade-distorting policies. FrequencYtYPe measures by
 themselves, however, are only a very crude measure for comparing

 the extent of protection or assistance across industries and
 countries.
                                                                 29

    Welfare measures, though regarded by economists as the best
summary measure of policies that reduce economic efficiency, are
unlikely to serve as a generally accepted basis for ascertaining
whether a balance of concessions has been achieved in a

negotiation. The wide divergence in views among negotiators
about the proper welfare weights to be given to different groups
within a country and to be assigned to different countries makes
it difficult to use welfare estimates for this purpose. But they
can be very useful to individual countries in assessing
alternative liberalization proposals, especially if the gains and
losses to different consumer and producer groups across
industries are separately identified so that public officials can
combine these welfare changes according to their own sets of

welfare weights.
     In addition to determining the form in which to measure

trade—distorting non—tariff policies, investigators must decide
on the types of policies they wish to measure and the industry
and country detail to include. Financial constraints will
probably force researchers in this area initially to focus on a
limited number of sectors and countries and on those nontariff

measures where price and quantity effects are significant.
Concentrating on a small number of industries, such as textiles

and apparel, steel, electronics, automobiles, and shipbuilding,
and on major consuming and producing markets, not only makes the
measurement task feasible but covers many of the non—tariff trade

policies of most concern to governments. There is also a danger
                                                                30

                             will get bogged down in disputes over
that measurement exercises
what is and is not a trade-distorting policy, Concentrating
initial efforts to measure non—tariff policies across countries

on policies that quantitativelY limit imports and exports,
enforce particular prices, or clearly represent trade—distorting
government subsidization may avoid this problem.
                                       FIGURE 1
                                                                              31



Price




        p1
        p0
        p3




             0                         ci 0
                                   Quantity of Imports

                                       FIGURE 2

                                                         /   AD-s
                                                                    SF


             p3
                                                                         ST
                                                                         —    S
                                                                                  T—s
             p0
             p1
                                                    —I
                                        —-—I
                                                                                  DD



                              /
                                         —I




                        /   /
                      /
                  0                            q3

                             Quantity of Imports and Domestic Outut
                                                              32

                           ENDNOTES



i. Average tariffs in the industrial countries have been reduced
   from about 40 percent in the mid-19305 to a current level of
   about 5 percent.
2. The focus of the paper is on goods and services that are
   traded across national borders. Goods and services supplied
   by foreign firms within a country are also subject to trade-
   distorting and discriminatory government measures, but these
   are not considered here.
                                   however, that to achieve
3. The European Community argued,
   reciprocity there should be greater cuts in high—duty items
   than low-duty ones. The tariff-cutting formula adopted in the
   Tokyo Round by which high-duty rates were cut by a greater
   percentage than low rates reflected this viewpoint.

4. The successive cross—price effects between imports  and the
   domestically produced substitute will settle at levels where
   the price and output level of the domestic variety are greater
   than initially and the price of imports is higher but the
   quantity lower than initially.
5. This threefold classification is used in the excellent survey
   of measurements methods by Deardorff and Stern (1985).

6. Under such arrangements as voluntary export restraints (VER5)
   where export licenses are usually allocated directly to
   foreign producers, p1 is the price these producers would
   receive if export licenses were auctioned off by the foreign
   government.  If the producers export to markets that are not
   subject to VERs, this is also the price that importers in
   these markets pay the producers.
7. This is part of a joint EUROSTAT—OECD exercise in calculating
                                               collects data for
   purchasing power parities in which EUROSTAT
   EC members and OECD is responsible for obtaining  data from
   non-EC members of OECD.
 8. Unit values estimated from customs data are usually poor
    indicators of these prices.
 9. In the case of VERs, for example, the export price in the
   tariff equivalent formula can be estimated from the price in
   markets supplied by foreign producers where VER5 do not
   apply.
                                                               33

10. As the OECD (1987) study of U.S. agricultural policies and
    their subsidy—equivalent effects documents, even finding
    identical agricultural products is not an easy task.
11. Levinsohn (1988) finds, for example, that to reduce total
    U.S. auto imports by the same quantity as a one percent rise
    in the price of Japanese autos alone requires only a 6/10 of
    one percent rise in auto imports from all sources.

12. For a discussion of changes in the rate of protection or
    assistance and changes in exchange rates, see Industries
    Assistance Commission, 1981.
                                                                34

                           References



Balassa, Bela (1965), "Tariff Protection in Industrial Countries:
 An Evaluation," Journal of Political EconomY 73, no. 6, 573-94.
         (1986), "Japan'S Trade Policies," WeltwirtschaftliCheS

  ArchiV 122 (Heft 4), 745—90.
Baldwin, Robert E. (1970), Non-Tariff Distortions of
  International Trade, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
         (1975), Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:
  The Philippines, New York: National Bureau of Economic

  Research.
Bergstefl, C. Fred, Kimberly Elliot, Jeffrey Schott, & Wendy
  Takacs (1987), Auction Quotas and United States Policy,
  Policy Analyses in International Economics, No. 19,
  Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics.
Bhagwati, Jagdish and T.N. Srinivasan (1975), Foreign Trade
  Regimes and Economic Development: India, New York: National

  Bureau of Economic Research.
Commission of the European Communities (1988), EuroPean Economy:
  The Economics of 199a, Luxembourg: Office for the Official
  Publications of the European Communities.
 Corden, W. M. (1966), "The Structure of a Tariff System and the
   Effective Tariff Rate," Journal of political Economy.
 Dardis, R. (1967), "Intermediate Goods and the Gains from Trade,"

   Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 9.
 Deardorff, Alan V. and Robert M. Stern (1985), "Methods of
                                                                 35

 Measurement of Nontariff Barriers," Geneva: United Nations
 Conference on Trade and Development, UNCTAD/ST/MD/28.

         and           (1986), The Michigan Model of World

 Production and Trade, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dixon, P., B. Parmenter, J. Sutton, and D. Vincent (1982), ORANI:
 A Multisectoral Model of the Australian Economy, Amsterdam:

  North—Holland.
Eurostat, (1988), purchasing Power Parities and Gross Domestic

  Product in Real Terms: Results 1985, Luxembourg: Office of
  Official Publications of the European Communities.
Feenstra, Robert (1984), "Voluntary Export Restraint in U.S.
  Autos, 1980—81: Quality, Employment, and Welfare Effects," in
  R. Baldwin and A. Krueger (eds.), The Structure and Evolution
  of Recent U.S. Trade Policy, Chicago: University of Chicago
  Press and National Bureau of Economic Research.
Grossman, Gene (1986), "Imports as a Cause of Injury: The Case of

  the U.S. Steel Industry," Journal of International Economics

  20, 201—23.
Hamilton, Carl B. (1986), "An Assessment of Voluntary Restraints

  on Hong Kong Exports to Europe and the U.S.A.," Economica 53.
         (1988), "Restrictiveness and the International

  Transmission of the 'New' Protectionism," in R.E. Baldwin
  (ed.), Issues in U.S.- EC Trade Relations, Chicago:
  University of Chicago Press and National Bureau of Economic

  Research.
Harris, Richard G. with David Cox (1983), ade. Industrial
                                                                 36

 PolicY, and Canadian Manufacturing, Toronto:   Ontario Research

 Council.
HickOk, Susan (1985), "The Consumer Cost of U.S. Trade
 Restraints," Federal Reserve Bank of New York: Quarterly

 Revi 10, No. 2 (Summer), 1-12.
HufbaUer, Gary C., Diane T. Berliner, and Kimberly Elliot (1986),
  Trade Protection in the United States: 31 Case Studies,
  Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics.
Industries Assistance CommissiOn, (1981) Annual Report. 1980-81,

  Appendix 1, 6, Canberra: Australian Government Publishing
  Service.
Jager, M. and G.J. Lanjouw (1977), "An Alternative Method for
  Quantifying International Trade Barriers," WeltwirtschaftlicheS

  Archiv 113, (Heft 4), 719—40.
Josling, Tim and Stefan Tangermann (1987), Quantitative Measures
  for Negotiating and Monitoring Trade Liberalization in

  Agriculture," paper presented to International Agricultural
  Trade Research Consortium Meeting, Airlie House.
Lawrence, Robert Z. (1987), "Does Japan Import Too Little: Closed
  Markets or Minds?", paper presented at Brookings Panel on
  Economic Activity, Washington, D.C., September 10.
Learner, Edward (1988), "Measures of Openness," in R.E. Baldwin,
   (ed.), Trade Policy Issues and Empirical Analysis, Chicago:
  University of Chicago Press and National Bureau of Economic

  Research.
Levinsohn, James (1988), "Empirics of Taxes on Differentiated
                                                                 37

  Products: The Case of Tariffs in the U.S. Automobile
  Industry" in R.E. Baldwin (ed.), Trade Policy Issues and

  Empirical Analysis, Chicago: University of Chicago Press and
  National Bureau of Economic Research.
Morici, Peter and Laura Megna (1983), U.S. Economic Policies
  Affecting Industrial Trade: A Quantitative Assessment,
  Washington, D.C.: National Planning Association.
Moroz, A.R. (1985), "Approaches and Methodologies for Estimating
  Non—Tariff Barriers," Discussion Paper No. 8508, Ottawa:

  Institute for Research on Public Policy.
         and G.E. Salembier (1985), "Quantitative Assessment of
  the Costs and Benefits of the Footwear Import Quota,"
  Discussion Paper No. 8506, Ottawa: Institute for Research on

  Public Policy.
Nogues, Julio J., Andrzej Olechowski, and L. Alan Winters (1986),
  "The Extent of Nontariff Barriers to Industrial Countries'
  Imports," The World Bank Economic Review, 1, 1, 181-199. The

  World Bank.
Olechowski, Andrzej (1987), "Nontariff Barriers to Trade" in J.

  Michael Finger and Andrzej Olechowski (eds.). The Uruguay
  Rounds; A Handbook in Multilateral Trade Negotiations,
  Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
  (1987), National Policies and Agricultural Trade: Country

  Study. United States, Paris: Organization for Economic

  Cooperation and Development.
                                                                   38

Peizinan, joseph (1986), "The Tariff Equivalents of the Existing
 Quotas Under the Multifiber Arrangement," paper presented at
  Southern Economic Association Meetings, Louisiana, Nov. 23—

  25.

Pitt, Mark M. (1981), "Alternative Trade Strategies and
  Employment in Indonesia," in A. Krueger, H. Lary, T. Monson,

  and N. Akrasanee (eds.), Trade and Employment in Developing
  Countries I; Individual Studies, Chicago: University of Chicago

  Press.
Roningen, V. D. and A. Yeats (1976), "Nontariff Distortions of
  International Trade: Some Preliminary Empirical Evidence,"
  weltwirtschaftlicheS Archiv 112 (Heft) 4), 613-25.
Saxonhouse, Gary R. (1983), "The Micro- and Macroeconomics of
  Foreign Sales to Japan," in W. R. Cline (ed.), Trade Policy

  in the 1980s, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
           (1988), "Differentiated Products, Economies of Scale,

  and Access to the Japanese Market," paper presented to Tenth
  Annual Middlebury Conference on Economic Issues, MiddlebUry

  College, Middlebury, Vermont.
Tarr, David G. (1988), "A General Equilibrium Analysis of Quotas
  on U.S. Imports," mimeo, Washington: Federal Trade
   Commission.
           and Morris E. Morkre (1984), Aggregate Costs to the
   United States of Tariff and Quotas on Imports: General Tariff
   Cuts and Removal of Quotas on Automobiles. Steel. Sugar. and
   Textiles, Washington, D.C.: Federal Trade Commission.
                                                                    39

Whalley, John (1985), Trade Liberalization Ainona   Malor   World

  Trading Areas, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
         and R. M. Wigle (1988), "Endogenous Participation in
  Agricultural Support Programs and Ad Valorem Equivalent
  Modeling," London, Canada: Centre for Study of International

  Economic Relations.
Wilkinson, B. W. and K. Norrie (1975), Effective Protection and
  the Return to capital, Ottawa: Economic Council of Canada.
