NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCENTIVES, INFORMATION, AND ORGANIZATIONAL DESIGN

Joseph E. Stiglitz

Working Paper No. 2979

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 01238
May 1989

NOG Lecture delivered to the annual meeting of the Austrian Economic Society,
Vienna, September 29, 1988. Financial support from the Olin Foundation, the
National Science Foundation, and the Hoover Institution is gratefully
acknowledged. This paper is partly based on joint work undertaken with RaaJ
K. Sah, to whom I am most indebted. I have also benefited greatly from
conversations with Joseph Farrell. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2979
May 1989

INCENTIVES, INFORMATION, AND ORGANIZATIONAL DESIGN

ABSTRACT

This paper explores the interaction between incentives, information,
and organizational design. It argues that the virtues of the market economy

do not lie so much in the vision of competition and decentralization
embodied in the Arrow-Debreu model, or the Lange-Lerner-Taylor analysis of

market socialism, as they do in those more recent models analyzing
as
contests
competition
and
Lazear-Rosen)
(Nalebuff-Stiglitz,
decentralization as a structure of decision making, in environments in which
imperfect information is dispersed among numerous individuals (humans are

fallible) and accordingly, some method of aggregation has to be found.
While the traditional model exaggerates the virtues of the market (whenever
markets are incomplete and information is imperfect, market allocations are
almost never constrained Pareto efficient), it also understates its virtues:
its ability to solve the problems of selection,incentives, and information

gathering and aggregation which are the care problems in organizational
design. The paper shows how this alternative perspective provides insights
into the role that time plays in resource allocation- -for example, patent (R
& D) races as well races to be the first to enter a market. We are able to
provide an explanation, for instance, for why in times of economic crisis
(such as wars) most economies abandon reliance on market mechanisms.

Joseph E. Stiglitz
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305

INCENTIVES, INFORMATION, AND ORGANIZATIONAL DESIGN
J. E. Stiglitz'
Most economic activity- -and almost all production- - takes place within

the context of organizations:

firms, family, and government.

In each,

there is a large element of collective decision making. Our mixed attitudes
towards this collective decision making are reflected by a number of popular

aphorisms and jokes:

while we may claim that "two heads are better than

one," it is also true that "too many cooks spoil the broth." There is the
old joke about an elephant being a horse made by a committee.

The fact that we continue to make so many decisions collectively, that
we so frequently assign difficult problems to committees, is suggestive that

this form of decision making must have some virtues, to compensate at least
partially for its well recognized vices.
For the past several years, I (together with my co-author,

Raaj Sah of Yale University) have been engaged in a research programme
attempting to understand better the behavior of economic organizations.2
We have focused in particular on decision making. Our concern has not only

been with the structure of decision making within organizations, such as

2Reports on some of our results are presented in Sah-Stiglitz (1985a,
l985b, 1986, 1988) and Stiglitz (1988).

1

firms, but more broadly, the organization of decision making in society as a
whole.

The contrast between our perspective, and the standard description of
"the economic problem" should be clear: we have been concerned not so much

with the rules for allocating resources (e.g. setting marginal rates of

substitution equal to marginal rates of transformation) as with how
decisions about resource allocations get made, who makes those decisions,
and how those who make those decisions are selected. We are concerned, in
a sense, with the process by which resources get allocated.

There is a good reason that standard economic theory has paid little
attention to these problems.

In the standard formulation, there is a fixed

set of resources (endowments), and fixed preferences; there is a once-and-

for all problem of allocating resources. Arrow and Debreu had the insight

to see that, within that formulation, it made little difference whether
there was a static, one period resource allocation problem or a multi-period

resource allocation problem. That result, in itself, should have alerted us
that something was seriously flawed about the Wairasian perspective.

(This

is not to say that the Arrow-Debreu work has not been very useful, but, in
retrospect, more in helping us to identify what is wrong with the standard

competitive paradigm and in developing the market failures approach to
government interventions, than in helping us to understand how resources are
actually allocated in modern capitalist economies.)

There is another result that should have had a similar effect:

the

Lange-Lerner-Taylor theorem, asserting the equivalence of a market socialist

economy and a capitalist economy.

Given that the theorem was based on an

inaccurate description of the market economy and an even worse description

2

of socialist economies, it is not surprising that the result, suggesting an

equivalence between the two, should seem so far off the mark.

Yet that

theorem has not been without influence, as several socialist economies have

tried to approach market socialism. Yet the problems encountered, say, by

the Chinese even in their limited attempts to move in the direction of

market socialism should make us cautious, not only about the policy
relevance of the theory, but more fundamentally, about the adequacy of the
theory itself.3

With there being only a once-and-for all decision concerning the
allocation of resources, no wonder that not much attention was paid to the

process by which resources get allocated.

Indeed, the question of who

should be in decision making roles- -a question that occupies much of the
time of businessmen, and even academics- -is of utterly no importance. The
view of economics encapsulated in the Arrow-Debreu framework (and reflected

in the contemporaneously written textbooks, such as Samuelson) is what I
call "engineering economics" (although in doing so, I intend no slur on the
engineering profession.)

It was, perhaps, most accurately put by Joan

Robinson, where she described the job of the manager of a firm as looking up

in the book of blueprints the correct page corresponding to current (and
possibly future) factor markets.

Even those much heralded results concerning the decentralizability of

the economy were not so much results concerning the decentralization of

In later sections of the paper,

I shall touch on some of the

problems that have been encountered in implementing market socialism, and I
shall be more precise in what ways the Arrow Debreu model does not provide
a good description of how market economies function.
3

decision making- - for

there was really little scope for decision making

within the Arrow Debreu framework4 - - as

they were descriptions of a

computational algorithm.

1 cannot, within the confines of this lecture, develop fully the
alternative approach that we have been exploring.
limited:

My objective is more

first, to clarify some of the important failures of the

traditional competitive paradigm; secondly, to describe briefly some of the

major ingredients in our alternative approach; and thirdly, to show how our
approach yields new insights, both in the new questions which it raises and

in the new answers to long standing questions which it provides. We focus
our attention in section III. in particular on the role of time in resource

allocation and on the choice of centralized versus decentralized resource
allocation mechanisms.5 Among the questions about which our analysis will

have something to say is, Why is it that, in spite of the praise that is

traditionally heaped upon the price system- - and

the abuse to which

bureaucratic behavior is subjected- - in times of work almost all countries
abandon reliance on the market and resort to some system of direct controls?

This seems all the more curious, since it

is

precisely in times of war that

"In the Arrow-Debreu models, firms make choices under uncertainty, but

those choices are no different from conventional static choices:
they
simply maximize the value of the firm, using state contingent prices. They

do not have to form judgments concerning the likelihood of various
contingencies, and they are precluded, by assumption, from gathering
information.
There is no exploration of new technological possibilities,
and no new products, and hence no scope for judgment concerning how the

market would react to these new possibilities.
A corollary of these characteristics is that there is always unanimity

In practice, of course, there are often
about what the firm should do.
(See
disagreements among managers about the firm's business strategy.
Stiglitz, 1970, and Grossman and Stiglitz, 1977, 1980.)
5The new analytic results in this paper I contained in this section.

4

resources need to be husbanded carefully.

And our conventional textbook

stories stress the role of prices in conveying information.6

When the

market at one date looks much the same as on previous dates, there is little

"news" to be conveyed.

It is in times of change and massive resource

reallocations- -such as associated with war- -where we should have thought

that the price system would show its mettle, its distinct advantage (if
indeed it has such an advantage) over other ways of conveying information.
And yet this is precisely the time when country after country seems to lose
its faith in the market.

I. Some Failures of the Traditional Paradigm
There are several obvious- -but no less fundamental on that account- -

criticisms

of the traditional theory.

I shall touch upon four in this

lecture.

1. The Complexity of the Commodity Space.
The first has to do with the complexity of the commodity space. In the

examples we teach our students, we talk about apples, oranges, and wheat.
But any farmers can tell you that there is no such thing as a price for an
apple. The price depends on the kind of apple, its freshness (and a variety

of other quality characteristics), its location, and the time of the year.

6Though not our formal models. It was not until the recent development
of information economics that formal models showing how new information
affected prices, and how prices could serve to transmit or aggregate
information, were developed.
(See Grossman and Stiglitz, 1976, 1980b)
These models have quite different welfare properties than the standard
Arrow-Debreu model.
5

Industrial commodities are even more difficult, having a myriad of relevant
attributes. 1

This has two fundamental

implications.

First, it makes it virtually

impossible for a central planner (a Wairasian auctioneer) to set prices, or

to set prices in a way which adequately reflects this diversity of
characteristics, which results in products of the right characteristics
being produced.

Market socialist economies have learned the hard way what

happens when the product is incompletely specified. If a price is specified
for "nails" short nails made out of any cheap material will be produced. If

the length is specified, the producer may still make nails out of a cheap
material, which may be excessively brittle.

For more complex commodities,

almost no matter how many characteristics are specified, there remain scope
for discretion, and in particular, cost cutting which adversely affects how
well the commodity performs the task for which it is intended. Moreover, it
becomes extremely costly to provide complete specifications of very complex

Moreover, if all the inputs

commodities (see previous footnote).

(materials, et cetera) are fully specified--for instance, the material of
which the nail is to be composed- -

it

forecloses opportunities for finding

alternative materials which meet the user's needs as well or better, but
which are less expensive.

If only the characteristics of the nail were

specified (brittleness, hardness, etc.), it often becomes a matter of
judgment about whether these standards have been met. And even then, there
remain questions of trade-offs:

some material might exceed the original

7An example of the complexity of the product space was recently
provided by the U.S. Defense Department, when it put up for bidding a
standard, white T-shirt, the kind of commodity that can be purchased in any
The specifications were 30 small print
clothing store for a few dollars.
pages.
6

standard in some characteristic, and fall short in another.

should be the producer receive for such a commodity?

What price

Market socialism

provides no answer- -other than requiring the planner to provide a complete

set of prices (an impossible task).

The market economy--which is not a

pure price system- -provides an answer, through the interaction of buyers and

sellers in real markets, in which prices are negotiated, not taken as given.

Secondly, it means that markets are frequently- -perhaps I should say
usually- -imperfectly competitive. The products produced by one firm usually

differ slightly, in one of the many characteristics, from those produced by
others.

The process of production is often more one of "negotiation" than of
"price taking." Firms negotiate delivery times, product characteristics, as

well as price.

Information (about the needs of the buyers, the

technological capabilities of the sellers) is transmitted in the process.
Prices play a vital role in this transmission. The qualitative statement,
"It would be hard to do make a nail which will do what you want it to do,"

becomes a quantitative statement, "I can do it, but the cost of the nail
will be $1.23 per nail." There is competition: the buyer will check with
other producers, to see if they can make a better offer.

But it not the

kind of competition described by the Arrow-Debreu model.

2. Technological change
Nowhere are the failures of the traditional price taking paradigm more
apparent than in the analysis of technological change and of the allocation
of time.

I shall also have more to say about the allocation of time later

in this lecture; here let me make a few comments about technological change.

7

It is not only that the standard competitive model does not address the

problems associated with technological change, and in particular the
development of new products; but the framework of that model cannot be
extended to incorporate technological change, at least in a meaningful way.

How can a firm be a price taker for a commodity, which has yet to be
invented? And to obtain a return on its R & D, firms must exercise a least

some monopoly power, as Schuapeter long ago emphasized.

Moreover, the

technical assumptions, such as convexity, underlying standard competitive

analysis, simply are inappropriate when there is technological change.8
Many of the problems here are closely related to problems that costly and
imperfect information poses for the standard analysis of market economies,
to which I shall turn shortly.9

There are many important links between organizational design,
incentives, and technological change- -issues which are not even addressed

within the standard model.

High rates of technological change require

greater institutional adaptability, and a standard argument in favor of
decentralized systems is there greater adaptability.

At the same time,

decentralized structures10 provides both the competition which is a spur to

8For a more extensive discussion of these issues, see Stiglitz, 1987b.

9lndeed, a central part of technological change is the acquisition of
information (knowledge), and accordingly, it is not surprising that all the
problems that have been encountered in extending the standard competitive
paradigm to situations where information is imperfect arise when considering
technological change.
'°Not the stylized decentralization of the Arrow Debreu model, but the
kind of decentralization that actually characterizes market economies. See
the preceding section.

8

innovation and the close interaction between producers and users which
helps direct innovation in an effective manner.'1

3. Information and Errors.
The third problem with the standard paradigm I have already hinted at:
it

poses

the resource allocation problem as a once and for all decision. In

fact, new products, new information, new individuals are constantly entering

the market. These events cannot be fully anticipated. As new events occur,

new opportunities are opened up and new decisions have to be made.
Different economic systems will differ in the speed with which they can

respond to the new conditions and opportunities, and in how well they
respond, including the errors that they make.

Though it has long been recognized that "too err is human," until
recently there have been few attempts to explore systematically the causes
of human fallibility and its consequences for the design of organizations.

In the Arrow-Debreu framework, individuals may have differing subjective

beliefs about the likelihood of different states, but there was no such

thing as "right" or "wrong," no attempt to come to terms with the
differences in judgments, no process by which views on the likelihood of
different states would change.

This is, of course, not the view taken by businessmen:

they do not

believe that one opinion is necessarily just as good as any other.

Firms

must decide how much and what information to gather, they must decide on how

11These arguments suggest the possibility of multiple equilibria:
decentralized structures create an environment which contributes to their
own relative advantage, and conversely with bureaucratic structures. For art
elaboration of this idea, see Sah and Stiglitz, 1989.
9

that information is to be gathered, e.g. to what extent the process of
information gathering should be decentralized; and beyond that,

they

must

decide who should gather the information and upon whose judgments they
should rely.

Inevitably, or at least with a high probability, there will be
differences in views: some will think the project worth undertaking, others

that it will not be. Any organization has to have a way of resolving these

differences, a way, in other words, of aggregating the beliefs of the
different participants.

In designing a structure (or as we called it in our earlier work, the

architecture) of decision making, account must be taken of two aspects of
individuals and their relations with each other:
(a)

Individuals have a finite capacity.

this in observing others.)

(I am particularly aware of

In particular, within any time they gan only

collect a limited amount of information. Time is of the essence in decision

making, partly because the relevant information is frequently dated:

one

typically can collect information about current relative prices, but only

very limited information about future relative prices; information about
relative prices can quickly become dated.

Because of their limited capacities, individuals never have perfect
information, and therefore there is always a finite probability of an error

of judgment. (Errors arise, of course, not only from the limited collection

of information, but also from imperfect processing of the available
information, again characteristics which most of us have become accustomed
to noticing in others, if not in ourselves). The heuristics individuals use

in making judgments, in arriving at conclusions from the available
10

information, are particularly error prone when used in contexts which differ
from those for which they were originally developed; but judging whether one

is in such a situation is itself a question in which opinions may differ,
and in which errors frequently arise.12
(b)

Communication is limited and imperfect. An individual can seldom

communicate all the information he has learned to another individual, and
what he communicates is often transmitted with noise; errors enter in the
transmission process.'3

I cannot give you (to use the term of computer

specialists) a "dump" of what is on my brain.

I always sense that my

understanding of a subject is far better and more complete than what I can
communicate to you: you will only be able to know but a fraction of what (I
believe) I know.

Concentration of information gathering and decision making in small
groups saves on communication costs and reduces the problems arising from
communication errors. But the finiteness of the capacities of individuals
means that concentrating decision making may result in decisions based on

more limited information, and hence more subject to errors (on that
account.)

What is critical is not only the number of individuals involved in the

decision making process, but how they are arranged. In earlier studies, we

contrasted the errors arising from hierarchical decision structures (in

The work of Tversky and his co-authors have been particularly
insightful in this respect.

'3The noisiness of communication is often illustrated by the children's

game, in which people sit in a circle, and a message is passed quickly
around. Usually, the version which returns to the originator of the message
is highly garbled.
11

which, for instance, project approval required approval by all members of a
hierarchical

chain)

with those arising from polyarchical decision

structures, where any unit could approve the project on its own.

(Our

analysis of polyarchical structures was meant to be suggestive of market
economies: in a market economy, any firm can undertake a project, and there

are usually several firms in the same industry, that is, involved in
reviewing similar kinds of projects.)

In the simple models we examined,

where the standards of acceptance of projects in both hierarchy and
polyarchy are the same, so that the likelihood of any single individual
(subunit of the organization) recommending that a good project be rejected

or a bad project be accepted is the same in both organizational forms,
hierarchical decision making lead to more good projects being rejected, but
fewer bad projects being accepted. Both of these organizational forms could

be viewed as special cases of committee structures, where the size of the

committees and the degree of required consensus depended on the costs of
various kinds of errors as well as the likelihood that any single decision
maker would make a particular error. We showed, for instance, that the more
important the decision (that is, a decision where errors were more costly),

the larger the size of committee, explaining the sense of powerlessness
often felt by individuals in modern society: as individuals earn the right
to participate in more important decisions, their voice becomes only one of
an increasingly larger number responsible for making these decisions.

Another critical aspect of the design of decision making structures is

delay. Hierarchical structures, because they require more approval, may be

more subject to delay.

Moreover, the malfunction of any one part of the

12

system may have severe consequences for the overall performance of the
organization, and, in particular, lead to long delays.

Delay may be reduced by having a large number of individuals look at a
project simultaneously (but independently).

But this has a distinct cost

disadvantage over the sequential review process typically associated with
hierarchical structures.

The issues of organizational form and information (error) aggregation

arise at all levels in society. We can think of the market economy as one
large polyarchical organization, each of the units of which are themselves

organizations, many of which are hierarchically organized.

Our earlier

analyses provided some hints at the circumstances under which one
organizational form would be more desirable than another, and an explanation

of why we should not be surprised to see the kind of mixture of polyarchy
and hierarchy that in fact we observe.'5

4.

Incentives.

Perhaps the most widely recognized failure of traditional

competitive framework is its failure to give sufficient attention to the

"Thus, the essential difference between a committee of two, in which
unanimity is required to proceed with the project, and a hierarchy, is one
of delay and wasted effort. The advantage of the hierarchy is that projects
that have been rejected by one person are not reviewed by the other- -and
since both would have to agree to have the project adopted, such a review is
wasted effort. On the other hand, in a committee structure (as we model it)
the two reviews occur at the same time, while in the hierarchy, the second
review does not begin until after the first is completed.
'5For instance, we show that (a)

it is always desirable to break up a

very long hierarchical chain into two (or more) hierarchies, with the
hierarchies being sub-units of a polyarchy; (b) it is always desirable to

reorganize a very wide polyarchy (that is, one in which there are many
independent decision units), into two sub-units, which bear a hierarchical
relationship with one another; and (c) with the appropriate combination of
hierarchies and polyarchies, one can attain perfect discrimination between
good and bad projects. See Sah and Stiglitz (1986).
13

problem of incentives.

Of course, in the obiter dicta surrounding the

reference is frequently made to the incentives provided by

model,

competition.

But the incentive problems which the model addresses are not

those which, again, most businessmen view themselves as facing.
traditional model, workers do not have to be motivated:

In the

they either do the

job which they have contracted to perform, or they do riot get paid the
contracted amount. The pay that they receive does provide them, to be sure,

with an incentive to perform the job, provided it compensates them for the
disutility of the task and the foregone leisure.

But the incentive problem which firms face arises from the fact that
few individuals are paid on a piece rate basis, on the basis of performance
alone. (The reasons for this I discussed extensively in my 1975 paper.)

This is particularly true of individuals involved in decision making.
After all, we have argued that most decision making is done collectively.
It is very difficult to assign responsibility for failures, or successes for

that matter. And indeed, many, if not most individuals, go to great trouble

to make it difficult to assign blame. They make sure that others have been

appropriately consulted, and they are careful about what they put down on
paper.

Verbal communication is much more subject to reinterpretation- -to

claiming that, if one's advice turns out to be wrong, the advice was not
correctly understood. When individuals put pen to paper, to leave, as the

expression goes, a paper trail, they are careful that it reads like a
Deiphic oracle.

In some sense, the Arrow Debreu model not only does not address the
central incentive issues facing the economy, it gives the wrong impression

about the relationship between competition (at least the peculiar form of

14

competition which goes by the rubric of "perfect competition") and
incentives.

In the case of technological change, providing incentives

requires that the individual be able to appropriate some part of the social

returns to the innovation--as the patent system does.

But this in turn

means that these markets cannot be perfectly competitive. Just as perfectly

efficient capital markets would provide no incentive for individuals to
acquire information (see Grossman and Stiglitz, 1976, l980a), so perfectly
competitive product markets would provide no incentives for innovation.

But while the traditional model of the Arrow Debrue economy does not
pay proper due to the importance of incentives, the Lange-Lerner-Taylor view

of market socialism is far worse:

managers are suppose to maximize firm

profits, at the established prices, simply because it is their job to do so.

Of course, j their job was a simplistic as it typically was depicted- -

looking

up the appropriate page in the book of blueprints- - incentives might

indeed have been a second order issue. But if our view of the importance of

decision making is correct, then incentives are important. And incentives
require •both property rights and at least the possibility of inequality:
for if individuals' standards of living are guaranteed to be essentially the
same, regardless of whether one works hard or not, there is little incentive

to work hard.

Incentive issues are concerned not just with effort, but

also with risk taking:

so long as individuals do not bear all the

consequences of the risks which their actions can affect, their will be
imperfect incentives. These incentive questions are not addressed by the

Arrow Debreu model because, by assumption, individuals do bear all the
consequences of their actions.

15

In recent years, there has been considerable research into the design
of good incentive structures.16 These require balancing off, say, the gains
from better incentives from relying more extensively on piece rates or more

generally perfortnartce related compensation schemes, versus the costs in
terms of greater risk bearing by the worker.
One form of incentives which has received some attention are contests- a form of competition much more akin to the kind of competition we see in

everyday life than the perfect competition of the standard paradigm.
Patent races are contests where the winner takes all, although the looser is

often in a good position to compete in the next race. Markets can be viewed

as contests, in which the losers--those who can't keep up with the rest-are eliminated.'7

The essential nature of these contests is that

compensation depends on relative performance.'8

I now want to say a few

words about the virtues of contests, and the concomitant organizational
architectures.

18See, for instance, Ross (1973) or Stiglitz (1974).

'71n on going work, we have viewed the evolutionary process from this
perspective. Two kinds of errors arise: Good organizations get eliminated,
and bad organizations survive. We analyze the determinants of the relative
See Sah and Stiglitz,
frequency and costs of these two kinds of errors.
1985a.

'8Contributors to this recent literature include Lazear and Rosen
[1981], Nalebuff and Stiglitz [l983a, 1983b], Green and Stokey [1983], and
Holmstrom [1982] and Stiglitz [1986].

16

II. Contests and Polyarchies

In the preceding section, we argued that the view of competition
reflected in the Arrow-Debreu model does not provide a good model of modern

capitalism; it does not even address some of the central issues facing
market economies.

Modern market economies are characterized by many firms producing many

different products. There is competition and there is decentralization of
decision making.

A major part of my research program over the past few

years has been concerned with understanding better how competition and
decentralized decision actually work in modern economies.

In our previous discussions, we have identified three tasks facing any
organization:

it must select those to be involved in decision making (the

selection problem); it must provide incentives; and it must have a decision

making structure, a structure which balances off the various errors, which

trades off the costs of errors and of delays with the costs of obtaining
faster and more accurate decisions.

In our work on decision making structures, we identified some distinct
advantages- - from

structures.

the perspective of error aggregation- -of polyarchical

This was particularly true when the units of the polyarchy

adjusted the standards for acceptance of a project to reflect the limited
number of reviews to which it was subjected.

Polyarchical structures have two further distinct advantages:

they

provide a basis of comparison of performance, which can be used for the
design of effective incentive structures, and which can be used as the basis
of selection.

17

One of

the problems facing standard piece rate systems is the

determination of the appropriate piece rate.

In contexts where the

environment is changing rapidly, where technology is evolving, and where
opportunity costs may be varying, the appropriate piece rate must constantly

be changing. (Of course, if there were a complete set of prices, the piece

rate would simply need to adjust to reflect the price changes.

But this

brings us back to the first point made earlier- -the complexity of the
commodity space.

There is not a complete set of prices; there are not

prices for a car with four thousand seven hundred and eighty two screws
tightened and for a car with four thousand, seven hundred and eighty three
screws tightened.

There is no market price to which we can look for the

value added of tightening one screw.

And since most production occurs

within large firms, most of the value added by individuals--when it can be
identified- -

represents but one piece of the production of a marketed

commodity.)

In joint work with Barry Nalebuff [Nalebuff-Stiglitz, 1983aJ, we showed

how contests have the advantage of what we called incentive flexibility. It
was as if the piece rate adjusted automatically to reflect the difficulty of

the task. Consider a two person contest. If the task became easier, if one
kept his output target fixed, slacking off on effort, it would pay the other

to increase his output target, to increase substantially the likelihood he
would win.

Of course, each participant knows this, and they all adjust

their output targets to reflect the increased ease of the task.

Market contests work in a similar way.

One of the problems that

monopolies face is the difficulty of knowing whether they are producing
efficiently.

Of course, the standard theory says that the problem with

18

monopoly is only that it produces too little; whatever it produces it
produces efficiently. But this does not seem to accord well with widespread

perceptions of managerial slack in monopolies.

The problem is that the

owners--or the government regulators, in the case of regulated natural
monopolies- -do not know whether the managers are performing well; and the

managers may not know whether their subordinates are performing well. How
much should it cost to make a telephone call between New York and Chicago?
How expensive should it be to develop a less expensive way of transmitting

information? The best, and in some cases, the only meaningful answers can

be derived by comparisons.

But comparisons require several units

undertaking similar tasks.

For some tasks, even a monopoly can set up bases of comparisons:
can organize contests among telephone operators.

it

Polyarchically organized

decision making provides a basis of comparison of the competence of
different decision making units.

Letting pay and selection for promotion

depend on the comparative evaluations thus both provides incentives and
facilitates the selection process.

(Contests have other virtues, and some vices, which we briefly note.
The incentives they provide are provided with limited risk bearing on the
part of the participants.

Sometimes competition is less effective than we

have depicted it- -workers band together to limit the degree of competition

among themselves, labelling those who work too hard, who play the game as

management intended, as rate busters; and sometimes it may even be
destructive--one can win not by doing well but by ensuring chat one's rival

does badly; competition among first year law students, with pages being
ripped out of the relevant law journals to hamper rivals, is clearly not

19

constructive; and Steven Salop'9 has shown

a

variety of circumstances in

which, with imperfect competition, efforts are directed at raising rival's

costs rather than lowering one's own costs and he has shown a variety of
ways in which firms can and do raise rivals' costs.)

195ee, for instance, Salop and Scheffman (1983).
20

III. Time, Incentives, and Organizational Design

Many, if not most contests that we see in day-to-day life involve
time:

both who can do the most (make the most widgets) within a given

amount of time, and who can do a particular task (run a quarter mile, swim
100 meters) in the fastest time.

Time is among our scarcest resources- -our days on this earth are
numbered- -

and while conventional economics has focused how markets lead to

efficient allocations of individuals' time between leisure and work, they
have had little to say about many of the more interesting problems involving
time.

In this section, I present four examples in which time is of the
essence, in which the standard competitive models provide little if any

insight into what is going on, but in which our alternative approach
provides several insights.

The examples illustrate the ways in which

markets--and time--address the

fundamental

problems of incentives,

selection, and decision making.

The first example focuses on incentives, and addresses the question,

does the market provide appropriate incentives for R & D? Is the pace of
research too fast or too slow?

The second example focuses on selection, and addresses the question,
does the market ensure that the least cost producers actually produce? We

construct a simple model showing how time helps solve this problem:

in

equilibrium lower costs enter markets, on average, at a more rapid rate.
But the market's screening is far from perfect: there is some chance that
high cost firms enter even when there are lower cost firms around. And the

21

market's selection mechanism is far from costless:

there is some chance

that two firms will enter, even when economic efficiency entails only one
firm.

While problems of coordination arise in our second example, issues of
coordination and communication are central to our third and fourth examples.

In our third example, we show how judgments about the worth of a project
made in a decentralized economy are communicated indirectly, and not just by

prices, but by "time":

the fact that no one else has undertaken a project

conveys important information to any firm or individual contemplating
undertaking it.

This information affects the decision rules employed. As

we shall see, our analysis provides an interesting interpretation of the oft
noted observation that while claim that they require high rates of return in
order to undertake a project (after tax returns in the order of 15% to 25%),
far higher than the realized cx post returns.

The fourth example attempts to provide an answer to one of the
questions we posed in the introduction: why is it that in times of war so
many countries abandon the use of the market?

A. Patent Races: An Example of a Game of Timing
Imagine how an Arrow-Debrue model, with a complete set of prices, might

deal with the question, do market economies provide the correct incentives
concerning the speed of R & D?. Let me simplify the problem for the moment
by ignoring risk.

First, there would have to exist prices for commodities

which have not yet been invented, perhaps not yet even conceived. (That, I
admit,

is

a mind-boggling thought.) The commodities would have to be fully

described, a complete list of all their characteristics (That, again, is a

22

mind-boggling thougltt.)

Next, these prices would have to be defined for

each moment of time, that is, there would have to exist prices at all dates,

so that the potential producer would know the extra returns to be obtained
from inventing the invention a day earlier. Finally, each of these markets
would have to be fully competitive:

there would have to be many producers

standing ready to produce at each date, to produce a commodity which has not
yet been invented!

I present this example in some detail, lest there be any among you who

have any lingering doubts about the applicability of the Arrow-Debreu
paradigm to industrial economies which technological change is important.

The returns to innovation are, as Schumpeter long ago recognized, the rents

The question is, does the race to

associated with monopoly or oligopoly.

acquire these rents lead to too fast or too slow research.

The answer to

this question reflects the old joke about economics exams:

the questions

stay the same, only the answers change.

Arrow [1982] suggested that,

because in markets, inventors do not capture the consumer surplus associated

with the lower prices resulting from innovation, there will be too little

innovation; and that with monopoly, this problem is exacerbated, because
with monopoly output is lower (than under competition), and therefore the
appropriable benefits from costs reductions (the change in costs times the

quantity produced) is smaller than under competition.

Stiglitz (1971),

Barzel (1968), and Dasgupta and Stiglitz (1980) then showed that there might

be excessive expenditures on R & D. Their results can be seen as an early

version of the by now common argument that in economies with rents, there

will be excessive expenditures on rent seeking activity. The return to a

23

patent is a rent.

The race to get that rent will dissipate much of the

value of the rent.

In the case of a patent race with an incumbent monopolist, Dasgupta and

Stiglitz showed that not all rents would be dissipated: the incumbent would

spend resources just to the point where it would not pay a rival to enter;
the rival's potential profit, entering as a duouolist, must be zero, leaving

a strictly positive profit for the incumbent monopolist.2

21

But upon closer examination, this result in turn had to be qualified:
in these earlier studies, decisions about R & D expenditures were once-and-

for all decisions, not made sequentially.

Most races--including patent

races- -are appropriately modelled as entailing sequential decision making.

The participants look at their position, relative to rivals, to decide on
how much resources to devote the next period to the race, or whether to drop

out. Expenditures on R & D are, for the most part, sunk costs. One of the

more important results to emerge from the recent research in industrial
structure is the recognition of the importance of sunk costs; with sunk
costs potential competition does not suffice, either to ensure economic

20See also Gilbert and Newbery (1982), who extended the analysis to the
case of uncertainty.

21Sciglitz (1986) went on to show several other problems with Arrow's
original argument: while it is true that if all industries except one are
competitive, then production in the one remaining industry will be less than
it otherwise would be, it is not necessarily true that if all industries are
imperfectly competitive, production in each is less than in the competitive
Furthermore, the relevant second best comparisons must take
equilibrium.

into account the actual level of production (given that production is
restricted, the question is, is R & D too slow in monopolistic economies?)
and alternative ways of raising revenues (benefit taxes used to finance R &
D would, for instance, have much the same effect on output as monopoly.)
Finally, as Dasgupta and Sciglitz (l980b) emphasized, market structure- -the
extent of competition--should itself be viewed as endogenous, depending,
among ocher things, on the technology of technological change.

24

efficiency

or

competitive

costs.)(Stiglitz, 1988.)

outcomes

(prices

being

bid

down

to

An incumbent monopolist can position itself so

that it can meet challenges from rivals: if it does this, they will have
no incentive to enter an R & D contest. And if it is successful, the pace
of innovation will- -apart from an initial expenditures to put itself in the
appropriate position to meet these challenges- -be determined essentially as

if it were a protected monopoly. Arrow's original conclusion, that markets
may provide too little incentives for R & D, is restored, under more general

conditions (for,

unlike Arrow, we allow the presence of potential

competitors), but for quite different reasons.22

I present this example in some detail both because of its importance

for understanding market economies and as an illustration of the general
principle, upon which I now wish to expand, that market economies often do
not deal well with time.

B. Entry Races: A Second Example of a Game of Timing

In older (pre-Arrow Debrue) discussions of the virtues and vices of
capitalist economies, one criticism of capitalist economies that was often

raised related to their inability to coordinate investment, and in
22 There are two other arguments suggesting that R & D may be too
usually there are inappropriable benefits from R & D (the results
suggest ideas to others, ideas which have market value but cannot be
slow:

patented).
innovators.

Indeed, in some cases, imitators have an advantage of

Not only does the
There is a "second mover advantage."
imitator save on the initial R & D expenditures, and avoids the many

unsuccessful projects, but he can learn from the innovator. He can see, for

instance, market reaction to the various attributes of the product
Though the
introduced by the innovator, and design a better product.
innovator could, in principle, redesign his product, it is often more
difficult to change a reputation, a market image, than to create a new one.
25

particular, entry, decisions. If people believed that there was an increase
in the demand for pizza, there might be a rush of entry into pizza parlors,

resulting in excess expenditures and social waste. The Arrow-Debrue model

made clear the nature of the market failure:

there were not equilibrium

prices extending even slightly into the future for most commodities, and
hence investors had to form exDectations of future prices.

There was no

coordinating mechanism to ensure that the appropriate amount of investment

would be undertaken.

In the early sixties, some economists and the

governments that they advised were hopeful that indicative planning would

provide that coordinating mechanism, but the failure of the French
experiment23 has, for the most part, dashed those hopes.

The lack of

attention to this problem in recent years is not because it has disappeared,
but arises from the absence of any apparent solution, and the recognition of

the marked disadvantages of alternative approaches involving larger
governmental roles in coordination.

In this section, I want to argue that decentralized decision making

concerning entry (or to use the term I used early, polyarchy) has both
distinct advantages and problems, both of which have received insufficient
attention to date.

First, it may partially resolve the selection problem, to which I
referred earlier:

if there are several potential entrants, which should

enter the market? Obviously, if we had a Walrasian auctioneer, the market
price would serve to sort among the potential entrants; the firm(s) with the

lowest costs would enter. ut there is not a Wairasian auctioneer.

23Partly due to the difficulties of getting the participants to reveal

truthfully their investment plans, partly due to the problems we noted
earlier arising from the complexity of the commodity space.
26

Similarly, one might imagine a Central Planner, asking each of the
potential producers to submit cost estimates, and on the basis of that
deciding who should enter. But is there any reason to expect each to submit
truthful estimates, or to engage in the requisite research to determine its
costs accurately?

The market provides a solution, but not without a cost. Assume that

there are fixed, sunk costs of entry S, and that marginal costs are
constant, but may either be low, C, or high, Ca.

Assume there are two

potential entrants. Each knows its own costs, but not its rivals.

With perfect information, the equilibrium would be easy to describe.
There are three possible cases--both firms have low costs, both have high
costs, or one has low costs, the other high costs.

In the last case, the

low cost firm enters, the high cost firm does not. In the other cases, Qfl

of the two firms enters (which makes no difference), the other does not.
For both firms to enter entails excessive expenditures on entry costs.

Equilibrium with imperfect information is markedly different.

We

assume that when both firms enter, prices are determined in a Bertrand game,

that is, the price equals Ca if both are high cost producers, CL if both are

low cost producers, and C-E if one is high cost and the other low cost.1f a
firm has a low cost, it enters with probability

it enters with probability

If

if it has a high cost,

at date t, it observes no one has

entered the previous period, it enters with probability

If a low cost

firm enters, it charges price q' while if a high cost firm enters, it
charges price q. If a low cost firm observes that his rival has entered

and is charging a price q, he enters the next period.

In this general

structure, information is conveyed both by prices and by actions- -or more

27

accurately, inaction: the failure of one firm to enter leads the other firm

to

revise his estimate of whether the firm is a high or low cost firm; if

the firm fails to enter, it appears more likely that the firm is a high cost

firm. This information obviously affects entry decisions.

We do not propose to provide a general solution to this problem, but

rather to illustrate the general principles in a two-period simplified
version. For simplicity, we assume the parameters of the problem are such
that

—

1,

and the q1 is the monopoly price for firm of type i.

Furthermore, we assume that there are only two periods and that the
probability of having a high cost is .5.

Then, the Mgh cost firm

indifferent whether to enter the first period or not.

must be

There is a fifty

fifty chance his rival will have a high cost, and if he has a high cost, the

probability he enters is ir (without confusion, we can drop the second
subscript). The possible outcomes are summarized in Table 1 below:

28

Table I

High Cost Firm

Enters

Period 1 Period 2

Outcome

Probability

Rival is low cost

.5

0

0

.5

0

0

R

R

Rival is high cost
and enters

Rival is high cost
and does not enter .5 (1- ir1)

R is the monopoly profits of the high cost firm.
profits are
.5(l-ir1)R - S

and this must equal zero, i.e.
1 -

ir

—

2S/R

I

-

2S/R.

or

—

29

Thus, his expected

When both are high costs, there is a chance ((l ii1)2) that neither

will enter in the first period.

Then there is again a mixed strategy

equilibrium the second period. By the same reasoning, 2 is such that each
firm is indifferent as to entering, i.e. since he only earns a return when
the other firm

does

not enter

—

R(l

or
— 1

-

S/R.

We now see the differences between the decentralized solution and the
solution with perfect information:

(a) One firm low cost, one firm high cost
A fraction of the time, i, the high cost firm enters; resources
equal to S are wasted.

(b) Both firms low cost
Always excessive entry, with resources S wasted

(c) Both firms high cost
A fraction of the time (l-ir1)2 (1-ic2)2 no one enters

A fraction of the time (1-ic1)2 entry is delayed
A fraction of the time ,r 2 + (l-ir1)2,r22 both firms enter,

and resources S are wasted

Delay is serving as a partial screening device.24 Entry is not random.

24Farrell and Bolton have recently formulated a model in which the date
delay from the first possible time for entry- - serves as a
perfect screening device; the lowest cost firm and only the lowest cost firm
of entry- - the

30

Sut there is a cost to the screening. We could contrast this decentralized
screening mechanism with that of a bureaucratic system, which chose one firm
to enter.

At the extreme, one could imagine the bureaucracy as simply

randomly choosing one firm to enter. Then there would never be delay, there
would never be duplication, but a fraction of the time- - .5 in our example- -

the high cost firm would be chosen. Relative to perfect information, both
systems make mistakes.

Which system is more efficient--that is, which

mistakes are more costly- -depends on the parameters of the problem.

The

inefficiency of the bureaucratic system depends on C - CL, the difference

in costs.

The inefficiency of the market system depends on three

parameters: (a) the costs of duplication (essentially the magnitude of the
sunk costs); (b)

the costs of delay (the loss of consumer surplus when no

entry occurs the first period, or the first and second period); and (c) the

likelihood of duplication and delay, which depends critically on S/R, sunk

costs relative to profits.

When S/R is high, delay (no entry) is more

likely, when S/R is small, duplication is more likely.25

enters.

The cost of this increased accuracy of screening (and reduced

duplication) is increased delay.

25 The expected loss of the bureaucratic selection mechanism (relative
to first best, perfect information) is
approximately .25((c - c)Q5 +
DWL(c - ct), where Q is the output with costs equal to c and DWL(c - CL)

is the dead weight loss (the Harberger triangle) arising from the

curtailment of production associated with using the high cost technology.

The expected loss from the market mechanism can be decomposed into
three parts. When there is one low cost firm and one high cost firm (which
occurs with probability .5), expected losses are (I - 2s)S, where s—S/R.
When there are two lost cost firms (which occurs with probability .25), the
loss is S.
And when both firms are high costs, there are three kinds of
losses:
with probability 4s no one enters, and in that case the loss is
Z(l + 8), where Z is the total surplus from producing (when c—cs) the first
period, and 6Z is the surplus from producing the second; with probabili9
42 entry is delayed, so the loss is just Z; and with probability (l-2s)
both firms enter the first period, so the loss is S and with probability
4s2(l-s)2 both firms enter the second period, and so the (present discounted
31

This result may provide a partial answer to the question of why, in
times of war, economies so often resort to bureaucratic selection:

may be particularly costly.

delay

Moreover, in the short run, the selection

problem is not as severe as in the long run. If our argument that a market

economy does a reasonably good job in screening out bad firms (high cost
producers), then as the economy enters an emergency, it begins with a better

than random sample of firms from which to choose to make production
decisions. Organizations change, and individuals enter and leave, so that

the task of screening is a perpetual one.

For a while, the economy can

slide along, taking advantage of the screening that occurred prior to the
emergency.

But over time, the value of this prior screening declines, and

accordingly the costs of the failure to screen effectively increase. This

is undoubtedly part of the reason why the longer market processes are
suspended in an emergency, the more likely it is that the economy will
encounter increasing difficulties

C.

Markets as Aggregators of Information

Earlier, we identified three problems that all economic organizations
must address:

selection. information transmission and agzreation. and

incentives. The previous example illustrated how time (delay) could be used
as a selection device. My next example illustrates how, in market contexts,

value of the) loss is SS.

zsThis is, of course, only one of several reasons. For instance, the
prices and production norms that have been established by market processes

prior to the emergency become increasingly out of tune with current
situations, and systems of direct control often have difficulty adjusting
them.

32

time (delay) can be used as a way of transmitting and aggregating
information. In earlier work with Sanford Grossman (1976, 1980b) we showed
how the price system conveyed and aggregated information. We are concerned
here with a context in which the price system, by itself, effectively does
neither.

Consider the simplest decision making problem:

an organization must

decide whether the expected return to a project is positive or negative.
Each individual (subunit) within the organization evaluates the project, but

with error. There are three types of projects, very good projects (denoted
with a subscript 0), mediocre (denoted with subscript 1), and bad (denoted
Evaluations are far from perfect. The probability that

with subscript 2).

a project of type

i

be evaluated as one of type j is denoted by p .

If

different individuals are assigned the task of evaluating the project, there

is some probability that their evaluations will differ.

The question of

information aggregation is, what to do in these circumstances. How are the

conflicting reports to be brought together to make an organizational
decision?

In a market context, firms face the following quandary.

If they think

a project is good, it is likely that some other firm will think similarly- -

if

it is a good project. And if others think it is a good idea, then they

are likely to enter, driving the return down.

If the firm thinks the

project is good (because it has erroneously evaluated it) and others think
it bad, then it will be the only firm in the market- -but because the project

is not a good one, again returns are low. This is the same kind of logic
that appears in auction markets, under the guise of the "winner's curse."

In that context, it has been recognized that firms realize that there is

33

information in the others' bids; that when the individual wins, it means the
others have bid lower, and that in turn means that their information is that

the project is not as positive as the winner's information.

Taking this

into account, the winner bids a lower amount.

One can view the decision to enter the market as a "bid." Firms take

into account the fact that when they are the only firm to enter, it is
likely that their information is overly optimistic concerning the projects
returns. This provides an explanation of the commonly observed puzzle that

firms insist on returns of 15% to 25% before undertaking projects, yet ex
post realized returns average perhaps half that.

Firms know that if they

are to realize a 12% return, their information must indicate a far higher
return.

These are examples of how non-price information- -other firm's decisions
not to enter a market- -

is

taken into account in firm decision making. The

decision of the firm does reflect some of the information gathered by other
firms.

I now want to draw attention to what might seem a perverse possibility:

that in fact the best projects may not be undertaken as quickly as mediocre
projects (and this is not because, as we academics sometimes feel, our best
ideas, being the most novel, are hardest for others to grasp, while our more

mediocre colleagues, with their more simplistic ideas, find it easier to

sell their ideas.) The reason for this has to do with the absence of a
coordination mechanism:

we know that if the project is really very good,

it is likely that some other firm will think so too, and there is therefore

a reasonable chance that both of us will enter, driving down the returns.

34

The fear of excess entry for very good projects leads, on average, to delays
in these projects being undertaken.

To see this most dramatically, assume projects, regardless of their
quality, have the same fixed, sunk costs, S. To simplify the calculations,

we assume that very good projects are either evaluated as very good, or as
bad, and mediocre projects are either evaluated as mediocre or as bad. (It

is straightforward but tedious to extend the analysis to the more general
case.)

Let p0 denote the probability that a very good project will be

evaluated as good, and p1 is the probability that a mediocre project will
be judged to be mediocre. Firms are, of course, on the lookout not for the
mediocre projects, but for the very good ones; the discovery of a mediocre

project can be viewed as the unsuccessful outcome of a search for a very
good project.

Assume that (individuals believe) that) more firms will be

engaged in evaluating any particular very good project than in evaluating

any particular mediocre project.

(There are, of course, more mediocre

projects around.)

The return to a very good project, if only one firm undertakes it, is
R0, and the return to a mediocre project (if only one firm undertakes it) is
R1. When more than one firm undertakes a project competition is sufficiently

fierce that profits are driven to zero. If

is large relative to S, then

equilibrium will be characterized by a mixed strategy:

only some of the

time when they discover a very good project or a mediocre project will they
undertake it.

(Firms may, of course, not view themselves as throwing dice

to determine their mixed strategy; they may make judgments about the
likelihood of other rivals entering, they may look at business forecasts or

35

sunspots, or engage in other forms of "reasoning," the net effect of which
is simply to randomize their decisions.)

Mixed strategies mean that a firm that observes a good signal must be

indifferent to undertaking and not undertaking the project.

is the probability that a firm that believes

If

symmetric equilibria.

We focus on

that his project is of type i undertakes it, and if n is the number of
firms that have evaluated a particular project of type i as being good, then

(

Return

1-

ir)i'

—

S

Probability that
no other firm

if
the firm
is the only
firm to
undertake
the project

enters

The probability that a project gets undertaken is
C — 1

-

(I

-

r)i

— 1

-

(S/R)'i"i

1)

To simplify matters, let us assume that n is just a function of R, the
expected return to the project.

For instance, if there are M firms

evaluating the same portfolio of projects, then the expected number of firms
giving a favorable review to a project with return R is
n(R) —p(R)M.

(1)

(p(R) is what we called in our earlier work the screening function; it has

the property that p' > 0, projects with a higher expected return are more
likely to get a favorable approval.)

Differentiating G with respect to R, we obtain

dC/dR —

(l-C){(l/(n-l))21n

(S/R)dn/dR + (n/(n-l))/R > or < 0
36

as

d in n/din R <

or > (n-l)/ln(R/S),

or, if n is simply related to R through the screening function, as described
by equation (1)

p'R/p < or >

(n-l)/in(R/S)

Thus, provided that the probability of getting a favorable evaluation goes
up fast enough with the quality of the project (its expected returns), the
probability that a very good project will be undertaken in any period will
actually decrease with its quality.

Of course, even if the probability that a project is undertaken does
not decrease, the probability that a project will be undertaken, given that
it has had a favorable review, will decrease with the quality of the project
under somewhat less stringent conditions; that is

dir/dR

—

(1

-

ir)(ln(S/R)/(n-l)2(dn/dR)

+

l/(n-l)R}

<

or >

0

as

d ln n/d mR

> or <

(n-l)/nln

(S/R),

or, if n is simply related to P. through the screening function, as

37

p'R/p >

or < (n-l)n

In (FIR).

D. Bureaucratic Delay and Organizational Form

There is a commonly held view that democracies- -and polyarchical
organizations- -are fine if you can afford if; but when things must get done

quickly, as in a time of war or in a country engaged in rapid development,
more centralized control is called for.

It is certainly the case that most

countries, in times of war, do resort to more centralization of control, but

whether this is because centralization is more efficient in making quick

decisions, or because there is a mistaken belief in the efficacy of
centralized control- - there

is a perhaps false sense of security in such

times from knowing that someone is in control27 - -

has

remained a question

about which political scientists and historians have commented but which has
received scant theoretical attention from economists.

The proclivity to resort to centralized control seems particularly odd,

given the widespread perception,

at other

times,

bureaucracies are subject to delays and inefficiencies.

that government

Why should an

organizational form which is so abused in normal times suddenly change its
stripes?

I want to argue that in fact there may be some theoretical
justification for the standard perceptions.

First, however, we need to

271n this perspective, an explanation for the proclivity for
centralized control in times of emergency is more likely to be found in
Freudian psychology than in economic analysis.
38

observe that time, that scarcest of commodities, is frequently not well
allocated in organizations.

This should not be surprising:

the kinds of prices that are used to

allocate scarce resources simply do not exist for the allocation of time
within an organization.

I once proposed to one of my department chairman

that each chairman of a committee or department within the University be
given a time budget, as well as a dollar budget. He could call a meeting,
but he would be charged for the time of the faculty members.

I proposed too

a clock be placed on the wall, with the units being dollars, rather than
minutes, so that each faculty member should weigh whether, for instance, his

five minute speech was worth the $1000 of aggregate faculty time that it
used. Needless to say, my suggestions were not taken up.

Hannaway28, in her recent study of the behavior of managers of
administrative units of organizations, has emphasized the disparity between

organizational objectives and individual objectives, and the difficulty of

distinguishing between them. When one manager consults another, it may be

to obtain better information or to check on the correctness of his
calculations, actions which improve the decision. ut it may also be to
show the other how well informed he is, or to shift some of the risk- -should

the decision turn out to be faulty--onto others, actions the return to which

may be more private than organizational. Since others' time is an unpriced

resource, there is a natural tendency for an excessive amount of
consultation.

In her studies, the amount of time spent by managers in

meetings was enormous--on average almost two-thirds of the time.29
28

Hannaway, KanaginE Managers, Oxford University Press, 1989.

29Her results are consistent with the findings of other scholars.
39

We argued earlier that some degree of consultation, of collective
decision making, was an inevitable consequence of the limitations on any
individual's ability to collect and process information. For most difficult

decisions, two heads are better--but costlier--than one.
how are the

heads

The question is,

to be arranged?

In our earlier work, focusing on polyarchical versus hierarchical
decision making, we made only limited reference to the issue of the speed of
decision making.

Two observations were made:

(a)

Sequential decision

making, while saving on the costs of decision makers, involved delays; and
(b) hierarchical decision making was more vulnerable to delays from "faulty
parts," that is, from a weak link in the chain of command; for instance, in

a hierarchical structure, if one member of the hierarchy has an in-basket
from which papers did not flow out, or came out only with long delays, the
organization's performance could be seriously impaired.

Here, I want to emphasize the costs and benefits of coordination in
decision making.

We consider a set of projects requiring two pieces of

information, which, because of diseconomies of scope, must be collected by

two separate individuals (suborganizations.)

The information may take

either one, two, or three periods to collect. At time 0, the individual
assigned to collect the information finds out how long it will take to
collect his information.

The organization cannot tell how long it should

have taken to collect the information. Assume that if information is
collected immediately prior to using, it becomes obsolete, and an additional

expenditure is required to update it.

Accordingly, if each believes that

40

the other will complete the information acquisition in period three, he will
time his completion for period three.3°

Consider now the gain from having an information coordinator-monitor,

who, at time 0, determines how long it should take for the acquisition of
each of the two pieces of information. If -y the fraction of the time that

it takes i periods to gather the information, there is a probability 72

that the information will be processed at the end of period 1 and a

2)

-

probability of (I - y32

that it will be processed at the end of

Let D1 represent the value of having a decision one period

period 2.

earlier, D2 the value of having a decision two periods earlier. Then the
total value of the information coordination is represented by

V —

D1(l

-

- 72)

+ D2y2

We will now consider what happens as uncertainty about the time it takes to

make a decision becomes greater, i.e. we consider a mean preserving spread

Hence, we assume that

in the distributions of
k —

+ 27 + 373= 2

-

- + 73.

Substituting, we obtain

V —

If
(a)

D1(l

-

(k-2)2

-

272

-

2(k-2)71)

+ D2-y12.

the distribution is symmetric, k— 2. It immediately follows that

If the distribution of decision times is not coo asymmetric, then a

mean treserving increase in the uncertainty associated with information
times increases the value of information coordination: and

30Presumably, the organization could call for a meeting at time t, and
But this would
penalize anyone who had not completed his assigned task.
impose a risk on the manager- -since, if the penalty is large enough to
affect his behavior, it will mean that he will be punished only when it was,

in

fact, impossible for him to acquire the information.
41

(b)

An increase in the value of having information earlier increases the

value of information coordination.

In war time situations, the economy faces a whole range of distinctly
new decision problems.
increased.

The range of times required to make decisions is

At the same time, the value of quick decision making is

increased enormously.

Our theorem provides a rationale for greater

centralized control of decision making in such situations.

42

IV. Concluding

Remarks

The Wairasian paradigm of the market economy- -and the Arrow Debrue
model to which it has given rise- -while it has provided fundamental insights

into the role of the price system in coordinating certain economic
decisions, is both incomplete and misleading, both with respect to its view

of the nature of competition and decentralization, the efficiency of the

economy, and the importance of prices.

Much of economic activity takes

place within organizations, in which limited use is made of the price
system.

We have seen how competition- -contests- - takes on a much richer

dimension than reflected by the price-taking paradigm.

new innovations, and they race to enter markets.

Firms compete for

Individuals compete for

positions within organizations. We have also seen how there is much more to
decentralization than its role as a computing algorithm, as suggested by the

conventional paradigm. Finally, while the traditional model exaggerates the

virtues of the market- -as Bruce Greenwald and I have recently shown,

whenever markets are incomplete and information is imperfect, market
allocations are almost never constrained Pareto efficient,31-- it also
understates its virtues: its ability to solve, if necessarily imperfectly,

the problems of selection, incentive, and information gathering and
aggregation which are the core problems in organizational design.
Few questions touch us as much in our everyday life as those concerning

with organizational design, or what we have called, organizational
architecture.

The sense of control over our own

lives,

our ability to

fulfill ourselves as individuals, our sense of individuality may all depend,

31See Creenwald and Stiglitz [1986].
43

in large measure, on the extent of centralization or decentralization in our
society.

There

is

undoubtedly

a

relationship between economic

decentralization and political democracy and freedoms.

I have not touched

upon these issues, not because I believe they are unimportant. But before
we can address these broader issues, we more fully understand the economic

strengths and weakness of decentralized market economies, looked at not

through the rose tinted glasses of the Fundamental Theorems of Welfare
Economics, but through the kind of more balanced perspective that I have
tried to present to you today.32

32Certainly, the perspective provided by the Lange-Lerner-Taylor
theorem, suggesting an equivalence between socialist and market economies,
provides a dramatic example of how traditional approaches can lead one far
astray.

44

REFERENCES

Arrow, K.J. (1962), Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for
Invention" in The Race and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic
and Social Factors, R. Nelson (ed.), NBER, Princeton University Press.
Barzel, Y. (1968), "Optimal Timing of Innovations,"

35(3):348-355.

Bolton, P. and J. Farrell (1988), "Decentralization, Duplication and Delay,"
IMSSS Summer Seminar Paper, Stanford University.

Dasgupta, P. and J.E. Stiglitz (1980a), "Uncertainty, Market Structure and
the Speed of R & D," Bell Journal of Economics ll(l):l-28.

(1980b) "Industrial Structure and the Nature of Innovative
Activity," Economic Journal 90:266-293.

___________

,

_________ (1988), "Potential Competition, Actual Competition and Economic
Welfare," European Economic Review, 32(2/3):569-577.

Gilbert, R. and D. Newbery (1982), "Pre-emptive Patenting and the
72:514-526.
Persistence of Monopoly,"
Green, J. and N. Scokey (1983), "A Comparison of Tournaments and Contests,"
Journal of Political Economy 9:349-365.

Greenwald, B. and J.E. Stiglitz (1986), "Information, Finance Constraints
and Business Fluctuations," Proceedings of the Taiwan Conference on
Monetary Theory, Taipei, Chung-Hua Institute.
Grossman. S. and J.E. Sciglitz (1976), "Information and Competitive Price

Sysems,".66(2):246-253.
_________ (1977), "on Value Maximization and Alternative Objectives of the
Firm," Journal of Finance 32(2):389-402.

"Stockholder Unanimity in the Making of Production and
__________ (l980a)
Financial Decisions," QL 94(3):543-566.
,

__________ (1980b)

,

"On the Impossibility of Informacionally Efficient

Markets," E 7O(3):393-4O8.
Holinstrom, 8. (1982), "Moral Hazard in Teams," Bell Journal of Economics,
13(2) :324-340.

Lazear, E. and S. Rosen (1981), "Rank Order Tournaments as Optimum Labor
Contracts," JPE 89:841-864.

Nalebuff, Barry and J.E. Stiglitz (1983a), "Prizes and Incentives: Towards a
General Theory of Compensation and Competition," The Bell Journal of
Economics l4(1):21.-43.

— (1983b), "Information, Competition and Markets," AER Proceedings
73:278-283.

Ross, S.A. (1973), 'The Economic Theory of Agency: The Principal's Problem,"
AER Papers and Proceedings 63(2):134-l44.
Sah, R.X. and J.E. Stiglitz (1985a), "Perpetuation, Self-Reproduction, and
Evolution of Organizations: The Selection and Performance of Managers,"
paper presented at the 1985 World Congress of the Econometric Society,
Cambridge.

_________ (1985b), Human Fallibility and Economic Organization,"
75:292-307.

_________ (1986), "The Architecture of Economic Systems: Hierarchies and
Polyarchies,"

76:716-727.

_________ (1988a), "Committees, Hierarchies, and Polyarchies,"

98:451-

670,

_________ (1.988b), "Qualitative Properties of Profit-Making k-out-of-n
Systems Subject to Two Kinds of Failures, IEEE Transactions on
Reliability 37(5):515-520.

Slop, S.C. and D.T. Scheffman (1983), "Raising Rivals' Costs," AER Pacers
and Proceedings 73(2):267-271.
Stiglitz, J.E. (1970), "On the Optimality of the Stock Market Allocation of
Investment," paper presented at the Far Eastern Meetings of the
Econometric Society, Tokyo, June 27-29, 1970.

_________ (1971), "Perfect and Imperfect Markets," mimeo, paper presented
at the Winter Meeting of the Econometric Society, Yale University.

_________ (1974), "Incentives and Risk-Sharing in Sharecropping," B 41,
April : 219 - 255.
_________ (1975), 'Incentives, Risk and Information: Notes Towards a Theory
of Hierarchy,' Bell Journal of Economics 6(2):552-579 (presented at
the Berlin Symposium on Planning, August 1973).

_________ (1986), "Theory of Competition, Incentives and Risk," in
Developments in the Theory of Market Structure, J,E. Stiglitz and F.
Mathewson (eds), Macmillan/MIT Press:399-449.

_________ (1987), "On the Microeconomics of Technical Progress," paper
presented to IDP-Cepal Meetings, Buenos Aires, November. Technoloz.v
Generation in Latin American Manufacturing Industries. Jorge M. Katz
(ed.), Hampshire, England: The Macmillan Press, Ltd. :56-77.

_________ (1988a), "Human acure and Economic Organization."
_________ (l988b), "Technological Change, Sunk Costs, and Competition,"
Special Issue on Macroeconomics, MN. Baily and C. Winston (eds.), The
Brookings Institution: 883.947.

</ref_section>

