                        NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     NEW CLASSICALS AND KEYNESIANS, OR THE GOOD GUYS AND THE BAD GUYS -




                             Robert   J.   Barro




                          Working Paper No. 2982




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 May, 1989




Prepared for presentation at the 125th anniversary meeting of the Swiss
Economic Association, April 1989. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #2982
                                       May 1989


                     NEW C1ASSICALS AND KEYNESIANS, OR
                       THE GOOD GUYS AND THE BAD GUYS


                                  ABSTRACT


    Old- style Keynesian models relied on sticky prices or wages to explain

unemployment and to argue for demand-side macroeconomic policies. This

approach relied increasingly on a Phillips-curve view of the world, and

therefore lost considerable prestige with the events of the 1970s. The new

classical macroeconomics began at about that time, and focused initially on

the apparent real effects of monetary disturbances. Despite initial

successes, this analysis ultimately was unsatisfactory as an explanation for

an important role of money in business fluctuations. Nevertheless, the

approach achieved important methodological advances, such as rational

expectations and new methods of policy evaluation. Subsequent research by

new classicals has deemphasized monetary shocks, and focused instead on real

business cycle models and theories of endogenous economic growth. These

areas appear promising at this time. Another development is the so-called

new Keynesian economics, which includes long-term contracts, menu costs,

efficiency wages and insider-outsider theories, and macroeconomic models with

imperfect competition. Although some of these ideas may prove helpful as

elements in real business cycle models, my main conclusion is that the new

Keynesian economics has not been successful in rehabilitating the Keynesian

approach.                               Robert J. Barro
                                        Harvard University
                                        Department of Economics
                                        Littauer Center
                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
Keynesian Models

   When I was a graduate student at Harvard in the late 1960s, the Keynesian

model was the only game in town as far as macroeconomics was concerned.

Therefore, while I had doubts about the underpinnings of this analysis, it

seemed worthwhile to work within the established framework to develop a model

that was logically more consistent and hopefully empirically more useful.

Collaborating with Herschel Grossman (Barro and Grossman, 1971), we made some

progress in clarifying and extending the Keynesian model. But that research

also made obvious the dependence of the central results on fragile underlying

assumptions. The model stressed the failure of private enterprise economies

to ensure full employment and production, and the consequent role for active

macro policies as instruments to improve outcomes. Shocks to aggregate

demand--but not aggregate supply--were the key to business fluctuations, and

mere changes in optimism or pessimism turned out to be self fulfilling.

These properties, which seem odd to economists who think in terms of price

theory and well-functioning private markets, suggest coordination problems on

a grand scale. But this perspective hardly accords with the basic source of

market failure that characterizes the standard Keynesian model. It is the

mere stickiness of prices or wages, primarily in the downward direction, that

accounts for the principal results. Of course, many macroeconomists think of

price stickiness as an "as if" device--a problem that is not to be viewed

literally, but instead as a proxy for serious matters, such as incomplete

information, adjustment costs, and other problems of coordination among

economic agents. But this viewpoint has not been borne out by subsequent

research. For example, the incorporation of these serious matters does not
                                                                 2




support the Keynesian stress on aggregate demand, and also does not provide a

normative basis for activist government policies of the usual Keynesian type.

    One important function of a macroeconomic model is to isolate the sources

of disturbances that cause aggregate business fluctuations. Keynesian

analyses focus on shocks to aggregate demand, and typically attribute these

shocks either to governmental actions (disruptive or corrective fiscal and

monetary policies), or to shifts in private preferences that influence

consumption or investment demand. Keynes's own discussion (Keynes, 1935,

chapter 12) referred to the "animal spirits" of businessmen, and the

consequent volatility of investment demand due to shifting moods of optimism

or pessimism. Thus, aside from governmental actions, the Keynesian model is

not strong at pinpointing observable, objective events that cause recessions

or booms.

    One reason that Keynes may not have been troubled by this "deficiency" is

that he viewed the private economy as inherently unstable. It did not take

large (and presumably objectively observable) shocks to trigger a recession,

because even a small shock--when -interacting with the multiplier (and, in

some models, also the investment accelerator)--could generate a significant

and sustained drop in output and employment. Curiously, however, later

Keynesian developments deemphasized the multiplier. For example, in the

well-known IS/UI model (in which interest rates adjust and matter for

aggregate demand) or in Keynesian analyses that incorporate some version of

the permanent-income hypothesis, multipliers need not exist. These

extensions do improve the model's fit with some facts about business cycles,

such as the apparent absence of a multiplicative response of output to

changes in government purchases and the relative stability of consumption
                                                                       3




over the business cycle. But the elimination of the multiplier means also

that large responses of output, as in a substantial recession, require large

impulses; hence, it again becomes important to identify the kinds of shocks

that typically matter for aggregate fluctuations.

    I think that the desire to find observable, aggregate shocks motivated

many Keynesians- -   although   not Keynes nor many of his immediate followers- -   to
assign a substantial weight to monetary disturbances as a source of the

business cycle. Within a framework where prices adjust slowly and output is

determined by aggregate demand, it is easy to conclude that an increase in

money raises output and also leads gradually to a higher price level.

Moreover, the positive correlation between money and output- - and perhaps

between the price level and output- - showed up in some data.

    During the 1960s and early l970s, Keynesian analysis became increasingly

identified with this Phillips curve-view of the world. Thus, this analysis

also lost considerable prestige when the Phillips curve disappeared in the

mid l970s; the rise in unemployment along with the increasing rate of

inflation was difficult to explain in this kind of model. New Keynesians

have, however, demonstrated their flexibility by arguing that the old

Keynesian model merely need to be patched up to incorporate the supply side.

But this argument does not work. In a single market, one can think of

quantity as determined by demand with the excess supply rationed--as in the

Keynesian model- - so that changes in quantity depend only on shocks to demand.

Then if this situation applies to the majority of markets, one can generate

orthodox Keynesian prescriptions for demand-oriented governmental policies.

Alternatively, quantity in a typical market could be determined by supply

with the excess demand rationed- - as in markets subject to effective price
                                                                   4




controls-- so that movements in quantity depend only on shocks to supply. If

this situation holds for the majority of markets, one again gets

prescriptions for the government's macro policies, but they are basically

opposite to those from the Keynesian model. The serious alternative to

either of these two polar cases is a framework where demand and supply are

somehow balanced or equilibrated on the various markets. Although I regard

this equilibrium approach as the logical way to think about macroeconomics,

this approach--pursued by new classical macroeconomists--turns out to be

inconsistent with basic Keynesian themes.



The New Classical Aporoach

    The new classical macroeconomics, sometimes referred to as rational

expectations macroeconomics or as the equilibrium approach to macroeconomics,

began with Bob Lucas's research (Lucas, 1972, 1976) in the early 1970s. A

guiding discipline of this work was that economic agents acted rationally in

the context of their environment; notably that people assembled and used

information in an efficient manner. Although the approach stressed fully

worked out equilibrium theories, the analysis was directed at explaining

real-world business fluctuations. The basic viewpoint implied that it would

be unsatisfactory to "explain" these fluctuations by easily correctable

market failures, such as those present in Keynesian models. Hence

fluctuations had to reflect real or monetary disturbances, whose dynamic

economic effects depended on costs of obtaining information, costs of

adjustment, and so on.

    The biggest challenge to the new classical approach was to explain why

money was non-neutral, and, in particular, why monetary disturbances played a
                                                                   5




major role in business cycles. This area was a significant challenge because

first, it seemed to be empirically important, and second, the equilibrium

framework with flexible prices tends to generate a close approximation to

monetary neutrality.

    Initially, the approach seemed to achieve notable successes. On a

theoretical level, short-term real effects of monetary disturbances could

arise from imperfect information about money and the general price level.

Monetary shocks, which affected the general price level in the same

direction, could be temporarily misperceived as shifts in relative prices,

which led to adjustments in the supply of labor and other quantities. These

real effects vanished in the long run, but could persist for awhile because

of information lags and costs of adjusting the quantities of factor inputs.

On the other hand, anticipated monetary changes-- which include systematic

monetary policies--would not matter because they did not lead to

informational confusions (Sargent and Wallace, 1975).

    On an empirical level, there was also evidence that appeared to support

the approach. Monetary disturbances seemed to be important sources of

business fluctuations, and there was some indication that it was mainly the

unanticipated or surprise part of monetary movements that mattered for real

variables (Barro, 1981). Some cross-country evidence supported the

theoretical predictions concerning the relation between the volatility of

money and the slopes of estimated Phillips curves (Kormendi and Meguire,

1984). The theory was also consistent with the observed absence of a

substantial long-term relationship between real economic performance and the

growth rates of money and prices; that is, with the absence of a long-run

Phillips curve.
                                                                 6




    Further investigations cast doubt on these successes. First, the

informational lag in observing money and the general price level did not seem

to be very important. If incomplete information about money and the general

price level mattered a lot for economic decisions, people could expend

relatively little effort to find out quickly about these variables. Second,

the theory did not do so well in terms of its predictions about monetary

effects on real interest rates, real wage rates, and consumption. Third, the

predicted Phillips curve-type relation between price surprises and real

economic activity basically disappeared after the early 1970s. Fourth, the

positive relation between monetary shocks and output shows up most clearly

with broad monetary aggregates. The relation with narrow aggregates, such as

the monetary base, is much weaker.

    The upshot of these arguments is that the new classical approach does not

do very well in accounting for an important role of money in business

fluctuations. However, this failing may not be so serious because the

empirical evidence on the causal role of money for real variables seems also

to have been overstated. In other words, the accounting for major short-run

non-neutralities of money was a misplaced priority for the new classical

approach. Some empirical evidence supports this conclusion; for example, the

observation that the correlation of real economic activity with broad

monetary aggregates is greater than that with the monetary base or the price

level, or the finding that real effects from the quantity of money are weak

once the behavior of nominal interest rates is held constant. These results

suggest that endogenous responses of money- - partly from the behavior of

policymakers and partly from the workings of the financial system--may
                                                                7




account for most of the correlations between money and real economic

activity.

    This verdict does not invalidate some of the major successes of the new

classical approach. In terms of methodology, these successes include the

application of equilibrium modeling to macroeconomic analysis, the use of

rational expectations as part of this modeling, and the revolution in

approaches to policy evaluation. One specific application in which the

equilibrium approach has achieved some success is in analyses of fiscal

policy (see Barro, 1989b, for a survey). Some of this research revolves

around the Ricardian equivalence theorem, which provides conditions under

which substitutions of budget deficits for taxes are of no consequence.' But

further developments have brought out the real effects from government

purchases and public services, the composition and timing of distorting

taxes, and so on.

    Another interesting off-shoot from the new classical approach is the

application of game theory to the interaction between government policymakers

and the private sector. The results here involve the distinction between

rules and discretion, and the related roles of commitment, credibility, and

reputation (see, Rogoff, 1989, for a survey). Some of the early analyses in

this area dealt with monetary models; specifically, with the Phillips curve

and the tradeoff between unemployment and inflation. But subsequent

applications, such as to tax and regulatory policies and to international

debt, do not rely on an important role for money in business fluctuations.




iBartley (1989) claims more than I ever would by describin Ricardian
equivalence as "an Exocet aimed at the heart of the Keynesian notion that
deficits stimulate the economy."
                                                                8




Real Business Qy Theory

   With the deemphasis on monetary models of the business cycle, most

proponents of the new classical approach have moved over the last five to ten

years to analyses that rely on real disturbances as sources of business

fluctuations (see Kydland and Prescott, 1982, and the survey by McCallum,

1989). These models stress technology shocks or other disturbances to the

supply side as central driving forces, but allow an important role for the

dynamic elements that influence the ways that shocks propagate. The models

are equilibrium in style, featuring cleared, competitive markets; optimizing

agents who are typically modeled as representative households with infinite

horizons; and neoclassical production functions that are subject to

stochastic disturbances. Although the models deemphasize monetary shocks,

the analysis of propagation mechanisms would apply as much to monetary models

as to real models. In the real business cycle (or RBC) framework, any

positive correlation between output and money reflects the endogenous

response of monetary aggregates (see King and Plosser, 1984).

   A number of authors have simulated versions of RBC models on U.S. data,

where the underlying parameters of preferences and technology are calibrated

to be consistent with findings from cross-sectional studies. In many

respects the results accord with observed characteristics of business cycles.

For example, RBC models can get right the relative variances of consumption,

investment, capital stocks, and worker hours; and also account for the

procyclical behavior of these variables. However, the models tend to

overstate the procyclical patterns of hours, productivity, real interest

rates, and real wage rates. In addition, to explain the standard deviation

of output growth, the models require a standard deviation for technological
                                                                           9




disturbances that may be excessive. However, so far, such judgments are

based solely on introspection.

    To explain recessions within the RBC framework, one has to admit

technological or other supply-side disturbances that are adverse as well as

favorable. Some critics have argued that technological regress is impossible

(although I noted recently the possibility that the gun turret on the U.S.

battleship Iowa could not be repaired because the expertise in this area had

been lost). Other events that amount to negative shocks to production

conditions are cartelization of markets (as with OPEC and perhaps with

European style labor unions), harvest failures, strikes, and--for a single

country- -   unfavorable   movements in the terms of trade. It is also likely that

a collapse of the financial and credit system--as in the United States during

the Great Depression-- can be viewed as an adverse real shock (see Bernanke,

1983). However, it would be desirable to have a theoretical model that could

explain financial collapses as an endogenous response to government policies

and other developments.

    Early versions of ItBC models exhibit Pareto-optimal behavior, and thereby

show that observed fluctuations in aggregate business activity are

insufficient reason for advocating governmental intervention in the form of

stabilization policies. Adverse shocks and recessions are unfortunate in

these models; it is just that the government cannot improve matters. RBC

models can be extended to include external effects, such as those implied by

public goods and taxation. The models are then well suited to incorporate

supply-side, incentive effects from taxation, regulation, transfer programs,

and so on. In this setting the outcomes are generally not Pareto optimal,

and- -   subject   to the usual problems of public choice- -   there   may be useful
                                                               10




roles for government policy. But the distortions that underlie these results

are of the classical, excessburden variety, rather than the Keynesian

type--that is, they involve "triangles instead of "gaps.' Consequently,

desirable policy in these models gets more from public finance theory than

from traditional macroeconomics.

    Overall, the real-business-cycle area has generated many new insights and

techniques that assist in modeling the macroeconomy and in thinking about

government policies. But it is not yet clear how much the models contribute

toward understanding actual business cycles, or to the construction of

policies that governments might wish to implement.



Endogenous Growth Models

    Another recent development, which is consistent methodologically with

real-business-cycle theory, concerns models of endogenous economic growth

(see, Romer, 1989, for a survey). Unlike the predecessors of the Solow

(1956)-Koopmans (1965)-Cass (1965) type, these new models generate long-run

growth within the models, and therefore can relate long-term differences in

growth rates to underlying parameters of technology, preferences, and

government policy. There are two major strands of this literature. One

strand features constant returns to a broad concept of reproducible capital,

which includes human capital and perhaps even the number of persons (see

Rebelo, 1987). With this type of constant returns, the long-term growth

rate, which is intimately related to the saving rate, is determined by

productivity and time preference. It is also possible to determine

population growth along with growth per capita. Because there are no

underlying externalities, the decentralized choices of growth and saving tend
                                                               11




to be Pareto optimal. However, as in the RBC context, some extended versions

of these growth models allow for a role of government by introducing public

services and taxation (see Barro, 1989a). Then the usual public-finance

choices arise, and these choices interact with the determination of growth

and saving. One major theme is that governmental provision of infrastructure

services and the protection of property rights can be especially important in

fostering private saving and economic growth.

    The second strand of the endogenous growth literature, identified

especially with Romer (1986), brings in spillover effects that involve the

creation of knowledge. At the level of an individual firm, production may be

subject to diminishing returns. However, because some advances in techniques

and information also benefit other firms, returns at a social level may be

constant or even increasing. Similar effects can arise with the accumulation

of human capital if the value of one person's stock of capital is benefited

by the accumulation of human capital by others. Two major implications from

these models are first, long-term per capita growth is sustainable and can be

explained by the underlying structural elements of the model, and second,

because social returns to research and perhaps the accumulation of human

capital exceed the private returns, the decentralized choices of growth and

saving tend to be too low from a social perspective. Thus, the analysis has

implications for positive analyses of differences in growth and saving rates

across countries, and also for the design of government policies. The

obvious policy implications relate to subsidies for research and development,

although additional results apply to education spending, restrictions on free

trade, immigration regulations, and so on.
                                                                     12




    After a lapse of serious interest for about 20 years, the field of

economic growth is once again exciting. The initial impetus came from some

theoretical breakthroughs, but the attention is now turning to empirical

analyses of the determinants of growth and saving across countries and over

time. In order for the interest to be sustained--as it was not in the

earlier period- -   I   believe that success at the empirical level will be

crucial. Since differences in long-term growth rates have such a dramatic

effect on levels of welfare, the success of this type of empirical work is

obviously of more than academic interest.



New Keynesian Models

    According to a newspaper article that I read from Australia there is now

a consensus among economists that a successful Keynesian revival is underway.

(Unfortunately, the reporter neglected to mention that the consensus was

acclaimed at a meeting of the Australian Economics Conference, where only

Keynesians had been invited to attend.) No less than four new areas (the

four horsemen of the new Keynesian economics?) are actively being pursued to

provide Keynesian analysis with firm microeconomic underpinnings. Looked at

this way, the mission of the new Keynesian economics (which I like to

describe by the acronym NUKE) is peculiar. Instead of providing new

theoretical results and hypotheses for empirical testing, the objective often

seems to be to provide respectability for the basic viewpoint and policy

prescriptions that characterize the old Keynesian models. It may well be

more rewarding to look instead for new theoretical insights, empirical

hypotheses, and policy implications.
                                                                        13




    The first NUKE area- -     implicit   or explicit long- term contracts for labor

or goods-- is intended to rationalize sticky wages or prices. Although these

models may explain why some wages or prices are sticky, the approach has been

less successful in relating this stickiness to Keynesian style behavior of

employment and output. Basically, the introduction of an ability to

undertake long-term contracts tends to make private markets function more

efficiently, rather than less efficiently as in the Keynesian model. If the

basic problem in business fluctuations is an inability of agents to

coordinate decisions, then it would indeed be surprising if this problem

originated from an ability to make contracts.

    As an example, in the context of a long-term labor agreement, it is

possible to attain the appropriate variations over time in work effort

without requiring day-to-day adjustments in pay. yorkers agree at the

outset- -   either   formally or informally- - that they will expend more effort when

there is more work to do, with the understanding that they will also receive

more leisure when there is less work (see Barro, 1977, and Hall and Lilien,

1979). As long as the variations in effort are not too great or

long-lasting, it is unnecessary for wages to rise along with the extra work

and vice versa. Thus, this analysis explains why the private economy can

behave efficiently- - as if markets cleared continuously- - even if observed

wages are sticky. The underlying shadow value of time is flexible,            and the

observed wages are merely installment payments that are part of a broader

compensation package. Thus, in this view, it is also not surprising or

disturbing if observed real wages do not correlate especially well with

variations in labor supply. (There are some differences here in the

predictions for movements in hours or effort from existing employees versus
                                                                     14




changes in the number of workers, because new employees are likely not

covered by previous labor contracts.)

    Another point is that long-term contracting is an element of a real

theory, and does not explain why monetary disturbances or the Phillips curve

would be important. Moreover, it is just as likely that the real wages or

relative prices determined in a long-term agreement would be "too low" as

"too high." Thus, the implications for excess supply or demand are

symmetric, and do not tend to support the Keynesian focus on aggregate

demand.

    The second area of the new Keynesian economics allows for menu costs in

the adjustment of prices or wages (see Ball, Mankiw, and Romer, 1988, for a

survey). Unlike long-term contracts, the idea here is that nominal prices

are costly to change--thus, this theory does relate to monetary disturbances

and to the interplay between nominal and real variables. In the absence of

long-term contracts (as above), the "errors" in price formation could

translateS into inefficient choices of quantities. However, as with long-term

contracts, this viewpoint does not point especially to the Keynesian case

where nominal prices are too high rather than too low. That is, Keynesian

excess supply would be no more likely than sustained excess demand.

    As a theoretical matter, it has long been known that direct costs of

adjustment could explain some stickiness in prices. However, the basic

misgiving about menu costs is that the direct costs of adjusting prices are

typically trivial relative to the losses from choosing inappropriate

quantities. (The costs for changing prices tend also to be much less

significant than those for changing quantities.) Thus, the main contribution

of the new literature on menu costs was to show that- -   starting   from a
                                                               15




position of market clearing--an error in price setting could involve costs

that are second order privately but first order socially. (Under imperfect

competition, the "market-clearing" price could also be allowed to deviate

from marginal cost.) Unfortunately, this result does not hold if output and

employment are already finite amounts away from their equilibrium values. In

this situation, the private cost from setting a price a little further from

its market-clearing value is also first order. Thus, if the costs of price

adjustment are minor, this approach still fails to explain significant

shortfalls in production and employment. New classical models with money

were often criticized for their reliance on faulty perceptions about the

general price level to explain major recessions. Since it was cheap to learn

about the general price level, the overall analysis was unconvincing. But it

is even more unconvincing to argue that major contractions of output and

employment arise because firms are unwilling to pay the small menu costs

required to change their prices.

    The third NUKE area, efficiency wages, starts from the reasonable view

that the terms of a labor compensation package can affect workers' incentives

to provide effort. For example, the more attractive a job and the less

attractive is unemployment, the more willing someone is to work to avoid

being fired. (Marx also had this idea in his reserve-army model.) These

features can be incorporated as influences on labor supply in real business

cycle models (Danthine and Donaldson, 1988); an extension that is

straightforward because efficiency-wage theory applies to real variables

rather than to monetary forces. However, the incorporation of the

efficiency-wage idea tends to exacerbate one of the shortcomings of RBC

models. Namely (at least in the absence of long-term labor contracts), the
                                                                  16




predicted pattern for real wages turns out, counterfactually, to be even more

procyclical.

      Instead of proceeding by introducing efficiency wages into an equilibrium

model and then evaluating the empirical implications, most proponents of this

approach have focused on the theoretical possibilities for generating

Keynesian style "involuntary unemployment" (see, for example, Akerlof, 1984,

and   Shapiro   and Stiglitz, 1984). Carmichael (1985) showed that this approach

depended on some missing prices; that is, attractive jobs were effectively

not sold up front. Even if job seekers have little access to credit markets

or are worried about exploitation from employers, this process would work to

clear the market; that is, to eliminate queues. Thus, to avoid this

straightforward elimination of involuntary unemployment, one has to assume

that the market for new jobs does not function or that the prices paid for

jobs are exogenously sticky. In effect then, the efficiency-wage theory of

unemployment is another example of old-style Keynesian theories in which some

prices are arbitrarily treated as rigid. Other critics of efficiency-wage

theories have noted that bonding and monitoring on the job can substitute for

high wages as incentive mechanisms (see Katz, 1986). Also, if efficiency

wages are important only on some jobs, there is another reason why the

approach cannot account for involuntary unemployment (although it still may

be significant in modifying the properties of a well specified equilibrium

model).

      Another area that is sometimes mentioned along with efficiency-wage

theories is the i,isider-oulsider model of the labor market (Lindbeck and

Snower, 1988). This approach shows how insiders can effectively obtain a

monopoly position over labor allocations. Thereby the determination of
                                                               17




employment and output can be Pareto inefficient. Moreover, the process

sometimes leads to a high degree of persistence in unemployment, which is

often discussed under the heading of hystereszs (Blanchard and Summers,

1987). In many ways this analysis is similar to the treatment of imperfect

competition in the product market, which is the topic discussed next.

   The last of the four main areas of the new Keynesian economics concerns

models of business fluctuations that include imperfect competition with some

elements of increasing returns (see, for example, Hall, 1988). As with

efficiency wages, imperfect competition is a purely real theory that could be

incorporated into real business cycle models. Aspects of imperfect

competition are, in fact, central to some endogenous growth models. Although

the results on fluctuations and growth under imperfect competition tend not

to be Pareto efficient (as is also true in the presence of distorting

taxation or public goods), there is no reason to think that the findings

would support Keynesian arguments for aggregate demand policies. In any

case, the important challenge is to show why the incorporation of aspects of

imperfect competition leads to model characteristics that accord better with

empirical evidence on business fluctuations. This demonstration has not yet

been made, and one reason to be skeptical is that the approach does not

identify any new elements as sources of fluctuations. (It also does not seem

to lead to multipliers, which might lessen the need to identify sources of

shocks.) Presumably, cyclical variations in the degree of monopoly are not

the key to the business cycle.

    Some of the ideas in the new Keynesian models, such as incentive

mechanisms for labor effort and imperfect competition, may turn out to be

useful for understanding the macroeconomy. But it is hard to see how these
                                                               18




ideas constitute a well-defined area of research that will actually

rehabilitate Keynesian analysis. At this point, I fear that the Australian

journalist's perception of an emerging consensus in macroeconomics is very

far from the truth. Macroeconomic research seems to be evolving into two

camps: could it be the good guys versus the bad   guys?
                                                                19




                                  References


Akerlof, G.A., "Gift Exchange and Efficiency-Wage Theory: Four Views,"
    American Economic Review, 74, May 1984, 79-83.

Ball, L.N., N.G. Mankiw, and D. Romer, "The New Keynesian Economics and the
    Output-Inflation Tradeoff," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1988.

Barro, R.J., "Long-Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy,"
    Journal of Monetary Economics, 3, July 1977, 305-316.

             "Unanticipated Money Growth and Economic Activity in the United
    States," in Money, Expectations, and Business Cycles, Academic Press, New
    York,    1981.

         --- "Government and Growth," unpublished, Harvard University, May
    1989a, forthcoming in the Journal of Political Economy.

             "The Neoclassical Approach to Fiscal Policy," in R. Barro, ed.,
    Modern Business Cycle Theory, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA,
    1989b.

             and 11.1. Grossman, "A General Disequilibrium Model of Income and
    Employment," American Economic Review, 61, March 1971, 82-93.

Bartley, R.L, "Budget Deficits: a Third View," The k'all Street Journal,
    February 16, 1989.

Bernanke, B.S., "Non-Monetary Effects of the Financial Collapse in the
    Propagation of the Great Depression," American Economic Review, 73, June
    1983, 257-276.

Blanchard, O.J. and L.H. Summers, "Hysteresis and the European Unemployment
    Problem," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1, 1986, 15-78.

Carmichael, L., "Can Unemployment be Involuntary?: Comment," American
    Economic Review, 75, December 1985, 1213-1214.

Cass, D., "Optimum Growth in an Aggregative Model of Capital Accumulation,"
    Review of Economic Studies, 32, July 1965, 233-240.

Danthine, J.P. and J.B. Donaldson, "Efficiency Wages and the Real Business
    Cycle," paper no. 8803, University of Lausanne, March 1988.

Hall, R.E., "A Non-Competitive, Equilibrium Model of Fluctuations," National
    Bureau of Economic Research, working paper no. 2576, May 1988.

            and D.M. Lilien, "Efficient Wage Bargains under Uncertain Supply
    and Demand," American Economic Review, 69, December 1979, 868-879.
                                                                  20




Katz, L.F., "Efficiency Wage Theories: a Partial Evaluation," NBER
   lacroeconornics Annual, 1, 1986, 235-276.

Keynes, J.M., The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and loney, Harcourt
    Brace, New York, 1935.

King, R.G. and C.I. Plosser, "Money, Credit and Prices in a Real Business
    Cycle," American Economic Review, 74, June 1984, 363-380.

Koopmans, T.C., "On the Concept of Optimal Economic Growth," in The
    Econometric Approach to Development Planning, North Holland, Amsterdam,
    1965.

Kormendi, R.C. and P.G. Meguire, "Cross-Regime Evidence of Macroeconomic
    Rationality," Journal of Political Economy, 92, October 1984, 875-908.

Kydland, F.E. and E.C. Prescott, "Time to Build and   Aggregate   Fluctuations,'
    Econometrica, 50, November 1982, 1345-1370.

Lindbeck, A. and D.J. Snower, The Insider-Outsider Theory of Employment and
    Unemployment, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1988.

Lucas, R.E., "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal of Economic
    Theory, April 1972, 103-124.

             "Econometric Policy Evaluation: a Critique," Carnegie-Rochester
    Conference Series on Public Policy, 1976, 19-46.

McCallum, B.T., "Real Business Cycle Models," in R. Barro, ed., lodern
    Business Cycle Theory, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1989.

Rebelo, S., "Long-Run Policy Analysis and Long-Run Growth," unpublished,
    University of Rochester, November 1987.

Rogoff, K., "Reputation, Coordination, and Monetary Policy," in R. Barro,
    ed., lodern Business Cycle Theory, Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
    MA, 1989.

Romer, P.M., "Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth," Journal of Political
    Economy, 94, October 1986, 1002-1037.

             "Capital Accumulation in the Theory of Long-Run Growth," in R.
    Barro, ed., lodern Business Cycle Theory, Harvard University Press,
    Cambridge, MA, 1989.

Sargent, T.J. and N. Wallace, "Rational Expectations, the Optimal Monetary
    Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political
    Economy, 83, April 1975, 241-254.

Shapiro, C. and J.E. Stiglitz, "Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker
    Discipline Device," American Economic Review, 74, June 1984, 433-444.
                                                              21




Solow, ILL, "A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth," Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 70, February 1956, 65-94.
