                         NBER WORKiNG PAPER SERIES




           CHANGES IN THE STRUCTURE OF WAGES DURING THE 1980'S:
                 AN EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVE EXPLANATIONS




                                John   Bound

                              George Johnson




                          Working Paper No. 2983




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  May, 1989




This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                     NEER Working Paper #2983
                                     May 1989


          CHANGES IN THE STRUCTURE OF WAGES DURING THE 1980'S:
               AN EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVE EXPLANATIONS




     Between 1979 and 1987 there were three significant

changes in the wage structure in the United States. the

pecuniary returns to schooling increased by about a third;

the wages of older relative to younger workers with

relatively iow education increased to some extent; and the

wages of women relative to men rose by almost ten percent.

It is important for policy purposes to know why these changes

occurred and whether they are temporary or permanent. The
paper investigates several alternative explanations of these

wage structure phenomena, including the most popular ones
that their principal causes were shifts in the structure of

product demand, skilled-labor saving technological change,
and changes in the incidence and level of rents received

by lower skilled workers. our reading of the evidence
suggests that the major cause of the dramatic movements in

the wage structure during the 1980's may have been some

combination of changes in both production technology and

the average relative nonobserved quality of different labor

groups.

  John Bound                          George Johnson
  Departnent of Economics             Department of Economics
  University of Michigan              University of Michigan
  Ann Arbor, MI 48109                 Ann Arbor, MI 48109
  313-763-7149                        313-764-2374
    During the 1980's there were three major changes in the

wage structure in the United States. First, from 1979 to

1987 the estimated average within-sex, experience-adjusted

hourly wage differential per year of completed schooling
increased from about six to eight-and-a-half percent, or a

rise by almost a half in the unadjusted rate of return to

education. Second, for both men and women in the lower half

of the educational distribution there was a widening of the

wage differential by experience, Third, over this period the
wages of women relative to men, adjusting for education and

potential experience, rose by almost tenpercent, which
eliminated about a third of the adjusted gender wage gap.
     changes in the distribution of earnings of this

magnitude in such a short period of time (over the course of

a single business cycle) are unprecedented in recent history.

They have given rise to a concern about the "vanishing middle

class" (see Morrigan and Haugen), and they have
understandably received notice in the political arena (for

example, the abortive slogan of the 1988 political campaign,

"good jobs at good wages"). Slogans aside, the changes raise
several important policy issues (concerning, for example,
resource allocation to education, trade policy, affirmative

action, and income taxation). The question of      the   wage

structure exhibited such profound changes is therefore as
important to policy makers as it is interesting to economists

per se. There are several possible explanations of these

wage structure developments, ranging from a focus on changes



                             —1—
in the composition of product demand, particularly those due
to foreign trade factors, to changes in production technology

that were biased toward intellectual as opposed to physical
characteristics of workers. The differences in the

implications of these alternative explanations for

educational policy, for exanpie, are fairly obvious.    If the

technical change explanation story is correct, society should

allocate more resources to education (and, perhaps, increase
the equity of educational financing). If, on the other hand,
the foreign trade version of the product demand shift
explanation is correct1 the increase in the rate of return to

schooling during the 1980's is temporary (in the sense that

it will disappear when the foreign trade deficit is

eliminated), and no major increase in expenditure on

education is justified.
     The purpose of this paper is to assess the merits of

various explanations of changes in the wage structure from
1979. The facts about these changes are described in detail
in section I; the alternative hypotheses that can be advanced

to explain the changes and the procedures for tes;ing among
the explanations are set out in section II; the results of

them of these procedures are reported in Section III; and the
major conclusions of our investigation, as well as several

qualifications, are set out in Section IV.




                             —2—
I.      Structure   changes During the 1980's

     Our first task is to document the major changes in
the structure of wages that occurred between 1979 and 1987.

To do this we took all observations of nonagricultural
employees between the ages 18 and 64 from •the 1979 and 1987

Current Population surveys.t The data were sorted into 32

separate groups for each year: four educational splits, <11,

12, 13-15, and 16+ years of schooling; four potential
experience splits, 0-9, 10—19, 20-29, and 30+ years; and two
sexes. For each of the 32 groups for both of the years, the

logarithm of the wage rate was regressed on potential

experience (X), dummy variables for years of schooling (where

appropriate), and dummy variables for nonwhite, part-time,
and location. The resultant estimated log wage rates and
their estimated standard errors that are reported in Table 1

refer to four educational levels (E), 8, 12, 14, and 16, and

four values of potential experience, 5, 15, 25, and 35, for
each sex, as well as to white, full-time workers in SMSA's in

a weighted average of regions. The sample size for each
regression is listed below the standard error of each

estimated average wage.
     The three stylized facts mentioned above are clear from

inspection of the table. The difference in the value of the
estimated average log wage of each of the 32

education/experience/sex groups between 1979 and 1987. and its

estimated standard error are reported under the relevant ch

column. For example, the log of the ratio the average wage



                               —3—
of a male with 16 years of schooling and five years of

potential experience (27 years of age) to the average wage of

male high school graduate with the same experience (age 23)
is estimated to have increased by .439 — .256    .lB3LOlS).
This implies an increaèe in the male college/high school

relative wage from 1.30 to 1.57. The equivalent ratios for

all such comparisons across educational groups, save the
16/14 relative for workers with 25 years of experience, rose

during the 1980's.
    Although less pronounced than the increase in wage
differentials by education, there was an increase in

differentials by age for six of the eight sex/education
groups. For example, for male high school graduates the
estimated ratio of those with 25 to those with 5 years of

potential experience rose from 1.43 to 1.61 (±,O1),

Only for both men and women college graduates did the age

differential remain constant over this period.

     Using the sample size numbers in Table 1 as weights and

taking the estimated values of the log wage of each group as

the mean for each of the 32 education/experience/sex

groups, the change in the average log wage from 1979 to 1987
was .418 for the entire sample, .386 for men and .487 for

women. The implied gap between the wages of men and women
declined between 1979 and 1987 from .388 to .287, a decline

in the percentage gender wage gap from 32.2 to 24.9. Both
the male and female labor force distributions were more
educated and slightly older in 1987 than 1979, and .048 of



                             —4—
the wage change for men and .053 of that for women were
attributable to compositional effects. This leaves adjusted
changes in log nominal wages of .345 for men and .434 for

women.
     A convenient way to summarize the stylized facts about

changes in the structure of wages that we will ultimately

seek to explain is to regress the estimated change in the
logarithn of wages for each of the 32 groups in Table 1 on

a relevant set of dummy variables. This set includes
one/zero variables for education equal to 12, 14, and 16,

women, and, for those groups with less than 16 years.of

 schooling, experience equal to 15, 25, and 35. The point
 estimates of the slope coefficients of this regression (using

 the square root of 1979 employment as the weight for each
 group) are reported in column (i) of Table 3. We are thus

 seeking to explain why the ceteris paribus college/high
 school logarithmic wage differential increased by an average
 of .161 (the difference between the coefficients on ElG and

 E=l2) between 1979 and 1987, why the high school/elementary

 differential increased by .081, why the female/male
 differential increased by .097, and why the differential
 among those non-college attenders with 35 years of experience

 to those with 5 years increased by .ll4.a
      It is interesting to point out that the change in the

 logarithm of the CPI during this period was .448.. This means
 that estimated-average real hourly earnings, adjusted for
 education/experience composition, grew at- annual rates of.




                              —5—
-1:3 percent (100*( .345-.448?j8) for men and essentially zerc

for women between 1979 and 1987. This is probably a slight
underestimate of the rates of qrowtlt of total employee

compensation, for employer-prov:ded fringe benefits, which
are not included in cFS wages, grew slightly faster over this

period than gross hourly pay. Further, taxes per dollar of
compensation also fell during the 19a0's (shifted to future

wage recipients), so the relevant rate of growth of net

hourly compensation, especially for groups with relatively
high wage rates, grew slightly faster than the above rates.
Nevertheless, these figures point out that the observed

changes in the distribution of wages during the 1980's was

much more than some groups receiving a larger share of the

historical "growth dividend." For example, the implied
annual rate of growth of real wages from 1979 to 1987 for

males with £ = 8 and X = 5 was -3.5 percent, which means that
the average 21 year old high school high school dropout in
1987 earned 25 percent less in real terms than did his

counterpart in 1979.

     Since nonwhites have, on average, lower levels of

educational attainment than whites, a general increase in
educational wage differentials would be expected to increase

the gap in average wages by race. Using 1979
education/experience weights by sex for whites and nonwhites,

the estimated changes in nominal wages by group in Table 1

imply that the nonwhite/white average wage ratio would have
declined by .019 for men and .012 for women due to general
changes in the structure of wages. Further, the weighted
average change in the coefficients on nonwhite in the
regressions underlying Table 1 imply an additional change in

the nonwhite/white average wage ratio of - .011 for men and
-   .032 for women.
II. Alternative Explanations
       Several hypotheses can be (and have been) put forward to

explain the various wage structure change phenomena described
in Section I. These include the following eight sets of

explanations:
        #1. Demographic changes. The first thing that one looks
for in explaining changes in the structure of wages of the
magnitude of those that occurred during the 1980's is a set

of large changes in the demographic distribution of the labor

force. There is now a large amount of evidence that intra-

factor own    elasticities   of substitution are large but finite

(see the survey by Mamermesh), and the depressing effect of
the baby boom cohort on the wages of young workers and of

increases in the fraction of workers with college degrees on

college/high school relative wages during the 1970's have

been well-documented (see Welch (1979) and Freeman). Given
that the relative wages of more educated, older, and female
workers increased during the 1980's, a relative supply
explanation (a leftward shift in the relative supply function

in Figure 1 with an unchanged relative demand function) would
lead one to look for evidence that the composition of the

labor force shifted toward less educated, younger, and     male



                                  —7—
workers. Unfortunately for this explanation, the opposite
happened; the work force got more educated, slightly older,
and more female: one would have to spin a very weird story
about the pattern of cross partial elasticities of
complementarity to reconcile the comovment of relative wages

and employment across demographic groups. Accordingly, in
the most detailed analysis of intra—factor substitution to
date, Murphy and Welch (1987) conclude that the labor market

went off its demand function during the 80's.
     A potentially important qualification to this quick
rejection of the supply shift hypothesis arises from the fact
that there may have been a large increase in the relative

number of illegal immigrants into the United States during

the 1980's. Because of language difficulties and legal

barriers to their employment in llvisthlehl jobs, these

immigrants would have been likely to have been employed in
very unskilled occupations and thus have been most

competitive with the youngest and least educated of the

native population, thus driving their wages down (see, for

example, Borjas).
     #2. shifts in Product Demand. An explanation that has
received much recent attention from economists is that the

composition of product demand shifted during the 1980's

toward industries that are both education and female

intensive. This would (in a two dimensional sense) shift the
relative labor demand function to the right, and, if the

product demand changes were of sufficient magnitude, this



                              —8—
shift would, as in Figure 1, overwhelm the riqhtward shift in

the relative labor supply function. Assuming, as certainly
appears to be true of the United States in the post-

Depression period, real and relative wages are free in the

medium run to adjust so that all markets are cleared, the

relative wages of groups whose employment distributions are
sufficiently correlated with the product demand shifts should

r is e.

          The most obvious cause of potential shifts in the

composition of product demand during the 1980's is the

drastic change in the international trade position of the
United states. Murphy and Welch (1987 and 1988) conclude

that the increased openness of and large trade deficits

incurred by the u.s. economy are the principal cause of the

major observed changes in the structure of wages (and,

indeed, stress that it is a temporary problem). To find
evidence in favor of the general hypothesis that product
market shifts are the root cause of the changes in relative
wages over this period, it is necessary to show that these

shifts are sufficiently positively correlated with the
initial industrial distributions of those groups whose wages

increased to overwhelm the effects of observed demographic

changes. This a major task of Section III of this paper.

          *3. changes in the Incidence of Rents. Whatever their
 source, it is well-known that there is large variation,

observable characteristics held constant, in wage rates

 across industries (see Dickens and Katz, Murphy and Topel



                                  —9—
and Krueger and summers). It follows that a candidate to

explain at least part of the wage structure developments of

the 1980's is the possibility that changes in the industrial
distribution of employment, caused by shifts in. the

composition of product demand or by changes in technology,

reduced the average industry wage premium received by certain
groups. Throughout this paper we shall refer to these premia

as "rents" even though they could reflect, following the

existing literature, compensating differentials, selection on
unobserved labor quality differences, or an absence of wage
discrimination against certain groups, which are not rents in

an economic sense, as well as union wage effects or implicit
sharing of monopoly profits, both of which are.

     Like explanation #1, the changing rent incidence story
has been put forward in the context of foreign trade

developments (see, for example, Katz and Summers). If, for
example, a large fraction of low educated males traditionally

worked at high relative wages in industries like

manufacturing and mining, a flood of imports would force many

individuals in this group out of their TMgood jobs" into "bad

jobs" (i.e., rent-free) in trade and services, and the
average wage of this group would fall relative to others who

were less represented in the trade-sensitive sector. This is

distinct from the effect on relative average wages through

the effect of this disturbance on wages in competitive
markets (the reduction of wages in trade and services for men

with low education due to their having been "crowded into"




                              —10—
these industries). The test of the incidence explanation
versus *2 involves the determination of how much of the

change in the average relative wages of different groups can

be accounted for by changes in industry employment weights as

opposed to   within-industry   wage changes.

     t4.   Changes in the   verage   Level of Rents. It is also

possible that some of the changes in relative wage rates

during the 1980's are directly attributable to changes in

the rents received by some groups in particular industries.
Reductions in rents could occur, among other reasons, because

of a reduction in the power or coverage of unions in those

industries orof an improvement in working conditions that

previously forced employers to pay large compensating
differentials.3 They may also have been caused by shifts in

product demand, perhaps reflecting increased foreign
competition, that necessitated "givebacks" of rents in order

for firms in certain industries to stay in business (see

Freeman and Katz). To test for this explanation, whatever
the story behind it, it is necessary to see if the within-

group variance of wage rates across industries fell for

relevant groups. Did, for example, the wage for low educated
males in relatively unionized and/or trade—sensitive
industries fall relative to those in industries with

competitive labor markets?

     #5. Technological change. A very different potential
explanation of some of the wage structure phenomena is that

the nature of production processes changed systematically in



                                 —11—
such a way that the relative demand for certain groups

increased. An example of this is the widespread adoption
during the 1980's of computer technology ma large segment
of the economy. More educated are presumably better
able than less educated workers to adjust to this new (and

rapidly changing) production environment and would be
therefore in greater demand than would be the case with the

pre-computer technology.6 It is not possible with our

conventional data set to test directly for this explanation;

it is, as in the analysis of the sources of economic growth,

a story about residuals. However, a major difference between

the technical change explanation and its principal
competitors the product demand shift story (#2), is that the
latter implies that the direction and magnitude of the shift

in the relative demand function can be explained by
observable variables whereas the former implies that they
cannot, A rejection of explanation #2 is consistent with the

technological change explanation but, of course, it would
not prove it.

     #6. Changes in Relative Labor Quality. This potential
explanation is similar to explanation #5 except that it
involves the average worker in particular groups rather than

the production environment. A very likely explanation of at
least part of the increase in the average wages of women
relative to men during the 1980's is that the average

employed woman with V years of potential experience in 1987
had more actual experience and longer job tenure than did her



                             —12—
counterpart in 1979 (see Smith and Ward). Similarly, the
average levels of unobserved characteristics (innate ability

and motivation) of young high school dropouts in 1987, who.
composed a much lower fraction of their cohort than
previously, could have been much lower than that of those who

were in this group in 1979. With the overall disappearance

of the per worker growth dividend since the mid-1970's,
tastes for consumption relative to job amenities on the part

of college graduates may have increased. This explanation,
that the relative intensity cr work or unobserved quality

of certain groups has changed, predicts, like explanation #5,
that the solution for 1987 lies off the labor demand function

after accounting for explanations #Z-#4.
     #7. Discrimination. It is also possible that there has

been a reduction in the extent of labor market discrimination
against certain groups such that the ratio of their wages to

their marginal products has risen. In the empirical analysis
of this paper this would be a potential explanation of the
gender differential. The problem with it is similar to that

with explanations #5 and #6; its effect is through the

residual. If a large part of the increase in the relative

earnings of women cannot be explained by explanations #1-4,
it could be argued either that women's unobserved labor

quality has increased (Smith and ward, O'Neill) or that

discrimination against women has decreased (Blau and Beller).

     #8. Differential Adjustment. A final possibility is

that shifts in product demand or technology ate likely to



                             —13-
haVe had a greater impact on the labor market status of

younger than of older workers because of (explicit or
implicit) contractual constraints. For example, a set of

firms that changed to some sort of robotic—centered may have

elected (or been required) to retain and retrain most of its

production workers over the age of forty, but it now

suecifies that its new hires must have post—secondary

technical education. A general development of this sort
would cause the wages of younger less-educated workers to

fall relative to their older counterparts.
     For purposes of evaluating the relative merits of these

eight explanations, it is useful to set out a simple
(admittedly stylized) model that includes all of them. There

are I labor groups that work in 3' industries. The production
function for industry j is C.E.S. in the I labor inputs, or



     (1)     Qj =    [E5t(btNij)ca_t)torfca_t,
                         :1.



where Q is the output of the jt1' industry, N± is the
employment level of group i in industry j, bi an index of the

efficiency level of group i, a is the elasticity of intra—

factor substitution (following Hainermesh's Law, 1 C a   <


and the 811s are share parameters. The marginal physical
product of          is



     (2)     NPs, =



The wage rate of group i in industry j is
     (3) W =

where W is the competitive wage for that labor group.
R1 is the rent of group i workers in industry    in the sense

used in the above discussion of explanation 3, and a value
of unity implies a zero deviation of the wage from the

competitive norm for that group.

     Firms maximize profit subject to the possible constraint

that they must set employment levels such that the marginal

revenue product of each labor group equals the competitive

rather than the negotiated wage. Assuming competitive

product markets, this implies that



     (4) PMP =
                  =



where P, is the price of the output of industry j relative
to that of, say, industry 1. The parameter p equals one if
the constraint mentioned above is binding (union-management
bargaining or some other form of rent-sharing is Pareto

optimal) and zero if firms are free to set employment levels

so as to maximize accounting profit.
     The relative demand for the output of industry j

relative to that of industry 1 is given by


                      a —a
     i   J
             I   —
                 —




                             —15—
where 13 is an exogenous parameter reflecting tastes and

other factors (like foreign competition) affecting industry
j and a is the absolute relative price elasticity of               product
demand. To c•:rplete the model, it is specified that the

effective (fixed) supply of labor of each of the I labor

groups equals the sum of its employment in the J industries,

or



             (6) N =      E   N1.
                          J



             This is a rather messy model to solve analytically

(unless one makes the rather uninteresting assumption that I
=    3   =    2),   but it turns out that it can be manipulated to

suggest approaches to the data that are informative of the

merits of some of the alternative explanations without too

much difficulty. First combine the marginal conditions, (4),
for industries j and 1 to obtain



             (7) (R/R±1)t'1
substituting (5) for P, in (7) and              solving   the result for

N1 gives


    (8) N±1 =

By (6) Nt = Ni,. +             I N, which allows one to solve for
                              jfrl

and thence for Nij, which is




                                         —16—
        (9)    Vij           Mu/Ni =
where
                     = ia             2—c/a



                     =   :
                         J
v is the fraction of workers in group i who are employed in

industry j.7
    As will shortly become evident, the denominator of (9

for the case of p =              1   is of considerable interest in this

exercise. Note that its total logarithmic derivative is

given by




        (10)    d(ln D} = S (81°x/D) d(ln xj)
                                       j

                                     = E   Vij dUn xj).
                                       J



This means that the proportional change in each D. is

the average proportional change in the xj's across industries

weighted by the group's industry employment distribution.
To identify the proportional changes in the Xj'5, take the
logarithmic derivative of (9), thatis



        (11) d(ln v1,) = (1 —                 6°x/D1)d(ln        xj)
                                      - S (8s?x.n/Ds)d(1n x,,,)
                                         i


                             =   (1 -      v)d(1n   x,) - S v1,, d(ln xm).
                                                          rn/i




                                               —17—
This implies that the log changes in the Xj'S, which are a

weighted average of log changes in the industry demand shift

parameters and the industry output levels, can readily be

estimated econometrically.8

     Now consider the average wage of group i relative to

group k workers. This is


        (12) W/W (S Wv)/(E WI€IVkJ)
                           j              I

which   is the product of the ratio of their average

wages rates in the competitive sector to the ratio of their

average rents across industries, R/R. Substituting (9)

(with p =      1) for N± and NK into the ratio of these two
groups! marginal products, the ratio of their competitive

wages is seen to be



(13) (w0/w,0) =


The logarithmic total derivative of this is



        (14)      d(ln(WS/WKC)) =       (1—l/a)d(ln(bj/bk))
               + (1/cr)ZLvij —   vaj)d(ln     Xj) —   (1/ojd(lii(N1/N)),
                      J



and the derivative of the log of the ratio of rents is



        (15)      d(ln(RS/Rk)) =                         —   (R,dv,j/Rk)]
                                    I



                                        —18—
                        + E[(v±dR,/R)     —
                                              (VnjdRlcj/RK)].
                           3



The proportional change in the ratio of observed average wage

rates of groups i and k is, of course, the sum of (14) and

(15).

        The five terms on the right hand sides of (14) and (15)

reflect the eight explanations set out verbally in the
beginning of this section. since a > 1, the first term in

(14) will be positive if technological change has been more
favorable toward group i than toward group k or if the

unobserved labor quality of the i's has grown faster than
that of the X's.' As mentioned in the initial discussion of

explanations #5 and #6, one turns to them (and thence to

alternative data sets, anecdotal evidence, etc.) only if the
other explanations fail to explain movements in the wage

structure. The second term in (14) reflects, among other
things, the effect of changes in the structure of product
demand on relative competitive wages. If (as is, in fact,

not true) industry employment distributions were identical
for all groups, its value would be zero and product demand

shifts would have no impact on the competitive wage

structure. The Murphy-Welch story is that the d(ln xj)'s in

the 1980's were sufficiently positively correlated with the
industrial distributions of certain groups to shift their

demand functions far enough to the right to make up for the
fact that their relative supply increased. It is relatively
straightforward ---    given our assumptions ---   to   test this



                                —19—
hypothesis.
       The third term in (14) reflects explanation *1, changes

in relative supply. Although we already know that this goes
in the wrong direction, it is important to reiterate that

the magnitude of the cther explanations must be sufficiently

large to overcome the "perverse" supply effects.

       The two terms in (15) reflect explanations 3 and #4
concerning possible changes in the incidence and level of

rents received by some groups relative to others. Given

a plausible assumption about which industries compose the
competitive sector of the labor market (a task that is

easier in theory than in practice), it is a straightforward

matter to estimate the magnitudes of these terms by what is,

essentially, a oaxaca decomposition.

       To summarize the empirical strategy suggested by the
model, it is useful to set out a regression equation of the

form



       (16)    d(ln W)    Bc,   + 131d(ln N) +   d(ln R) + tJ   +   Ci.


B   ia equal to -1/a, d(ln R) is the logarithmic change in
the average rent of the group, and e± is a random error term.

u. represents changes in relative product demand,
technological intensity, and labor quality, as well as

possible changes in discrimination and differential labor

market adjustment, explanations #2 and 5-8- We have already
shown (see fn. 4) that for the 1979-87 period the simple


                                  —20—
correlation between d(ln Wi) and d(ln N,.) was positive, which

implies that U1 and/or d(ln R} was positively correlated
with d(ln Ni) during that time. our task in the next section

is to see if we can explain that positive correlation with

those parts of U1 and d(ln R) that are readily observable.




III. Evaluation of Explanations
      The tests of the first four of the six explanations

implied by the preceding section require disaggregation of
the data by industry, a task for which the C.P.S. is well-

suited. We have disaggregated our sample by the following 17
industries:

1.   construction            10.   personal serv.
2.   durable mfg. & mining   11.   entertain. & rec. serv,
3.   nondurable mfg.         12.   medical serv.
4.   transportation          13,   hospitals
5.   public utilities        14.   weif. & relig. serv.
6.   wholesale trade         15.   education
7.   retail trade            16.   professional serv.
8.   finance, ins., & r.e.   17.   public admin.
9.   business serv.

These correspond to the usual C.P.S. "major industries"

except that mining had to be folded into durable goods

because of the presence of empty cells for some female

education/experience groups in 1987.

      The distributions of employment by industry by education
and sex are shown in Table 2. Although most of our

subsequent empirical analysis uses the industry by experience
as well as the other two characteristics, the major "action"

in terms of assignment of workers to industry is due to



                             —21—
education and sex, so these numbers provide a reasonably
accurate impression of what happened between 1979 and 1987.

Men with low education tend to be concentrated in the

those industries that are the traditional employers of

blue collar labor (t relatively high wages), construction,
mining, manufacturing, transportation, and utilities, and
these industries declined in relative importance during the

1980's. Higher educated men are much more likely to employed

in employed in white collar private sector industries like
FIRE and professional services, which Increased in relative

importance, and in the public and nonprofit sector, which
decreased in relative importance. Women are much more likely

than men to be employed to be employed in the rapidly growing
service sector, but it is interesting to note that a large

fraction of women college graduates are employed in the
education sector, an industry that declined in relative

importance during the 1980's.

     A. Product Demand Shifts
     The first task in the evaluation of explanation *2

is the estimation of the industry demand change parameters,
the d(ln xj)'s, along the lines of (11). This involves

regressing the 1979 to 1987 change in the logarithm of the

weight of group i in industry j on one minus its weight in
that industry in 1979 and the negative value of its weight in

each of the other industries. The parameters of this
 regression, with the demand change in construction
 arbitrarily suppressed to zero, were estimated with weights



                                —22—
equal to the square root of              for 1979 and are reported

in column (i) Table 4. Each of these coefficients is

interpreted as the change in log x in that industry relative

to that for construction, so, for example, the change in the
value for retail trade relative to durable goods is .018 -

(-.313)   =   ,351(.029).   As would be expected from a casual

attention to the news of the 1980's, demand for manufacturing

declined relative to trade and service industries. Two of

the other three large employers of males with relatively low

education, transportation and public utilities, also
declined. However, two of the large employers of college

men and women, education and public administration, declined
as well. we also estimated this equation separately for men
and women, and, although the test of equality of coefficients

was rejected at the five percent level, use of the

alternative demand change indices made no difference.
     The next step is to employ these estimates to calculate

the estimates of the effect of demand changes on wages, the

second term in (14). These are reported in column (iii)
of Table 5, which also gives the estimated average wage

changes (at the particular education/experience values
employed in Table 1) and the proportional change in group
supply, d(ln N±). It is clear from glancing at the table

that the demand shift hypothesis does not stand up very well.
That its variation is small relative to the variation in

relative supply changes is not terribly troubling, for there

are many potential alibis on this score (e.g., aggregation


                                  —23—
bias, errors in variables, and a more complex pattern of

cross partial elasticities of complenientarity than that

allowed by the C.E.SJ. What is more disturbing to
acceptance of the demand shift hypothesis is the fact that

relative demand changes generally go in the wrong direction.

For example, the group with by far the lowest wage increase,

males with c-   years   of experience and <12 years of

schooling, had, by these estimates, the second most favorable
industry demand change conditions (as well as one of the

largest decreases in supply) .      The reason for this is that,

although this group is well represented in mining and

manufacturing, it is also very highly represented in
construction and retail trade and have very little exposure

to the public sector.

     The inadequacy of the product demand explanation of

the relative wage change phenomena of the 1980's (given our
maintained assumptions concerning functional form) is

illustrated by comparing columns (i), (ii), and (iii) of
Table 3. The numbers in column (ii) are the estimated slope

coefficients in a weighted regression of d(ln N) on dummy
variables for three education groups, three experience
categories interacted with s dummy for the two lower
education categories, and women; column (iii) is the same

thing with d(ln xi)     as   the dependent variable, column (i)

is thus the estimated ceteris paribus effect of a

characteristic on the 1979-87 wage change and columns (ii)
and (iii) the analogous effects on supply and demand. For


                                   —24—
example, holding experience and sex constant, the college!
high school logarithmic wage differential increased by .152,
but college/high school relative supply increased by .805 -

.331   =   .474 and relative demand by —.096 — .003      =   —.099.

By (14) the relative wage change is the reciprocal of the
intrafactor elasticity of substitution times the difference

between the changes in relative demand and supply. It is,
accordingly, clear that there is little insight in the

equation .152       (i/o) [—.099 —    .474).   The same conclusion

follows from the application of the product demand shift
hypothesis to the other malor relative wage change facts.

       column (iv) of Table 5 reports a recomputation of the

demand change index by removing four industries that are

primarily governmental or non-profit (hospitals (28 percent
government in 1979), welfare and religious (39%), education
(79%), and public administration). The confinement of the
index to the private sector yields results that are much

more favorable to the demand shift hypothesis, at least

qualitatively. Its value is highest for college graduates,
and it is higher for women than for men. The reason for the
difference with respect to education is that college

graduates are employed in large numbers in education and

public administration, and the removal of these industries

gives heavier weight to industries like durable goods and

FtRE, developments in which have been clearly relatively
favorable to more educated workers. We are aware, however,
of no theory of labor market behavior that implies that one



                                     —25—
can ignore the public sector ---   especially   when, as with

older women college graduates, it employs two-thirds of

the labor force.
     A second alternative to estimation of the effect of

product market demand shifts on the structure of labor demand

is to calculate the average of rates of growth of total

employment by industry weighted by the 1979 employment
distribution for each group. This index (which was used by

Murphy arid Welch) is equal to S vd(ln Nd). It is
straightforward to show that it is a biased estimate of the

true demand shifts in the sense that it will be positively

correlated with shifts in relative supply if, as is the

case, the v1's differ across demographic groups.s The values
of d(ln Nj) from 1979 to 1987 are given in column (ii) of

Table 4 and the resultant demand change index in column (v)

of Table 5. As expected, this demand change index is
slightly more favorable to explanation #2, for it is biased
toward such an acceptance. It is clear, however, that even
this measure does not come close to overwhelming the perverse

supply changes that occurred during the 1980's. column (iv)

in Table 3 reports the slope coefficients of a weighted
regression of this demand change index on the demographic
characteristics of particular interest in the light of wage
structure developments, and their size is such that they

perform little better than the preferred demand change index.

     A further insight into the usefulness of explanation #2

 is provided in Table 6, which reports relative annual rates



                              —26—
of -growth of employment by industry aggregates for 1947 to
1955, 1955 to 1970, 1970 to 1979, and 1979 to 1987. With the
exception of the increase in the shift from durable

goods,'mining to FIRE and services, the changes in industry

employment from 1979 are, in the main, a continuation of past

trends- By the demand shift argument, there should have been

some downward pressure on unskilled/skilled relative wages

during the 1970's, but there was not.

     In sum, shifts in product demand during the 1980's do
not seem to have been either sufficiently large or in the

right direction to have been the major source of the observed

movements in the wage structure in the 1980's. Foreign trade

(and perhaps other factors) did cause manufacturing amd
mining industries to decline, which is obviously consistent

with the demand story. Other shifts of different origins,
however, such as the decline in the public sector and the

rise in construction, seem to have had approximately equal

effects in the other direction.

     B. Changes in the Incidence and Level of Rents

     To test explanations #3 and #4, we first added dummy

variables for 16 industries to the basic regression model

described in Section I in order to obtain estimated wage

rates for 1979 and 1987 by industry by education, experience,
and sex. This provides a set of estimated logarithmic
deviations of the wage rate in each of the .7 industries

relative to an arbitrarily excluded industry, other factors

(location, etc.) held constant, for each group, say aij. one



                             —27—
interesting feature of these results is that, as has been

noted by several previous investigators of this topic, the
relative wage structure across industries is highly

correlated among labor groups (for example, the estimated
coefficients on durable goods manufacturing are high and

those in retail trade low for all 32 demographic groups in

both years)- There are, however, several interesting
exceptions to this general pattern.
     in order to estimate the two terms on the right hand

side of (15), it is necessary to establish which industries
compose the competitive sector so that W and then the R's
can be identified. Several attempts at doing this revealed
that there does not seem to be a set of industries that serve

the function of providing a reference wage that has
consistent properties across all groups. For example, when
considering the labor market for males with high school and
less, the competitive sector might consist of all the trade

and service industries (the providers of "bad" as opposed to
"goods" jobs), and the other industries can be grouped into

three other sectors: manufacturing and mining, the other
relatively unionized industries (construction,
transportation, and public utilities), and the
 government/nonprofit sector employed in the analysis of

 demand changes above. The (weighted) variance of the 17
 estimated industry effects is almost entirely picked up, for

 males with relatively low education, by the variance across
 these four sectors. For women and males with high



                              —28—
educational attaiiunent, however, this four-sector approach
performed poorly in the sense that the variance of average
wage effects across the four sectors was much lower than the

variance across all 17 industries. Without going into
superfluous detail, there seem to be several different

explanations of adjusted between-industry wage differentials
that apply to different groups.

     since rents, in the very general sense we used in

Section II, are not readily observed, we must make

approximations of the two terms on the right hand side of
(15) in order to assess the relevance of explanations #3 and

#4. with respect to the first of these, estimates of the

direct effect of industry composition changes on average wage

levels by group can be obtained by calculating Eadv for
each group, where Qij   is   the estimated logarithmic industry

wage effect in 1979 for group I in industry j and dv is the
change in the weight from 1979 to 1987. These calculations
are reported in column (vi) of Table 5.

     The estimated impact of changes in industry weights on

the change in a particular average wage differential is

obtained by subtracting the value in column (vi) for the

denominator group from the numerator group. For example, the
change in the logarithm of the average wages of male college

to high school at x     5 was .428 -.245 =   .173, and from
column (v) the estimated amount of that due to changes in

industry weights is .022 - (—.021) = .043, or about a quarter

of the change.




                                 —29-
  • To get an overview of the contribution of compositional

changes to the explanation of the major changes in wage
differentials of interest in this study, the values in

column (vi) of Table 5 were regressed on the three education

dummies, the three experience dummies interacted with

education less than college, and the sex dummy variables.
The resultant coefficients, which are reported in column (v}

of Table 3, represent the estimated partial contribution of

compositional changes to the explanation of wage changes of

the relevant group relative to young males with low
educational attainment, with respect to the change in

relative wages by education, very little of the change in
the high school/elementary differential (.002 out of .017)

is attributable to compositional change. However, 16 percent
(.025 out of .152) of the change in the college/high

differential can be explained by this factor.7 For workers
with less than college, about 12 percent of the increase in
the r=35/x=5 differential (.014 out of .123) is due to the

compositional effect.7 This factor explains none of the

 increase in the relative wages of women.
     The task of estimating the second term in (15), which

 reflect explanation #4 that the average level of rents
 changed during the 1980's in a manner that contributed

 significantly to the major wage structure developments, is
 subject to the same difficulty as explanation #3 concerning

 the identification of the Rjj's. It is, however, interesting

 to note that differences in wages changes from 1979 to 1987



                              —30—
appear to be dominated by group rather than industry-specific

trends. In line with this, the weighted (by 1979               -



education/experience/sex    proportions) variance of the 544

d(ln wjj)'S, .0088, is equal to the sum of the within-

industry variation of the 32 groups, .0028, and the variance

of average industry wage changes across groups, .0060. Thus,
despite the fact that the estimated wage changes within

industries is much noisier than those for across the averages

for the groups, the latter accounts for 2/3 of the variation.

    A direct approach to this problem is to estimate

industry specific effects for 1979—1987 wage changes on

the assumption that abnormally high or low wage increases in

industry j   will   be experienced by all I groups. To test for

this, d(ln Wij) was regressed on dummy variables (with 1979
industry employment of group i as a weight) for each of the

industries. The resultant estimated parameters, with

construction as the excluded group, are reported in column

(vi) of Table 4. These estimates show that relatively skill—

intensive industries like FIRE, education, and professional

services had significantly larger wage increases during the
1980's than did those industries that traditionally hire blue

collar males.

     This, of course, does not bear directly on explaration

#4, for the skill-intensive industries had to increase their

age levels in order to stay competitive in the labor market.
(It is subject to a deficiency similar to the use of the

second demand change index above.) To estimate industry



                                 —31—
effects on wage changes independent of what we are trying to
explain, the seven control variables used throughout Table 3

were added to this regression, and the resultant estimated

coefficients on the industry dummies are reported in column

(vii) of Table 4. Although the industry dummies are still

jointly significant (F =   10.4),   the magnitudes of the effects

fall appreciably. A few industries, like public utilities

FIRE, and hospitals, increased their wages significantly
relative to others, but the sizes of the differences are

insufficient to provide a complete explanation of the changes

in demographic wage differentials.
     Nevertheless, industry wage effects do explain a small

part of the major wage structure developments of the 1980's.
column (vi) of Table 3 reports the reduction in the estimated

coefficients on the dummy variables for education, experience
(for non-college workers), and sex attributable to the

addition of the 16 industry dummy variables. For example,
 .020 of the .161 increase in the college/high school

differential is due to changes in industry wage effects,
 .006 of the .114 increase in the X=35/flS for non—college

workers, and .009 of the .097 decrease in the gender gap.
 •

     Another way of looking at changes in average rents by
different demographic groups is to examine what happened to

the extent of unionization (as is done in some detail by
Blackburn, Bloom, and Freeman). For males with high school
or less, the groups that have the majority of union
membership, the fraction of workers who are union members




                               —32—
(from the May C.P.S.) fell from .39 In 1979 to .27 In 1987.

The estimated logarithmic wage effect of union membership,
however, increased from about .16 to .23. This means that

the average rent of males without college attributable to

unionism changed by .l5L27 — .39)     = —.019 due to the

decline in union membership, by .39L23 - .16) = .023 due
the rise in the union premium, and by -. l2• .07 = - .00]. due to
the interaction of the two effects. Thus, although much
publicity has been given to the decline of the unionism as a

potential cause of the plight of working people in the U.S.,

the net effect of a declining membership proportion and an

increasing wage premium was approximately zero.



IV. Conclusions
     In the preceding section we examined the data to assess

the power of the three explanations of wage structure
developments that could be tested fairly straightforwardly.

As we noted at the outset, their quantitative magnitude would

have to be very large, for the changes in the demographic
structure of the labor force have been decidedly in the wrong

direction. However, we found no "smoking gun" among
explanations #2-4. Product demand changes appear to be at
most neutral with respect to the phenomena we have sought to
explain, and the estimated combined effects of changes in the

incidence and level of rents for only a tenth to a fifth of

them. What, then, does explain changes in the wage structure
during the 1980's?



                               —33—
     First, the large and systematic increase in the relative
wages of women relative to men must surely be due in some

part to increases in the relative quality of the former

(explanation #6). Based on trends in the actual labor market
experience of women iii the labor force, Smith and Ward

predicted that women's wages would rise at least 15 percent

faster than men's from 1980 to 2000. Our estimate of the

gender difference in percentage wage increases between 1979

and 1987 of 10 percent suggests that either women's actual
experience gap narrowed much more quickly than Smith and ward

expected or that something else is going on.'-'

     Second, there is also the possibility that technological

change, explanation #5, accounted for some of the major
changes in the wage structure. There is a great deal of

anecdotal evidence that production processes have changed

significantly over the past decade in a manner that favors

more relative to less educated workers. A recent report on a

B.L.$. survey of changes in techniques in firms describes
technological changes that imply "lower demand for manual

dexterity, physical strength for materials handling, and
traditional craftsmanship" (Mark). This, probably reflecting
the widespread adoption of computer technology across
industries, certainly could have had some effect on the

relative demand for labor by education and, by d(ln b) in
(14), on the position Of the relative demand function.'2

     The explanation may also explain some of the increase in
the wages of women relative to men. At the lower end of the



                              —34—
educational spectrum, jobs that are traditionally filled by
women (e.g., secretarial) rank higher in job evaluations on
"intellectual challenge" attributes than do jobs

traditionallyheld by men; men's jobs, on the other hand,
rank higher with respect to "physical exertion" and "required

strength" (see Johnson and Solon). A reasonably widespread
change in production processes such as described in the

B.L.S. studies would accordingly increase the market wage

of women's relative to men's jobs.
      The technological change explanation also leads to a

reinterpretation of the role of relative supply changes
during the 1980's. consider the difference between the

change in wage rates by demographic group over the 1979-87

(period 2) and 1973—79 (period 1) intervals. By (16) this is

equal to



      (17)   d(ln     W1(2)) -      d(ln   Wj(l)) =   (Z(2) —
        + A,(d(ln     N1(2)) -      d(log   N±(l)))   + (U(2)      —   U(1))
             +   (d(ln(R1(2})   —   d(ln   fl(1)) +   (es(2}   —   es(1)).

Now assume that (fl most of the source of the TJ(t)'s is due

to variation in rates of technological change across groups,

the d(ln b)'s, (ii) rates of technical change are equal for
each group in the two periods, and (iii) differences in
changes in average group rent levels are uncorrelated with

differences in relative supply changes across groups.                     (i)

and   (ii)   imply that U±(2) z       U(1),    which means that technical




                                       —35—
change drops out as fixed effect.     (iii) implies that the

slope coefficient on a simple regression of d(ln W1(2))
—   dUn w(l}) on d(ln LiZ)) — dUn N(1)) is an unbiased
estimate of a   = - 1/c.
      when th-is procedure is followed (after converting the

changes in the logarithms of wages and employment over the
intervals into per annum terms), the estimated slope

coefficient is —.l86(.047), implying a (somewhat large but
plausible) elasticity of intrafactor substitution of

5.4. By this story, what is responsible for the large
increase in educational wage differentials is the slowdown in

the rate of increase in the rightward shift of the

distribution of educational attainment. For example, between
1973 and 1979 the fraction of workers with 16+ years of

schooling increased from .111 to .193, a per annum growth

rate of .092. Between 1979 and 1987, however, this growth
rate fell to .026, hence the dramatic increase in the

pecuniary returns to schooling. It is, of course, not clear
from the preceding that technological change biased toward
relatively skilled labor will continue into the 1990's. If

itdoes and college enrollment rates do not rise
substantially, the widening of the wage structure observed

over the last decade is likely to continue.




                               —36—
Footnotes
*   - we are indebted for useful suggestions on an earlier
      draft of this paper to several participants in seminars
      at Michigan and N.E.E.P.. We have also benefitted from
      several discussions with Larry Katz and Ana Ravenga, who
      have been studying this problem from a somewhat different
      perspective.
1 - The sample includes all persons in the annual CPS whose
      principal activity was working (i.e., excluding full-time
      students) in all nonagricultural industries (with the
      exception of private household services), the wage
      rate is defined as the ratio of the responses to
      questions concerning "usual weekly earnings" and "usual
      weekly hours." Potential experience is defined as age
      less years of schooling less six for those with
      educational attainment in excess of nine years;
      otherwise, experience equals age less 16. One problem is
      that the response to the question on usual weekly
      earnings was capped at $999.99, which was relevant for
      many highly educated males in 1987. Based on data from
      the March C.P.S., David Card has estimated that the
      actual earnings of those at the cap were on average 1.165
      times the maximum recorded value, and we used this
      adjustment for the 1987 data.
2 -   We also estimated wage profiles by this demographic
      breakdown for 1973 cs data and analyzed the 1973-79
      changes in relative wages. The regression of the change
      in estimated log wage across the 32 groups on a similar
      set of dummy variables (with the exception that the three
      experience variables were specified to have the same
      effect for all groups) showed that the return to
      schooling fell and the return to experience rose slightly
      during this period. The coefficients on high school,
      some college, and college were, respectively, —.027,
      —.080, and —.097, implying that the college/high school
      logarithmic relative wage fell by .070 as contrasted
      with its .161 increase during the 1979—87 interval. The
      slope of the experience/earnings profile increased by a
      small amount (e.g., an increase in the wage ofworkers
      with X = 35 relative to those with X = 5 of .034). There
      was a slight increase, .028, in the adjusted logarithmic
      relative wage of women. Apparently the decline in the
      wage gap, which has continued through the 1980's, began
      around 1975 (see O'Neill).
3 - The increase in composition-adjusted real wage rates
    during the 1973-79 interval was -0.7 percent per annum
    for men and slightly under -0.2 percent per annum for
    women.
4 —   It is "off its demand function" in the sense that the
      changes in the relative wages of demographic groups are
      not negatively related, as was true in the 1970's, to
      changes in their relative supply. Indeed, a weighted
      (by the square root of 1979 employment) regression of
      the 1979—1981 change in the log of the estimated w
      in Table 1 on the change in the log of employment yields
      a slope coefficient of +.183(.043). This is consistent
      with an elasticity of intrafactor substitution of minus
      55 as compared to conventional estimate of about +L5.
      For the 1973—79 period, on the other hand, the estimated
      coefficient on the change in log employment was
      —.O8lLolO). Obviously, some omitted variable was
      correlated with employment changes during the 1980's (and
      possibly during the 1970's) that caused this perverse
      result.

3- An increase in the rent of a particular group in a set of
    industries will only have a positive effect on the
    average wage of that group relative to others under
    certain circumstances; roughly, the demand elasticity for
    that group in those industries must be less than
    unity.
S -   This view of the inter-relationship between human capital
      and technical change was developed in the context of a
      formal growth model by Nelson and Phelps. Welch (1970)
      applied this basic idea --— that education is the more
      pràductive the more volatile is the state of technology -
      -- to an empirical analysis of the effect of schooling on
      earnings in agriculture.
7 - The absolute value of the logarithmic derivative of N1
    with respect to R, with .i             0 and holding the value of
    the denominator of (9) constant, is
                            aije +    (1—a)o,
      where ajj is the output share of group i in industry j.
      This is, of course, Hicks' well-known formula for the
      wage elasticity of demand in a competitive industry in
      a partial equilibrium setting.
8 - The econometric estimation of (11) is more easily
    envisaged when it is written in matrix form, i.e.,

             d(ln v11)        =      1—v11 —v12 . ..    —v17     d(ln x.)
             d(ln via)               —v12 l—vLa . ..    —v,,.7   d(In x2)

             d(lnv,,)                -v,,,, -v,,       1—v,,.    d(lnx.7)
             d(ln vat)               l—va,, —v22 ...

             d(ln   v1,,)             -yr1   V12   ... l—v
  - An error term can be added to the equation by assuming,
    for example, that there is variation across industries in
    changes in the technological coefficients (say, d(ln b±)
    =   d(ln b) —
9 - To compare the properties of this "intuitive" demand
    change index, D12, with our index, D11, consider the
    example with two labor groups (i=1,2), two industries
    (j=a,b), and a = a (so that Xj =
    that
                                                    Sj.
                                           It is easily shown


                    D11 = (Vab -       Vb)d(ln      Sb),

   which is the correct index in the sense that the change
   in the logarithm of W,/W1 equals (1/a) times this index
   less d(ln(N2/N)). The intuitive demand change index,
   under the above assumptions, equals


                    D12 =   (vn,   -   Vib)(1   -   K)d(ln   Sb)

                            + Kd(ln(N/N1)),

    where
                    K = (Vab - VLb)2NIN2/NaNb.

    In other words, D12 is a weighted average of our demand
    index and the proportionate change in relative supply.
    The weight K is equal to one when both groups have the
    same industry employment distributions (vib = Vab), but
    it is equal to zero when the two groups are perfectly
    segregated by industry (say Vab = 1 and Vab = 0 so that
       = Ni and Nb = N2).  The intuitive demand change index,
    therefore, is biased toward reflecting labor supply
    shifts rather than product demand shifts.
10 — These results are based on the inclusion of 16 dummy
    variables for major industries, and a natural question
    arises about the appropriateness of this level of
    aggregation. To check for this, we replaced this set
    of industries with 44 dummies for detailed industry
    (principally the addition of two-digit manufacturing) in
    regressions for men and women that included all education
    and experience groups. The results showed that most of
    the effect of industry on the 1979—1987 changes in the
    estimated coefficients on education and experience were
    picked up by the 16 major industry dummies. For example,
    89 percent of the reduction in the fall in the estimated
    college/high school differential due to adding detailed
    industry was captured by adding major industries. Thus,
    the true effect of explanation #3 is only slightly
    greater than that reported in Table 3.
11 - One aspect of the performance of relative wages during
    the 1980,5 that is not favorable to a simple version of
    explanation #6 is that there is no observed tendency of
    the male/female differential to narrow with respect to
    potential experience. Indeed, it goes slightly (but
    insignificantly) in the other direction. It is possible
    that relatively younger women are expecting to (and
    are expected by employers to) behave differently with
    respect to the labor market      more specific training
    longer annual work hours, different "career ladders,"
    etc. --- then their counterparts in the 1970's. An
    update and extension of a study like that of Corcoran
    and Duncan, with detailed data on actual work histories
    of large samples of men and women, would be necessary to
     test for this possibility. Even with this, however, many
     of the relevant changes between the 1970's and 1980's
    might not be measured.
12 -    For direct evidence on the relation between the rate of
       technological innovation and the demand for education by
       skill across industries see Bartel and Lichtenberg. They
       also raise the interesting point that a particular
       innovation may raise the relative demand for education
       initially but not after the innovation has become part of
       the production routine, with respect to computer
       technology, workers with strong mathematical aptitude and
       training may be "essential" for a few years after its
       introduction into a particular firm, but subsequently
       most of the work can be done by high school graduates
       using canned programs like Lotus 1-2-3. Accordingly,
       whether or not the effect of computers on the relative
       demand for labor by education is long-lasting depends on
       the degree to which future generations of computers
       require as much adaptation as was required in the first
       generation.
   Working Paper No. 2739, October 1988.
Krueger, Alan and Lawrence Summers, "Efficiency Wages and the
   inter-Industry wage Structure," Econometrica, March1988.

Mark, Jerome, "Technological Change and Employment; Some
   Results from BLS Research," Monthly Labor Review, April
   1988.

Murphy, Kevin and Robert Topel, "Unemployment, Risk, and
   Earnings1" in K. Lang and J. Leonard, eds., Unemployment
   and the Structure of Labor Markets, oxford, 1987.

____________ and Finis welch, "The Structure of Wages,"
   mimeo, IJnicon Research, November 1987.

_____________ and _____________, "Wage Differentials in the
   1980's: The Role of International Trade," mimeo, August
   1988.

Nelson, P. and E. Phelps, "Investment in Humans,
   Technological Diffusion, and Economic Growth," American
   Economic Review, May 1966.
Oaxaca, Ronald, "Male-Female Differentials in Urban Labor
   Markets," International Economic Review, 1973.

O'Neill, June, "The Trend in the Male-Female Wage Gap in the
   United States," Journal of Labor Economics, January 1985
   (Part 2).

Smith, James and Michael Ward, Women's Wages and Work in the
   Twentieth Century, Santa Monica, 1984.

Finis Welch, "Effects of Cohort Size on Earnings: The Boon
   Babies' Financial Bust," Journal of Political Econonjy, pt.
   2, october 1979.

__________   "Education in Production," Journal of Political
   Economy, January/February 1970.
References

Bartel, Ann and Frank Lichtenberg, "The comparative Advantage
   of Educated workers in Implementing New Technology,"
   Review of Economics and statistics, February 1987.
Blackburn, McKinley, David Bloom, and Richard Freeman, "Why
   Has the Economic Position of Less-skilled Male Workers
   Deteriorated in the united States?," Brookings Discussion
   Paper, March 1989.
Blau, Francine and Andrea Seller, "Trends in Earnings
   Differentials by Gender: 1971—1981," Industrial
   and Labor Relations Review, July 1988.

Sodas, George, "Immigrants, Minorities, and Labor Market
   competition," Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
   April 1987.
corcoran, Mary and Greg nuncan,"Work History, Labor Force
   Attachment, and Earnings Differences Between the Sexes and
   Races," journal of Human Resources, winter 1979.

Dickens, William and Lawrence Katz, "Inter-Industry Wage
   Differences and Industry characteristics," in K. Lang
   and J. Leonard, eds., unemployment and the structure
   of Labor Markets, Oxford, 1987.
Freeman, Richard, "The. Effect of Demographic Factors on the
   Age-Earnings Profile," Journal of Human Resources, Summer
    1979.

             and Lawrence Katz, "Industrial wage and
    Employment Determination in an Open Economy," mimeo,
    N.B.E.R., september 1987.
Hamermesh, Daniel, "The Demand for Labor in the Long Run," in
   0. Ashenfelter and 1%. Layard, Handbook of Labor
   Economics, North-Holland, 1986.

 Horrigan, Michael and Stephen Haugen, "The Declining Middle-
    class Thesis: A sensitivity Analysis," Monthly-Labor
    Review, May 1988.
 Johnson, George and Gary Solon, "The Empirical Foundations of
    comparable Worth Policy," American Economic Review,
    December 1986.
 Katz, Lawrence and Ana Revenga, "changes in the Economic
    Rewards to Education: The U.S. vs. Japan," mimeo,
    Harvard university, 1989.
             and Lawrence summers, "Can inter-Industry Wage
    Differentials Justify strategic wage Policy?," N.B.E.R.
relative
 wage
                  S




                       relative   employ.

           Figure 1.
                              table      1.

      Esti.ated Log Hourly wage Rates by Education.
      Potential Experience, and Sex, 1979 end 1987
                                                       12                                14                         16
  Education:         8
                                                                      ch        79       87       cli      79       87       cli
        X     79           07      cli          79           87
                                              1.702         1.958     .256    1.810    2.136   .326      1.968    2.407     .439
        S   1.475        1.641     .166
                                              (.005)        (.005)   (.007)   (.009)   (.009) (.0131     (.000)   (.009)   (.012)
            (.020)       (.024)   (.031)
            3332          2303                11230         9515               6122     5317              6802     6347

                                   .206       1,999         2.296     .297    2.109    2.455   .346      2.286    2.680     .394
      15    1.767        1.973
                                  (.032)      (.008)        (.008)   (.011)   (.012)   (.009) (.015)     (.012)   (.008)   (.014)
            (.022)       (.023)
                          2718                 8036          9860              4371     5651              5153     7651
Hen         2967
                         2.110   .203         2.063         2.436     .373    2.173    2.615   .442      2.390    2.813     .423
      25    1.027
            (.018,       (.024) (.030)        (.010)        (.008)   (.012)   (.018)   (.0141 (.023),    1.014)   (.012)   (.018)
            3430          2227                 5753          6656              2275     3198              3114     4025

                         2.235   .340         2.080         2,467     .379    2.201    2.601   .406      2.359    2.037     .479
      35    1.895
                         (.015) (.017)        (.010)        (.009)   (.013)   (.018)   (.017) (.025)     (.011)   (.016)   (.023)
            (.008)                                                                                        2129     2518
             7667         4689                 7310          6453              2203     2252


                                              1.449         1.811   .362      1.583    2.007     .424    1.749    2.267     .518
        5   1.220        1.512     .292
                                  (.039)      (.006)        (.001) (.009)     (.010)   (.000)   (.013)   (.011)   (.009)   (.014)
            (.025)       (.030)                                                                           5228     6311
             1734         1304                10042          8851              5454     6152

                                   .334       1.575         2.024   .449      1.736    2.241     .505    2.877    2.386     .509
      15    1.309        1.643
                                  (.030)      (.009)        (.000) (.012)     (.015)   (.010)   (.018)   (.018)   (.010)   (.021)
            (.020)       (.022)
                          1133                 7140          8946              2800     5113              2438     5412
wonen        1854

                         1.732     .362       1.600         2.043     .443    1.708    2.255      547    1.045    2.349     .504
      25    1.370
            (.020)       (.022)   (.020)      (.011)        (.009)   (.014)   (.020)   (.014)   (.024)   (.021)   (.017)   (.027)
                                               5518          7571              1123     3126              1595     2735
             2231         1176

                                   .351       1.612         2.070     .466    1.710    2.219     .501    1.844    2.356     .512
      35    1.401        1.758
                                              (.011)        (.020)   (.015)   (.021)   (.019)   (.020)   (.029)   (.026)   (.039)
            (.017)       (.020k   (.026)
                                               6952          7009              1138     2089              1113     1319
             4264         2919
                                   Table 2.
   E•ployaent Distributions by Industry by Education
                  and Sex, 1979 and 1987

                                                 Hen                                                           women
Iducation;              €12                 12          13—fl             16+           '12               12           13—15          16+

Industry           79         87       79     87       79     87     79     .87    79         87    79     87      79      87    79         87

1. const.        .145   .177         .115   .129   .081     .082   .030   .031    .006   .009      .013   .014    .012   .014   .005   .006
2. d.q./.nq.     .273   .217         .248   .201   .200     .170   .153   .145    .170   .142      .116   .093    .072   .065   .026   .044
3. nondur.       .141   .126         .123   .113   .097     .078   .086   .077    .229   .194      .098   .091    .061   .051   .036   .041
4. transp.       .077   .067         .069   .065   .062     .059   .026   .029    .012   .012      .022   .020    .026   .024   .013   .015
5. utile.        .029   .025         .052   .047   .052     .053   .031   .042    .008   .006      .035   .027    .031   .027   .017   .020
6. whole.        .042   .052         .058   .059   .065     .061   .050   .054    .016   .022      .031   .031    .031   .026   .015   .021
7. retail        .120   .147         .135   .151   .143     .155   .064   .070    .215   .239      .204   .220    .150   .154   .063   .065
8. FIR!          .019   .020         .02S   .031   .059     .057   .084   .099    .031   .028      .116   .116    .118   .132   .062   .086
9. bus. s.       .041   .055         .037   .056   .036     .056   .032   .057    .023   .046      .028   .043    .029   .050   .023   .047
10. pen. s.      .012   .017         .011   .017   .013     .020   .007   .009    .055   .064      .032   .040    .020   .027   .007   .010
11. enter.       .008   .012         .007   .009   .013     .012   .007   .010    .008   .009      .007   .007    .012   .011   .008   .009
12. medic.       .005   .007         .004   .006   .009     .009   .018   .018    .057   .065      .056   .067    .034   .084   .050   .054
13. h.p.         .013   .011         .013   .014   .021     .022   .035   .035    .063   .048      .070   .058    .132   .113   .099   .111
14. w.&r.        .005   .006         .004   .007   .008     .011   .037   .031    .019   .031      .019   .028    .026   .037   .039   .047
15. ethic.   .   .025   .025         .018   .021   .023     .026   .186   .138           .054      .070   .061    .091   .072   .45)   .318
                                                                                  .061
16. prof. a.     .005   .006         .009   .009   .021     .021   .055   .006    .008   .010      .027   .026    .041   .042   .035   .046
17. pub.ad.      .037   .026         .074   .065   .098     .106   .099   .097    .019   .021      .058   .059    .065   .072   .050   .061
                     Table 3.

  Changes in Grouped Relative Wages by Education,
    Experience, and sex and Their Determinants

                                                industry
             d(ln Vi) d(ln N) demand change    comp. wages
  Group        (i}    (ii)     (iii) (iv)       (v)    (vi)

E<12, XclO    .000      .000     .000   .000   .000   .000

   E=12       .081      .368     .003   .025   .002   .007

 12<Ec16      .140      .542    —.020   .037   .005   .013

   E16        .242      .755    —.096   .036   .028   .027

              .054      .372    —.032 —.019    .008   .004

ESl2,20SX29 .102        .314    —.042 —.021    .013   .005

 El2,X)29     .114      .078    —.018 —.047    .014   .006

  Women       .097      .147     .003   .057   .000   .009

(i): Estimated coefficients of regression of 79—87 change in
log estimated wage for 32 demographic groups (col. (i) of
Table 5) on dummy variables for E = 12, 14, and 16, dummy
variables for x    15, 25, and 35 interacted with a dummy
variable for E < 16, and a dummy variable for women.
(ii): Regression coefficients for group employment change
(col. (ii) of table 5) on dummy variables.
(lii): Regression coefficients for demand change index of
group (col (iii) of Table 5) on dummy variables.
 (lvi: Regression coefficients for alternative demand change
index (col (v) of Table 5) on dummy variables.
 (v): Regression coefficients of industry composition effects
 (col (vi) of Table 5) on industry dummy variables.
 (vi): Reduction in estimated coefficients on dummy variables
in regression of change in log wages of 544
education/experience/sex/industry groups due to addition of
 16 industry dummy variables.
                        Table 4.

  Estimated Industry Demand Change Effects (d(ln xfl)
    and Wage Change Effects Relative to Construction
                 Demand     Emp.       Wage Change
                 Change    Change   without      with
                  (i)       (ii}     (iii)       (iv)

 1. Construct. .000 -      .000 .000    -     .000
 2. Dur./Mng. —.313(.036) —.224 .053L016)     .019(.0l1)
 3. Nondur.   -.235(.039) —.168 .050(.017)    ,006(.012)
 4. Transp.   -.203(.048) —.111 .004(.021)   —.028(.016)
 5. Utils.    —.222(.057) —.028 .117(.024)    .068(.017)
 6. Whole.    —.071(.048) .051 .051(.023)     .006(,015)
 7. Retail     .018(.038) .073 .041(.016)    —.0121.011)
 8. FIRE      —.033(.044) .171 .152(.020)     .066(.014)
 9. Bus. Serv. .360(.053) .477 .058(.025)     .015(.017)
10. Pers. $erv .175(.175) .245 .038(.023)    —.025(.021)
11. Entertain. .008(,090) .141 .071(.04l)     .029(.028)
12. Medical   —.021(.055) .201 .l35(.026)     .OO5(.018)
13. Hospitals —.239(.048) .034 .171(.022)     .079(.016)
14. Welf./Rel. .050(.067) .340 .080(.031)    -.020(.021)
15. Educat.   —.437(.043) —.066 .185(.019)    .053(.013)
16. Prof. Ser.—.039(.060) .187 .139(.027)     .058(.019)
17. Pub. Ad. —.185(.044) .046 .162(.021)      .051(.013)
(1): Estimated coefficients of regression of 79-87 change in
log employment for 32 education/experience/sex groups in 17
industries on 1979 employment weights according to (11) in
text (standard errors in parentheses).
(ii): 79—87 change in. log employment by industry relative to
construction.
(iii): Estimated coefficients of regression of 79—87 change
in log wages for 544 education/experience/sex/industry groups
on industry dummy variables.
(iv): Estimated coefficients on industry dummy variables in
regression as in (iii) with addition of duiminy variables on
education, experience, and sex described in Table 3.
                .
                IS
                1
                a
                4.
                Mis
                 •        .4 UI 0 a 0 UI            UI UI — OP. N N N S -. UI Si —       UI C is C N NW SiN N            Si UI — N

                 C 0-40 000000
                 SC)
                flu—.
                IS
                 a.
                 04
                 a'.
                 3 P. UI Si UI UI.4 i—on a 0
                                ..         i a UI a is awn  w Ui 01— UI UI P. eN — UI
                                                                                      e                                       UI UI
                                             UI a P. 0 0 UI0P4 Si UI .4 C r- UI — UI
                        C — Si UI Si 0 W UI 4. 0 UI Si P.
                                                                                                                         UI UI .
                 %0.I000_000_000000_b00"00".'00_000_is
                 60)
                 U            —
                    So
                 0C
                    N

                        a
                    as  5-4

                                                                                                                          SI 510'a
                          N — a n 0 UI      P. a e aC• Si                                is r a N a Si e N —
                     a. —,ooooooo0O0099C00090000!0.00.0.  a UI P. UI 0
                                       onaoo00000N..0is0000001OOOO
                    3ciii
                        -4
                                                         Ii II            1141111 4(I II III
                45 a—ca — a • iso UIisSi UI UIW P.s SiisO UI N UI P. n'-0'- N UI P. P.                                                                        a
                1) .)nn_OSiSinOP.SiNP.UInis0P.SiN01isSi001N4flO                                                                                               a
                                       Ill
                                                                                                                                               •
     C              S4...00000000000000000000000000000000                                                                                    P.          UI I
                                                                                                                                                             4'-I —
                                                                                                                                             UiUI
     a          a                                   111111(4 11144                                          I         II            I
                                                                                                                                                         -a
                                                                                                                                                          P.
     S                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                             CU,
     a
     S                                                                                                                                  O
                                                                                                                                        o Isis
                                                                                                                                          o             ——        .4
                N t._SiI.,SiaNlaNenSiNn UINP..IN.4NUIUISi NaaNnUI44eSi1fl
             aacoSiSinNisP.eeisaSi.nOUIa_NP.UIisisi-UIisisP.UIN
      -a V0 ),40...0                                                   V aa—                                                                       a . —— S   Si
                                                                                                                                                                   —
                            isisois0000is00000001000
     45
     Ca   U Si
             1.'
     .44 5a a.
                 •11111111111111111111111111111111 Vo . MO. S-S
                                                                a—&O
                                                                             —.
                                                                             0                                                               ,s,
                                                                                                                                             C0 U
                                                                                                                                        • • a &'
     .4,
     '.5 0                                                       .44,6 •V I• a
                                                                                                                                        ('as I-iUIfl ca
     04.'

     • a
     aaa
                        — — Si UIUI 01* N N 00 01 0 Si OUI Sis.N P. UIa P.
                        -1.4           0is0 a
                                     In UI—Si UI i UI 0 Si
                                                             —
                                                                           Sit n UI Si W . UI
                                                                                an
                                                                         0.. 0144010en• 51W 01 — a
                                                                                  is
                                                                                                   * Si is
                                                                                       is is is N is is N
                                                                                                                     —a                 •a•    CO .4
                                                                                                                                        UI—il.'>.
                                                                                                                                              4.IC—
                                                                                                                                        pasac ia) —Ca
                                                                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                                                                      lSiSi        4!


     ac
     C7     C
                                       iiiiIiIlIIII 111(1111111111111111                                                                UI UIa c-I —-4 Si
                                                                                                                                        cace' isa).
                                                                                                                                        _ocg     aIs
     4 U                                                                                                                                  6M0
                                                                                                                                        vsu    a a a>
                                                                                                                                               aLSI               -0
    SC
 • tea
    0 43
UI 4—C
• )aa
—
a ——
      c.s
    006
                         -S
                         3—UI Siisisa aI Si
                                  1.1 Si — a
                         0.441 NisCON N 01 C is 01 N
                                       I'll
                                                           UI N Si is P. p-i a. N a UI an a P. UI N P. C Si Si UI UI C no
                                                    a 0 UI UI 01W — UI UI N ai Si SiN I' a Si NO a N is
                                                                          UI piO is N isisisON P. N
                                                                                                           UI 01 UI o a—
                                                                                                        UI UI UI UI OisN
                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                                                        a—  a
                                                                                                                                         -'ca
                                                                                                                                        ia'.ae:v     "
                                                                                                                                        al t)CIi.'V Q6
                                                                                                                                        cac Q&lC 00-
                                                                                                                                                     ac>.o
                                                                                                                                                 .CJ.4a1J
                                                                                                                                        a ov—in c—'— 0
                                                                                                                                              fl.4.4O
                                                                                                                                        • u'.434        Uat
                                                                                                                                                                   —

(.
      SI
     544X
     taN                 a
                         3Si                                      0.465.15.5 UI 00.4
                                                                  —.O   auca).a1
                                       Si Si UI Si P. CC 0101 N NO UI Si UI NW a               *
                                                                                            UI UI UI N N i-Si is Si is N
                                                                                                                                                   Q5045fl45
     00                           ..   Si a'   N N OUIO Si i- N           C P.O P. UI Si N 01.00 'U 500 UI Sin is
                                                                   aas—-.4'
                          a_isNn.N..nnNnW_neNN4UInCUIUI01eUIisU5- a.a'fli—.flaMa a
                                                                              VP—
                         .4                                                        —                                                    5kV              3US'Si
                         V
                                                                               UI         UI           UI           Si         UI       a.
                                                                                                                                        C0.4-4 0.4—P. a—C>
                                                                                                                                        sac 4.Iasaa—
                                                                                                                                              •a.4i-a'O•
                              •
                                                                                                                                              .'.-aali>.a
                                               UI          UI        UI
     CCV                      U isNisèNis Sflis#isN.1 4 isNiSSisNis tisNis •isNri 4
     ca.                   a _isIeis.4ISiUI..ISiisis.Si.-eISi01islSi04*isisIa
                                                                          0.,                                                           J'Oa
                                                                                                                                           isiso —P.    0U
     2   -                'O    IflV nisY n—iv
                          II V is     —     is
                                                  NisS
                                                   is
                                                         nisy
                                                         —
                                                              nisy
                                                              is
                                                                    nisw
                                                                     is   is                                                             .).aQ4a
                                                                                                                                           • u as
                                                                                                                                                S 55500 o.a
                                                                                                                                                              45501
     45.
     6S
     a.
     043                      •
                              a        a            Ut
                                                    is          UI
                                                                N         +         UI
                                                                                               UI
                                                                                               is
                                                                                                            UI
                                                                                                            N              4
                                                                                                                                        aasaa
                                                                                                                                        .-.a
                                                                                                                                        -s Si
                                                                                                                                        —sac     sea isa.
                                                                                                                                                   so.  as
                                                                                                                                               '.sa0'.a'C
                          a                          '          I         0         I
                                                                                    0          0is I
                                                                                                            0   I          0
                                                                                                                           N             a
                                                                                                                                        vs  ai.iaaUII.   Is--
     as                   N
                                       i
                                       0            0is         0
                                                                N
                                                                          01
                                                                                                            N                           a'.--UISI a 4,..IJ.
     a.—                                                                                               C
                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                                        co—a.-. -a.—.a.4
                                                                                                       a                                — a—ac
                                                                                                                                        .450)   )—..to'0-
                                                           •3
                                                           C
                                                                                                       C
                                                                                                       3                                — a—S C >1. c) c
                         Table 6.

 Relative Annual Rates of Growth of Employment by
Aggregated Industries: Selected Postwar Intervals
              47—55        55—70         70—79    79—87
 Construct.       .014    —.010          .004    —.001
 Dur./Mng.        .003    -.013      —.010       —.033
 Nondur.      -   .006    —   .015   -   .025    —.022
 Tran.&P.U.   -.010       -.017      -.011       —.010
 Wholesale        .017    —.005          .008    —.003
 Retail           .008     .003          .007     .009
 FIRE             .024        .009       .006     .019
 Services         .017        .019       .016     .027
 Govt.            .020        .018       .000    —.008
