                        NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 MACROECONOMIC POPULISM IN LATIN AMERICA




                            Rudiger   Dornbusch

                            Sebastian Edwards




                          Working Paper No. 2986




                  NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  May 1989




This paper was presented at the second meeting of IASE, Bogota, Colombia,
March 30 - April 1, 1989. The authors are indebted to conference
participants, Eliana Cardoso, Vittoria Corbo. Javier Iguiez, Eduardo Engel,
Jose de Gregorio, Caterina Nelson, Eva Paus, Andres Solimano and Andrew
Zimbalist for helpful suggestions. The research reported here is part of a
project supported by the World Sank. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                           NBER Working Paper #2986
                                           May 1989


                THE MACROECONOMICS OF POPULISM IN LATIN AMERICA


                                    AZ S TRACT




Macroeconomic populism is an approach to economics that emphasizes growth

and income distribution and deemphasizes the risks of inflation and deficit

finance, external constraints and the reaction of economic agents to

aggressive non-market policies. The purpose of our paper is to show that

policy experiences in different countries and periods share conunon features,

from the initial conditions, the motivation for policies, the argument that

the country's conditions are different, to the ultimate collapse. Our

purpose in setting Out these experiences, those of Chile under Allende and

of Peru under Garcia, is not a righteous assertion of conservative

economics, but rather a warning that populist policies do ultimately fail;

and when they fail it is always at a frightening cost to the very groups who

were supposed to be favored. Our central thesis is that the macroeconomics

of various experiences is very much the same, even if the politics differed

greatly.




 Rudiger Dornbusch                        Sebastian Edwards
 Department of Economics                  Department of Economics
 M.I.T. E52-357                           University of California
 Cambridge, MA 02139                      Bunch Hall, Room 8283
                                          405 Hilgard Avenue
                                          Los Angeles, CA 90024
        THE MACROECONOMICS OF POPULISM IN LATIN AMERICA'




         This paper addresses the macroeconomics of populism in Latin

America. We mean by "populism" an approach to economics that emphasizes

growth and income redistribution and deeniphasizes the risks of inflation

and deficit finance, external constraints and the reaction of economic

agents to aggressive non-market policies. The purpose of our paper is to

show that policy experiences in different countries and periods share

common features, from the initial conditions, the motivation for policies,

the argument that the country's conditions are different, to the ultimate

collapse. Our purpose in setting out these experiences, those of Chile

under Allende and of Peru under Garcia, is not a righteous assertion of

conservative economics, but rather a warning that populist policies do

ultimately fail; and when they fail it is always at a frightening coSt to

the very groups who were supposed to be favored. A central thesis we

advance is that the macroeconomics of various experiences is very much the

same, even if the politics differed greatly.

          We are struck by the strong similarities in Chile, Peru, and in

other episodes not developed in detail here of the way policy makers

viewed the objective conditions of their economy, how they proposed that
                                        2



strongly expansionary policies should and could be carried out, and how

they rationalized that constraints could be dealt with.2 And, of course,

we are impressed by the fact that In the end, foreign exchange constraints

and extreme inflation forced a program of violent real wage Cuts that

ended in massive political instability, coups and violence. There is no

doubt in our mind about the sincerity of the policy makers who embark on

these programs, and we share their conviction that income distribution is

unacceptably unequal. The very sincerity of these policy makers convinces

us of the   usefulness,   and indeed the necessity of laying Out exactly how

and why the programs do go wrong.

            The combination of external influences (debt crises,economic

blockades etc.), domestic policies (socialization of firms, bank

nationalization, etc.) and macroeconomic policies bring about an

unsustainable economy where inflation is out of control, and the foreign

exchange constraints force realism on policy makers. Accounts of these

experiences by sympathizers often emphasize politics and, especially,

external factors as central to the demise. Our purpose is not to belittle

these factors. There is no question in our mind that external

destabilization can be an important part of the unravelling of an economic

program. ut we want to emphasize that the extreme vulnerability that

makes destabilization possible is, by and large, the result of

unsustainable policies. This is one more reason to focus sharply on the

macroeconomics of populist programs.


2See Sachs (1989) and Dornbusch (1988b) for this same theme.
                                    3



         In this paper, we analyze the most important historical features

of populist economic programs. We do this by contrasting the experiences

of Chile during Allende's Unidad Popular (1970-1973) and Peru under Alan

Garcia. It is clear that the Unidad Popular of 1970-73 experience in

Chile had political goals that were very different from the experience in

Peru. Even so, we want to emphasize that the political mobilization

strategy had strongly similar elements. Moreover, we will show that there

are remarkable similarities between the Allende experience and that of

Alan Garcia's Peru. In fact, we believe that an important cause of the

Peruvian economic catastrophe was that the architects of the program, and

their economic advisors, failed to learn the lessons of recent Latin

American history and, in particular, of Allende's Chile.




I. THE POPULIST PARADIGM

          Populism has traditionally been a fuzzy concept. In fact, for

many years political scientists have struggled to provide a meaningful and

precise definition. Drake (1982) emphasizes three elements of a tentative

definition: populism uses "political mobilization, recurrent rhetoric and

symbols designed to inspire the people", it draws on a heterogeneous

coalition aimed primarily at the working class, but including and led by

significant sectors from the middle and upper strata and, third, populism

"has conoted a reformist set of policies tailored to promote development

without explosive class conflict. He notes (Drake (1982,p.2l8)
                                     4




     "[The programsi normally respond to the problems of underdevelopment
     by expanding state activism to incorporate the workers in a process
     of accelerated industrialization through ameliorative redistributive
     measures."


          Conniff (1982,p.S) has argued that "populist programs

frequently overlapped with those of socialism". We emphasize that the

redistributive objectives are a central part of the paradigm. Whether

they are motivated by a strategy of massive social reform is

consequential, but is not central to our discussion.

         We have asserted above that many populist economic programs

exhibit strong similarities. In this section, we set out in paradigmatic

fashion what we see as the critical common factors. In later sections we

document these for the experiences of Chile and Peru.3

         Seers (1964) summarized the great difficulty in achieving

consensus in the debate between "monetarists" and "structuralists." The

names have changed, but the discussion between those who emphasize the

limited scope for financial experiments and others who see the need for

social progress and are impatient about the means, who believe the special

conditions of their country yields a fruitful yet unexploited strategy for

social progress continues. As Seers (l964,p.89) states:


     "This is not just a technical issue in economic theory. At the hearty
     of the controversy between "monetarists" and "structuralists" are two
     different ways of looking at economic development, in fact two


31n a larger project we expect to look at a significant number of experience
Latin America to get a sharper picture of the phases and ultimate breakdown
programs.
                                    5



    completely different attitudes toward the nature of social change,
    two different sets of value judgments about the purposes of economic
    activity and the ends of economic policy, and two incompatible views
    on what is politically possible."


         The populist paradigm is typically a reaction against a

"monetarist" experience. The phases of the experience are the following:



         • Initial Conditions. The country has experienced slow growth,

stagnation or outright depression as a result of previous stabilization

attempts. The experience, typically under an IMF program, has reduced

growth and living standards. Serious economic inequality provides

economic and political appeal for a radically different economic program.

The receding stabilization will have improved the budget and the external

balance sufficiently to provide the room for, though perhaps not the

wisdom of, a highly expansionary program.



         • No Constraints: Policy makers explicitly reject the

conservative paradigm. Idle capacity is seen as providing the leeway for

expansion. Existing reserves and the ability to ration foreign exchange

provide room for expansion without the risk of running into external

constraints. The risks of deficit finance emphasized in traditional

thinking are portrayed as exaggerated or altogether unfounded. Expansion

is not inflationary (if there is no devaluation), because spare capacity

and decreasing long run Costs contain cost pressures and; there is room to

squeeze profit margins by price controls.
                                       6




              The Policy Prescription. Populist programs emphasize three

elements: reactivation, redistribution of income and restructuring of the

economy. The common thread here is "reactivation with redistribution". The

recommended policy is a redistribution of income, typically by large real

wage increases. Inflation notwithstanding, devaluation is rejected

because of the inflationary impact and because it reduces living

standards. The economy is to be restructured to save on foreign exchange

and support higher levels of real wages and higher growth.



             • Phase I: In the first phase, the policy makers are fully

vindicated in their diagnosis and prescription: growth of output, real

wages and employment are high, and the macroeconomic policies are nothing

short of successful. Controls assure that inflation is not a problem, and

shortages are alleviated by imports. The run-down of inventories and the

availability of imports (financed by reserve decumulation or suspension of

external payments) accommodates the demand expansion with little impact on

inflation.




             • Phase II: The economy runs into bottlenecks, partly as a

result of a strong expansion in demand for domestic goods, and partly

because of a growing lack of foreign exchange. Whereas inventory

decumulation was an essential feature of the first phase, the low levels

of inventories and inventory building are now a source of problems. Price
                                     7




realignments and devaluation, exchange control, or protection become

necessary. Inflation increases significantly, but wages keep up. The

budget deficit worsens tremendously as a result of pervasive subsidies on

wage goods and foreign exchange.



         • Phase III: Pervasive shortages, extreme acceleration of

inflation, and an obvious foreign exchange gap lead to capital flight and

demonetization of the economy. The budget deficit deteriorates violently

because of a steep decline in tax collection and increasing subsidy costs.

The government attempts to stabilize by cutting subsidies and by a real

depreciation. Real wages fall massively, and politics become unstable. It

becomes clear that the government has lost.



          • Phase IV: Orthodox stabilization takes over under a new

government. An IMF program will be enacted; and, when everything is said

 and done, the real wage will have declined massively, to a level

 significantly lower than when the whole episode began! Moreover, that

 decline will be very persistent, because the politics and economics of the

 experience will have depressed investment and promoted capital flight. The

 extremity of real wage declines is due to a simple fact: capital is mobile

 across borders, but labor is not.

          We now turn to the experience of Peru and Chile to study in more

 detail the policy makers' diagnosis and the actual events. We start with

 the Chilean case, because the facts of the entire experience can be seen.

 The results suggest what to look for in the Peruvian experience.
                                     8




II. ECONOMIC   POLICIES IN ALLENDES CHILE

         In September of 1970, after a hard-fought election, Salvador

Allende, the socialist candidate of the Unidad Popular (UP), was elected

President of Chile. For Chile, this was the beginning of a unique

political and economic experience that continues to be analyzed and

discussed today.4 The Unidad Popular was a political coalition of left

and center-left parties dominated by the Socialist and Communist parties,

both of which had a Marxist-Leninist ideology and aspired, in the long

run, to construct an orthodox socialist type society. The smaller parties

comprising the coalition were of Christian democrat, middle class

extraction. Although they backed profound structural changes, they did

not subscribe to the Leninist view of the world.5

          Both communists and socialists initially recognized the

inulticlass hature of the Unidad Popular and considered the alliance and

the politics that sustained it to be a tactical intermediate step that

would help set the basis for the transition to socialism.6 Vuscovic

(l973,p.5O) noted:

    "..economic policy is subordinate, in its content, shape and form, to
    the political need for increasing the Popular Unity's support. .. .The
    urgent need to achieve rapid recovery of the economy, and to extend
    the benefits to the mass of the working population, cannot be
    undertaken in isolation from the structural changes; they are all
    necessarily interdependent. It is not possible to make deeper changes


See Oppenheim (1989) for a recent review of the literature.
 See Stallings (1978) and de Vlyder (1974) for a discussion of politics and
conomics in Chile.
 See the discussion in Zammit (1973).
                                        9




    without broadening the Government's political support, and economic
    reactivation and income redistribution will provide an impulse to
    these fundamental changes."



         The UP program called for deep institutional and economic

reforms, including the replacement of the bicameral congress by a unique

legislative body --   the "People's Assembly", and the nationalization of
the mining, banking and, agricultural sectors and a substantial nuxnber of

large manufacturing firms. All of this was to be accomplished within the

existing legal framework. The program called for a democratic "Chilean

road to socialism."

          The UP program, and most of the technical literature written by

the UP economists, characterized the pre-1970 economy as "monopolistic"

and "dependent."This diagnosis was strongly influenced by the

structuralist thought developed in the United Nations Economic Commission

for Latin America (CEPAL) during the l960s. Many of the top officials in

the administration were, in fact, CEPAL staff (on leave). It was argued

by the UP program, and in the related literature, that the most serious

problems faced by the country were unequal income distribution and chronic

inflation and unemployment. It was also argued that the structure of

internal demand, the semipermanent crisis in the external sector and the

low level of capital accumulation conspired to prevent a sufficiently high

rate of growth. It was then postulated that the implementation of deep

institutional reforms - -   or   "revolutionary reforms" according to the

jargon of that time - -   plus   improvement in the distribution of income
                                      10



would not only constitute an important step towards the construction of

socialism, but would also generate a fast pace of growth for the economy.

            Upon taking power in 1970. the Unidad Popular faced a somewhat

stagnated economy with a rapidly increasing rate of inflation. Between

1967 and 1970, real GDP per capita grew only at 1.2% --    significantly
below the Latin American average --   while   urban unemployment crept up to

9.2% in 1970. Inflation, on the other hand, had steadily increased during

the last few years of the Frei administration, reaching 35% in 1970. On

the positive side, the external sector was in good shape; the balance of

payments had experienced substantial surpluses during all but one of the

Frei years. As a result of this, when Dr. Allende became president, the

central bank had a significant stock of international reserves of

approximately $400 million U.S. or half a year of imports.



111.1 The Short Run Economic Prpzram

            The most important short run economic objective of the UP

included:

            • initiating, at a rapid speed, a whole range of structural

economic transformations, including the nationalization program;

            • raising real wages, especially for the lower classes;

            • reducing inflation;

            • increasing the rate of output growth;

            • increasing consumption, especially among   the   poorer groups and

            • reducing the economy's dependence on the rest of the world.
                                            11



            The first objective - -   the   nationalization program - - was to be

achieved by a combination of new legislation, requisitions, and stock

purchases from small shareholders. The other goals --         output   and

consumption growth, with rising salaries and declining inflation - -         were

to be accomplished by a macroeconomic policy characterized by an increase

in aggregate demand, mainly generated by higher government expenditures,

accompanied by income redistribution measures and severe administrative

controls over prices.

            This macroeconomic program followed the structuralist tradition

and was based on a number of key assumptions. First, it was believed that

there was ample excess capacity in the manufacturing sector. Second, it

was thought that this low rate of capacity utilization was closely related

to the existing pattern of consumption and income distribution. Third, it

was assumed that there was a dualistic manufacturing sector, where firms

producing "luxury" goods had excessively high capital/labor ratios.

Fourth, inflation was considered to be a reflection of the economic

structure, not of financial or monetary pressures. In what follows, we

will analyze these four key assumptions in some detail.

The assumption of significant excess capacity in the manufacturing sector

was at the center of the short run macroeconomic program and provided the

 intellectual base for the belief that large fiscal deficits would not

necessarily be inflationary. This view is clearly captured in the

 following statement made by Americo Zorrilla, Allende's first Minister of

 Finance:
           "The subutilization of installed capacity is another feature of
      the current economic situation ... In 1969 it was possible to
                                       12



    increase production, due to subutilization, by more than 30 percent
         [A]ccording to recent studies ... unutilized capacity has
    reached, in the last few years, 61 percent in the cloth industry, 50
    percent in the baking industry ... 74 percent in the shoe industry,
    etc.          (As reproduced in Garcia, 1972, p. 72)


         An important corollary of the unutilized capacity hypothesis was

that firms in many sectors faced decreasing average costs so that, under

proper administrative price controls, demand increases would not generate

inflationary pressure. Moreover, to the extent that many of the larger

firms were indeed nationalized, as called for by the UP program, output

could be greatly increased even with price reductions. In a docuiuent

prepared by the Planning Office (ODEPLAN) in 1971, it was stated that by

"combining the increase in production derived from a higher use installed

capacity ...   the former monopolies will be able to absorb, without

problems, the required wage increases, while maintaining, or even

reducing, prices and still generating the same surplus".

         The   lack   of "full" utilization was, in turn, attributed to two

fundamental factors: The previously mentioned monopolistic nature of the

manufacturing industry and, the structure of income distribution.

According to this interpretation, the unequal income distribution resulted

in a highly diversified pattern of consumption. Vuskovic stated this view

as follows:

         "(There is) ... an obvious association between income
    distribution and the composition of demand and, consequently, the
    structure of production ... Given current income distribution . .. the
    effective market is limited to higher income groups ..    . [I]t
                                                                 is a
    restricted ... and highly diversified demand ... (A] broad range of
    industries producing nonessential consumption goods operate an
    insufficient scale ...         (Vuskovic, 1970)
                                   13




         Based on this diagnosis, it was thought that if income was

redistributed towards the poorer groups through wage increases and prices

were properly controlled, there would be a significant expansion of demand

and output. According to Sergio Sitar, former Minister of Mining in the

Allende government,

     "[I]n order to expand demand there would be a hike in white and blue
     collar workers salaries, and there would be an increase in government
     expenditure on education, health, housing and public works.'
     (Sitar, 1979, p. 78)


And with respect to the price effects of these measures, he said:

        "Since there was a substantial margin for expanding supply, it was
     concluded that the increase in demand would not provoke an
     acceleration of inflation. With respect to costs, severe price
     controls were supposed to ensure that the higher wages would not be
     passed on to prices ... Since sales were supposed to grow
     substantially, global profits in each firm would be affected only
     slightly, even though the per unit profit would decline .
                                              (Sitar, 1979, p. 79)

          An important component of this short term macroeconomic program

was the existence of substantial international reserves. It was expected

that because of these reserves, the expansion of demand would not run into

foreign-exchange related bottlenecks. Moreover, the program expected that

 the nationalization of the large copper mines plus planned increases in

copper production would allow the central bank to maintain a relatively

high level of international reserves.

          In spite of the fundamental role assigned to increasing capacity

utilization, the UP economic team was aware that investment was required
                                    14



to sustain the expansion in the medium to long run. Here, however, the

program was based on two important assumptions.   The first was that with

the new structure of demand, lower investment would be required to achieve

significant growth. This was based on the belief that until 1970 the

industrial structure had emphasized on the production of "luxury"   goods,
                                                                         that
which required excessively high capital/labor ratios. It was argued

basic consumption goods, however, had a much lower capital/output

requirement. A very convenient side effect of this change   in the demand

structure was that employment could grow very fast. VuskoviC's

fundamental article captures this view quite vividly:

     [Tihe new dynamic sectors ... will, in general, be characterized by
     lower capital requirements and greater capacity to absorb labor;
     consequently, a rapid increase in savings and capital formation will
     cease to be a requisite to accelerate the global rate of growth .
     (Vuskovic, 1970, p. 58)

          Regarding inflation, the UP program followed the structuralist

approach, which emphasized rigidities, bottlenecks, and the role    of

monopolistic pricing and played down the role of fiscal pressures and

money creation.7 In accordance with this position, the UP paid very

little attention to the financial sector when implementing its short run

program. In fact, in his memoirs, the former Allende Minister and Vice

President Clodomiro Almeyda relates how in the first meeting of the

economic team after the elections the CEPAL-oriented technocrats

expressly, and convincingly it would seem, argued that monetary and


7See Sunkel (1960) for a discussion of structuralist inflation theory. See, too,
Baer and Kersternetzky (1964).
                                    15



financial management did not deserve too much attention.8 Alfonso

Inostroza, the President of the Central Bank, stated in early 1971 that

the main objective of the monetary policy was to

     "transform it into a key instrument ... to achieve the complete
    mobilization of productive resources, and their allocation to those
    areas that the government gives priority to ..


         The final component of the short run program referred to

reducing Chile's external vulnerability. The UP basic program stated that

a priority of the new government would be to "execute a foreign trade

policy tending to expand and diversify our exports ..."   (Unidad Popular

1969, p. 24). What is interesting, however, is that this objective was to

be achieved without providing any price incentives. Quite the contrary,

the UP economists thought that changes in the exchange rate had very

little, if any, effects on exports or imports. In fact, in the same

paragraph where the program called for expanding and diversifying exports

it was stated that an important goal of the policy was to "avoid the

scandalous devaluations of [the) ...     currency" (p. 24). In line with this
belief, one of the first measures undertaken by the Allende administration

was to eliminate the system of crawling peg that had been adopted,    with

great success, by the Frei administration. It was expected, then, that

expansion of exports would be the result of administrative decisions

geared towards centralizing foreign trade activities.10


 8See, for example, the 1971 ClAP Report reproduced in Panorama EconomiCO, No.260
 Feb. -March 1971, p.36.
 9See Inostroza (l97l,p.8).
 10See Plan Anual 1971 (Odeplan, 1971).
                                    16



         An important, indeed crucial, objective of the economic program

was to broaden the UP's political base of support very quickly.   The UP

leaders thought that it was necessary to obtain the support of the middle

classes and, more specifically, to draw a large number of voters that had,

until then, supported the Christian Democrats into the UP in order to move

towards a socialist system. This political objective plays a significant

role in explaining the heavily populist content of the short run program

and should be kept in mind when evaluating the short term achievements of

the Allende government.

         To sum up, the short run macroeconomic program of the UP was

aimed at provoking a rapid economic recovery after years of semi-

stagnation and at generating a significant improvement in the living

conditions of the poorer groups. The main tool for achieving this was a

fast growth in government expenditures geared especially at increasing the

real incomes of the lower classes. The intellectual underpinnings of this

plan were basically given by the structuralist model that attributes a

great role to rigidities and bottlenecks and looks with great contempt at

the financial and monetary sectors. A key element of the plan was the

belief that, if channeled to the appropriate groups and if accompanied by

the right kind of administrative controls, fiscal deficits would not be

inflationary.

          Needless to say, this view of the way the economy functioned

ignored many of the key principles of traditional economic theory. This

was not only reflected by the greatly diminished role given to monetary
                                    17


policies, but also by the complete ignoring of the real exchange rate as a

key variable in determining macroeconomic equilibrium. Moreover,      the

macroeconomic view of the Unidad Popular failed to recognize that their

policies would only be able to generate a burst of economic activity that

would be unsustainable in the medium term if the transition from recovery

to sustainable growth was not handled with extraordinary circumspection.

Also, the UP technocrats greatly underestimated the role of expectations

and the capacity of the public to react to severe inflationary pressures.

gitar (1986, chapter 5) portrays very clearly the government's inability

to control events, to shift from redistribution to accumulation.
      "It turned out to be very difficult to contain the forces unleashed
     in 1971. The sequential conception of redistribution followed by
     accumulation assumed that basic political and social conduct could be
     altered and popular expectations changed virtually instantaneously.
     In the next few months (early 19723 it proved impossible to apply
     this thinking with the facility that had been hoped for."


111.2 The First Year: Raoid Growth With Reoressed Inflation

Armed with the intellectual framework analyzed above, the UP rapidly began

to implement its program in late 1970. In terms of structural reforms,

two basic measures were immediately undertaken:11 First, the Agrarian

Reform was greatly intensified with a very large number of farms being

expropriated. Second, a project for a Constitutional Amendment aimed at

nationalizing the large copper mines -   - until   then jointly owned by large

U.S. firms and the Chilean state -- was studied.12 Their reforms of the


11The agrarian reform law passed by Congress during the Frei administration provided
the necessary tool. See Alauf et al (1972).
120n June 11, 1971, Congress unanimously approved the constitutional reform that
nationalized large copper mines. See Celler and Estevez (1972), and Ffrench-DaviS
and Tironi (1974).
                       CHILE: THE REAL WAGE
                                  (Index 1970:3—100)
120


110


100


 90


 80


 70


 60


 50


 40


 30
      1967   1968   1969   1970     1971    1972       1973   1974   1975   1976   1977
                                       18



banking system and large manufacturing firms were somewhat more difficult,

because the government lacked the institutional channels for implementing

the nationalization program. Initially, this obstacle was overcome by

purchasing blocks of shares - -   especially   bank shares -   - at   very high

prices. These acquisitions were, in turn, financed with loans from the

Central Bank to the CorDoracion de Fomento de l.a Produccion (CORFO).

          These acquisitions were complemented by a process of requisition

based on an old, and until then forgotten, decree law promulgated during

the short lived Socialist Republic of 1932.

          In terms of macroeconomic policy, the government rapidly applied

measures that were consistent with its program. Salaries and wages in the

public sector were raised, on average in 1971, with wages for the lower

segments of the bureaucracy increasing relatively faster than those for

the higher echelons. Salaries in the private sector grew at approximately

the same rate. Unions used public section salary adjustments as a

benchmark in their negotiations. Figure 1 shows the gain in real wages.

Also, government expenditures were greatly boosted via the so-called

 "Special Programs for Expansion and Development." This higher expenditure

was mainly directed towards construction, farming and social security13

 and was financed with loans from the Central Bank (i.e., with money

 creation). The short run package was topped by a severe and quite

 generalized scheme of price controls.


 13The new program assigned 66% of its resources to these three sectors.
                                    19


         The expansion of demand quickly affected sales and production.

During the first and second quarters of 1971, manufacturing output

increased 6.2% and 10.6% compared to the same periods in the previous

year. Manufacturing sales grew at even faster rates: 12% during the

first quarter and 11% during the second quarter. Overall, 1971 was a good

year. Real CDP grew at 7.7 percent, average       wages increased by 17

percent, aggregate consumption grew at a real rate of 13.2 percent, and

the rate of unemployment dipped below 4 percent. Not too surprisingly,

given the behavior of real wages, there was a significant improvement   in

income distribution. In 1971 labor's share of GOP reached 61.7 percent,

almost 10 points higher than its 1970 level of 52.3 percent; and this

happened without an acceleration of inflation. What was even more

important for the UP was that the policies rapidly paid off politically.

In the municipal elections of 1971, the UP parties saw their share of the

vote climb from the 36% they had received in the 1970 presidential

election to around 50%.14

          Needless to say, all of this created a sense of euphoria in the

government. The program was working as planned. The fact that the fiscal

deficit had jumped from less than 3% of CDP in 1970 to almost 11% in 1971

did not worry the UP technocrats. Nor did they think much of the fact

that the rate of growth of the money supply had surpassed 100 percent in

annual terms in the fourth quarter of 1971, and that the rate of growth of


14The strong showing in early municipal or congressional elections was not uncommon
in Chile. In fact, the Frei government had a similar experience in 1965.
                                        20


domestic credit to the public sector was approaching 300 percent.        All of

this, in fact, was part of the plan. When evaluating the results from the

first year of Allende's government, Julio Lopez, a prominent UP economist,

stated that "the economic recovery policy was based on a significant

increase ..   . in   the government deficit. We ignored those orthodox

recommendations that look for ... budget equilibrium." And, then, he said

that it was precisely because of these policies that it was possible to

"achieve the political objective of quantitatively broadening the base of

support for the government".

          Of course, these macro policies were rapidly generating a highly

explosive situation of repressed inflation. The rapid growth of GDP in

1971 rested heavily on an almost 40% increase in the imports of

intermediate goods. As a result, the stock of international reserves

inherited by the Allende government was reduced by more than one half in

 that year alone. A steep reduction of inventories was another important

 factor contributing to the expansion of consumption.

          By the end of 1971, the mounting inflationary pressures became

 evident. The combination of the expansion in demand and price controls

 resulted in growing scarcity of some consumption goods. Production

 resporses, on the other hand, became more and more sluggish.      The supply

 problem was aggravated by a series of labor disputes in many large

 establishments that resulted in the takeover of those firms by their

 workers. In fact, this procedure became the institutionalized way in

 which the government seized a large number of firms. The government made
                                    21


use of a 1932 Decree-Law that provided that whenever a labor dispute

generated a serious disruption in supply, the authorities could take over

the firm in question.

         By the end of 1971, the government had used this channel to

expropriate more than 40 large firms. Naturally, this process disrupted

production not only in the firms that were seized but also in the rest of

the industrial sector where uncertainty was quickly mounting. Moreover,

the level of productivity in the nationalized firms began to drop rapidly.

contrary to the thinking of the architects of the UP plan, these firms

generated no surpluses but instead incurred huge losses that resulted in

additional pressures on the government's budget.



111.3 The Second Year: Failed Stabilization Pro&rams

During 1972, the macroeconomic problems continued to mount. As can be

seen in Table 1, in that year inflation reached 217% and the fiscal

deficit surpassed 13% of CD?. The rate of growth of domestic credit to the

public sector reached almost 300%, and international reserves dipped below

$77 million.
                                   22




Table 1 Chile: Main Macroeconomic Indicators

                           1970     1971       1972      1973

                            34.9      34.5       216.7        605.9
Inflationa
                             2.1       9.0        -1.2         -5.6
Growth
                            98.4     115.1      103.5         70.3
Real Wages (1970:3—100)

Gov't. Revenueb             23.7        20.4     18.2         20.2
                            26.4        31.1     31.2         44.9
Gov't. Spendin
Budget DeficitU              2.7        10.7     13.0       24.7
Money Growtha               52.9        99.3    100.9      264.4

Int'l. Reserves ($Mill.)    320         129      95         36
Trade Balance ($  Miii.     246          73    -161        -73
Black Market Premium         99         358      898          2349


a Percent of GDP b Percent, Dec. -Dec.
Sources: Yanez (1978); Banco Central de Chile; International Monetary
Fund; Edwards (1986); Edwards and Edwards (1987), Solimano (1988).


          What was even more serious was the continuous growth of the

underground economy. As more and more activities moved out of the official

economy, more and more sources of tax revenues disappeared.     In this

context, a serious vicious cycle took over. Repressed inflation encouraged

the informal economy, which in turn resulted in reduced taxes, higher

deficits, and, thus, in even higher inflation. In 1972, two

stabilization programs were implemented, and failed.

          When evaluating the causes of difficulties, the dominant view

 among UP economists was that the authorities had failed to impose

 appropriate controls in implementing the program. For example, when

 discussing the severe external crisis already evident in late 1971, Garcia

 argued that it was incorrect to attribute the loss of reserves to the
                                       23



significant real overvaluation of the escudo. He then pointed out,

matter-of-factlY, that "since the Central Bank has the power, and

administrative mechanisms, to slow down imports, it is possible to control

them [imports] without devaluing ..."       (Garcia. 1972, p. 206). And with
respect to the overall strategy, he recommended that in order to solve the

mounting disequilibrium "the State should, necessarily, increase the

degree of direct control .   . ." (Garcia   1972, p. 255).

         This dominant view was indeed the one that guided the first,

rather weak, attempt at stabilizing the economy which was launched in

February of 1972.15 This package sought to:         (a) solve the problems

derived from the growing underground economy and the related scarcity of

goods at official prices; (b) avoid an outburst of inflation; (c)

maintain, or further improve, income redistribution; and (d) solve the

serious crisis of the external sector. However, no serious measures aimed

at solving these problems were undertaken. For instance, it was argued

that it was not convenient to reduce government expenditures, the policy

of granting salary increases that exceeded inflation was maintained, and a

significant devaluation was ruled out)6

          The combination of generalized price controls and unchecked

fiscal and monetary policies acted as a major encouragement for the black


15Bitar (1986) in his insider's account of policy making tells of how this view was
opposed by a small group of technocrats who argued for a correction of the
fundamental source of the disequilibrium. But they encountered two difficulties, the
technical accuracy of their position was in doubt and the politics of major budget
    exchange rate correction was perceived to be too costly.
  In 1971 a small devaluation was followed by the institution of four separate
exchange rates.
                                   24


market economy. What made things even worse was that the government

completely lost control over wages. Unions in both nationalized and

private firms demanded increasingly higher wage adjustments.    This

produced a dilemma for the government. If it had refused to grant the

wage adjustments. it would help the macroeconomy but deeply hurt its

political constituency and objectives. Under these circumstances, the

government chose, every time, to uphold its revolutionary label.

Moreover, a number of economists argued that higher real wages could be

sustained as long as the government was able, via increased controls, to

extract additional "surplus" from the private sector.17

          y mid-1972, it became apparent that the February stabilization

program was a failure. The underground economy was now generalized.

output began to fall, open inflation reached an annual rate of 70 percent

in the second quarter, foreign exchange reserves were only $82 million,

and the black market rate was climbing at a very fast pace (see Figure 2).

From a political perspective, what made the situation particularly

difficult was that parliamentary elections were scheduled for March of

 1973. It was increasingly clear that the economic crisis was going to

work against the UP in those elections. In August of that year, and under

 the political overview of the Communists, a new stabilization program was

 launched. The Communist party favored tackling the financial

 disequilibria.


 17See Bitar (1979)
               -                        •—     —4
                   __ —   a-.,
                                a—
                                              - -   -   —   I   —   —
                   —        -           —-a                             I
           I
                                 =I -                                   -
      —                                                                     L,1
      S.
      S.
      —
      —                                                                     C)
                                                                            7:
      S
      -
      S.

      —
      —                                                                     ti
—.1   —

      —
      —                                                                     z
      —


      —

—4  —
       —
c•)    a



      —



-S 0


      —i
                                     25


         Unlike the previous plan, the cornerstone of the August program

was a massive devaluation of the escudo. The exchange rate for imports

was raised by almost 90 percent, while that for exports increased by 33

percent. It was expected that, as a result, the ever.mounting pressures

on the balance of payments would subside. The program called for two

basic measures to contain the fiscal pressures. First, price increases

for the nationalized firms were authorized. It was thought that their

losses would decline and, consequently, there would be a reduction in the

rate creation required to finance the newly formed nationalized sector.

Second, the program called for a massive increase in production as the

major way to close the gap between aggregate supply and aggregate demand.

This increase in output was expected to r be a response to Doliticat

rather than economic incentives. In fact, at that time, the Communist

Party's main slogan became "Let's   win the battle for increased
production!" The devaluation immediately affected the prices of those

goods not still subject to severe controls. This plus the authorization

of a large number of price increases resulted in a rate of price increase

of 22.7% in August and 22.2% in September.

          In spite of the action taken on the exchange rate front,   the
program was destined to fail as no change in the wage rates policy was

introduced. In the second week of August, the government announced that

it had reached an agreement with the national federation of workers

(Central Unica de Trabaladores, CUT) with respect to an across-the.board

wage adjustment to be granted on October 1st except for firms subject      to
                                       26



private bargaining. The new wage policy called for an increase in public

and private sector wages by a proportion equal to the accumulated rate of

inflation between January and September. In addition, the new policy

called for more frequent wage adjustments.11-8 In this way, by a stroke of

the pen, the effects of the devaluation were fully offset.

           In order to combat the general scarcity of goods and of food in

particular, the government tried to organize a rationing scheme, where a

certain amount of food (the so-called "popular basket") was made available

to each household through neighborhood organizations specially created for

this purpose. This rationing scheme, however, generated a massive

reaction by the opposition, who argued that Chile was being transformed

into "another Cuba". In October, 1972, the opposition parties organized a

national strike as a protest against what were considered to be erroneous

and antidemocratic government policies. The protest was particularly

directed against the governments economic and educational policies. This

strike generated significant economic costs and greatly aggravated the

situation. In fact, the strike could only be solved after President

Allende included representatives of the armed forces in his cabinet.



111.4 The Third Year: Economic Chaos and Coup

During the first quarter of 1973 chile's economic problems reached chaotic

proportions. Compared to the first quarter of 1972, inflation reached

22%; industrial output declined by almost 6%; the real exchange rate was


18Que   Pasa   No.70, August 17th, 1972,p. 14.
                                        27



even more overvalued, and foreign exchange held by the Central Bank was

barely above $40 million. The black market by now covered every single

transaction in foreign exchange. The fiscal deficit continued to climb as

a result of ever higher expenditures and of rapidly disappearing sources

of taxation. In that year, the fiscal deficit exceeded 23% of GDP!

           Once more the government faced the options of implementing a

major corrective stabilization program or of furthering the extent of

controls. And once again it opted for the latter. This decision, made in

March of 1973. sealed the fate of the government. The extent of the

economic crisis quickly alienated the middle classes; and, after March

1973, the political confrontation with the opposition became increasingly

severe. Of course, it must be remembered that, in the midst of this

polarization, the support commanded by Allende actually grew: whereas in

1970 the UP received the votes of 30% of the electorate, its share rose to

44 percent in 1973.

           The opposition, after an important victory in the parliamentary

elections of March 1973, became extremely impatient. By mid-1973, the

opposition parties were demanding the resignation of President Allende.

In addition, an even more serious problem within the UP was developing.

The UP parties -   - in   particular the Communists and Socialists - -   had

entered into a serious feud, strongly disagreeing on how to face the

 crisis.

           In concluding, we must comment on the role of domestic economic

 opposition and the foreign economic blockade. There is little doubt chat
                                       28


the strategic use of economic disruption by the opposition, foreign

enterprises and foreign governments played a role in the ultimate

unravelling of the Allende policies. We doubt, although we certainly

cannot demonstrate this point, that a more neutral external environment

would have allowed the Allende experiment to continue for a significant

period. Our view is that the uncontrolled side effects of the growth

policy (shortages, inflation etc.) sufficiently weakened then ability to

govern, so economic destabilization by domestic opposition forces and

foreign companies and governments could be effective. We advance this view

as a hypothesis and propose further research to substantiate this critical

feature of the unravelling of populist experiences.

         On the 11th of September 1973, the Allende presidency came to a

sudden and shocking end. That day the armed forces staged a coup. When

the military took over, the country was politically divided and the

economy was in shambles. Inflation was galloping, relative price

distortions -   - stemming mainly from massive price controls -• were

generalized; black market activities were rampant; real wages had dropped

drastically; the economic prospects of the middle class had been greatly

damaged; the external sector was facing a serious crisis; production and

investment were falling steeply; and the government finances were

completely out of hand. This was the stage where frightful real wage

cutting (see Figure 1 above) took over.19


19Even if the real wage decline of 1974-75 is in part due to the dramatic terms of
trade deterioration, one should not minimize the aftermath of the Allende policies.
                                   29




III. GROWTH WITH REDISTRIBUTION IN GARCIA'S PERU

       When Alan Garcia assumed the Peruvian Presidency in August 1985,

he captured the world's imagination: a dynamic, charismatic leader taking

charge of a country desperately in need of social and economic progress.

The fact that he adopted a confrontational attitude on external debt did

not hurt his image, either in Latin America or in progressive circles in

Europe and the United States. On the domestic front, he had an unambiguous

message: growth and redistribution. That policy lasted two years before

running aground in a catastrophic manner.

            In early 1988, Alan Garcia's populist government staged a

dramatic turnaround on the policies that had driven the country to

bankruptcy and near-hyperinflation: budget cutting, real wage cutting and

massive exchange depreciation were the predictable aftermath of three

years of reckless mismanagement. But that is unlikely to be the end of the

story. Even if the economic measures were to succeed, the political

consequences are still to come. Real wage cutting and austerity, in the

Peruvian Context, may well be the opening phase for massive and perhaps

violent confrontations.

          More so than in any other country of Latin America, economic

performance is central to maintaining the very precarious social peace in

Peru. At issue is not only the possible confrontation between left and

right. Far more dangerous is the widening conflict opened by the Maoist
                                          30



Shinin Path    guerilla.   The Outcome is wide open because of the divisions

between rich and poor, the city and the sierras, white and indios. Further

deterioration of economic performance with declining per capita incomes,

explosive inflation and real wage cutting would make Peru ungovernable.

Yet these events almost certainly lie ahead. Unless a massive improvement

of export prices or external assistance on a major scale provide foreign

exchange resources to help achieve (together with policy reform) a gradual

adjustment, an out-and-out economic crisis is inevitable.



11.1 From Belaunde to Garcia2°

            In the l950s and 1960s Peru experienced significant growth of

real per capita income and moderate inflation. Cable 2 shows that the

problems of declining per capita income and high inflation date from the

second half of the l970s.


Table 2     Growth and Inflation
            (percent per year)

                           1950-60 1960-70 1970-75 1975-80     1980-85

Growth Per Capita           2.8     2.6         1.6   -1.0      -4.2

Inflation                   8.0     9.3        12.6   50.0     102.1

Source: Kuczynski (1977), Central Bank and Ministry of Finance



20See R. Thorp "Trends and Cycles in the Peruvian Economy." in P.Bardhan et al
(eds.) International Trade. Investment. Macro Policies and Histor'q. North Holland,
1987, R.Thorp and G.Bertraa Peru 1890-1977, Columbia University Press, 1978; and
PP. Kuczynski Peruvian Democracy under Economic Stress, Princeton University Press,
1977 for history and extensive references.
                PERU'S REAL PER CAPITA INCOME
                                (w40Ex 1980—100)
110


105



100



95


 90


 85


 80


75


70
      60   62   64   66   68   73 72     74   76   78   80   62   84   86   88
                                    31



         In the past 25 years, three major stop-go phases can be

discerned. The first was the Belaunde expansion which crashed in 1967-68.

The growth program faltered because it ran into external constraints.

Budget correction and real depreciation were undertaken and prepared the

ground for the economic expansion of the military government in the early

1970s. The extremely favorable world environment permitted a massive

expansion until 1974, with an average growth rate of per capita income of

3.7 percent per year in the 1969-74 period. Figure 3 shows the rapid

increase in real income during thIs period.

          Deterioration of the terms of trade (a 27 percent decline

between 1974 and 1977) occurred at the same time that the government was

undertaking a massive investment program. As a result, the noninterest

current account balance showed a deficit of 6 percent of GDP in 1974-77.

This straining of external financing opportunities forced a slowdown of

growth and a reshaping of economic policies. Exchange rate and trade

policies introduced in 1978-79 emphasized export growth rather than

government spending. While the resource transfer had been inward in 1973-

78, now came three years of large external (noninterest) surpluses.

          The second Belaunde administration (1980-85) had to cope with

extraordinarily adverse conditions. Belaunde inherited an economy with

deep social problems: Per capita income had declined since 1974 and, the

external balance improvement of the late 1.970s notwithstanding, the

interventionism of the military government had created pervasive

distortions. The possibility of advancing the economy was drastically
                                    32



limited as a result of a combination of shocks: the world recession of

1980-82, terms of trade deterioration, the explosion in world interest

rates and the resulting rise in debt service obligations, external credit

rationing, and natural disasters. These shocks combined to choke off any

room for expansion. In 1982-83, under an IMF program, real GDP per capita

declined by 16 percent and inflation nearly doubled to 112 percent.

           The disastrous economic performance of the e1aunde government

led to a total rout in the elections and thus brought Alan Garcia into

power in 1985. In 1980 Belaunde had won the elections with the largest

majority in history. In contrast, in the 1985 elections, his party was

devastated in that they came out with a meager 6.2 percent of the vote!

Alan Garcia's APRA party took 45.8 percent of the vote, and the United

Left took another 21.3 percent.21

          The election which swept Garcia into office in a landslide

victory carried one clear message: growth first!22 This message,

regardless of its feasibility, conditioned the economic policies of the

Garcia Administration from the very beginning and is now taking the

country to the brink.



11.2 The Heterodox Proram

          In July 1985, the last month of the Belaunde administration,

inflation reached 250 percent at an annual rate. Unemployment was


21See Wise (1988) and Ortiz de Zevallos (1989) for a review of politics.
22See Ortiz de Zevallos (1989).
                      Peruvian Income Distribution




                                                     rercent of the
Per Capita
                                                     Population
income (1979 Intis)




       12. 746                                             1 .0




             253
                                                          46 .




                                                             23   5


                                                             29 .4
       129
                                    33


pervasive, idle capacity abounded, and real wages had been reduced in an

effort to cope with the external crisis. Against this background, Garcia's

government developed a populist project of expansion entitled "Growth with

Redistribution" emphasizing economic recovery combined with disinflation.



Premises and Policies: Three points are central to an understanding of why

economic policy took the form it did. The first is the impressively

unequal distribution of income. Figure 6 shows the Peruvian distribution

with a diagram widely used in Peru. The striking fact is that 1% of the

population receives nearly half the national income.23

          The second is that policy makers were impressed with the large

gap between actual and potential output. In Carbonetto et al (1987, p.14),

it is estimated that actual output was only 66 percent of potential output

in 1984 leaving a 34 percent gap to be made up by the judicious choice of

policy.

          The third consideration is that Peruvian economists, in company

with economists throughout Latin America, were unimpressed with the

effectiveness of IMF programs. It will be remembered that at this time

Israel and Argentina made their hecerodox stabilization efforts, as did

8razil shortly afterwards. The orthodox approach to stabilization had been

discredited by the strong recessionary effects and the absence of any

success stories. The alternative, heterodoxy, had all the appeal of


23See Glewwe (1988).
                                     34



offering an end to inflation without the attendant Costs of

unemployment.24
          Against this background, the general theme of economic policy is

summarized in the Plan Nacional de Desarrollo 1986-90 (p.6) from which we

quote extensively.

     "The new economic policy seeks to pass from an economy of conflict
     and speculation to one of production and consensus. In this economy
     it is possible to make compatible stability, growth, distribution and
     development in a Context of national planning which finds concrete
     expression in dialogue and social and economic concertation.
          Planning of economic development will be full, decentralized and
     participatory and concertation will center on the effort to make
     compatible the generation of saving and productive investment with
     attention paid to the undelayable priority attention to social needs.
     We need to reconcile economic efficiency with social equity in a
     productive dynamics which is fundamentally sustained by domestic
     resources."


Specific premises and prescriptions in the national development strategy

can be paraphrases as follows :   (op. cit. p.63-65)


          • The complementarity of internal and external markets,
     rejecting the apparent dilemma between import substitution and
     exports and reaffirming the primacy of the internal market.

          • The necessity to redistribute income as a means for sustained
     growth and the possibility to bring together with the redistribution
     process the necessary capacity to save and invest.
          The heterodox management of economic policy starts from a
     reinterpretation of traditional economic concepts in terms of their
     implications for the Peruvian economy.

          •Prices and Rentability: Profitability cannot increase from an
     increase in profit margins because that would lead to a generalized
     decline in sales. Smaller margins yield lower prices, higher demand,
     higher sales and better utilization of capacity; higher sales allow a
     fuller scale of production.


24See Dornbusch (1981, 1988a), Bresser Pereira and Nakano (1987) and Bruno   et   al.
(1988).
                               35




     •Salaries and Profitability: The generalized and open-ended
restraint on wages reduces profitability because it reduces workers'
purchasing power, bringing about recessive effects that reduce demand
and thus the benefits of dynamic economy.

     • The Recessive, Inflationary Crisis: This follows from the
increase in costs and the fall in demand, not from an excess in
demand. The contraction of public spending, credit and salaries
reduces demand; at the same time devaluation and increases in
interest rates incessantly raise costs. To talk of excess demand is
erroneous when there idle capacity in almost all sectors and ample
supply of unemployed labor.

     • The Fiscal Deficit: The fiscal deficit is not necessarily
inflationary. It only is if domestic demand exceeds potential output.
With substantial idle capacity there is a need for a certain
deficit.

     • Money Creation: Must increase demand, thus allowing an
increase in real liquidity and disponibility since the opposite would
slow growth.

     • Interest Rates: Increased real interest rates do not raise
saving, since the latter depends fundamentally on income, but they
discourage productive investment...

     • Exchange Rate: Depreciation of the exchange rate does not
constitute an effective means of balancing the external accounts
since only 15% of imports and 20% of exports are sensitive (elastic)
to exchange rate changes. As a consequence, although it is necessary
to avoid devaluation, the external flows must be handled by more
efficient selective methods.

     The specific targets of the economic program are set out in

 Table 3.

 Table 3 The 1986-90 Economic Development Plan

                        1985   1986    1987    1988   1989    1990

 Growth
   GDP                  1.4     6.5      6.2    6.1    6.3    6.2
   Consumption          0.1      8.5     6.3    5.7    5.0    5.2
   Exports              3.5    -13.6     4.8    5.8    5.9    5.9
   Imports            -24.6     5.0     13.7   11.9    5.6    7.4
   Investment         -12.3    12.0     14.4   11.8   11.6   10.7
 Budget Deficita        0.6     2.3      2.3    2.1    1.8    1.6

 a Percent of GDP
 Source: Presidencia dela Republica (1986)
                                    36




         The new economic policy was based on four measures, as noted in

Carbonetto et al (1987,p.lS):


          • Rapid expansion of effective demand via real wage increases.

          • Financial de-strangulation to give firms relief and contain
cost pressures by reducing financial costs of enterprises, effective
interest rates, indirect taxes and other elements of costs.

          • Reestablishment of selective exchange rates and abandonment of
the devaluation policy.

          • The external accounts are to be kept in balance by growth in
exports, import substitution and limitations on debt service to be
compatible with acceptable growth. Of course, many of the foreign exchange
and growth policies on which any success of the plan might depend never
saw the light of day. This is particularly the case for foreign exchange
savings strategies.


External Debt: The most widely noted measure of the Garcia government is

no doubt the limitation of external debt service to 10 percent of exports.

The move followed a policy of quiet arrears of the elaunde government. It

attracted attention because it was openly unilateral and thus potentially

invited sanctions from the commercial bank creditors. The policy made the

best of a situation where a conventional rescheduling, including an IMF

agreement, was entirely impossible from a political point of view. Since

then, debt service arrears have been extended to official creditors,

including the IMP and the World Bank.

          The policy of limiting debt service was not only an essential

step on the political front. It effectively suspended the external

constraint. With the foreign exchange savings resulting from limited debt
                                       37


service, a widening of the trade deficit became possible. Thus external

constraints on growth, and the resulting need for realistic exchange rate

policies, were suspended, at least for some time. That temporary reprieve,

as we will see below, was already exhausted by mid-1988.

         The quality of Peruvian debt, as viewed by the secondary market,

has steadily declined since 1985. In July 1985, when Mexican debt traded

at 60 cents on the dollar. Brazilian at 75 cents and Argentinean at 60

cents, Peruvian already was down to only 45 cents. By January 1986, the

price had declined to only 25 cents per dollar face value. By the end of

1987, the external debt stood at $16.6 billion, with arrears on principal

and interest of $6.1 billion. By early 1989 Peruvian debt could be bought

at 5 cents per dollar. The low price is certainly explained by one single

factor: it would be exceptionally difficult politically to achieve a

stabilization in which real worker incomes were cut for the purpose of

external debt service.



The First Two   Years   The immediate priority for the Garcia administration

was to introduce a "heterodox" program of stabilization: inflation

reduction via an incomes policy combined with a massive reactivation of

the economy.

          In the short term, the heterodox program was immensely

successful. Inflation declined sharply (as shown     in   Table 4), employment

increased, and the real wage was pushed up substantially (as shown in

Figure 5). In the   last   quarter of 1987, the real wage stood 52 percent
                    PERU: THE REAL WAGE
                             (INDEX 1982:2—100)
110


100


90


80


70


 60


 50


 40


 30
      1980   1981   1982   1983    1984     1985   1986   1987   1988   1989
                                           38


above the level of 1985! Growth, too, had been very substantial. In 1986,

the economy grew by 9,5 percent; and, in 1987, by another 6.7 percent.


Table 4 Peruvian Macroeconomic Indicators

                        1985       1986         1987     1988

Inflationa               158        63          115       1722
Growth                   2.5        9.5         6.9       -8.4
Real wageb               111       127          138       106
Trade Balance ($)       1173        -67         -463      -84
Cov't. RevenuesC        42.7        32.1        25.9      23.5

aDecember December b Index 1975—100 cpercent of CD?
Source: World Bank, Ministry of Finance, National Institute of Planning.


            It is important to recognize just how successful the heterodox

approach is. Given enough foreign exchange and a depressed economy.

expansion of domestic demand can work. In fact, the success is broadly

shared because the recovery of demand can raise firsts' profitability by

raising capacity utilization. That was, in fact, the case. A year after

the program started Garcia was celebrated by the business class for the

success of his recovery strategy. Private investment increased by 24

percent in 1986 and another 18.6 percent in 1987.25

            By early 1987, the program was at the peak of its success: real

GD? had grown cumulatively more than 20 percent since the third quarter of

1985. Inflation had been reduced from 188 percent to only 75 percent. But

while the   success   was startling, the strain was starting to appear in

rising cost pressures and a growing loss of foreign exchange. But these

strains, while obvious to economists, were far from alarming to policy


25See Centro de Economia Applicada (1988) and especially Iguinez for an evaluation
of the first three years of the program.
                                      39



makers or the public.



The Turning Point: The turning point came in July 1987, ahead of the

economic unravelling of the program, as a result of a proposal to

nationalize the banking system. On July 27th, 1987, President Garcia

declared: 26



     "In Peru, today, the financial system is the most powerful instrument
     of concentration of economic power and thus of political influence;
     it   is
           the major obstacle to the democratization of production and the
     accumulation of the surplus."


            The immediate motivation for the nationalization was to get a

hand in the allocation of credit and a better control of the saving

generated by the business sector. Control of the financial system was also

expected to help monitor profits and capital flight by the privileged

groups in the economy. The private financial system was reproached for not

belonging      to the necessities of economic development", with large parts

of the country's saving being channelled by the few rich families who

captured these savings into inventories, nonproductive assets, or accounts

abroad.

            The nationalization crisis represents the beginning of open,

dramatic political conflict. It represented the moment where the right,

with public appearances of Vargas Lhosa, dramatized the shift in

government policies toward socialism. It also represented the end of the


26See Presidencia de la Republica (1987b,p.l).
                                     40


recovery policy and the turning point toward inflation and foreign

exchange crises. Although the bottlenecks opened up only gradually, during

the remainder of 1987, it is fair to say that July-August of that year

represented the turning point, after which the continuation of

expansionary policies could no longer be defended.

           Populist programs such as that practiced in Peru fail when the

economy runs out of foreign exchange and when the controls that support

the initial redistribution and expansion have to be dismantled. By late

1987, growth was petering out and inflation, brought about by external

constraints, bottlenecks and the adjustment of severe price distortions,

was exploding.

           To understand what went wrong it helps to return to the basic

philosophy of the program which is fully documented in a book, El Peru

Heterodoxo: Un Modelo Economico, the economic architects of the program

published in July, 1987.27 The most striking revelation of this book is

the extraordinary extent to which policy makers in the Garcia

administration diverged from accepted economics. Thus we learn (p.75-7)

that


       "An examination of the Peruvian record reveals that periods of
       moderate inflation are associated with expansionary fiscal policies.
       And periods of major inflation are associated with fiscal restraint.
       Thus, the record shows exactly the opposite of what is predicted by a
       theory which explains inflation by fiscal deficits."


27See D.Carbonetto, I.de Cabellos, O.Dancourt, C.Ferrari, D.Martinez, J.Mezzera,
G.Saberbein, J.Tantalean, and P.Vigier El Peru Heterodoxo. Un Modelo EcononCO,
National Planning Institute, Lima, 1987.
                                    41



          And, to dispel any doubts:(p.82)


     "If it were necessary to summarize in two words the economic strategy
     adopted by the government starting in August 1985 they are control
     (meaning control of prices and costs and recognizing that this could
     be done only temporarily for the first twelve month) and spend,
     transferring resources to the poorest so that they increase
     consumption and create a demand for increased output, thus
     'justifying' that idle capacity be put to use.
          It is necessary to spend, even at the Cost of a fiscal deficit,
     because, if this deficit transfers public resources to increased
     consumption of the poorest they iemand more goods and this will bring
     about a reduction in unit costs. Thus the deficit is not
     inflationary, on the contrary! This constitutes without doubt the
     basic premise on which the economic team acted and the major
     departure from the earlier strategy that had emphasized adjustment
     from the demand side"


          Peru learned in 1987-88 that continued rapid growth and massive

real wage increases are incompatible with moderate inflation. In 1986,

inflation was only 63 percent, far below the level at which the program

started. Eut the experience of high growth with moderate inflation, after a

while, became an artifact of the controls and subsidies on public sector

prices and on foreign exchange. Subsidies and controls were used to avoid

price increases in politically sensitive areas. In 1987-88, most petroleum

products sold at one-third their July 1985 price. Electricity prices, the

price of rice, and bus fares had declined by more than a third, as had the

real price of foreign exchange.
                                          42




Table 5 Real Levels of Controlled Prices
          (July 1985—100)

                    Dec.1986       Dec. 1987   Dec. 1988

Averagea              75             59          58
   Rice               73             61          47
   Light Elect.       49            40           16
   Telephone          84             87          32
   Gas                58             33          25

aWe ighted by expenditure shares
Source: Apovo


           When adjustments in the controlled prices had to be made,

inflation accelerated rapidly. Initially, the real wage gains and demand

expansion pushed up inflation, but the catching up of lagging prices became

increasingly important as the government had to undo, at least in part, the

large drop in the real prices of subsidized goods, of foreign exchange, and

of controlled goods. In 1987, inflation already reached 115 percent; and,

by early 1988, the program was unraveling as inflation exploded. In the

first quarter, it reached 470 percent per month. In March 1988, inflation

at an annual rate already exceeded 1000 percent; and the year closed with a

December-December inflation of 1.722 percent. In December itself, the

annualized rate of inflation was in excess of 6000 percent. Even at the end

of 1.988, after repeated attempts to realign controlled prices, the real

level of prices in the public sector remained at less than 60 percent of

their 1985 level.

           Inflation was also a result of the massive increase in the

budget deficit. The policy of subsidies, and the extraordinary decline in
                    PERU: NET FOREIGN RESERVES
                               (Billion SUS)

       0.9
       0.6
       0.7
       0.6
       0.5
       0.4
       0.3
       0.2
a
0
C
o        0
a
      —0.1
I.-
•1
      —.
      —0.3
      —0.4
      —0.5
      —0.6
      —0.7
      —0.8
      —0.9


      —1.1
             1985       1986           1987    1988   1989
                                        43



real tax collection increased the budget deficit. In 1975-86, tax

collection had averaged above 12 percent of CD?, and in 1985, it rose to

13.2 percent. By 1988, because of a sharp decline in compliance, tax

collection had fallen to only 7.5 percent of GDP.

             The decline in revenue and the large cost of subsidy programs,

including interest subsidies in credit markets, created a vast budget

deficit. The   Central   Banks policy of multiple exchange rates contributed

an important part of the deficit. It involved losses amounting to 2 percent

of CNP from buying foreign exchange at a high price from exporters and

selling it at a low or subsidized price to importers.


Table 6 Public Sector Financing Requirement
               (Percent of GDP)

                                             1985   1986     1987    1988*

Overall Public Sector Deficit                4.4    6.7       9.9    6.1
   Budget Deficit                            2.4    4.9       6.5    5.3
   Central Bank Losses                       1.9    1.8       2.8    0.8
Credit to Development Banks                  0.8    1.4       1.9    0.8

Public Sector Financing Requirement          5.1    8.1      11.2    6.9
Domestic Financing                           1.2    5.7       9.8    6.9

*Es timate
Source: World Bank, Central Bank and Ministry of Finance


             The Large budget deficit had increasingly detrimental effects on

the economy's performance. It directly contributed to inflation, but it

also affected the allocation of credit and hence investment. While foreign

exchange reserves lasted, the government could sell off foreign exchange

rather than borrow in the home market or print money. Now, with reserves
                                       44


precariously low, there was no room left for further reserve sales to

finance the deficit. 28 (See Figure 6) The declining reserves now forced a

more consistent exchange rate policy which immediately raised the inflation

rate.29 Thus external financing of the budget deficit ultimately had an

inflationary cost, even though it may have been delayed by a year or two.

             Another way to finance the deficit was through the banking

system. High reserve ratios for banks or direct financing requirements

effectively achieved this. The counterpart of this policy was a 30 percent

decline in real bank credit to the private sector in the past three years.

The Central Bank could finance the deficit by printing money. That, too,

had occurred and was one of the reasons for the accelerating inflation.

             Since September 1987, the World Bank and Peruvian authorities

have been discussing stabilization. But the political impetus for major

policy changes so far has been missing. The only impetus for change came

from the external balance side where a crisis has been building up quite

visibly. The trade surplus of above $1 billion in 1985 had become a deficit

by 1987. Reserves declined by over $1 billion to the point where net

reserves were negative at the beginning of 1988. The response to the

looming foreign exchange crisis was a major real depreciation in late 1987.

This depreciation was one of the reasons for the sharp acceleration of

inflation.


 28The net reserves included on the liability side $800 million of arrears to the
 IMF. The gold position of the central bank had been revalued at various points and
 amounted to $659 billion in December, 1988.
   By April 1989 the decline in economic activity and the restrictions of imports had
 become so massive that art actual reserve recovery had taken place. The reserve gains
 were surficient to feed a rumor of another reactivation program.
                                          45


             The real depreciation helped stem capital flight and the

widening trade deficit for some time. In a vicious cycle, accelerating wage

and price increases which were triggered by this depreciation eroded the

initial gain in competitiveness. The renewed real appreciation of the real

exchange rate for imports since the end of 1987. and the resulting exchange

losses of the central bank, signal the government's inability to force a

real depreciation. And that simply foreshadows a certain foreign exchange

crisis. In other sectors, too, real prices remain grossly misaligned as we

already saw above in Table 5. This is the case for interest rates as well

as for politically sensitive prices.



11.3 tThat Next?

             y early 1989, there were less than $500 million in foreign

exchange left as reserves. Another $628 million in gold were available, but

trade had become a hand-to-mouth operation. Ships would not unload until

receipt of payment abroad was confirmed. From this position, the Peruvian

economy could move in one of three directions. The first possibility is a

draconian stabilization. This would require a drastic increase in real tax

revenues, a unification and real depreciation of the exchange rate, and a

realignment of those relative prices which today sustain the overly high

real wage. Policy reforms in     these   areas must eliminate the budget deficit

and lessen the external constraint. The cost would be a decline in real

wages and hence, at least in the short term,       a reduction in growth of
output and   employment. In   terms of Peruvian history, this amountS to a
                                     46



1983-style program which is "politically impossible". Of course, that does

not mean it will not happen. It merely means that it will come too late and

hence will be far more expensive in economic and political terms.

           The second possibility is a gradual stabilization, supported by

increased tax compliance, exchange rate reform, and external support from

improved export prices or resources provided by foreign governments. Many

debtor countries have the capability of incurring arrears on interest

payments or amortization of their external debt. This provides them with a

temporary cushion on the foreign exchange side while gradual adjustments

are made. Peru has already used and fully exhausted that capability: debt

service was halted in 1985, and there now is a deficit even without

interest payments. Only fresh external resources (net transfers) can do the

job, but it is difficult to know whence they might come. The main reason to

contemplate such a possibility at all is political. The U.S. has a lot at

stake if Peru, as a result of political disintegration, comes to the brink.

The growing power of the United Left and extremism of the Shining Path

suggest possibilities much more difficult to live with than Nicaragua. But

 it is extremely unlikely that a stabilization program with external support

would fall from heaven; more likely it would be the maiden gift after a

right wing coup.

           The third, and the most likely way, is a gradual but

accelerating disintegration of the Peruvian economy. As the growing foreign

exchange crisis forces more and more rapid depreciation, there will be

 demands for the maintenance of real wages. With both wages and the exchange
                                      47


rate showing accelerating inflation, prices will quickly follow. In fact,

to avoid mammoth deficits or violent strikes, the government will be forced

to run a fully indexed economy. But even as the economy becomes fully

indexed, the real exchange rate has to be brought down and real public

sector prices must rise. Accelerating inflation is the only way that can

happeit: prices and the exchange rate have to outrun wage increases, even as

wages try to catch up. Moreover, as prices, the exchange rate and wages

chase each other not only the size of increases but also the frequency of

adjustments increase. Adjustment periods shrink from a year to, the

adjustment to hyperinflation. Pazos (1972, p.92-3) has described the

dynamics as follows:


      "When the rate of inflation approaches the limit of tolerance, a
      growing number of trade unions ask for raises before their contracts
      become due. And management grants them. These wage increases give an
      additional push to inflation and bring about a further reduction of
      the adjustment interval. Probably the interval is initially shortened
      to six months, and then, successively, to three months, one month,
      one week, and one day. At first the readjustment is based on the
      cost-of-living index; but since there is a delay of one or two months
      or more in the publication of this index, it must soon be replaced by
      another. The best-known and more up-to-date of the possible
      indicators in Latin America is the quotation of a foreign currency,
      generally the U.S. dollar."

            The process is well underway,   as   inflation was running at an

 annual   rate of 6000 percent at the end of 1988. The    financial

 disintegration was apparent in the massive demonetization of the economy
 which   was so significant that financing of the budget deficit was not

 consistent with stable inflation even at this incredible level. Real
                                     48


wages, as seen in Figure 4 above, had declined to a level far below 1985,

the starting point of the program.

          Somewhere in this process, the government might fall. But even

that would not solve the problems of an economy where the basic fight is

about income distribution. While foreign exchange reserves lasted, the

country could spend more than the whole pie and grow in relative harmony.

With reserves gone, the real income gains have to be paid back unless they

can be earned by sharply higher productivity. Peru today is far away from

the kind of policy reform that would try to make the best of its

resources; and, hence, maximum pessimism is warranted.

          Peruvian policy makers do not like to hear this, but the most

likely course of Peru is that taken by Chile under Allende in the period

from September 1970 to September 1973. The exact timing and details of the

Peruvian experience may not match that of Allende, but the broad outline

certainly does.

          The unfortunate implication of having allowed so radical a

deterioration of the Peruvian economy is that there is no longer any broad

political support for reform. The center-left political concentration is

vanishing, and new poles of concentration are emerging far away from where

Garcia started his presidency: the right around de Soto and Vargas Llosa

which is agitating for a Chilean style free market approach, and the

United Left for whom the unfortunate nationalization of the banking system

in 1988 was merely a first step in the direction of pervasive

Socialization. And then there is, far off at the extreme left, the Shining
                                        49


Path whose vision is nothing short of a civil war along racial lines.

Against this background of deteriorating economics and politics, where

will the Peruvian economy be a year from now?

             Economic mismanagement need not be shortlived. If the politics

are supportive end external destabilization is not a factor, such a regime

can last another year or even more. Garcia can make time by radicalizing

his own    position   and policies in the direction of populism and increasing

government intervention. A massive program of nationalization and control

would give the government more than a few months of breathing space,

except if it were overthrown. Garcia could adopt a gradualist, reformist

policy and attempt a shift to the right! In the meantime, the political

scene remains relatively calm: coups are not in sight for one simple

reason: the right does not want to let Garcia off the hook, doing the hard

and ungrateful work of stabilizing the economy only to see Garcia come

back for another round. But while there is apparent stability, the extreme

reduction in living standards and the growing number of strikes do suggest

that surviving for another year, to the elections in April 1990, will not

be easy.

            Just how far the disintegration of the economy has gone is

apparent from a survey      reported by Apovo, an economic consulting service
in   Peru. Middle and upper income respondents predominantly indicated that

they would buy dollars given extra income. Of the lower income groups.

more than half reported that they would spend the extra income      on food.
                                      50



IV. CONCLUDING REMARK

         IMF-tyle    policies, without concern for growth or social progress

may well establish short run financial stability, but they inevitably open

the door to yet another round of destructive reaction in the form of

populist policies.

         It is clear that the two instances of populism discussed here

led to disastrous consequences for those who were meant to be the

beneficiaries. The central question then is whether populist policies are

outright unsustainable, or whether there is a variant which, properly

executed can in fact succeed. We leave to a further paper the elaboration

of the thesis that populist policies can succeed provided they stay far

clear of foreign exchange constraints, emphasize reactivation only for a

brief initial period and then shift to growth policies. Most importantly,

they need to their financing on an extremely orthodox fiscal policy and

rigorous tax administration. Within those restrictions, there is

significant room left for the redistributive objectives of populism.
                                        51




Table A-I       Peru: Macroeconomic Indicators

            Crowtha   Inflationa   Terms of      External   Resource    Real
                                    Tradeb         Debtc    Transferd   Wages

1970          7.3        5            100            3.68      4.1
1971          5.1        7             85            3.69       0.8
1972         5.8         7             80            3.83       1.0
1973         6.2        10            101            4.13      -0.6
1974         6.9        17            103            5.24      -5.4
1975          2.4       24             88            6.26      -9.8
1976          3.3       34             84            7.38      -5.6
1977         -0.3       38             79            8.57      -3.4
1978         -1.7       58             75            9.32       3.3
1979         4.3        67            100            9.33      12.5
1980          2.9       60            111            9.59       3.8       100
1981          3.0       73            104            9.63      -4.4        98
1982          0.9       73             94           11.1       -3.7       101
1983        -12.0      125            104           12.4        0.2        84
1984          4.7      112             96           13.3        4.5        70
1985          2.3      158             82           13.8        6.9        60
1986          8.9       63             64           14.4       -2.0        76
1987          6.5      115             61           15.4       -3.8        80
1988*        -8.5     1720                          16.2                        53

*estimates aPercent per year, b Terms of Trade Index, 1970—100, c Total external
debt,Billion    d Resource transfer abroad as a percent of GD?. Resource transfer is
measured in the national accounts as net exports excepting factor payments.
                                      52




REFERENCES

Almeyda, C. (1987) Reencuentro con iiii    Vida, Santiago, Chile: Ediciones
del Ornitorrinco.

Alaluf, D. et al (1972) La economia Chilena en 1971, Santiago, Chile:
Instituto de Economia Universidad de Chile.

Baer,W. and I. Kersternetzky (1964) Inflation and Growth in Latin        America
New Haven: Yale University Press.

Bitar, S.(1979) Transicion. Socialtsnio y     Democracla,   Mexico, D.F. : Siglo
XXI.

              (1986) Chile. Experiments in Democracy. Philadelphia: Institute
for the    Study of Human Issues
Bresser Pereira,L.C. and Y. Nakano (1987) Inertial Inflation. Boulder Co:
Westview Press.

Boorstein, E. (1988) Allende's Chile New York: International Publishers
Co., Inc.

Bruno, H. G.di Tella, R.Dornbusch and S.Fischer (1988) Inflation
Stabilization, The Experience of Israel. Arentina. Brazil. Bolivia and
Mexico Cambridge,Ma. : MIT Press.

Carbonetto, D. et al (1987) El Peru Heterodoxo. Un Modelo Economico
Instiuto Nacional de Planificacion, Lima.

Centro de Economia Applicada (1988) "Evaluacion de dos anos y medio de
Cobierno: Julio 1985-Diciembre 1987" Lima, February.

Conniff,    M. (1982) Latin American Populism in Comparative Perspective,
Albuquerque,    University of New Mexico Press, 1982.

Dancourt, 0. and I. Carazo (1987) "Los      Avatares   de la Heterodoxia"
Pontifica Universidad Catolica, Lima.

de Vlyder, S. (1974) Allende'.s Chile Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Dornbusch, R. (1981) "Stabilization Policies in Developing Countries: What
Have We Learned?" World Development, Vol. 10, No.9 reprinted in Dollars.
Debts and Deficits MIT Press,l987.

         (l988a) "Inflation S:abiIzation: The Role of Incomes Policy and
of Monetization" in Exchan2e Rates and Inflation Cambridge,Ma. : MIT Press
                                       53




        -   (1988b) "Peru on the Brink" Challenge September/October.
Drake, P.(1982) "Conclusion: Requiem for Populism?" in Conniff, M. L. (Ed)
Latin American Populism in Comparative Perspective, Albuquerque,
University of New Mexico Press.

Edwards,S. (1986) "Stabilization with Liberalization: An Evaluation of Ten
Years of Chile's Experience with Free Market Policies, 1973-1983" in A.
Choksi and D. Papageorgiou Economic Liberalization in Developing
Countries, Blackwell.

         and A.Cox-Edwards (1987) Monetarisni and Liberalization, The
Chilean Experiment, Cambridge: allinger.

Foxley, A. (1981) "Stabilization Policies and their Effects on Employment
and Income Distribution." in W.Cline and S.Weiuntraub (eds.) Economic
Stabilization in Developing Countries, Washington DC: Brookings.

          (1983) Latine American Experiments in Neoconservative Economics,
University of California Press, 1983.

Ffrench-Davis, R.and E.Tironi (eds)(1974) El Cobre en el Desarrollo
Economico Nacional Santiago: Chile, Edicones Nueva Universidad.

Garcia, Norberto (1972) "Algunos Aspectos de la Politica de Corto Plazo en
l97l",in D. Alaluf et. al. La Economia Chilena en 1971, Santiago, Chile:
Instituto de Economia de la Universidad de Chile.

Geller, L.and J.Estevez (1972) "La Nacionalizacion del Cobre", in D.
Alaluf et. al. La Economia Chilena en 1971, Santiago, Chile, Instituto de
Economia de la Universidad de Chile.

G1e'we, P. (1988) "The Distribution of welfare in Peru 1985-86" mimeo,
World Bank.

Herrera, C. et al.(l987) Reactivacion Y Politica Economica Heterodoxa
1985-1986 Fundacion Friedrich Ebert. Lima

Iguinez, 3. (1988) "Evaluacion Critica de la Politica Economica Bajo
Garcia: Balanca a los Tres Anos de Gobierno." mimeo, Fondad-Region Andina,
Lima.

Inostroza, A. (1979) "El Programa Monetario y la Politica de Comercio
Exterior de la Unidad Popular", Panorama Economico, March 1971.

Kuczyrtski, P. -P. (1977) Peruvian Democracy under Economic Stress,
Princeton University Press.
                                    54




Lopez, J.(1972) "La Econoinia Politica de la Unidad Popular: Una Evaluacion
de su Primer Ano de Cobierno", in D. Alaluf et. al. La Economia Chilena en
1971, Santiago, Chile, Instituto de Economia de la Uriiversidad de Chile
1972.

Martner, C.(ed) (1971) El Pensamiento Economico del. Gobierno de Allende,
Santiago, Chile: Editorial Universitaria 1971.

Novoa, E. (1971) "Vias Legales para Avanzar al Socialismo" Revista Mensale
167.

Ministerio de Economia (1987) Programa Trienal 1988-1990. Liina.

Nove, A. (1976) "The Political Economy of the Allende Regime" in P.O'Brien
(ed.) Allende's Chile New York: Praeger.

Odeplan (1971) "Objetivos del Plan 1971", in C. Martner (ed) 1
Pensamiento Econond.co del Gobierno de Allende, Santiago, Chile, Editorial
Universitaria.

Oppenheim, L. (1989) "The Chilean Road to Socialism Revisited." Latin
American Research Review, Vol. 24, No.1,pp.155-183.

Ortiz de Zevallas, F. (1989) The Peruvian Puzzle New York: Twentieth
Century Fund.

Pazos, F. (1972) Chronic Inflation in Latin Anerica, Praeger, 1972.

Presidencia de la Republica (1986) Plan Nacional de Desarrollo 1986-1990.
Instituto Nacional de 1;a Republica, 1986.

           (1987a) Plan Nacjonal de Desarrollo 1988 Instituto Nacional de
Planificacion, Lima.

           (198Th) "Porque la Estatizacion Del Sistema Financiero
Peruano", Instituto Nacional de Planificacion, Lima. August.

           (1987c) Dianostjco v Prozrarr.macion 1987. Instituto Nacional de
Planificac ion.

Ramos,J. (1980) "The Economics of Hyperstagflation" Journal of Economic
Deve1oment, pp.467-488.

          (1986) Neoconservatjve Economics in the Southern Cone of Latin
Anerica. 1973-1983, Johns Hopkins

Sachs, J. (1989) "Social Conflict and Populist Policies in Latin Anerica."
NBER Working Paper No. ,March.
                                       55




Seers, D. (1964) Inf1ation and Crowth: The Heart of the Controversy" in
W.Baer and I. Kersternetzky (eds.) Inflation and Growth in Latin America
New Haven: Yale University Press.

Solimano,A.(1988) "Politica de Remuneraciones en Chile: Experiencia
Pasada, Instrumentos '1 Opciones A Futuro Coleccion Estudios Cieplan.
No.25. December.

Stallings, B. (1978) Class Conflict and Economic Development in Chile.
1958-73, Stanford: Stanford University Press.

        (1988) "Self-destruction of an Auspicious Initiative: Peruvian
Debt Policy Under Alan Garcia," mimeo, University of Wisconsin, Madison.

Sunkel, 0. (1960) "Inflation in Chile: An Unorthodox Approach."
International Economic Papers No. 10, pp. 107-131.

Taylor, L. (1979) Macro Models for Deve1opin Countries New York:
McGrawHill.

          (1983) Structuralist Macroeconomics New York: Basic Books

Thorp, R. (1987) "Trends and Cycles in the Peruvian Economy." in P.Bardhan
ec al (eds.) International Trade. Investment. Macro Policies and History.
North Holland, 1987,

         and C.Bertram (1978) Peru 1890-1977, New York: Columbia
University Press.

Unidad Popular (1969) Prorama Basico de Gobierno, Santiago, Chile: 1969.

Vuskovic, Pedro (l970)"Distribucion del Ingreso y Opciones de Desarrollo",
Cuadernos de la Realidad Nacional, September.

              (1973) "The Economic Policy of the Popular Unity Government"
in Zammit,J.A. (ed.) The Chilean Road to Socialismo Austin: University of
Texas Press.

Wise, C. (1988) "Peru in the 1980s:Political Responses to the Debt
Crisis." mimeo. Columbia University.

World Bank (1985) Peru. Country Economic Memorandum. Washington DC

              (1988) Peru: Policies to Stop Hvperinflatioi-i and Initiate
Economic Recovery. Washington: DC
                                    56



Yanez,J. (1978) Una Correcion del Indice de Precios al Consumidor Durante
el Periodo 1971-73." in F. Contrereas (ed.) Commentarios Sobre La
Situacion Economica Santiago.

Zamniit, J.A. (ed.)(1973) The Chilean Road to Socialism Austin: University
of Texas Press.
</ref_section>
