                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             WHY DO MULTINATIONAL FIRMS SEEK OUT JOINT VENTURES?




                              Magnus Blomstrom

                                 Mario Zejan




                           Working Paper No. 2987




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  May 1989




The research reported here is part of the NBER's program in International
Studies. We are indebted to the Industriens Utredningsinstitut (IUI) of
Stockholm for the use of their survey data, to Renato Aguilar and Robert E.
Lipsey for comments on an earlier version of this paper, and to James Hayes
for the preparation of the manuscript. Blomstrom's participation in this
project was supported by the U.N. Centre on Transnational Corporations and,
both his and Zejan's work, by a grant from the Swedish Council for Research
in the Humanities and Social Science. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the sponsoring
agencies.
                                          NEER Working Paper #2987
                                          May 1989


               WHY DO MULTINATIONAL FIRMS SEEK OUT JOINT VENTURES?


                                    ABSTRACT



     This   paper uses a model of dichotomous choice to distinguish the

characteristics of Swedish multinational firms that seek out joint ventures

 from those that do not. The findings suggest that firms with little

experience of foreign production and highly diversified product lines are

 the most likely to share equity. In general, it is found that multina-

 tional firms that have the most to offer the developing countries are

 reluctant to enter into joint venture agreements. Therefore, imposing

joint-venture status on multinationals may prevent the inflow of advanced

 technologies.




Magnus Rlomstrom                         Mario Zejan
Stockholm School of Economics            Department of Economics
P.O. Box 6501                            University of Cothenburg
113 83 Stockholm, Sweden                 Viktoriagatan 30
      and                                411 25 Cothenburg, Sweden
National Bureau of Economic Research
269 Mercer Street
New York, NY 10003, USA
              Why Do Multinational Firms Seek Out Joint Ventures?

                      Magnus Blomström and Mario Zejan*


1. Introduction

   Since the early 1970s, we have witnessed an increasing desire in a

number of developing Countries to exercise greater control over the activi-

ties of multinational corporations (MNC5). Many countries have started to

frame the environment within which these firms operate and have introduced

various performance requirements for their behavior. Special attention has

been given to policies regarding technology transfer. A number of measures

intended to encourage multinational firms to transfer more technology have

been introduced over the years, including requirements for a certain degree

of local participation in the ownership of the MNC5' affiliates. By

forcing the multinationals to "unbundle the package" of inputs that they

bring to the host country, it is believed, a host country can enable local

firms to obtain access to these inputs without the traditional direct

investment.

    Before conclusions about such effects can be drawn, however, one has to

know the costs of the "unpackaging." For example, policies aimed at

forcing multinationals into joint-venture agreements may impede the inflow

of advanced technologies, since firms may choose not to invest rather than

to accept local equity participation. In this paper, we take a first step




    *The research reported here is part of the NBER's program in International
Studies. We are indebted to the Industriens Utredningsinstitut (IUI) of
Stockholm for the use of their survey data, to Renato Aguilar and Robert E.
Lipsey for comments on an earlier version of this paper, and to James Hayes
for the preparation of the manuscript. Blomström's participation in this
project was supported by the U.N. Centre on Trarisnational Corporations and,
both his and Zejan's work, by a grant from the Swedish Council for Research
in the Humanities and Social Science. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the sponsoring
agencies.
                                   —2—

towards understanding these costs by analyzing the characteristics of

multinational firms that insist on majority-ownership of their foreign

affiliates and the characteristics of those that do not. We, thus, focus

on the determinants of different patterns of ownership and control of

foreign affiliates of MNC5, and ask why multinational firms seek out joint

ventures.

    Previous studies of the strategy alternatives for potential multina-

tional firms have mainly focused on why a company would choose to become

multinational rather than exploiting its firm—specific advantages by

exporting (see Caves, 1982, for a review). However, given that a firm has

decided to invest abroad, it can do so with varying degrees of equity par-

ticipation. The main investment alternatives are majority-owned affi-

liates, which permit control over the foreign project, and minority

participation or joint ventures. These alternatives offer different advan-

tages and disadvantages for the MNCs and the question is why they choose

one over the other.

    So far, there has been no empirical study of this issue using compre-

hensive, quantitative firm-level data. Apart from a few case studies (see

references in Lecraw, 1984), from which generalizations are dangerous, the

regression analyses are based either on small samples of firms (Stopford

and Wells, 1972, and Fagre and Wells, 1982) or on small samples of host

(developing) countries (Lecraw, 1984). Furthermore, none of these studies

uses quantitative data for some of the most important explanatory

variables. Lecraw, for example, uses a subjective ranking, as perceived by

the affiliates' managers, for the "technological leadership" of the parent
                                   —3—


companies and for the "attractiveness" of the host countries.

    Another possible serious limitation of the earlier statistical studies

is the way in which they construct the dependent variable. By using the

level of equity ownership in a continuous fashion, they obscure the idea of

control over the foreign affiliates. For example, a drop in equity par-

ticipation from 51 to 49 per cent is different from a drop from, say, 49 to

47 per cent. Therefore, we argue that one should look at this as a choice

problem, where a firm faces the choice of controlling its foreign affiliate

(majority—ownership) or not controlling it (minority venture). In this

context, it is possible to describe firm behavior analytically using a

model of dichotomous choice. The parameters of such a model, estimated

using the maximum likelihood technique, help distinguish the charac-

teristics of firms that insist on majority ownership of their foreign affi-

liates from those of firms that do not, and, thus, to shed light on the

potential benefits for the host developing countries of various forms of

foreign investment.

    This study uses unique data covering almost the entire population of

Swedish manufacturing firms operating abroad in 1974, and is organized as

follows. The next section provides the theoretical framework for the

study. In Section 3 the data and the statistical model are described.

Section 4 presents the empirical results, and, finally, section 5 concludes

the study.


2. Theoretical Framework

    Theory suggests that in order to compete successfully in a foreign
                                   -4-


market, a firm must possess some ownership specific assets in knowledge,

technology, organization, managerial and marketing skill. A firm blessed

with such assets enjoys several possible ways (apart from exporting) to

claim the rents that they will yield in foreign markets, including sub-

sidiary production, joint ventures, licensing, franchising, management

contracts, marketing contracts and turnkey contracts. Of these, subsidiary

production and joint ventures involve varying degrees of equity par-

ticipation, while the others represent arm's-length transactions in the

market for technologies and other skills.

    Technology and similar rent-yielding assets can normally be transferred

more efficiencly and cheaper within a firm than between independent firms.

tn fact, multinational firms often find it very difficult, or sometimes

impossible, to earn the same rent on their intangibles in foreign markets

in forms other than through the establishment of an affiliate abroad.

However, affiliate production is not without costs. It involves the com-

mitment of both capital and managerial resources, the costs of which must,

of course, be considered by the firm in its choice of how to exploit a

foreign market.

    According to Caves (1982), a firm's organizational choice is located

along a continuum, where the relative advantages and disadvantages of sub-

sidiary production, joint ventures and non-equity participation determine

where one stops and the other starts. This approach suggests several

important determinants of the level of equity ownership in the foreign

affiliates.

    The nature of the multinationals' intangible assets seems to be an
                                   —5—

important aspect, since such assets enable firms to operate efficiently in

foreign countries where local firms have certain advantages (such as

knowledge of consumer and factor markets). In order to limit the diffusion

or spillover of such intangible assets, we expect technology and marketing

oriented multinationals to be more unwilling to share information, and to

insist on full control or majority-ownership of their foreign affiliates,

since both product and process technologies are generally considered to be

important intangible assets.

    Multinationals with a lot of experience of foreign operations are also

likely to exploit their rent-yielding assets by internalizing their produc-

tion abroad. "Learning by doing" occurs in international technology trans-

fers, in the sense that the transfer costs decrease with the number of

transfers (see Teece, 1976). Furthermore, uncertainty levels decline as

the firms become more familiar with international operations in general,

and with their individual markets in particular (Davidson, 1980). This

reduction should affect decisons regarding organizational choices.

    On the other hand, there are several factors that may encourage multi-

nationals to seek out joint ventures. For example, the economic environ-

ment may be unfamiliar to the multinational firm and, therefore, it may

find advantageous to take on a host country firm as a partner. A local

firm may bring the joint venture some intangible assets of its own, such as

knowledge of local marketing and production conditions.

    Another reason for equity sharing and non-equity forms of involvment

has to do with risk aversion. If a project is risky -- which many projects

in the developing countries undoubtedly are --   the multinational may wish
                                   -6-

to shift some of the risks to firms in the host country, or to other multi-

nationals. The same argument holds when the project is large in relation

to the investing firm, something which is particularly common in extractive

industries. Equity sharing can therefore be expected when foreign projects

are risky or big. Minority-ownership is also more likely when the sub-

sidiary's output is diversified from the parent's (Stopford and Wells,

1972).

    Finally, some characteristics of the host country may influence the

forms of international activities undertaken by the multinationals, one of

them being the size of the host country market. It may be difficult for a

multinational firm to enter a large foreign market on its own, if such an

investment requires a lot of resources for local sales networks, after

sales services, and so forth. This should be of particular importance if

the MNC is based in a small country like Sweden, because we know that

Swedish firms are typically smaller when they venture abroad for the first

time than are firms from, for instance, the United States (Swedenborg,

1979). Thus, we expect that joint ventures become more prevalent as multi-

nationals proceed towards larger host countries, other things being equal.

    The willingness of MNCs to seek joint ventures should also be

influenced by the extent to which the host country can provide specific

resources that are of interest for the multinationals. The higher the

income level of the host country, the more likely that the local partner

possesses technology, capital, and knowledge about local marketing.


3. Data and Statistical Model

    The data for this study come from the Industriens UtredningsinstitUt
                                    —7-


(IUI) of Stockholm, supplemented by official GOP and GNP per capita figures

from the United Nations. The IUI has completed four surveys of Swedish

multinationals (1965, 1970, 1974 and 1978), which cover virtually all

Swedish manufacturing firms operating abroad (see Swedenborg, 1979 and

1982, for a description of the data). We use the 1974 survey, mainly

because it covers more details on the minority-owned affiliates than the

other surveys do. Another reason for going back to the early 1970s is that

many host countries (particularly developing countries) had not yet begun

to demand local equity participation.1 Thus, the 1974 survey is better

suited for our purposes, which is to isolate the factors causing firms to

seek out joint ventures.

    In the data, it can be observed whether the foreign affiliates are

majority-owned or not. Labeling this characteristic as one in the case of

a majority-owned affiliate, and zero otherwise, we obtain a dichotomous

dependent variable which requires an appropriate statistical technique.

    We postulate the existence of a continuous variable y, linearly depen-

dent on a vector of explanatory variables X --   corresponding    to a set of

parent company, affiliate and host country attributes --   with   a vector of

parameters .   That   is,

                                =   x•
The variable y could be interpreted as an index of the utility that

majority ownership generates to the parent company. When the index is

positive, the parent chooses a majority ownership strategy.

    We cannot observe y, but we assume that there is a certain threshold

value (we can assume this threshold to be zero without loss of generality),
                                            -8-


such that y is greater than the threshold value for majority—owned sub-

sidiaries.

      On the other hand, we do observe the outcome of this process, i.e. if a

subsidiary is majority-owned or not. Labeling the event "majority-owned"

with one and "minority-owned" with zero, we get a proxy variable for y*•

We assume that the probability of a given subsidiary to be majority-owned

is given by

                         p(y* >   0) =   p (y=1) = F (X'$)

where F(.) is the standard normal cumulative distribution function. This

case is known as the probit model, and maximum likelihood estimates can

easily be computed.

      The explanatory variables for the model were suggested in the previous

discussion in Section 2. One by one they are:


RD       =   R&D   expenditures as per cent of sales for the parent firm.

             We expect technologically oriented multinationals to insist on

             control and, thus, the probability for majority ownership to

             increase with the R&D expenditures.2


YEARS = The age of a multinational firm's oldest foreign manufacturing

             affiliate (in log), as a measure of "experience" of producing

             abrOad.3 The more experience a firm has of foreign production,

             the less tolerant we expect it to be towards equity-sharing.4


DIV      =   A dummy variable taking the value one if an affiliate belongs to

             a different 2-digit industry from its parent company's principal
                                     —g-

           one, and   zero otherwise. If an affiliate's Output is a different
           industry from the parent's, minority-ownership is expected to be

           more likely.


MIX    =   One minus a Herfindahl index of the distribution (over 6-digit

           industries) of a firm's industrial activities, as calculated by

           Swedenborg (1979). MIX equals zero if a firm produces only one

           product, and one if it produces an endless number of products. A

           high value of this index is, thus, supposed to reflect a high

           degree of product diversification, which in turn is expected to

           result in more tolerance towards minority ownership.


SIZE   =   The size of the parent firm, measured by its world wide sales.

           We expect larger firms to be able to take higher risks in the

           form of majority-owned subsidiaries.


GOP    =   Host countries' GOP in 1974, as a measure of market size.

           The larger the host country market, the more resources needed for

           a successful entry. Thus, we expect the likelihood of equity

           sharing to increase with the size of the market.


GNPC   =   Host countries' GNP per   capita   in 1974, as a measure of income

           level. The income level is supposed to capture the extent to

           which the host country firms can bring a joint venture certain

           intangible assets of their own. Thus, we expect the probability

           for joint venture agreements to increase with the level of income

           in the host country.6
                                    - 10   -




4.   The Empirical Results

     The probit model was estimated, using the maximum likelihood method,

first with data on all the 50 host countries of Swedish MNC5, and then for

23 developed countries and the 27 developing countries, separately. The

reason for the separation of the data is that the status of being a deve-

loped country may have some meaning beyond per capita income (e.g. the

investment risks may be lower). The main findings from these estimations

are shown in Table 1 and Table 2 (see Appendix for correlation matrices).

     The results seem to confirm most of our prior expectations regarding

the determinants of the patterns of ownership of the MNC affiliates. The

importance of capacity and competence as an underlying reason for ownership

sharing is certainly suggested by the performance of the variables YEARS,

MIX and DIV. The YEAR variable consistently performed well, with the

expected positive sign. In other words, firms that have been in inter-

national business for a long time seem to become more experienced and

interested in exploiting their rent-yielding assets in majority-owned affi-

hates. The variables MIX and OIV had, as expected, negative signs in

front of their coefficients, although they were not always significantly

different from zero. Still, the result suggests that MNCs that are diver-

sifying in product (MIX) seem to find advantageous to take on a domestic

firm as a partner. The same seems to be the case if an affiliate's output

is diversified from the parent's (Dlv). In both these cases, the parent

may lack capacity or competence for majority-ownership of their foreign

affiliates.

     The same argument should, of course, hold for the size variable as
                                   — 11 —




well.7   We expect larger parent companies to have more resources of

various kinds and, thus, to be able to take higher risks, but SIZE turned

out strongly negative. In other words, the probability of ownership

sharing seems to increas with the size of the parent company but we have no

explanation for this paradoxical result.

    Another result that deserves a comment is the insignificance of the R&D

variable, particularly since it has been shown elsewhere that ownership

sharing in high-tech industries is rare (see Lipsey, 1984). The explana-

tion for this finding can have to do with the construction of the dependent

variable. The most technologically oriented firms may not accept any

ownership sharing at all, while firms that are less, but still dependent on

their proprietary technology, may accept only limited joint participation

(less than 50 per cent) in foreign ventures. If this is the case, the R&D

variable should have come out significant with another dependent variable

(e.g. 100 per cent ownership vs. less than 100), but unfortunately we could

not test for this.

    Finally, the performance of the two host country variables adds some

interesting information to the problem at hand. The size of a host

country-market (GOP) seems to be an important determinant of different pat-

terns of ownership of foreign affiliates only in the developed countries.

The likelihood of equity sharing, thus, seems to increase with the size of

the host country market, but only after the market has reached a certain

size. However, in contrast to previous studies, using small samples of

firms or host countries, the income level variable (GNPC) turns out signi-

ficant only in the regressions with data on the developing countries, and
                                      — 12 —




with   an unexpected positive sign. The income level may, therefore, not be

a very good proxy for the comparative advantages of the local partners.

Instead, it seems to reflect demand conditions in the host economies.

       Earlier work have also suggested the importance of the distinction bet-

ween export-oriented and local—market affiliates. It has, for instance,

been shown that MNC5 hold significantly higher fractions of equity in

export-oriented affiliates than in local market oriented ones (Reuber, et

al., 1973). unfortunately we can not test for this in our study, since we

do not have any export data for the minority-owned affiliates.

       It has also been suggested that joint-venture participation of MNCs

varies with their national origin (see e.g. Vernon, 1977). Multinationals

from other (i.e. smaller) countries than the United States are supposed to

be more willing to share ownership. Of course, we can not test this

hypothesis here, but it is worth noting that BlomstrOm (1987) found that

Swedish firms had lower proportion of foreign direct investment held in the

forms of minority ventures that U.S. multinationals. From this, he

concluded that one should look for explanations to openness for ownership

sharing in factors such as the age, size and the differences in activities

undertaken by the firms, rather than in their national origin.


5. ConcludinQ Remarks

       The particular concern of this paper has been to investigate what

determines multinational firms to enter into minority venture agreements

rather than to invest in majority-owned affiliates. Comprehensive firm-

level data, covering almost the entire population of Swedish multina—
                                     - 13   -




tionals,   have been used in a model of dichotomous choice, where the firms

can choose between majority ownership or minority ownership of their

foreign affiliates. The results suggest that this choice is strongly

influenced by the firms' capacity and competence. Firms with brief

experience of foreign production and highly diversified product lines

turned out to be the most likely to choose minority ventures. There was

also some support for the hypothesis that multinationals choose minority-

ownership for affiliates producing different (2-digit) output than their

parents.

    Also the size of the host country market turned out to be an important

determinant for the firms' choice. However, the likelihood of equity

sharing seems to increase with the size of the host country market only

when it has reached a certain size, judging from the fact that the variable

was not significant in separate regressions on developing countries.

    Our findings are of interest for the current debate on transfer of

technology to developing countries. The flood of literature analyzing the

costs of such transfers by multinational corporations sometime claims that

the developing countries, which are often in a weak bargaining position

vis-á-vis the multinationals, are buying their technology too expensively.

However, to be able to judge whether or not the developing countries really

pay "too much" for their technology, it is necessary to know whether there

exist alternative ways of getting a certain technology. Our study suggests

that such alternatives may not always be available, since the multinational

firms that seek out joint ventures appear to be the diversified ones and

those that pursue diversifying strategies. This, in turn, suggests that a
                                    - 14   -




          control of technology transfer, for example, in the form of
tighter
insistence on ownership sharing, may prevent the inflow of advanced tech-

nologies.
                                    - 15   -




                                  Footnotes


    1For example, India introduced its Foreign Exchange Regulation Act in

1973, which places a 40 per cent ceiling on foreign equity participation

(with some exceptions). In Malaysia, the Industrial Co-ordination Act of

1975 requires all manufacturers to apply for licences to start or continue

operations. In some Latin American countries various regulation policies

are of an older date. In Mexico, for example, some legislation has been in

force since 1944, but it was not until The Law to Promote Mexican

Investment and to Regulate Foreign Investment, which came in 1973, that

majority Mexican ownership in all foreign ventures was required. The law

has been applied mainly to firms starting up after 1973.

        was not possible to analyze whether other rent-yielding assets,

such as managerial and marketing skills, were of importance or not, since

data were not available. An interesting additional variable would have

been advertising expenditures, but no such information has been collected

for Swedish MNC5.

    31t seems realistic to assume that firms gain more experience in the

first year of operation than in, say, the 15th, but that they always gain

something. This is why we use this variable in its logarithmic form.

    4An alternative measure of experience, defined as the parents' number

of foreign affiliates (also in log), was tried, but it did not change the

results in any significant way.

                       Ex
                       ji
             MIX1      n     2'   0<MIX<1
                      (E x.)
                          1
                       1


where xj is a firm's output in industry i.
                                   - 16   -




                                               with host—country firms.
   6Here we assume that all joint ventures are

They could, of course, be with other investors, but the data do not shoe

who the parters are.
    7A dummy variable equal to one if an affiliate belonged to natural

resource intensive industries, and zero otherwise, was also tried, to take

care of generally risky and big projects in extractive industries. Since

it never turned out significant it is not shown in the tables.
                                   — 17   -




                                References


Blomström, M. (1987). "The Forms of Foreign Involvement by Swedish Firms",

    Draft, NBER.

Caves, R.E. (1982). Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis.

    Cambridge: Cambridge University Press

Davidson, W.H. (1980). Experience Effects in International Investment and

    TechnoloQy Transfer. Ann Arbor, Michigan: UMI Research Press

Fagre, N. and L.T. Wells Jr. (1982). "Bargaining Power of Multinationals

    and Host Governments", Journal of International Business Studies,

   (Fall) 9—24

Franko, L.G. (1971). Joint Venture Survival in Multinational Corporations.

    New York: Praeger

Lecraw, D.J. (1984). "Bargaining Power, Ownership, and Profitability of

    Transnational Corporations in Developing Countries", Journal of

    national Business Studies (Spring/Summer) 27—43

Lipsey, R.E. (1984). "Recent Trends in U.S. Trade and Investment", in

   Miyawaki (Ed.) Problems of Advanced Economies, Heidelberg: Springer Verlag

Reuber, G.L., et al. (1973). Private ForeiQn Investment in Development,

   Oxford: Clarendon Press

Stopford, J.M. and L.T. Wells, Jr. (1972). Managing the Multinational

    Enterprise: Organization of the Firm and Ownership of the Subsidiaries.

    New York: Basic Books

Swedenborg, B. (1979). The Multinational Operation of Swedish Firms:

    An Analysis of Determinants and Effects. Stockholm: Industriens
                                   - 18   -




   UtredningSiflSti tut
Swedenbory, B. (1982). Svensk Industri i Utlandet. En Analys av Drivkrafter

    ochEffekter. Stockholm: Industriens Utredningsinstitut

Teece, 0. (1976). The Multinational Corporation and the Resource Cost of

    International Technology Transfer. Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger

    Publishing Company

Vernon, R. (1977). Storm Over the Multinationals. The Real Issues.

    Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press
</ref_section>
                                  - 19    -




                                APPENDIX

        Simple Correlation Coefficients for Independent Variables



              RD       YEARS       DIV        MIX       SIZE        GOP


                           All Host Countries

RD           1.00
YEARS         .348      1.00
DIV          -.107       .089     1.00
MIX          -.054       .427      .405       1.00
SIZE          .245       .317     -.026        .143     1.00
GOP           .058       .092      .033        .094     -.051       1.00
GDPC         -.051      -.138      .064        .024     -.092        .371

                           Developed Countries

RD           1.00
YEARS         .357      1.00
DIV          -.099       .094     1.00
MIX          -.012       .453      .424       1.00
SIZE          .222       .336     -.027        .206     1.00
GOP           .086       .143      .036        .113     —.020       1.00
GDPC          .025       .027      .072          .081     .062       .356

                          Developing Countries

RD           1.00
YEARS         .226      1.00
DIV          -.149       .068     1.00
MIX          -.292       .264      .324       1.00
SIZE          .273       .101     -.035       -.126     1.00
GOP           .042       .093     —.173       -.121     -.069       1.00
GOPC          .211       .125      .022       -.035       .062      -.101
                                     Table 1

       Regression Results for the Determinants of Majority Ownership    in
                 Affiliates of Swedish Multinationals in 1974



                                                     Al 1 Countries
                                                  (497 Observations)
                                                         Probit


Explanatory Variables


Intercept
                                                         1.22*
                                                        (3.53)

RD                                                     -2.21
                                                        (.54)

YEARS                                                    2.87 E_O1***
                                                        (2.98)

DIV                                                     —2.52 E_O1*
                                                        (1.62)

MIX                                                     -1.21
                                                        (2.85)

SIZE                                                    -3.83 E_O5*
                                                        (5.81)

GOP                                                     -5.05 E-O7
                                                        (2.32)

GNPC                                                     7.49 EO5*
                                                        (1.94)

Wrong predictions as %
of total observations                                   16.6

Wrong predictions of
majority-ownership ()                                        .96


t—statistics

***     significant   at the I per cent level
 **     significant   at the 5 per cent level
  *     significant   at the 10 per cent level
                                       Table 2

       Regression Results for the Determinants of Majority Ownership in
               Affiliates of Swedish Multinationals in Developed
                        and Developing Countries, 1974



                              Developed Countries     Developing Countries
                               (403 observations)       (94 observations)
                                    Probit                   Probit
Explanatory
 Variables


Intercept                            1.64***                -5.68 E-O1
                                    (3.56)                   (.64)

RD                                  -2.37                   -6.88
                                     (.52)                   (.71)

YEARS                                2.50 E-O1               5.77 E—01
                                    (2.37)                  (2.17)

DIV                                 -1.93 E-O1              -5.39 E-01
                                    (1.09)                  (1.54)

MIX                                 -1.32*                  -8.60 E—01
                                    (4.00)                   (.88)

SIZE                                -3.81    E-O5           -3.84 E_05***
                                    (4.00)                  (2.71)

GDP                                 -4.23 E-O7              -1.04 E-06
                                    (1.90)                   (.29)

GNPC                                 2.05 E-05               9.65 E_O4*
                                     (.31)                  (2.74)

Wrong predictions as %
of total observations               14.9                    20.0

Wrong predictions of
majority-ownership (*)                .29                    4.1



t—statistics in parenthesis

***     significant   at the 1 per cent level
**      significant   at the 5 per cent level
*       significant   at the 10 per cent level
