                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE SOURCES OF FLUCTUATIONS IN AGGREGATE
                             INVENTORIES AND GNP




                               Kenneth D. West




                           Working Paper No. 2992




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 June, 1989




I thank Ben Bernanke, Olivier Blanchard, Alan Blinder, Ray Fair, James
Hamilton, Tryphon Kollintzas and participants in several seminars for helpful
comments and discussions, and the Bradley Foundation and the National Science
Foundation for financial support. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #2992
                                        June 1989


                   THE SOURCES OF FLUCTUATIONS IN AGGREGATE
                              INVENTORIES AND GNP


                                   ABSTRACT

     A simple real linear-quadratic inventory model is used to determine how
cost and demand shocks interacted to cause fluctuations in aggregate GNP and
inventories in the U.S., 1947-1986. Cost shocks appear to be the predominant
source of fluctuations in inventories, and are largely responsible for the
well known fact that GNP is more variable than final sales. Cost and demand
shocks are of roughly equal importance for GNP. These estimates are, however,
imprecise. With a different, but plausible, value for a certain target
inventory-sales ratio, cost shocks are less important than demand shocks for
GNP fluctuations.




                                        Kenneth D. West
                                        Department of Economics
                                        University of Wisconsin
                                        1180 Observatory Drive
                                        Madison, WI 53706
                                            1

                                   I. Introduction

    This paper is concerned with how real cost and demand shocks interact to

determine aggregate real inventories and ClIP in the postwar United States. Its aim

is to answer such questions as; Do inventories respond mainly to demand shocks

(Holt et al. [1960])? Are demand   shocks   of secondary importance in explaining

fluctuations in CNP (Prescott [1986a,b])? What is the dynamic pattern of the

response of inventories to cost and demand shocks? Of CNP (Blanchard and Quah

[1988])?

     A long tradition attributes the bulk of movements in inventories to demand

shocks. Accelerator models, pioneered by Metzler [1941] and Lovell (1961], posit

that inventories are proportional to expected sales. Production smoothing models,

pioneered by Holt at al. (1960], suggest that because of increasing marginal Costs

of production, the desire to smooth production relative to demand will also cause

adjustment of inventories in response to demand.

     Some recant evidence has, however, suggested that inventories may also (or

instead) be responding to cost shocks. One simple stylized fact that suggests this

is that for virtually any U. S. industry or aggregate, production is more variable

than demand (Blinder (1981, 1986a], Blanchard (1983]).' This is logically

inconsistent with a simple production smoothing model with increasing production and

inventory costs, because such a model argues that the sole reason to hold

inventories is to smooth production relative to demand (West (1986]). It is also

empirically inconsistent with more complex production smoothing models that allow

for accelerator effects and for quadratic costs of changing production, since these

additional complexities do not appear to explain the excess variability (West

(1986]).

     Cost shocks, however, rationalize the excess production variability quite

naturally. This is most easily seen in an extreme case when demand is constant
                                             2

(there are no demand    shocks).   Production will still vary as costs vary, since

production will be high (low) when costs are low (high), with procyclical adjustment

of inventories covering the gap between production and sales. Production will

therefore be more variable than sales.

       Partly   because cost shocks provide a simple explanation of the excess
variability of production, recent inventory research has emphasized the potential
role of cost shocks (e.g., Blinder (l986b], Maccini and Rossana (1984], Miron and
Zeldes   [1987]). It appears, however, that there is as    yet no direct evidence, still
less   a consensus, on how important cost shocks are relative to demand shocks.

Christiano and Eichenbaum (1987], for example, find the excess variability of

production suggestive of a predominant role for coat shocks, while Blinder [1986a]

constructs an example in which the excess variability is consistent with a very

 small role. As stated above, one aim of this paper is to quantify the relative

 importance of cost and demand shocks as determinants of aggregate inventories.

       Simultaneously, the paper   studies how these shocks   interact to determine GNP.

 Recent work in real business cycles has argued that most of the movements in GNP can

 be explained by fluctuations in costs. Prescott [1986a], for example, suggests that

 75 percent of these movements are cost related. Consistent with this, two very

 recent vector autoregressive (VAR) studies have found that well over half of the

 variance of GNP forecasts more than twelve quarters ahead is due to permanent rather

 than transitory shocks (Blanchard and Quah [1988], King et al. (1987]); both studies

 interpret permanent shocks as cost rather than demand related, while acknowledging

 that other interpretations are possible. By contrast, an earlier VAR study

  (Blanchard and Watson (1986]) found that demand shocks are the primary source of GNP

  fluctuations, as did a recent study by Fair tl988].

         The present paper uses comovements of inventories and GNP to help determine the

  sources of fluctuations in GNP. Given the importance of movements of inventory
                                              3

stocks   at cyclical   turning points (Blinder (19811, Blinder and I4oltz-Eakin (1986]).

this seems likely to contain significant information about the sources of U. S.

business cycles. The basic intuition is suggested by a simple production smoothing

model, where    the   only cost terms are ones quadratic in the level of production and

inventories: demand shocks will tend to cause inventories to move countercyclically,

cost shocks will tend to cause them to move procyclically.

     Since it    is   well known that inventory movements are procyclical (Summers

(1981]), this simple model would, of course, attribute much of the movement in GNP

and inventories to cost shocks. The model used, however, allows for a target

inventory-sales ratio (as does, e.g., Blanchard (19831, Ramey (19881 and West

(1986]). This can induce procyclical movements in inventories in response to demand

shocks, and no simple mapping between shocks and comovements is expected to obtain.

But estimation of the parameter that determines the target inventory-sales ratio,

together with the other parameters of the model, allows one to disentangle movements

due to cost from those due to demand shocks. These parameters may be computed from

the estimates of a bivariate VAR in inventories and GNP. The VAR is estimated on

quarterly data, 1947-1986, for both stationary and unit root specifications.

     The point estimates suggest that cost shocks are the predominant source of

fluctuations in inventories. They are largely though not exclusively the reason

that GNP is more variable than final sales; some excess variability appears to be

due as well to increasing returns in production. Cost and demand shocks are of

roughly equal importance in GNP fluctuations. Cost shocks are especially important

for inventories at relatively long horizons, for GNP at short horizons. Over 90

percent of the variance of inventory forecasts 20 quarters ahead is due to cost

shocks. The comparable figure for CNP is about 40 to 60 percent.

     CNP and inventories both display hump shaped responses to both demand and cost

shocks, with the peak affect occurring about four quarters out. When the shocks are
                                                 4

assumed to have unit       roots,   new steady states are essentially achieved in about ten

to   twelve quarters; when the shocks are assumed stationary, the variables       are

markedly     different from   the steady state even forty quarters out.

       For   the usual reasons, however, these results should be    interpreted with

caution: tests of overidentifying restrictions strongly reject the model (as in

Christiano and Eichenbaum (1987], for example), and confidence intervals are rather

large (as in Blanchard and Quab [1988], for example). In connection with the latter

point, it should be noted that the estimates are quite sensitive to the parameter

that determines the target inventory-sales ratio. The point estimate of the

relevant parameter is lower than that obtained in some previous studies (e.g.,

Blanchard [1983], Ramey (1988], West [19861). When this parameter is constrained to

a higher value consistent with these previous studies, much less--only about 10 per

cent--of the movement in GNP over 20 quarters ahead is attributed to cost shocks.

       Section II describes the model. Section III presents empirical results.

Section IV concludes. An appendix has some technical details, with an additional

appendix available on request from the author containing additional results and

details not of central importance.



                                              II. Model

       The basic model is a generalization of the linear-quadratic inventory models

 in, for example, Blinder (1982], Blanchard (1983), Beisley [1969], and West [1986],

 and was suggested by Sargent (1979, ch. XVI]. A similar model was developed

 independently by Christiano and Eichenbaum [l987]          To focus on interactions between

 inventories and output fluctuations, it is assumed that storage in inventories is

 the only means of smoothing production or demand in response to shocks. Demand is

 linear (the area under the demand curve is quadratic). Production and storage costs

 also are     quadratic.
       Let S be real demand (sales), Q real production, H real inventories. The

variables are linked by the identity Q —              S   + .     Let   L be   labor supply, P the

real price of output, R. real profits, with the wage rate the numeraire.

       Utility is separable over time. The per period utility function of the

representative consumer            depends   on labor and current consumption     St:


(1)            -
                   fL    - fg05S2 + 2dtSt.


In (1), f and g are positive, and Udt is & demand shock. Constant and linear terms

in (1) and throughout are suppressed, for notational simplicity. The first term in

(1) reflects disutility from work, the second diminishing marginal benefit of

additional demand. The demand shock Udt captures shocks to preferences, policy, and

the like. A positive value raises demand.

       For the representative firm, production and storage costs L —                  C   are




(2) C —        gOQQP.2   + g10Q2 + g01(R_1-gS)2 +



In    (1), h   and g       are   positive and the other g parameters are such that the
maximization problem stated below is well defined               (see    footnote 3   below)     U is a
cost shock; E is mathematical expectations (linear               projections) conditional on

period t information.

       The first term         in   (2) reflects increasing costs to production if
decreasing         costs   if g<O. The second term reflects costs of adjusting production

(e.g.,    hiring and firing costs). Simple forms of costs               of adjustment are often

assumed present in inventory models (e.g., Eichenbaum [1984], Maccini                     and Rossaria
[1981,1984]).            The quadratic specification can be considered an approximation Co an

arbitrary cost function that is convex in production. The accelerator term,
                 appears in many studies of manufacturing and retail inventoriea

(e.g.. Blanchard [1983], Irvine [1981]). It reflects a balancing of inventory

holding and stockout coats (Molt at al. [1960]) capturing a tendency of inventories

to track a target level             and g is the target inventory-sales ratio that waa

mentioned in the introduction. Sea Elanchard [1983] or West [1986] for additional

discussion of this and the other terma in the coat function.

       A positive coat shock tJ raiaea the coat of both production and inventory

storage. The parameter h measures the shock's impact on inventory storage coats

relative to its impact on production coats. The shock captures random fluctuations

in technology.

       The representative consumer maximizes the expected present diacounted value of

utility, the rapreaantative firm the expected preaent discounted value of profits,

using a common discount rate b, 0<b<1:



                                                        s.t. PS —            +
(3) max lim __,.     E

                                                             —      -
 (4)   max lim --—   E5    EbtRt                   s.t. Re

                                                             — c,   St
                                                                         —       - AH.


 The constraints in (3) and (4) assume that all profits are remitted to consumers as

 profits are earned.

       The modal is solved as follows. Tentatively assume that all markets are

 competitive. Set the number of firms and consumers to one. Use PS —                     + Re   to
 eliminate l. from (3),




 (5)   max lim   T--' E5   Et_sbt
                                                     7

Differentiate    with   respect   to S. The resulting first order      condition may   be

written as an aggregate demand curve




(6)   Pt —   -2g5S+2IJ.


      For    the firm, use S — Q -          to write the sum in (4) in terms of H and Q•
Let c —                   Differentiate with respect to } and Q.          The   resulting first
order conditions may be written


(7) -P+bEP÷t—            8c/øR —                         +
                                                              +    2hU,
                  —
                         ôcj3Qt   —
                                      -2bg10EQ+j + 2[g+(l+b)g10]Q

                                      -ZglQQ_l
                                                 -
                                                     g05g(H1-gS)   +




The first     equation in (7) says that the firm is indifferent between adding a unit to

inventory this period to be sold next period (excess of discounted expected revenue

over cost is bEP+j-8ct/8Ht) and selling the unit this period (revenue is )•                   The

second equation in (7) says that the firm produces until marginal production cost

equals price. See or lanchard and Melino [1986] for additional interpretation.

      Equilibrium P,          S   and H are determined by the three equations in (6) and

 (7) and the identity Q—S+AH. The equilibrium is perturbed as demand shocks shift

the aggregate demand curve (6), cost shocks shift the aggregate inventory and output

 supply curves (7). To estimate how the shocks interact to determine Q.               H   and S,

 it is convenient to eliminate P and EP+i from (7) by substituting (6) and (6) led

 one time period into (7). Let Y be the (2x1) vector (H Q). It follows from

 straightforward algebra that the resulting first order condition is
(8) E[bA1'YI+1 + A0Y1 + A1Y1 + PO'(DOU + bD1U÷1)1 — 0.


In (8), p0—g05+g+g05g2+(1+b)g;                   A0   and A1 are 2x2 matrices that depend on the
discount         rate b and the parsmeters in (1) and (2), with A0 symmetric and positive

definite, with nonzero off-diagonal elements,




                  p2   p1                    p4 0
        A0—
                   P   1,           A1



                                         —                                                    —                —
whir.   P1   —
                 -fi0'[g054g05g2), P2                                                    P3       PO1B1Q, $4

-$2[g0s-g05g55(l-g8s)];           U is the 2xl vector (iJCt,Udt)' ;             the D are 2x2 matrices,

                   h        1                0        -l

                   1    -1,                  0         0.

         Equation (8) may        be interpreted by noting that the competitive market structure

so far assumed solves a social planning problem of msximizing the expected present

discounted value of the excess of consumers surplus                         over   production and storage

costs:




         mmii lim            E0 z,.0bt(W1*   - Ct)          s.t.   —    -g03S12+2U4S1,
                                                                   —
                                                                       S    +   AN.



Equation         (8) says that one can increase this value neither by selling one fewer unit

this period, carrying the extra unit in inventory and selling it next period, nor by

producing and selling one extra unit this period.

         Equation (8) was derived under the assumption that the product market is

competitive. Suppose instead that a single firm                        is   a monopolist, as in Blinder

 [1982]. It is straightforward to verify that (8) still holds, i.e., the
                                                9

monopolistic    and perfectly competitive versions of the model      are   observationally

equivalent. The analysis below therefore is robust to possible imperfection in the

product market, and allows sticky prices in the sense of Blinder (19821.2

        Regardless of the structure of the product market, the reduced form solution to

(8) depends on the stochastic process followed by the shock U. The empirical work

assumes that the cost and demand shocks follow uncorrelated AR(l) (possibly random

walk)   processes with parameters         and *d, with j ,<l: Et.lUdt —                EU
—            Let   $ be a 2x2 diagonal matrix, • — diag(,#4). Also, let



(9) 0 —        +b 0
                      00
        The solution to (8) is


(10)            — IIY   +   FU,


where    II and F are 2x2 matrices that depend on b, 0, •, A0 and A. Since U         follows   a

vector AR(l)    with coefficient matrix $,     FU   follows a vector AR(l) with coefficient

matrix FIF': FU —       (FF')FUj + F(U-IU.1).        To obtain an equation with a serially

uncorrelated disturbance, quasi-difference (10) to obtain



(11)         Y-FF'Y.. —      flY   -
                                       FF'IIY2 + V, V.F(U-Ut).

        The aim of this paper is to use (11) to determine how cost and demand shocks

interact to determine inventories, production and sales. This requires estimates of

II, fl —              and F. Given FF', the first two are easily obtained from (11) by

linear regressions; calculating F$F' entails some work (see below and the

appendix). Given F, G may be diagonalized by multiplying it by F1. One may then
                                             10

apply standard VAR-techniques to compute impulse response functions and variance

decompositions.

    A basic check on the plausibility of the results is the pattern of impulse

responses. While complicated and perhaps counterintuitive dynamics are possiblt

(Blinder [l986a]), intuition suggests that the initial impact of a cost shock will

be to cause inventories, production and sales to fall, with a negative long run

impact as well when there are unit roots. One expects the initial impact of a

demand shock to cause production and sales to rise, with the effect on inventories

indeterminate: production smoothing will tend to make the effect negative, g55>O in

equation (2) will tend to make the effect positive (see also Blinder [1986a]). When

there are unit roots (*d'4e1)'     the long run impact of a demand shock on production
and sales is positive, on inventories indeterminate (again because of conflicting

forces from production smoothing and g>0).

        This section cloaes with an overview of the procedure used to identify the

shocks, and may be skipped without loss of continuity. The first step is to obtain

an estimate of F4F', which is used construct the right and left hand aide variables

 in (11). Estimation of FIF' when • and 0d        are   unknown is discussed in the

appendix. Consider instead when Ø and *d are imposed a priori. This was true,

with *d4c.l'    for   one of the specifications estimated below. Then t—F'F1—I, the

 shocks follow uncorrelated random walks, and equation (11) is just AY—fltY..1+V.

 Upon defining (v v2)'—V, this may be written out in scalars as




 (12)        Rt —          + xdQ..1 +
                  —        +         + v2.


 Given a value of the discount rate b, the four $         (DO)   defined in equation (8) can

 be computed from the OLS estimates of the four fjj'5. The estimates of the fl         can
                                                       11


then be used    to   compute   the   g,j, as well as h, 2c'     o     and F. See the appendix for

details. Note that the gjj           are   only identified up to a normalization, as are h,

and F.     (This is apparent in (6) and (7): doubling all the gjj terms except g

leaves    the first order conditions unchanged, apart from a rescaling of the

disturbances.) The normalization chosen was fl—l. Variance decompositions, and

impulse responses to a one standard deviation shock, however, are invariant to

choice of normalization.

       It should be noted that whether or not               is known a priori this is not the

usual procedure for orthogonalizing vector autoregressive residuals (e.g.,

Haltiwanger and Maccini [19871), and issues such as sensitivity of results to

orderings of variables are not relevant. The basic algebraic reason for this is

that   the three unknowns h, a2            and   ad are determined uniquely by the three unknowns
in .
                                           III.   Emoirical Results

A. Data and Estimation Technique

         The data were real (1982 dollars), quarterly, seasonally adjusted, and

expressed at annual rates, 1947:1 to 1986:4. Figures for ON?, final sales (demand)

and inventory investment were obtained from CITIBASE files 0NP82, CNS82 and GV82.

The implied series for inventories was obtained by setting the 1982:1 figure to

match the corresponding entry in the CITIBASE file for real inventories, GL82, and

 then using the series for inventory investment (GV82) to compute the level in other

 quarters.

         The first step in the empirical work was to model deterministic and stochastic

 trends. Regressions of log levels of the data on a constant and time trend yielded

 estimated growth rates of 0.786 per cent per quarter for inventories, 0.828 percent

 for production; when inventories and GNP were constrained to have a common
                                            12

deterministic growth rate, the figure was 0.807 percent per quarter. This suggested

that it. is reasonable to model the two variables as having a common deterministic

trend, and, indeed, neither asymptotic nor Monte Carlo tests could reject the null

of a common deterministic trend. Details on these tests, as well as on the

consistency of geometric growth with the model, are in the additional appendix

available on request. The data used in all the estimation below therefore are data

"scaled" by this common deterministic trend, i.e. ,   the   1982 data just described

divided by (10Ø8Ø7)t• The mean values for scaled inventories, CNP and sales were

1,017, 1,106 and 1,099 billion 1982 dollars. See Figure I for a plot of the scaled

data.

        All the inference reported below is conditional on the estimated growth rate of

0.807 percent per quarter and, except for the results in Tables I and II below, on

an imposed discount rate b—0.98 as well. Related work (West [1986)) and some tests

described in a footnote suggest that the empirical results are not likely to be

sensitive to even large errors in the estimate of this deterministic trend, or to

the exact choice of discount rate.0

        The Said and Dickey [1984) test for a unit root in the scaled data does not

reject the null of a unit root in either GNP or inventories at even the ten percent

level, for either 4 lags (t-statistic for H0: coefficient on lagged dependent

variable—l is -1.96 for GNP, -1.20 for inventories) or 12 lags (t-statistic —      -1.62

for CNP, -1.16 for inventories), using either the asymptotic or Monte Carlo levels

in Schwert [1987]. This suggested the importance of a differenced (—d—l)

specification. On the other hand, extreme serial correlation of GNP and inventories

is consistent with a stationary model as well, with the persistence coming from

and d less than but near unity. This suggests the plausibility of an undifferenced

specification as well. A cointegrated specification seemed of secondary interest

because the null of no cointegration of GNP and inventories was not rejected at even
                                             13

the ten per cent level using the Engle and Granger [1987] CRDW test, when either GNP

was regressed on inventories (Durbin-Watson —       0.070) or inventories on GNP (Durbin
Watson —   0.042).
       This suggests the importance of two   of   the specifications estimated: a

differenced one, with -.—l imposed, and a quasi-differenced one, where —0.969,

d°997      was estimated as described in the appendix. In this stationary

specification, demand disturbances were overwhelmingly dominant at distant horizons,

for GNP (see the discussion of Table V below). To check whether this result

followed simply because #d was very near one, and slightly larger than ,           a   third

and final specification estimated d and           subject to the constraint that

The maximum   likelihood estimate was *——O.949.        See Table I for a summary of     the
serial   correlation parameters for the three specifications, as well as the left hand

side   variables used   in the regression estimates of (11).

       In all three specifications, confidence intervals for various estimates were

bootstripped (Efron [1982], Freedman (l984, Runkle [1987]), using one thousand

repetitions.° For each of the one thousand repetitions: (a)a time series of Y was

generated recursively using the estimated II and FF', and sampling the estimated

residuals with replacement; (b)equation (11) was reestimated (holding F$F' fixed),

to get another U. Inference was thus conditional on the estimated or imposed                   -




serial   correlation matrix F4F' (and, as noted above, on the value of the discount

rate b and the estimated growth rate).

       Impulse responses and variance decompositions over various finite horizons were

calculated in th. standard way, using the RATS computer program. The results also

report variance decompositions at an infinite horizon, computed simply as the limit

of the finite horizon variance decompositions.

       A specialization of the model that involves a simple form of costs has simple

implications for the relative variabilities of GNP and final sales. Suppose in
                                              14

particular that h—g1Q—g—O, so that C —        go2   +   g05H2 +   2QUC.     Assume tentatively
that all variables have a zero unconditional mean. Then in a stationary
                                                                                                 -
environment,     (a)in the presence of demand shocks only (UO), 0 < E(S2-Q2) — ES2

EQ2 — var(S) -     var(Q),   or var(Q)/var(S) < 1 (West [19861); (b)in the presence of

cost shocks only (UdtO), var(Q)/var(S) 2 1 (see the additional appendix available

on request).

       In the presence of unit roots, variances do not exist, but analogous

inequalities nonetheless hold (West (1987]). Since St —                     S2-Q2 —   -2Qk1 +
AB2.    Under fairly general conditions- - including in particular when (}1,AQ)

follows a vector autoregression, as in the present paper--EQll —              E[(Q + AQ    +


       )M]   —                   exists (is finite). The simplified model defined in the

previous paragraph then implies (a)in the presence of demand shocks only (U—O), 0

< E(S2-Q2), (b)in the presence of cost shocks only (Udt•O), 0 > E(S2-Q2).

       That the data do not have zero means, and are first scaled by gt, is irrelevant

for the stationary specification but introduces some minor complications for the

unit root specification. As explained in the additional appendix available on

request, it is necessary to examine not -2cov(Q,.Ht) +            var(}{)   but -2cov(Q,}I) +

gvar(All).       This was calculated in a straightforward fashion from the (A}1,Q)

autoregression, and is reported in the Table IV entries for E(S2-Q2).

8. Emoirical Results

       Estimates of the reduced form, of cost and demand parameters, of impulse

response functions, of production and sales variability, and of variance

decompositions will be discussed in turn. Table II has estimates of the reduced

form (10), where fl—[s. (Constant terms were included in all the regressions, but

are not reported to conserve space.) Given how close are the values of                 and ,
the    reduced from estimates are of course quite similar (columns (2) to (5)).
                                         15

    The results of three disgnostic tests sre reported in columns (6) to (8). The

Q ststistics in columns (6) and (7) cannot reject the null of no serial correlation

in the residuals at the 5 per cent level, though they do reject at the 10 percent

level for the inventory equation all three specifications. Column (8) reports

maximum likelihood tests of the null of a lag length of one versus a lag length of

two (after differencing or quasi-differencing by Ftr'). These reject the null of a

lag length of one quite strongly. For the stationary specifications, tests of an

unrestricted lag length of two, in levels, versus the restricted second order VAR

implied by (11) also reject the null at the .05 level (not reported in the Table)

     The rejection of the overidentifying restrictions reported in column (8)

suggests that this model is too simple to fully characterize the data.

Qualitatively similar results obtain, however, when a more complicated model that

implies a longer length VAR is used (see section C below). Since the present model

is simpler to interpret, and since the parameter estimates and impulse response

functions are for the most part quite plausible (see below), I will focus on this

simple model.

     Cost and demand parameters are reported in Table III, with the normalization as

stated in the Table. Most parameters are correctly signed. The demand curve slope

g05, the inventory cost g05 and the cost of adjustment gIQ are all fairly precisely

estimated, and are consistent with those for the automobile industry (Blanchard

[1983]) and for two digit nondurables manufacturers (West [1986]). The target level

parameter ge is, however, incorrectly signed, although the 95 percent confidence

interval is so large that it includes values such aa .4 and .7 that are consistent

with Blanchard [1983], Ramey [1988] and West [1986] .   I   therefore interpret this as

a noisy and imprecise sample estimate of a population parameter that is positive

 (though perhaps small).7 Particularly interesting are the eatimatea of the

quadratic production coat g. As in Blanchard [1983] this coat is insignificantly
                                                 16

different from zero and constant returns to scale cannot be rejected. As in Ramey

[1988], however, the point estimates are negative, implying a tendency to bunch

production.

     Figures II and III plot the response to one standard deviation cost and demand

shocks for the .-4.—O.949 specification. Figures IV and V do the same for

#e1.0.        (To conserve space, plots for O.969, —O.997 are not presented, but

any differences from d°•949 are noted below.) The signs of the shocks are as
in equations (1) and (2): a positive cost shock raises costs, a positive demand

shock raises demand. The units on the vertical axis are billions of 1982 dollars.

Note that the vertical scale in Figure III is slightly more compact than in the

other three figures, and that the horizontal scales are different for the

cd°949        and             specifications.
     In response to a positive stationary cost shock (Figure II), GNP, inventories

and final sales all fall initially, then rise back to the initial steady state. The

smoothing role of inventories is illustrated by the sharper initial fall of GNP than

demand, in response to the increase in costs; without inventories, this sharper fall

would not be possible. The smoothing pattern appears to make GNP more variable than

sales, as is expected in simplified versions of the model in the presence of cost

shocks alone.

     The GNP and sales responses to a stationary demand shock, in Figure III, are

familiar hump-shaped ones. As in Blanchard and Quah [1988], the peak response

occurs at about four quarters. Inventories are initially drawn down, thereby

buffering GNP from the shock. They are then built up, accumulating above the

steady state level before falling back down. The pattern is similar to Haltiwanger

and Maccini's [19871 estimates of the response of finished goods inventories to new

orders shocks. The smoothing by inventories appears to make GNP more variable than

demand. This is inconsistent with the standard production smoothing model with g0Q
                                         17

positive, but is unsurprising given that the estimated g is negative.9

     In response to a positive random walk cost shock (Figure IV), inventories,

demand and CNP all fall. Once again, inventories perform their smoothing role,

allowing demand to fall less than GNP. The decline in both inventories and final

sales is slmost monotonic; GNP displays a hump shape (as in Blanchard and Quah

[1988] and King et al. [1987]). The new steady state is essentially obtained in

about two years, again as in Blanchard and Qush (1988] snd King et al. [1987]. (The

similarity of the steady state changes in final sales and GNP results because

inventory investment (the first difference of inventories) is assumed stationary.)

     In response to a positive random walk demand shock (Figure V), inventories are

drawn down, demand and GNP rise. Some smoothing is apparent initially, although GNP

quickly rises past demand. Inventories show a hump shape; the return back towards

the initial level again suggests a target level. The steady state is again reached

in about two years.

     Table IV reports the relative variability of GNP and final sales, using the

*c4C&949 and *c*dl specifications. As is well known (Blinder [1981]), the

variance of CNP exceeds that of final sales (line 1, column 2). The appropriate

inequality holds as well when unit roots are assumed present (line 1, column 1).

The impression from the Figures that GNP is more variables than sales, in response

to either cost or demand shocks, is borne out by the relevant point estimates (lines

2 and 3), though the excess variability is statistically insignificant at the 95

percent level when there are demand shocks only (line 2).

     Table IV suggests an explanation of the seeming contradiction between the

Blinder [1982] version of the production smoothing model and the fact that CNP is

more variable than final sales. The bulk of the explanation is that cost shocks are

important. But even in the absence of cost shocks, CNP would possibly continue to

be more variable. This excess variability appears to be attributable at least in
                                          18


part to a small tendency to bunch production (i.e., to the small negative value of

     if the Table IV figures are recalculated for the #c'4C"° specification under

the counterfactual assumption that g—O (constant rather than increasing returns to

scale), with all other parsmeters held constant, the entry in line (2) for just

demand shocks falls to 0.994.

     Table V has variance decompositions. In all three specifications, the variance

of inventories is largely attributable to cost disturbances. This is eapecially

true at relatively long horizons. The point estimates suggest that over 90 per cent

of the variance is attributable to coat shocks at horizons of 4 quarters or more,

the confidence intervals that it is unlikely that less than half the variance is due

to cost shocks. This dominance of cost shocks is consistent with the marked

procyclicality of inventory stocks (see Figure I), and is perhaps unsurprising given

that the estimates of the accelerator parameter g were negative.

     All three specifications attribute to coat shocks about 40 to 60 per cent of

the variability of GNP at horizons of about 20 quarters. At longer horizons,

however, there are marked differences between the two specifications that impose

c"#d (columns (1) and (2)) and the one that does not (column (3)). When dc' the
infinite horizon figure is still about 40 to 60 per cent, but for #—0.967,

°.996     the figure is about only a little above 10 per cent. A comparison of
columns (2) and (3) indicate that this is an artifact of the alightly higher point

estimate of #5: if #—I,         the contribution of coat ahocka at an infinite

horizon would of course be zero. Here, instead, #d is slightly less than one, ao

 the contribution of cost shocks at that horizon is not exactly zero.t° I am

 therefore inclined to downplay the infinite horizon decompoaitiona in column (3).

 In this connection, the reader should recall that the confidence intervals are

 conditional on the eatimatea of    and        so the upper bound of 34.9 in the
 infinite horizon confidence interval in column (3) probably is consistent with a
                                         19

point estimate in the 40 to 60 range.

     This 40 to 60 per cent range is bracketed by the somewhat higher estimates in

&lanchard and Quah (1988] and King et al. [1987], and the somewhat lower estimates

in 3lanchard and Watson (1986] and Fair [1988]." A possible reconciliation with

the two papers that find higher estimates is that permanent shocks, tentatively

linked in those papers to cost rather than demand, are in fact partly demand

related: in the present context, at least, nothing in the model or results argues

for allowing for cost but not demand shocks to be permanent.

     A possible reconciliation with the three papers that find a smaller role for

costs is suggested by the only one of the papers that has an inventory equation,

Fair [1988]. Fair uses a standard flexible accelerator/production smoothing model.

Desired inventories are proportional to sales; actual inventories adjust only

partially toward the desired level (Fair [1984, ppl3l-l32)). In Fair [1988) the

shock to the inventory equation is interpreted as one of the components of the

aggregate demand shock. In the present paper, however, the shock to the inventory

equation in both (8) and (10) depends on cost as wall as demand. Inventory

investment therefore responds to cost shocks. The same plausibly applies to other

types of business investment. Insofar as the shocks to the aggregate demand curve

in Blanchard and Watson [1986) are due to business investment, some of the GNP

variability that those papers attribute to aggregate demand shocks might more

properly be attributed to aggregate cost shocks. In any case, whether or not I am

correct in arguing that shocks to investment equations plausibly reflect cost as

well as demand, my argument does suggest why I find a more important role for cost

shocks than do and Blanchard and Watson [1986) and Fair (1988]. Whether this

argument is persuasive of course will require further research.

     To return to Table V: Cost shocks are less important for CNP as the forecast

horizon increases. This pattern held quite rigidly. Although not reported in Table
                                             20

V, the fraction of CNF   variability attributable   to cost shocks declined

monotonically as the horizon increased. Evidently, demand shocks are estimated to

have increasing real effects for GNP, with inventories serving as a buffer. This is

illustrated in the impulse responses. In both specifications, CNP responses to cost

shocks show an earlier peak and a quicker approach to the steady state.

     The decreasing importance of demand shocks is consistent with Maccini and

Haltiwanger [1987] , who report an analogous tendency for shocks to new orders to

account for an increasing fraction of the variance of manufacturing inventories as

the forecast horizon increases. The contradictory Zlanchard and Quah [1988] and

King et al. (1987] result that cost shocks are increasingly important as the horizon

increasea again potentially can be reconciled with Table V if permanent disturbances

are demand as well as cost related.

     Finally, fluctuations in final sales appear to be attributable in roughly equal

shares to coat and demand shocks.       (I again discount the results in column (3), for

the reasons given above.) There does not appear to be a marked tendency for cost

shocks to be particularly important at any particular horizon. (Once again, for the

differenced specification, the similarity of the infinite horizon decompositions for

CNP and sales results because inventory investment is stationary.)

C. Additional Emoirical Results

     As a check on the preceding results, two      additional   sets of estimates were

obtained. For simplicity, I imposed *cdl in both, and did not compute any

confidence intervals. The first set of estimates was already mentioned in the

discussion of diagnostic tests, and used a more complicated model that implied a

longer length VAR. Equation (2)'s cost function was expanded to:



(13) Ct — go0Q2 + g10AQ2   + g55(H.1-gS)2 + 2Ut(hHt+Qt)     +

                         + gaEaQ    +   g2H2 + gQ5.
                                            21




The four additional terms are suggested by Eichenbaum [1984]. With cd1' this

can be shown to lead to an exactly identified second order VAR in

Diagnostic tests on the OLS estimates of this second order VAR: For the tll

equation, Q(36) for the residual was 32.81 (p-value —      0.62);   for the   equation,
Q(36)—28.37 (p-value —   0.82);   2(4) for lags—2 against lags—3 (second order against

third order VAR) yields 4.33 (p-value—0.36).

     Point estimates for the g are given in Table VIA. Of the five parameters

present in the model used above, four fall within the 95 percent confidence

intervals in line 1 of Table III (the exception is gjQ, which is a little larger

than one would expect from the Table III confidence interval). Most of the four

additional parameters are small relative to the original parameters, with three of

the four (g, g, g) having negative signs. The interpretation of these negative

signs is unclear. Perhaps this suggests a tendency to bunch inventory holdings as

well as production. The entries corresponding to the & line in Table V are

reported in Table VIB. As may be seen, they are consistent with the Table V

entries.

     I conclude that even though the model in section B was, as usual, rejected by

tests of overidentifying restrictions, substantively different results are unlikely

to be produced by extensions to models that are complicated and more difficult to

interpret, but unrejected.

     A second set of additional estimates considered the implications of the

imprecise estimates of the accelerator parameter g. In this set, g was fixed at

0.68 instead of its estimated value of -    .04;   .68 is the upper bound of the 95

percent confidence interval in line (1) of Table III, and is consistent with the

estimates of some earlier studies (Blanchard [1983], West [1986]). Holding the

other g parameters fixed at the values reported in Table III, I then solved for
                                         22

the reduced form and used thia in all aubaequent calculations.

    One would expect the higher value of g to lead to a less important role for

cost shocks, since more of the procyclical movement of inventories will be

attributed to movements in demand. Indeed, with the other g parameters held fixed

at the values reported in Table III, the implied infinite horizon fraction of the

variance of inventories, GNP and sales due to cost shocks falls, to 66, 9 and 9.

See Table VII. The estimates in Table V, then, are sufficiently imprecise that

fixing g at a plausible value that is rather different from its estimated value

results in a variance decomposition that is rather different, and more consistent

with some earlier studies (e.g., Fair [1988,p2321 who finds that supply shocks

account for 7 percent of the variance of the eight quarter shead forecast error in

GNP).


                                   IV. Conclusions

     Fluctuations in aggregate inventories in the postwar U.S. appear to be due more

to fluctuations in cost than in demand. Despite some long standing difficulties in

linking movements in inventories to those in costs (a recent example is Miron and

Zeldes [1987]), the implication is that future inventory research should emphasize

the role of costs. Fluctuations in CNP appear to be due in roughly equal

proportions to fluctuations in cost and demand. The point estimates are, however,

noisy. With a different, and plausible, value for the parameter that determines a

target inventory-sales ratio, cost shocks are less important than demand shocks for

CNP fluctuations.
Footnotes

     1. An   exception   is production to order manufacturing, when demand is

measured by orders rather than sales (West (1988]).

     2. Readers who prefer the monopolist interpretation should note that under

that interpretation the parammter estimate called g is instead an estimate of

.5g. In a related context, Eichenbaum (1984] states that an oligopolistic

structure results in an observationally equivalent equilibrium, provided

individual firms follow symmetric open ioop Nash strategies.

     3. Necessary conditions for (8) and (10) to be the optimal solution to the

model include (l)A0 is positive definite (the Legendre-Clebsch condition for

optimality [Stengel, l986,p2l3]); (2)the two       smaller   of the four roots to

 bAiz1+Ao+AjzI_0 are strictly less than b"2 in modulus. These conditions are

guaranteed to hold if g, g. g0, gjq > 0. See Hansen and Sargent [1981]. I

thank Tryphon Kollintzas for clarifying this point.

     4. Actually, impulse response functions are invariant only up to a sign

change.

     S. For the            specification described below, I calculated the infinite

horizon variance decompositions described in the next paragraph, for data scaled

by (1012)t — [1 +     (l.5)x(.008)]t   and (1•004)t — (1 + (.5)x(.008)]t. None of

these estimates were more than four percentage points different than the figures

reported in Table V below. See West (1986] on the insensitivity of results to

exact choice of b.

     6. For the differenced specification, asymptotic standard errors were also

calculated for some of the parameter estimates, in a fashion similar to that

described in West [1988]. The results were about the same.

     7. While   g<0   is not sensible, this model still generates a positive level

of inventories (see Schutte [1983]). In the underlying model that allows for

deterministic growth in inventories and production, which is described in detail

in the additional appendix available on request, the quadratic costs in (2) are
interpreted as costs around a minimum point that grows over time. This growth

can lead to positive inventory levels even if g is negative (or, more

plausibly, zero).

     8. The estimated value of g is small enough relative to the other

parameters that the conditions noted in footnote 3 are met. It should be

emphasized that the conditions in that footnote are necessary but not sufficient.

James Hamilton has pointed out to me that these conditions therefore do not

establish that the point estimates are consistent with (8) and (10)

characterizing the optimal policy.

     9. For —0.969, #d°.997' the response to a cost shock is quite similar to

that in Figure II, but the response to a demand is somewhat different from Figure

III, in that (a)even after 80 quarters, no return to the steady state is obvious

(this of course results since *d      is   so near unity), and (b)after initially

falling, inventories rise up above the steady state before finally falling back

towards the steady state.

     10. The ""     entry   for H in column 3 indicates that this argument does not

yet apply to inventories with #d.996;         it would of course eventually apply for
some #d   arbitrarily near   unity.

      11. Fair [1988] only calculates decompositions up to eight quarters out;

these, too, attribute a much lower figure to costs than does Table V.

      12. In defense of the present paper, it should be noted that these estimates

do not seem to be any less precise than those in Blanchard snd Quah [1988] or

King et si. (1987]. Incidentally, for the #c4d"1          specification,   plots of the

 eight quarter ahead forecast error in GNP (as in Blsnchard and Watson [1986])

 indicated that both the cost and demand shocks tended to be negative in

 contractions, positive in expansions, with no noticeable tendency for cycles to

 be demand or cost driven. When g was fixed at .68, the same plot indicated

 that all cycles were demand driven (including, perhaps implausibly, the 1973-75

 recession).
                                                   - Al -

                                               Aooendix

      This discusses (l)how to calculste F (defined in equation (10)), given

estimstes of F41 end U; (2)how to estimate FIF' snd U.

(1)Tentatively ignore the scaling for growth discussed in the text. Inserting (10)

led once into (8) yields




      bA1'   (11Y1+FIU1) + A0Y + A1Y01    -
                                              DU   —   0   —>
      bA1' [U(flY1+FU)+FtU1) + Ao(UYt+FU1) + A1Y11               -
                                                                     DU1   — 0 —>

(Al) bA1'U2 + A011 + A1 — 0

(A2) [bA1'(FGF+U)+A0]F — 0.



      After estimating the reduced form (11), one uses the four equations in (Al) to

linearly recover the four elements of A0 and A1. Given estimates of A0 and A1, one

can   calculate the three unknowns h,               and Q24 from the three equations in
                                               — D(1D'. (An          estimate   of Q   is available from

the covariance matrix of the reduced form residuals.) One then calculates F —

[bA1' (F.rt+n)+A4,r'D.
      As stated in the text, the data were scaled by a growth rate of (100807)t _                     gt
prior to estimation of (11). The model that allows such growth (described in detail

in the additional appendix available on request) implies that the first order

condition (10) should be written




       E( bgA11Y1 + A0Y +       ('A1Y.1 +     DU1 ) —      0,


where D—D0+bgD1, D0 and D defined below equation (8). The calculations just

described are then modified in a straightforward fashion.

(2)When #c#d#       for   some scalar ,    F4r'—#I,        and it is straightforward to estimate
                                             -A2-

and   II subject   to the restriction that                         for some scalar .   Then

FF'—I and one proceeds as above. When                maximum   likelihood   is very

cumbersome. (The constraint is not only nonlinear but involves both the regression

parameters and the variance-covariance matrix.) The following procedure, which

yields consistent though not efficient estimates, was therefore used instead:

(a)OLS was used to estimate the second order VAR YU1Y+U2Yz+V.

(b)The matrix lag polynomial I-U1L-112L2     must be factored as (I-FF'L)(I-flL). For

given fl and U2, there may be zero, two or four real factorizations. (Analogy: if

FF', U, fl and U2 were all scalars, there would be zero or two factorizations: zero

if both roots to l-111L-It2L2 are complex, two if the roots are real. In the latter

case one obtains two factorizations by assigning first one and then the other root

to the serial correlation parameter FIF'.) For the U1 and fl actually estimated,

there happened to be two real factorizations.

(c)Let P—FF1. For each factorization (each P and II): (i)Compute A0 and A1 as

described above. (ii)With some manipulation, (A2) implies that

DI_[bA1'(P+U)+A0]P[bA1'(P+U)+AY'D. Imposing that •        is   diagonal allows one to solve

for .       Given h (computed as described above), one can also use this to compute .
This yields • and I). (iii)Compute F as above, F—[bA1'(P+II)+A0F1D. (iv)Compute F'F'

using the diagonal        produced in step (ii). Call this matrix P*. (v)The implied

restricted VAR is Y_(P*+fl)Y1..jP*UYt..z+V. Compute the likelihood (the log

 determinant of the variance covariance matrix of V1).

 (d)Select the factorization that yields the highest likelihood. This P* is what is

 reported as FF1 in Table I.

        Estimation of the restricted model described in step (c), part (v) may be done

 linearly, by defining left and right hand side variables that are appropriate

 transformations of current and lagged Il and Q.

 University    of Wisconsin
                              - -Additional   appendix, p1- -

Additional     Aooendix

       This appendix contains additional details on the empirical work that were

omitted from the main body of the paper to save space. There are eight items:

I. Growth

II. Production versus sales variability

III. Tests for a common deterministic trend in Q and H

IV.    Estimation   of infinite horizon variance decompositions

V. Regressions to scale data

VI. Estimates of the fl

VII.   Asymptotic standard errors for the

VIII. Asymptotic standard errors for the ir, cd''               both   scaled and unscaled

data

IX.    Plots   of impulse response functions for c•969'd•997•
                                 - -Additional       appendix, p2- -

I.   Growth

      As noted in the text, exactly the same first order conditions, and,

therefore, exactly the same reduced form, is delivered by the observationally

equivalent model in which the economy maximizes the excess of consumers

surplus W* over production costs,



(AS) max lim i-->. E0 Ebt(Wt* -             C)        s.t. Q —       S+

where in the model in the paper W* —                 -g5S2+2U4S.       It is algebraically

convenient to work with the (AS) statement of the model. Let h, q,                           Udt,

and       be the original data and shocks in levels, with }, Q, S. U, and

U the scaled data (e.g., H—h/gt).                    Let W*-C     be



(A4) k -       g05s2 - 2mostst +   2tt.3s

               -                             -   2g(q-m)         -

               -                        - goq(q-moQt)2      -   g1Q(àq-m1Q.)
               -   2(h.h+q)u.

k. is a purely deterministic term that grows no faster than gZt The
deterministic       mjjt shift   the bliss level and minimum costs points, mtjt —

 gtmjo.    Also,    gtjt —    gtg0 Let y—(h,q),                 Substituting (A4)
 into   (AS), using qt       —   +   to substitute out for s, differentiating with

 respect      to q and h and then dividing by two            yields


        E( bA1'y1 + AoYt + A1y +                 -
                                                     [Dou + bD1u+1] ) — 0,
                             - -Additional   appendix, p3- -

where m—(m,in)', A0, A1, D0 and D are defined in equation (8), and, e.g.,
   — Ifl0 + bnI0s+1 +        +               + bg05(l-g)m05, with ni. defined
similarly. Dividing     through by gt and rearranging yields



(A5)   E( bgA1'Yj + AoYt + gA1Y1 + M + DU ) — 0,


where D—D0+bgD1 and M—(M9,M0)', with, e.g.,         —   - (l-bg)m00   + g093 + g05g53m050 +

bg05(l-g)m0. Equation (10) is a version of equation (A5) with the               constant

term   and growth factor g suppressed.
       By mimicking the argument in Hansen and Sargent         (1981), it can be

established   that bAj'L1+A0+A1L — (C0+bC1L')'(C0+C1L), with C0+C1L a stable

polynomial,   C0+bC1L1 an unstable polynomial. It follows that

bgAj'L'++g'A1L     —
                       (C0+bgC1Lt)'   (C0+g'C1L). Since gl, C0+g1C1L is a stable
polynomial. As long as bg<l, C0+bgC1L' is an unstable polynomial. The rule
of solving stable roots backwards, unstable roots forwards leads to the
solution in the text.
                                           - -Additional   appendix, p4- -

II.      Production         versus sales variability

         As in the previous section, let lower case letters denote the variables

before scaling by g, uppercase letters denote scaled variables. Let h/gt —

H    —   EH       +   }r,   EW — 0,   with similar notation for Q            and St. (This is not the

same }r and Q                that   appear in Tables I and II.)

             In the stationary model, one can derive the inequality var(Q)<var(S) in

the presence of just demand shocks exactly as in West (1986). One compares

the unconditional expectation of the infinite sum in equation (A3) under the

optimal policy to that under the alternative policy that sets hA —                             Eb     —

gt},         $A — st        qA —    s+    E.oh.   One can derive the inequality var(Q)>var(S) in

the presence of just cost shocks by performing the same comparison, this time

with an alternative policy that sets                         — Eh., s' —     q   -        qA —   q.
             In a model with unit roots, if there is no deterministic trend to the

data (g—1), begin by noting that the period zero conditional expectation of

the infinite sum in (A3) must be larger for the optimal policy than for any

alternative. Consider the alternative that Sets h. —                             Eh   — gtEH, sA —    s,
         —   s + EMI, in the presence of just demand shocks. Quadratic inventory
costs (}r2) are strictly greater in the optimal policy. So a necessary

condition for optimality is that the conditional expectation of the difference

between the optimal                 and   alternative values of (A3), exclusive of such costs,

is nonnegative. Taking unconditional expectations of this difference implies

O <      E(S2-Q2). The              argument for 0 > E(S2-Q2) in the presence of just cost

shocks is similar.

             That g>l introduces some slight complications. If, for example, q —                           s
+                 QA    —
                            qA/gt — S     + ER - g1EH —    Q   -   H   + g'H1 + ER     - g1EH —> (QA)2

 -
      Q2      —
                  -2Q.H +            + Q(l-g')H1, and the last of these three terms does
                                - -Additional   appendix, p5- -

not   have a finite unconditional expectation. Considering instead the policy

qA    —
          s+   Eth1 +   ((g-l)/g](h-Eh),   we find that (Q)2      - Q2 — -2g'QH   +

g2M12, which does have a finite expectation. It is an estimate of
cov(Q,Et) +       g var(MI)    that is reported in Table 3.
                           --Additional appendix, p6- -

III.   Tests for a common deterministic trend in 0 and H



       For the stationary specification, an asymptotic test of whether the two

unconstrained growth rates of .786 and .828 percent are significantly

different from one another was performed. This did not reject the null of a

common growth rate at conventional significance levels (t-statistic less than

1.43, using either fifth, tenth, or fifteenth order Newey and West (1987)

corrections).    For the nonstationary specification, a bootstrap test of the

null of one deterministic and of the null of two stochastic trends was

performed. The residuals for the AR(l) first difference specification were

sampled with replacement, the scaled data were generated according to the

estimated VAR parameters, and unscaled data were constructed using the

estimated common growth rate of .807 percent. For each sample, I estimated

and saved (a)the absolute value of the difference between the estimated growth

rates of (i)inventories and (ii)CNP, and (b)the Durbin Watson of the

regression of scaled inventories on scaled GNP, with an estimated common

growth rate used for scaling.



       Fewer than 60 percent of the estimates of the separate growth rates were

less than .042 (—.828- .786) percent apart. The null of a common deterministic

trend thus cannot be rejected. In addition, fewer than 50 percent of the

Durbin-Watson statistics from the regression of scaled inventories on scaled

GNP were smaller than .042, the figure for the actual data. Thus, the null of

 two stochastic trends cannot be rejected.
                            - -Additional   appendix, p7- -

IV. Estimationof     infinite horizon variance decpmDositions

       For data assumed stationary these are just unconditional moments,

calculated from the Yule-Walker equations. For differenced data these were

calculated by computing lim n--> n1                           —

                          (easily   established). This yields estimates of, say,

   and         where lim >    n var(Q           Q) — 8lQc+G2rd.     The infinite

horizon fraction of the variance of          due to cost shocks was then computed as
   2       2     2
OlacOlac+9fd
                                          -Additional appendix, p8- -

V. RegressiOns to scale data
A. The first regression is that of log(H) on a constant and a time trend, the
second that of log(Q) on a constant and a time trend, the third that of log(H)
and log(Q) on constants and a time trend, constraining the coefficient on the
time trend but not the constant to be the same for both log(H) and log (Q).

 DEPENDENT VARIABLE         22              LOCH
 FROM 1947:     1 UNTIL 1986: 4
                       160                    DEGREES OF FREEDOM      158
 OBSERVATIONS
 R**2            .98259523                    RBAR**2           .98248507
 SSR         .41431915                        SEE          .512O8135E-O1
 DURBIN-WATSON   .03435775
 Q( 36)—      1203.30       SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL .000000
                    VAR LAG     COEFFICIENT STAND. ERROR                       T - STATI STIC
 NO.       LABEL
 ***       ******* *** ***                   ************    ************         *** * *** *
   1       CONSTANT     0         0         6.898694         .813482OE-O2    848.0451
   2       TREND       24         0         .8278275E-02     .8765125E-O4    94.44560

 DEPENDENT VARIABLE             23           LOCQ
 FROM 1947:        1 UNTIL 1986: 4
 OBSERVATIONS           160      DEGREES OF FREEDOM     158
 R**2             .98548817      RBAR**2          .98539632
 SSR          .31069384          SEE         .44344297E-O1
 DUR.BIN-WATSON   .06198289
 Q( 36)—     818.569        SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL .000000
                   VAR LAG      COEFFICIENT   STAND. ERROR                     T - STATISTIC
 NO.      LABEL
 ***     AAAk***       *** *** *****-k**kkk*  ***AAAA***                      ***** * * ** * * *
   1      CONSTANT 0     0    7.016528       .7O44444E-O2                    996.0372
                     24  0    .7862309E-O2    .759O264E-04                   103. 5 841
   2      TREND



  DEPENDENT VARIABLE            25           LOCHQ
  FROM 1947:    1 UNTIL 2026:                  4
  OBSERVATIONS           320                   DEGREES OF FREEDOM     317
  R**2             .98351946                   RBAR**2          .98341548
  SSR          .75454189                       SEE          .48787891E-O1
  DURBIN-WATSON .04651863
  Q( 51)— 2824.53         SIGNIFICANCE                  LEVEL .000000
                       VAR LAG                 COEFFICIENT    STAND. ERROR      T - STATISTIC
  NO.       LABEL
  ***      *Ak*** *** ***                    ************     ************     ** * * *** * * * * *
       I    CONSTANT        0         0      6.915436        .6l21456E-O2     1129.704
                                                                              15.46373
       2    CON2A       27            0      .8434927E-O1    .5454652E-O2
       3    TREND2      26            0      .8O7O292E-O2    .5904949E-04     136.6700
                                     - -Additional    appendix, p9- -


VI.   Estimates of the 8

95 percent confidence intervals, from the bootstrap, are in parentheses.




1.0,1.0             -   .39          .93        -   .34            -   .40
            (-.68,-.15) (.41,1.52) (-.39,-.21) (-.63,-.18)

.949,.949        -.32       .77       -.37      -.33
            (-.61,-.ll) (.29,1.40) (-.42,-.25) (-.58,- .17)

.997,.969           -.37             .87        -.35               -.33
            (-   .66,- .13) (.30,1.47) (- .48,- .20)               (-.61,- .13)


VII. Asvnmtotic standard errors for the


                    goQ       gos.         go              gs
                    - .072       .392        .145         - .040         .344
                    (.128)      (.152) (.064) (.352) (.050)
                                -Additional appendix, plO- -

VIII.   Asymptotic standard errors for the ,          ——l,     both scaled and unscaled
data

Scaled data:

 DEPENDENT VARIABLE    30            K
 FROM    1947: 3 UNTIL      1986: 4
 TOTAL OBSERVATIONS     158      SKIPPED/MISSING         0
 USABLE OBSERVATIONS    158     DEGREES OF FREEDOM     155
 R**2             .48732169     RZAR**2          .48070648
 SSR         7262.5946           SEE         6.8451040
 DIJRBIN-WATSON 2.43771175
 Q( 36)—        49.5592         SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL .656635E-O1
 NO.       lABEL     VAR LAG        COEFFICIENT   STAND. ERROR         T -   STATISTIC
 ***      *******     *** ***        ************    ************     ******* * * * * *
   1                  30   1     .5000198           .66752O2E-Ol    7.490707
   2       12       31     1     .2307379           .5219937E-01    4.420319
   3       CONSTANT   0    0     -   .1975552       .5453114        - .3622796

 DEPENDENT VARIABLE    31            Q
 FROM    1947: 3 UNTIL      1986: 4
 TOTAL OBSERVATIONS     158      SKIPPED/MISSING         0
 USABLE OBSERVATIONS    158      DEGREES OF FREEDOM    155
 R**2            .17745930       RZAR**2         .16684587
 SSR         19076.316           SEE         11.093827
 DURBIN-WATSON 2.19384641
 Q( 36)—    29.4534       SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL .771581
 NO.     LABEL    VAR LAG     COEFFICIENT   STAND. ERROR      T- STATISTIC
 ***    ******* *** *** ************ ***ak&&***** ******* * ** * *
         21        30  1 - .2988348       .1081847       -2. 7 62266
   2     22        31  1    .4889196      .8459927E-O1     5.779242
   3     CONSTANT    0  0 - .2419853       .8837836       - .2738060
                               - -Additional   appendix, p11- -

Unscaled (raw) data:

 DEPENDENT VARIABLE       30
 FROM    1947: 3 UNTIL          1986: 4
TOTAL OBSERVATIONS     158      SKIPPED/MISSING         0
USABLE OBSERVATIONS    158      DEGREES OF FREEDOM    155
R**2             .48683366      RBAR**2         .48021216
SSR         30186.405           SEE         13.955322
DtJRBIN-WATSON 2.38573786
Q( 36)—    45.0114         SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL .144211
NO.     LABEL     VAR LAG      COEFFICIENT   STAND. ERROR         T- STATISTIC
 ***    ******* ***        ***   ************ ************ ************
   1                30     1   .5329307       .6298521E-O1 8.461203
   2     12         31     1   .2232077       .4883594E-O1 4. 570563
   3     CONSTANT     0     0  3.200179        1.471144     2.175300
 DEPENDENT VARIABLE       31
 FROM     1947: 3 UNTIL         1986: 4
 TOTAL OBSERVATIONS     158          SKIPPED/MISSING         0
 USABLE OBSERVATIONS    158          DEGREES OF FREEDOM    155
 R**2             .16822391          RBAR**2         .15749132
 SSR         80816.213               SEE         22.834074
 DURBIN-WATSON 2.18309959
 Q( 36)—    46.2777       SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL .117221
 NO.     LABEL    VAR LAG     COEFFICIENT  STAND. ERROR       T- STATISTIC
 ***    *AAAAAA   *** ***      AA A A A***** ************    ****** * * * * * *
   1               30  1 -.3528995        .1030581        -3.424277
   2     ir        31  1    .4339241      .799O668E-O1     5.430386
   3     CONSTANT    0  0   14.74241      2.407125          6. 124491
                   IX.   Plols of impu1e   cesponBe functions       for   .969 d
               H[SPONSLS               TO        O[MHND              SHOCK
12



10




 6




 LI




 2



 0

          NInventories
—2    —




—9
                   I               I         I       I          I


           8      16       29     32        90      98      56             69   72       BO
                                                                          HO
                                                                          00         +
                                                                          Sn
                                 CC

                                        1=

c-fl
                                 U)



ci-)

C-)

D
H-

c-rD                             (N
uJ                               C-.)




z
                                 (N
0
ci-)




                   (N       CD
       I   I   —   —    —   —
References

Beisley, David A. Industry Production Behavior: The Order-Stock Distinction,
     (Amsterdam: North Holland, 1969).

Blanchard, Olivier J., "The Production and Inventory Behavior of the American
     Automobile Industry," Journal of Political Economy XCI (1983), 365-400.

Blanchard, Olivier 3. and Angelo Melino, "The Cyclical Behavior of Prices and
     Quantities: The Case of the Automobile Market," Journal of Monetary
     Economics XVII (1986), 379-408.

Blanchard, Olivier 3. and Danny Quah, "The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand
     and Supply Disturbances," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
     Paper No. 2737, 1988.

Blanchard, Olivier J. and Mark W. Watson, "Are Business Cycles All Alike?',
     123-156 in The American Business Cycle: Continuity and Change, Robert J.
     Gordon (ed.), (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1986).

Blinder, Alan S., "Inventories and the Structure of Macro Models," American
     Economic Review LXXI (1981), 11-16.

Blinder, Alan S., "Inventories and Sticky Prices: More on the Microfoundations
     of Macroeconomics," American Economic Review LOII (1982), 334-48.

Blinder, Alan S., "Can the Production Smoothing Model of Inventory Behavior be
     Saved?", The Ouarterlv Journal of Economics CI (l986a), 431-454.

Blinder, Alan S., "More on the Speed of Adjustment in Inventory Models,"
     Journal of Money. Credit and Banking, XVIII(l986b), 355-65.

Blinder, Alan S. and Douglas Holtz-Eakin, "Inventory Fluctuations in the
     United States since 1929," 183-214 in The American Business Cycle, Robert
     J. Gordon (ed.) (Chicago,IL: University of Chicago Press, 1986).

Chrstiano, Lawrence J. and Martin Eichenbaum, "Temporal Aggregation and the
     Stock Adjustment Model of Inventories," Federal Reserve Bank of
     Minneapolis Working Paper 357, 1987.

Efron, Bradley, The Jacknife. the Bootstrap and Other Resampling Plans,
     (Philadelphia, PA: Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1982).

Eichenbaum, Martin S., "Rational Expectations and the Smoothing Properties of
     Finished Goods Inventories," Journal of Monetary Economics XIV (1984),
     271-96.

Engle, Robert F., and C. W. J. Granger, "Dynamic Model Specification with
     Equilibrium Constraints: Co-integration and Error Correction,"
     Econometrica LV (1987), 251-276.

 Fair, Ray C., The Specification and Estimation of Macroeconomic Models,
      (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1984).
Fair, Ray C., "The Sources of Economic Fluctuations in the United States,"
     Ouarterlv Journal of Economics CIII (1988), 313-332.

Freedman, David, "On Bootstrapping Two Stage Least Squares Estimates in
     Stationary Linear Models," The Annals of Statistics XII (1982), 827-842.

Haltiwanger, John C. and Louis J. Maccini, "The Time Series' Properties of
     Aggregate Order, Inventories and Labor Inputs," unpublished manuscript,
     The Johns Hopkins University, 1987.

Hansen, Lars Peter, and Thomas J. Sargent, "Linear Rational Expectations
     Models for Dynamically Interrelated Variables,' 127-158 in Rational
     Exoectations and Econometric Practice, Robert E. Lucas, Jr., and Thomas
     J. Sargent (eds) (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1981).

Bolt, Charles C., Modigliani, Franco, Muth, John and Herbert Simon, Planning
     Production. Inventories and Work Force, (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
     Prentice-Hall, 1960).

Irvine, F. Owen, "Merchant Wholesalers Inventory and the Cost of Capital,"
     American Economic Review LXXI (1981), 23-29.

King, Robert, Plosser, Charles, Stock, James and Mark Watson, "Stochastic
     Trends and Economic Fluctuations," NBER Working Paper No. 2219, 1987.

Lovell, Michael C., "Manufacturer's Inventories, Sales Expectations, and the
     Accelerator Principle, " Econometrica XXIX (1961), 293-314.

Maccini, Louis J., and Robert Rossana, "Investment in Finished Goods
     Inventories: An Analysis of Adjustment Speeds," American Economic Review
     LXXI (1981), 17-22.

Maccini, Louis J., and Robert Rossana, "Joint Production, Quasi-Fixed Factors
     of Production and Investment in Finished Goods Inventories," Journal of
     Money. Credit and Banking XVI (1984), 218-236.

Metzler, Lloyd M., "The Nature and Stability of Inventory Cycles," Review of
     Economics and Statistics XXIII (1941), 113-129.

Miron, Jeffrey A. and Stephen Zeldes, "Seasonality, Cost Shocks and the
     Production Smoothing Model of Inventories," NBER Working Paper No. 2360,
     1987.

Prescott, Edward C., "Response to a Skeptic," Federal Reserve Bank of
     Minneaoolis Ouarterlv Review X (l986a), 28-33.

Prescott, Edward C., "Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement," Federal
     Reserve Bank of Minneaoolis Ouarterlv Review X (l986b), 9-22.

Ramey, Valerie A., "Non-Convex Costs and the Behavior of Inventories,"
     manuscript, University of California at San Diego, 1988.

Runkle, David E., "Vector Autoregressions and Reality," forthcoming, Journal
     of Economic and Business Statistics, 1987.
Said, Said E. and David A. Dickey, "Testing for Unit Roots in Autoregressive -
     Moving Average Models of Unknown Order," Biometrika LXXI (1984), 599-607.
Sargent, Thomas J., Macroeconomic Theory (New York, NY: Academic Press, 1979).

Schutte, David P., "Inventories and Sticky Prices: A Note," American Economic
     Review LiOO(III (1983), 815-816.

Schwert, C. William, "Tests for Unit Roots: A Monte Carlo Investigation,"
     unpublished manuscript, University of Rochester, 1987.

Stengel, Robert F. ,   Stochastic   Ootimal Control (New York, NY: John Wiley and
     Sons, 1986).

Summers, Lawrence H., "Comment," Brookines Paoers on Economic Activity,
     (1981:2), 513-517.

West, Kenneth D., "A Variance Bounds Test of the Linear Quadratic Inventory
     Model," Journal of Political Economy XCIV (1986), 374-401.

West, Kenneth D. ,"Order Backlogs and Production Smoothing," 305-318 in The
     Economics of InventorY Manaaement, Michael Lovell (ed), (Amsterdam:
     Elsevier, 1988).

West, Kenneth D., "Dividend Innovations and Stock Price Volatility,"
     Econometrica LVI (1988), 37-62.
                                       Table I

                   Estimates of Serial Correlation Parameters

      (1)   (2)         (3)               (4)                  (5)
                                      Left Hand Side Variable in Regressions
      #c    #d                            H                          Q
(1)   1.0   1.0   1.0         0.0       H-Ht                     Q-Q-
                  0.0         1.0

(2) 0.949 0.949   0.949       0.0       H-0.949H...1             Q-0.949Q1
                  0.0         0.949

(3) 0.969 0.997   0.976 -0.005          H..-O.976H1+.OO5Q1 Q+.O27Hj-0.99OQ1
                  -0.027      0.990
                                                                 Table   II
                                                 Suninary Statistics     .    Reduo Form
      (1)                     (2)          (3)             (4)                 (5)           (6)    (7)       (8)
                                                                                           Q(36) (p—value) x2(4) (p—value)
                                                                                             Hj      Q;    lags=1 vs. lags=2

(1)   1.00,1.00               0.500        0.231           —0.299             0.489         49.56 29.45      21.68
                     (0.338,0.612)    (0.126,0.340)   (—0.539,—0.106)    (0.299,0.650)      (0.07) (0.77)    (0.00)
      0.949,0.949         0.537            0.227           —0.256               0.508       49.72 29.16      21.79
(2)
                     (0.370,0.644)    (0.127,0.333)   (—0.500,—0.088)    (0.333,0.676)      (0.06) (0.78)    (0.00)

(3)   0.969,0.997         0.515            0.231           —0.278             0.490         49.11 29.69      21.90
                     (0.357,0.610)    (0.133,0.339)   (—0.518,—0.067)    (0.297,0.652)      (0.07) (0.76)    (0.00)

      In cx,luims (2) to (5), 95 percent centidez Intervals in parentheses, frun bootstrap. (1uirris
       (6) aid (7) report the Box-Ljun Q statistic, where the left hard side variables H aid Q are
      defined in Table   I.
                                                 Table III

                             Estimates of Cost and Demand Parameters

        (1)                (2)             (3)               (4)     (5)            (6)




(1)   1.00,L00           -0.072         0.344         0.392          0.145         -0.040
                    (-0.320,0.232) (0.214,0.407) (0.111,0.657) (0.050,0.320) (-0 663,0.680)

(2)   0.949,0.949        -0.044          0.366          0.317         0.111          -0.127
                    (-0.303,0.260)   (0.251,0.417) (0.074,0.589) (0.041,0.287) (-0.947,0.551)

(3)   0.969,0.997        -0.055        0.347          0.367         0.129          -0.057
                    (-0.315,0.218) (0.203,0.407) (0.108,0.625) (0.037,0.299) (-0.636,0.874)



      95 percent confidence intervals in parentheses, from bootstrap. The five parameters
      are related by the normalization I — g05+g+g0gZ5+(1+b)g10.
                                           Table IV

                         Variability of GNP versus Final Sales

                                       Specification
                                 (1)               (2)
                             #cC1'°°          *r#C0 .949
                             E(S5-Q2)         var(Q)/var(S)

(1) Raw data               -303.2                  1.09
                         (-491.3-161.7)        (1.06,1.14)

(2) Just demand shocks       -13.4                 1.002
                         (-241.8,70.0)         (0.90,1.05)

(3) Just cost shocks        -289.7                 1.17
                         (-472.3, -58.1)       (1.09,1.40)


95 per cent confidence intervals in parentheses, from bootstrap. For column I,
units are billions of 1982 dollars squared. To interpret these entries, it may help
                                                                       column I are
to note that the values of var(AQ) corresponding to the three lines in
146.8, 44.5, and 101.2.
                                              Table V

                           Percentage of Variance Due to Cost Shocks


Variable Horizon                               Specification
                                    (1)               (2)            (3)
                                 #c#d1"°° ——0.949               —0. 969    ,—0. 996

            1                       89                77             83
                              (64.7,99.9)      (60.3,98.2)      (60.6,99.9)
            4                       97                94             96
                              (74.0,99.7)      (75.5,98.9)      (60.5,99.3)
            8                       98                97             99
                              (68.1,99.5)      (78.2,99.2)      (51.6,99.4)
             12                     99                98             99
                               (66.7,99.6)     (78.3,99.4)      (48.7,99.5)
             20                     100               98             99
                               (65.6,99.7)     (78.2,99.4)      (46.1,99.6)
                                    100               98             93
                               (64.5,100.0)    (78.0,99.5)      (36.7,98.5)

Q            1                      75                83             76
                               (17. 7,91.4)     (47.0,94.8)     (12.1,90.7)
             4                      60                  71           59
                                (9.9,81.5)      (31.4,90.4)      (7.2,78.4)
             8                      51                  63           48
                                (6.7,74.9)      (24.6,87.3)      (5.8,69.4)
             12                     48                  60           43
                                (5.3,71.9)      (22.9,85.9)      (4.4,66.0)
             20                     45                  58           37
                                (4.8,70.4)      (21.7,85.0)      (3.7,60.4)
                                    41                  57           13
                                (3.2,68.2)      (21.3,84.4)      (2.9,34.9)

S            1                       14                 22           15
                               (0.1,38.6)          (1.0,48.1)    (0.1,41.1)
             4                       40                 51           39
                               (4.2,61.3)       (18.2,74.5)      (4.2,59.7)
             8                       41              53              38
                               (3.7,64.9)       (19.1,78.8)      (2.9,61.4)
             12                      41              53              36
                               (3.6,66.2)       (19.0,80.0)      (2.7,60.2)
                20                  41               53              33
                               (3.4,66.7)       (18.7,81.3)      (2.4,57.1)
                                     41                 53           12
                               (3.2,68.2)       (18.8,81.7)      (2.3,34.3)



 95 percent confidence interval in parentheses, from bootstrap. For the column (1)
 specification (95 percent bootstrap confidence interval in parentheses), h—O.81
 (.0.38,4.70), (/â) — 0.85 (0.07,2.03). For the column (2) specification, h—0.65
    (-0.14,2.87), (o/o) — 1.16 (0.07,9.86). For the column (3) specification, h—0.71
    (-0.41,3.97), (o/aj)    —0.92   (0.09,1.94).
                                           Table VT

                         Estimates for Expanded Model, #c*d

                    A. Estimates of Coat and Demand Parameters


                   8oa        80!            Baa          g                    gzs


-0.222   0.453     0.323      0.099          0.118        -0.088      -0.003   -0.045   0.115


                   B. Percentage of Variance Due          to   Coat Shocks

                   Horizon            H              Q          S

                                      99             45         45


No confidence intervals available; h— 1.83, (c/o) — 0.72.
                                       Table VII

            Percentage of Variance Due to Cost Shocks, g—.68, 4cd1

                   Horizon        H           Q      S

                                  66          9      9


No confidence intervals available; h— 4.98, (e/d)   0.07.
                                                            FIGUPE   I


                                                     BASIL DATA
TRILLIONS OF 1982   1   20   —
    DOLLARS


                                 GNP
                    1   16—


                    1   12—


                    1   08-

                    1   09—


                    1   00—


                        36   —




                             —                                                                               I
                        32                                           11111111111      —r————I————————T—1—l
                                        111111 1111111
                                       1352   1357   1962    1367        1372   I97         9132

                                                                                ti
                              FIGURE   II
                RESPONSES          TO       COST     5 )CIc
  0—

        —
—2



        -          CNP
 -I-I



 —6     -


 —B     —




-10     —




        —
—12



-19     —




        —
-16
            8     16     29   32       90   98     56        64   72       80
                                                    [i-ic
                                                        ac             +
                                                    Lc_ ________
                          N

0                         T
                          (0
(J-J

                          (0
0
:z
0
                          T
uJ
0                         ar
0
                          r'j


                          r
                          (0




       :r   C   r   ('J
                                                      FIGURE   IV
                                 RESPONSES                      TO     COST SHOCK
BILLIONS OF    —2
1982 DOLLARS


               -9

               -6
                                aale&
               -B


           -10
                                            CNP
           -12

           -19

           -16                                                  inventorteB       -
           —16      —
                                              I                               I       I          I     I    I

                        1   2    3      i     5   6   7   0    3 10 11 12 13              1-1   15 16 17 10 19 20   QUARTER

                                                                                                I-IC        0
                                                                                                OC          +
                                                                                                cc'         U
                                                     FIGURE V

                                RLSPONSES TO ULMAND                                           SHOCK
               12   —
BILLIONS OF
1982 DOLLARS


                    -                        sales
               10


                8—

                6—

                9—

                2—




                        tortes
                        I   I   I   I    I     I      I   I     I   I   I   I   I    I    I    I   I   I   I   I
                        1   2   3   LI   5    6      7    8 S 10 11 12 13           1LI   15 16 17 18 1520         QUARTER
                                                                                          HO               0
                                                                                          00               t
                                                                                                           n
