                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 UNRAVELING THE PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH SLOWDOWN IN
                  THE U.S., CANADA AND JAPAN: THE EFFECTS
                                                             OF
                   SUBEQUILIBRITJM, SCALE ECONOMIES AND MARKUPS




                              Catherine J. Morrison




                             Working Paper No. 2993




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 1989




Research support from the National
                                    Science Foundation, Grant #SES87-082l1, is
gratefully acknowledged. This paper is part of NBER's research
Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the author notprogram  in
                                                                   those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                           NBER Working Paper #2993
                                           June 1989


               UNRAVELING THE PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH SLOWDOWN IN
                                                                THE
            U.S.,  CANADA AND JAPAN: THE EFFECTS
                                                   OF SUBEQUILIBRIIJM
                           SCALE ECONOMIES AND MARXUPS



                                      ABSTRACT


       Measures of productivity growth typically include in the Productivity

 "residual" the impacts of subequilibrium from
                                                  fixity of factors, costs of
adjustment, returns to scale and markups. This
                                                   paper proposes a general two
part framework for adjusting the residual measure to take these impacts into

account.    Errors computing the weights on output and quasi-fixed input growth

in traditional measures are first
                                    corrected for both primal- and Cost-side
measures. Then the deviation of revenues from costs is used to decompose the

full primal measure to identify the
                                      differential influences of technical

change, utilization fluctuations, scale economies and price margins. Use of

the framework is illustrated
                               empirically for the U.S.,, Japanese and Canadian

manufacturing sectors, using an econometric model that allows explicit

incorporation and measurement of these influences.
                                                      The adjusted measures show
that a significant amount of cyclical and secular change in measured

productivity growth can be attributed to production characteristics other than

technical change, particularly scale economies.



                                           Catherine J. Morrison
                                           Tufts University
                                           Department of Economics
                                           Medford, MA 02155
                                           -1-




  I. Introduction

        The literature on productivity
                                          growth measurement is primarily based on
 models which, implicitly or explicitly,
                                             incorporate restrictive assumptions
 such as instantaneous adjustment of
                                         inputs, constant returns to scale and

 perfect competition. Recently researchers have begun focusing on the

 importance of taking these characteristics of
                                                    production processes into
 account to isolate the "true" productivity
                                                 growth residual independent of
 these factors. The importance of returns to scale on productivity
                                                                         growth
 measurement, particularly on the cost side, was outlined
                                                               by Ohta [1975] and
 elaborated on by Morrison [1986) and Fuss and Waverinan [1986]
                                                                among others.
 Researchers such as Berndt and Fuss [1986],
                                                 Hulten [1986] and Morrison [1986]
 have attempted to represent subequilibrium
                                                 from quasi-fixity of inputs such as
 capital by relaxing the assumption that the market price captures the true

 marginal return, or shadow value, of the fixed
                                                    input. In addition, a
 literature has begun to materialize,
                                        including Denny, Fuss and Waverman
 [1981], Hall [1988), Domovjtz, Hubbard and Peterson [1988], and Morrison and

Diewert [1988), which focuses on adjusting the Solow [1958) productivity

residual for markup behavior.

      Most of these models recognize
                                        only one deviation of the true economic
return to an input or output from its market valuation. This is due to the

nonparametric nature of the empirical implementation
                                                          of these models, which
precludes isolating the independent impacts. With a parametric econometric

model, however, the deviations due to different factors can be Independently

measured and their impacts on the
                                    productivity residual individually assessed.
To accomplish this requires
                              constructing a measurement framework for
adjustment of the productivity residual for these deviations and postulating a
                                            -2-


     model for estimation. This paper offers such an integrated framework and

     model, and provides an empirical illustration that demonstrates the empirical

     significance of these adjustments.

           Two components of the adjustment process are
                                                          initially identified. The
     first is based on correcting the errors in
                                                  measurement of productivity growth
     indexes due to differences between shadow values and
                                                            observed input prices.
 This extends the approaches suggested by Berndt and Fuss [1986] and Hulten

  [1986J for subequilibrium. The second part recognizes the difference between

 cost and primal measures when the usual simplifying assumptions do not hold.

 It focuses on using the cost elasticity with respect to output and the output

 demand elasticity to decompose the primal residual measure into its components
 -   - true   productivity growth (technical change) and the effects of other

 characteristics. This is analogous to the adjustments for subequilibrium and

 returns to scale suggested in Morrison [1986] from a dual cost perspective and

 for markups by Hall [1988] on the primal output side. Both these

 modifications may be thought of as reflecting error biases in the traditional

measures.

         A measurement procedure is then proposed to use for computation of these

adjustments, based on the model in Morrison [l989a].        This model is built
around a Generalized Leontief Restricted Cost
                                                   Function developed in Morrison
[1988], which allows for multiple quasi-fixed
                                                   inputs and unrestricted returns
to scale, and a similarly constructed demand
                                                  function for output that

incorporates imperfect competition in the output market. Using this model,

measures are computed for the shadow values of fixed inputs, the extent of

costs of adjustment, the degree of returns to scale, and the deviation between

price and marginal cost for the U.S., Japanese and Canadian manufacturing

sectors. Appropriate measures are then inserted into the framework for
                                         -3-



 adjustment of productivity growth measures to yield productivity growth

 indexes for these industries that isolate technical change from
                                                                    the effects of
 the other characteristics of the adjustment process.

          The measured productivity growth indexes adapted to recognize

 subequilibrium and scale economies show that a substantial portion of cost

 declines generally attributed to technical change are instead
                                                                  explained by
 other production characteristics, particularly in years of large growth.

 These adjustments tend to smooth both cyclical and secular
                                                              productivity
 fluctuations. Adaptations of output-side measures of productivity growth

 isolating the impact of price markups counteract evidence of productivity

 slowdowns over time. The modified indexes suggest that traditional measures

 increasingly underestimate productivity growth when markups are rising, as the

markup estimates suggest is true. However, when the full series of

corrections are made to accommodate low marginal (as compared to average) cost

of production and capacity utilization fluctuations as well as markup

behavior, the smoothing implication is at least partially offset. This

results because the cost characteristics imply minimal profitability even with

markup behavior, an empirical finding consistent with recent results of Hall

[1989].




II. The Framework for Productivity Adjustment

      Analysis of productivity growth is based on determining the increase in

efficiency of production over time. The concept of increasing efficiency can

be formalized in either of two alternative forms; the potential growth in

output when technology changes, holding the use of inputs fixed (the revenue

or primal side), or the possible diminution of costs for given levels of

output and prices of inputs (the cost or dual side). In the case of zero
                                         -4-



 profits, choosing the first or second of these approaches is equivalent to

  focusing on either the left or right hand side of expression pyY—C, where Y is

 output, Py is the corresponding price, and C is total costs. Computations

 based on the left hand side of this expression include returns to all cost and

 demand characteristics, whereas those based on the right hand side allow

 distinctions to be drawn among the impacts of different cost characteristics.

       These distinctions can be used to motivate development of a framework

 for decomposition of multifactor productivity growth measures to identify

 various determinants of increases in output production,   or declines in cost of

 production, over time. In this section the standard approach to measurement

 of productivity growth is outlined and then adjustments are developed in turn

 to take scale economies, fixity, adjustment costs and markup behavior properly

 into account.




 ha. The Traditional Framework for Productivity Growth Measurement

      Assume firms face a production function Y—Y(v,t),
                                                           or equivalently a dual
cost function which represents the technology, C—C(p,t,Y), where Y is output,

C is total costs, v is a vector of J
                                       inputs with corresponding prices p, and t
denotes technology (usually measured as a time counter). The various concepts

underlying primal and dual productivity growth measures
                                                           are represented using
elasticities of these functions with respect to t: specifically,

3m Y/8t—e and 3m C/3t. These expressions reflect the residuals of

total output (cost) growth less the contributions of the arguments of the

functions other than t. Solow [1958] demonstrated that with perfect

competition, constant returns to scale and instantaneous   adjustment these
residuals isolate technical change.
                                                -5-



        The primal measure              reveals the potential increase in output between

 two time periods using a given amount of inputs. Computation of this residual

 is accomplished using accounting or index number methods by calculating the

 output change normalized for the changes in inputs as din Y/dt-d].n v/dt
—                        —
    Y/Y- Sj(vj/vj)                 where Sj is the share of input j in terms of the

value of total output (Pjvj/pyY). This equality is derived from the

production function, where din Y/dt —           (i/Y).(3Y/ôt   -
                                                                   Ej8Y/3vjdvj/dt
 recognizing that with profit maximization and perfect competition

Py(3Y/8v)P and solving for the change in output independent of input

changes, 3m Y/3t. Similarly, the cost-side productivity growth residual or

index can be measured as (din c/dt-dln p/dt) —
                                                         (c/c-jMj(pj/pj)    —   ölnc/3t
—
    eCt, where c is unit costs (c(p,t) —         C(p,t,Y)/Y   with constant returns to

scale (CRTS)), and Mj is the share of input J in costs
                                                                    (vjpj/C). This
equality is based on manipulation of the unit cost function derivative dc/dt
—   3c/ät   +
                Xjoc/oPj(dpj/dt)    analogously to the derivation of the primal measure

using the production function.

       Under the standard assumptions of CRTS, instantaneous adjustment and

perfect competition, the dual cost share is equivalent to the primal output

share (Sj_Mj). In fact, with these restrictions on the production process,

the primal and dual methods of measuring the productivity growth residual are

identical --
                  eytCt      --   as was shown by Ohta [1975).

       Illustrating this relies on the equivalence of the cost and output

shares, which results from the equality pyY=C; revenues just cover costs of

production. More specifically, applying this equality to the cost residual



         jj
1) —--E pv
                C Y
                C Y          C
                                  p
                                   Pj
                                         -6-




 and substituting din C/dt — C/C —                          from the definition

          ,   yields


               Y       pv    V       Y         pv V
2)
      ECt__+j
          Y            C             Y
                            Vj                 PY Vj
      The equivalence of the two measures arises because constant returns

implies no returns are generated from technological or supply characteristics

such as scale economies; instantaneous adjustment guarantees no returns exist

from varying utilization of inputs (the value of marginal products of inputs

just covers their hire costs, so full utilization is maintained); and perfect

competition ensures no returns to market power. However, if any of these

assumptions is relaxed, returns or profits generated from the underlying

supply and demand characteristics must be taken into account.



lib. Taking Account of Scale Economics

      The importance of extending the traditional productivity growth

framework for situations when returns to scale are evident was recognized by

Ohca [1975J. In this case, the pyY=C equality does not hold because returns

to the firm due to scale economies1 cause a deviation between marginal and

average cost, and thus a difference between Py (which under perfect

competition equals marginal cost) and average or unit cost c—AC—C/Y.

1Note that these returns, when measured with aggregated data, could be due
to factors other than internal firm scale economies. For example, "thick
market" external benefits (mentioned in a number of recent macroeconomic
studies including Hall [1989]) could also cause scale economies to be
evident. Another possibility, proposed by Romer [1986], is that if
knowledge has an increasing marginal product external economies will result
which can be considered a scale effect even in the absence of technical
change. The important consideration is whether scale appears to affect
costs, independently of other factors.
                                       -7-



Intuitively, this means that the effects of exploiting returns to scale should

be considered due to productivity growth but to a technological charactistic

of the production process that allows firms to be more efficient at larger

output levels independently of technical change. This suggests two

adjustments to the measurement of multifactor productivity by cost-side

measures.

      The first simply requires recognizing that the usual cost-side measure

is no longer valid when the assumption of constant returns to scale is

invalid; it is incorrect and must be adjusted accordingly. In particular, the

above measure based on unit cost changes presupposes that a unit cost function

can be used, because the total cost function can be written as C—Yc(p,t). If

this is not the case, c/c—C/C-Y/Y becomes C/C-y Y/Y, where E—öln C/81n Y

weights the output change and is the inverse of returns to scale. This arises

naturally from the Ohta derivation, where the standard measure is generated by

recognizing that —l with CRTS. More formally, the residual eCt must be

adjusted to



             C       Y        pv p           Y    pv —
                                                     V -                      Y
3)      -        -       -E          --—+                        + (l-Ecy)


where R denotes the "Returns to Scale Adaptation", and the last term on the

right hand side can be thought of as the bias correction when constant returns

are inappropriately assumed. This bias may be implemented empirically using

either a direct estimate of the elasticity of the cost function, or by taking

the inverse of an independent measure of returns to scale, if one is

available.
                                         -8-



     The second adjustment, rather than correcting the traditional measure

for an invalid assumption, adapts the cost side measure to be equivalent to

the output measure. In particular, under CRTS the duality of the cost and

production measures requires proportional cost and output changes, whereas

when nonconstant returns exists this proportionality is lost. Thus, the cost

change arising from a given output change must be divided into the

contribution of the technological change itself and the return to scale

economies. Ohta showed that this could be accomplished by multiplying €cR by

       or, cR/ecy_ey. Conceptually this is a decomposition of the primal

measure (which does not have a bias correction because the assumption ey—l

was not used for construction of the measure) into two parts, the effects of

technical change and scale, since the output value reflects both

characteristics of production. This adaptation can also be written in terms

of an additive component; Eyt_ECtR+eCtR[l(l/fCy)), which again can be

computed once an estimate of     is obtained.

      In a sense this adjustment simply adapts the cost shares to measure

output shares, since E—MC.Y/C—pyY/C, where MC is marginal cost and perfect

competition is assumed. Thus, dividing by y removes the weight from the

output growth component of the measure and adapts the shares to be specified

in terms of output values or true returns instead of costs.

      One other point to mention is that, depending on the context and

interpretation desired, either £ctR or         might be more appropriate to use as

a productivity growth measure. The important impact of Ohta's discussion is

to highlight the two independent factors incorporated in multifactor

productivity measures, not to identify which measure is better, since in some

circumstances one might think scale economies are a valid element of

productivity growth that should be included in the measure. However, in most
                                       -9-


cases it would seem desirable to identify the individual contributions of

technical change and scale. In such a case the decomposition of
                                                                  Eyt provides

more interpretative potential. If only the technical impact is desired the

     measure could be used alone or one could employ the primal measure cyt

multiplied by     or divided by returns to scale.2



lic. Recognizing Subequilibriuxn Impacts

      In addition to scale economies, there are a number of other reasons the

pyY—C equality, and therefore the duality of the primal and dual productivity

growth measures, may not hold. Some of these arise when the observed prices

of inputs (or output) do not correctly reflect their marginal contribution to

production. For example, if any inputs are fixed, the values of their

marginal products may differ from their market prices so evaluation of their

contribution by observed prices is generally invalid. In this case the shadow

values of the fixed factors represent their true marginal economic

contributions to the firm, and should be used for productivity growth

computations. It may not be straightforward, however, to identify these

shadow values.

      One potential approach to measuring shadow values draws on another type

of cost derivative or elasticity, that of a variable cost function with

respect to a fixed input. More formally, a shadow value can be measured3 as

           for any fixed input xk, where C is the variable cost function

C(Y,p,x,t). In this functional representation, the fixity of K factors in the

vector x is explicitly recognized, and the shadow values of these inputs, Zk,


 2Note that dividing ECt by Ed is equivalent to multilving C by cay, and
 vice versa for Eyt and p.,Y. This can create some confusion since at first
 glance this may appear to reverse the adjustments discussed above.
 See Abel [1979] and Berndt, Fuss and Waverman [1980) for examples of the
 definition and use of this concept.
                                            -10-



represent the one period savings in terms of variable inputs possible on the

margin if the fixed stock of xk        were to be adjusted.
        Using   this notion, we can write total costs C as C—C+Xkpkxk, where Pk is

the market price of input xk, and shadow costs can be defined as C*_G+kZkxK,

which captures the actual or effective value of xk to the firm.        C   and C* will

differ according to the true contribution to generating revenue, or marginal

product, of the fixed inputs, so with perfect competition C* by definition is

equal    to pY. This    equality, in fact, has often been used to compute an ex-

        or residual measure of the returns to capital (K) as pyY-C—ZKK, assuming

capital is the only quasi-fixed input and no other returns are mistakenly

attributed to capital.4 Thus, this computation is based on the assumptions of

CRTS, perfect competition and only one fixed input. We will return to

elaborate     on this further below.
        The shadow cost function, defined by Berndt and Fuss [1986), has been
shown   by   Morrison [1986] to be the basis of a cost-side capacity utilization

measure    C*/C_CU. When overall excess capacity exists       the shadow valuation of

the fixed inputs will fall short of their market prices on the margin, in

which case this measure is less than one. If stocks are lower than

economically     optimal, however, the shadow values will exceed their market
equivalents     and the measure will exceed one5. Morrison [1986] also showed

that CTJ is equivalent to the short run elasticity of costs with respect to

output, y, measured holding the quasi-fixed factors at their current levels

and   assuming long run CRTS. In sum, these relationships imply that with
subequilibrium     from fixity the pyY—C    equality becomes pyY.CsCU_C.Ey_C*,C.

 See, for example, erndt and Hesse [1985).
  Note that if some stocks exceed their economically optimal levels and
 others fall short of these levels the deviation of the capacity utilization
 measure from one is ambiguous; it will depend on the extent of the
 deviations for the different fixed inputs.
                                       -11-



Because the contributions to revenue can be separated in this fashion, it is

possible separately to distinguish the impacts of utilization fluctuations

and technical change on productivity growth using the capacity utilization

measure

      Modifying the traditional productivity growth residuals correctly to

reflect the impact of fixity can be thought of as simply evaluating fixed

inputs at their shadow values. However, as in the case of returns to scale,

the adaptation of the cost side measure can be expressed in terms of two

conceptually different parts. First, both the standard primal- and cost-side

measures must be adapted to correct for the invalid assumption of

instantaneous adjustment, and then the relationship between the resulting ECt

and       measures can be used to decompose Eye.

      The first step toward correction of the cost measure is straightforward

given the above development; the weight on the output growth term must again

be y. However, the deviation of this measure from one is now due to returns

to the fixed input(s):            Therefore, to value these fixed inputs

correctly this must be taken into account for measuring their shares. One way

to think of this is to use the equality ECY—l-EkeCk where       is am c/am xk
for the kth fixed input. This in turn is equivalent to C*/C, since, based on

the definitions of C and Zk, eck can easily be shown to equal (pk-Zk)xk/C.6

      Thus, if the Ohta derivation is reworked as in Morrison (1986], the two

adjustments necessary to measure short run productivity growth correctly are

to weight the growth in output by y—(l-kEck) and to correct the shares of

fixed inputs to be ZkXk/C. On the primal side only this latter adjustment



 6This arises from the assumption of CRTS and the definition of long run
 returns to scale as ECY1—alnc/alnY-+-k8mnc/alnxk=l, which in turn is based on
 the long run constant returns assumptions dlnxk/dlnY—1 for all k. For
 further details, see Morrison [1986].
                                                     -12-



must be done; the shares for fixed inputs should be weighted by Zk rather than

       Thus the cost measure, e, becomes




4)
       F        -
                        Y    j
                               P C
                                                Ek
                                                     Zkx
                                                       C
                                                                Xk   —   Ct       kCk Y
                                      Vj                        Xk


where F stands for "Fixity recognized" and the last expression can again be

thought of as a bias correction.7 In this case the bias occurs if

instantaneous adjustment is assumed when subequilibrium really exists. This

bias is computable either by constructing the elasticities, or by using a

capacity utilization measure and the definition l.kEck_yCUc, if a

justifiable measure is available and one quasi-fixed input                          is assumed. Note

that the bias depends on the relative growth rates of output                            and the fixed

inputs since the standard assumption that ck° affects the weights on both

these components of the measure.

           Equation (4) is based on an output-side computation of the cost measure,

where din C/dt has been substituted, as in (2) as compared to (1)                            above.

Alternatively, the cost side measure can be calculated directly,                            although the

 adjustment is not as straightforward. Instead of substituting Zk for Pk in

 this case, so that the measure would depend on the measures of din Zk/dt,

 Morrison (1986] has shown that carrying out Ohta-type manipulations on the

 cost elasticity results in



           F
                    C
                                     PjVj !lxk PkXk
                                                                                  kZkk     Xk
 5)
           Ct           C?       j
                                                                              k     C
                    C        Y        C                     C                              Xk
                                           Pj




     71t is worthwhile to note here that the sum of the shares does not equal
     one. This departure from one constitutes the adjustment between the cost
     and primal measures discussed below.
                                                  -13-




          —        +
                               YXk
                                - —)
              Ec       kECk Y
                           (

                                     X
                                                            be derived from
where the last equality is analogous to that in (4) and can
the definitions cCYk1Ck and (pk.Zk)Xk/CCk
      Although these two equivalent cost measures and the corresponding output

measure €yt'' with the xk valued at their shadow values both correct

traditional measures for the existence of quasi-fixed inputs,              the cost-side

index does not reflect the utilization changes captured in YtF. The cost

measure is based on an elasticity with respect to C rather than C*, and

C,C*pyY. Identifying the independent impacts of utilization and technical

change on multifactor productivity growth, therefore, requires recognizing

that the output side measure is a combination of these two types of returns.

The decomposition of the multifactor productivity residual into its

utilization and technical change components can be accomplished by showing

                                 or                             as in Morrison (1986].
 again that

 This multiplicative decomposition can be transformed into an additive one

 similarly to that outlined for the returns to scale measure above.

       An additional factor to include when utilization is an issue and a full

                                                         the portion of cost changes due to
 dynamic adjustment process is specified is

 adjustment costs. In such a case, from Morrison (1986], (4) and (5) can be

 adapted to




 4') E_ECy÷j]L

      A
     ECt - — - ECY
           C
                   -
                   Y       j   pivi
                                 C
                                         Pj
                                              -    ____ 1'k
                                                   PkXk —-        kkk XK
                                                                ________
                                                                     C
                                                                         —-
                                                                           Xk
                                                                                  Zkx
                                                                                    C
                                                                                           Xk

                                                                                           Xk
                                     -14-




where A represents "Adjustment costs recognized". In terms   of magnitude,

however, the empirical work reported below indicates this adaptation is

generally negligible and thus is of second-order empirical importance.

      To this point scale economies and utilization have both been represented

by y, where in the first case y reflects a long run elasticity assuming

instantaneous adjustment and in the second it is a short run elasticity

assuming long run CRTS. However, using relationships already developed these

two effects can individually be represented as components of the ECY

elasticity when both characteristics of the production process   exist. In

particular, it can be shown that the long run elasticity of costs with respect

to output, ECyL, can be written as cyL_     yS+kEcyLEck, or ECY5ECY
                where L denotes long run and S (or no supersript) short run.

Since (lkcCk)CUc_C*/C, as mentioned above, it is straightforward to show

that jyiualnC/alnYECyLCUc_(MCY/C*)CUc. In other words, cCy' is defined as

alnC/alnY evaluated at the steady state value of the fixed inputs, Zk,8 or

3C/3Y.(Y/C*)_MC.Y/C*, where MC is short run marginal cost. This scale measure

captures the deviation between average cost (AC) and marginal cost because

AC*.Y(C*/Y) .YC*,MC.Y.
      Thus, with when both nonconstant returns to scale and subequilibrium

exist, y is a combined measure of both scale economies and capacity

utilization. Adjusting the pyY—C equality for the difference between returns

and costs requires multiplying C by both components of       to obtain

pyy_cscucyL _C*,1L..MC.Y,C*,C. This collapses to the two earlier cases by

setting C*C for instantaneous adjusment or ECy'1 for CRTS. However, if


 8Note we are simply evaluating the derivative at a given value of Zk, not
 allowing it to change, so short run marginal cost here does not include
 3Zk,'ôXk.
                                      -15-



these assumptions are invalid and thus are not made, the adjustment by eCy,

and the corresponding adaptation to the productivity growth measures, captures

both the scale and fixed input effects. Again, if independent measures of

scale economies and shadow values of fixed inputs (or capacity utilization

with only one quasi-fixed input) are available, these measures may be used

empirically to assess the difference between returns and costs. However, if

both scale economies and capacity utilization, or multiple quasi-fixed inputs,

exist, it is difficult consistently to identify these measures without

employing a parametric framework.

      Adjustments tO correct productivity growth measures and decompose the

primal productivity growth index when both nonconstant returns and fixity

exist may also be carried out simultaneously by distinguishing the two parts

of ecy. The correction to the cost measure requires multiplying the growth in

output by               and valuing the shares of the xk at Zk to generate




6 T_.
  Ct  CY
         YPvjZiXkXk
         y  C
                k   j
                              Vj
                                         C
                                             Xk
                                                    Ct   ekCk
                                                                'k
                                                                      CY



where T stands for "Total Correction" and the bias correction is analogous to

the earlier cases. Similarly, modifying Cyt to eyT is accomplished as in the

adaptation to fixed inputs by valuing the shares of fixed inputs at Zk.      Also,

costs of adjustment can be incorporated by adding terms analogous to those

found in (4') and (5'). Finally, the decomposition of productivity growth

becomes etT/eyTCUc_eytT, which independently identifies the three parts of

 eyT. Again, which individual or combined measure is the most appropriate for

measuring productivity growth depends on the context, but identifying the

components individually refines the measure and facilitates understanding.
                                     -16-



lid. Allowing for Markups of Price over Marginal Cost

     A final reason revenues (pyY) will not equal costs (C)      is if market

power exists so pySMC. This adjustment is somewhat different conceptually

than the two already outlined; the market power adjustment can be thought of

as a demand side adjustment, In contrast to the first two supply side

adjustments that represent characteristics of costs facing the firm. In fact,

the markup of price over marginal cost is py/MC—l/(l+epy) where €py measures

the inverse demand elasticity facing the firm, implying that     the markup is

completely determined by the demand elasticity. This results because MC—HR in

short run equilibrium for the profit maximizing firm, where HR is marginal

revenue, so the expression for py/MC becomes p../(py+Ys8py/8Y)

_py/(py.(l+8lnpy/8lnY)]1/(l+Epy). The level of marginal cost simply

determines which output level is chosen for evaluation of the markup.

      To adjust for markups, the markup ratio py/MC is used to adapt the pyYC

equality to read p1Y—C(py/MC)—C/(l+Epy) (or pyY_C(py/MC)CUEcyL

                        if nonconstant returns and subequilibrium also exist

So ei,y'l). This measure explicitly incorporates the dependence of revenue on

the cost or supply and demand side elasticities; the adjustment factor

ECY/(l+Cpy) includes the elasticities of both cost and inverse demand with

respect to output. Again the pY measure captures returns to all

characteristics of the production process that cause           whereas C includes

only ex-ante returns to inputs.

      Because the markup adjustment pertains to demand, the cost measure of

productivity growth is not affected; construction of cCt depends only on the

 cost elasticities and no p—MC assumption is made. However, since markups

 affect the deviation between pY and C, there will still be a difference

 between primal and dual productivity growth measures. This deviation reflects
                                     -17-



the impact of imperfect markets, and it can be isolated to determine the

impact of technical change independently of market power. The implied

decomposition is similar to those above; the adjustment factor can be used to

show cyT_ ET(l+Epy)/Ey. Multiplication of the cost measure by (l+py)

accounts for the return to market power included in the denominator of the

output shares, which should not be attributed to increased efficiency. The

additive version of this decomposition is EytT_ctT+EctT(1((1+Epy)/ecy)].

Implementation of this decomposition may be carried out either by

parametrically measuring the inverse demand and cost elasticities to construct

the (l+cpy}/ey adjustment factor, or by using available estimates of the

markup, capacity utilization and returns to scale,

      It is worth remarking that the markup portion of this decomposition is

analogous to the Hall (1988) notion of "correcting" the Solow (1958] primal

productivity growth residual by evaluating the measure at marginal cost

instead of price. Hall noted that the shares should be evaluated in terms of

MC.Y instead of pyY, implying that the Sj should be multiplied by the markup

ratio py/MC. This is equivalent to multiplying yt by the l/(l+cpy) measure

elaborated above, which is the inverse of the decomposition process proposed

here; it adapts the primal measure to reflect only the cost components. Which

perspective or interpretation of this relationship is most relevant depends on

the context. In addition, if subequilibrium, non-optimal capacity utilization

or multiple quasi-fixed inputs also exist, Hall's nonparametric framework is

not sufficient to untangle these effects.



III. A Related Concept -- Returns to CaDital Measured as a Residual

      The analysis in the previous section of the deviation between pY and C

when returns to scale, subequilibrium and market power are present
                                     -18-


distinguishes the returns to inputs from those to cost and demand

characteristics. Thinking of this as a refinement of the concept of returns

to inputs suggests another application of this decomposition,   alluded to

earlier. In particular, the above decomposition can be used to motivate the

residual method of measuring capital returns and suggests an adjustment for

this method if the cost and demand characteristics are important aspects of

the production structure. It also allows further interpretation of the

distinction between ex-ante and ex-Dost returns to factors and their role in

this adjustment process. In this section I pursue these ideas further.

      More specifically, returns to capital are often measured as pyY-G, or

revenues less the payments to variable inputs such as labor and, perhaps,

energy and materials if a gross output formulation is used. This is, of

course, only valid if one quasi-fixed input exists so   the residual method is

justified. In this case, if instantaneous adjustment, constant returns to

scale and perfect competition exist, this residual computation measures      both

an ex-post and an ex-ante return to capital.

      However, in the absence of instantaneous adjustment, these returns

reflect ex-Dost or shadow returns to capital, ZKK, rather than the ex-ante or

market returns pKK. This can be seen by recognizing that pY incorporates

returns to fixity so pyY.G_C.(C*/C)G_C*GZKK, or alternatively adjusting pY

by dividing by           to capture only ex-ant.e returns; pyY.(C/C*)G_CGPKK.
 If instantaneous adjustment exists the measures will be equivalent. If

 subequilibrium prevails, however, they will not be. In the latter case either

 of these measures could be relevant depending on the application being

 considered. The important point is to recognize the difference when returns

 to fixity are incorporated, generating the ex-Dost measure, compared to when

 they are not, resulting in an ex-ante measure.
                                       -19-


     Even this computation, however, does not correctly measure the returns

to capital (either ex-ante or ex-Dost) if p1Y is capturing returns to scale

and market power as well as those truly attributable to capital. In this more

general case adjustments to pyY analogous to those outlined for correcting

primal-side productivity growth calculations must be carried out.     If scale

economies exist, EyL must be divided by pyY to obtain an ex-pos valuation

purged of returns to scale; pyY(C*/(MCSY))G_pyY/EyTG_ZKK or both

adjustments can be made to compute ex-ante returns as pyY(C/C*)(C*/(MCIY))-

G—pyY(C/(MC.Y)) G_pyY/ECy-G—pKK. Similarly, the market power adjustment can

be made to purge the pyY measure of the associated returns, resulting in

                                                 or both adjustments can be made

to compute ex-ante returns as yY(MC/P)(C/C*)(C*/(MC1Y)}.GPyY(l+Epy)/Cy

G—PKK.
         These manipulations allow the residual method of measuring capital

returns to be adjusted to reflect true returns to capital. This has a number

of implications. First, if the distinction between PK and ZK is not made,

although the primal measure of productivity growth will be correct, it will

not be possible to decompose it into the impacts of technical change and

utilization.

         In addition, j     is measured as a residual, more adjustments must be

made to carry out the modifications to productivity growth measures discussed

in the previous sections. Productivity calculations from both the primal and

dual perspective must be based on a corrected measure of returns to capital,

ZK, as discussed in terms of the adjustment to incorporate subequilibrium.

Therefore, if PK is computed as a residual in an attempt to measure ex-post

 returns to capital, but imperfect competition exists, the share of capital

 should be adapted to purge the returns to market power. This adds an extra
                                        -20-



dimension to the adjustment process for the productivity growth index; the

price of capital measure must be corrected prior to the decomposition of this

index.

         Finally, a returns to capital or shadow value of capital equation is

often estimated as part of a system of factor demand equations based on a

variable cost function. The corrected residual computation suggests that this

approach may be used even if returns to scale and imperfect competition exist.

In particular, the shadow value equation procedure involves constructing a

parametric expression for ZK 8G/ÔK for the estimation equation, and computing

the dependent variable as pyY-GZKK. Once this is done, the adjustments

suggested above can be made either to the left or right hand side of the

equation to represent correctly the returns to capital independent of returns

to these other characteristics, although in some cases     this will result in a

very complex equation for estimation purposes.



IV.      Toward EmDirical Measurement of the Adjustment ComDonents
          The framework developed in the previous sections reveals that adjustment

of the productivity growth residual or returns to capital relies on cost and

 (inverse) demand elasticities with respect to output that have standard

 interpretations; they are indexes of capacity utilization, returns    to scale,

 and markup power. As mentioned earlier, if one can estimate these

 nonparametrically, as Hall [1988) does for the markup, or one has independent

 estimates of these values, such as published estimates of capacity

 utilization, these adjustments can be carried out directly. However, such

 measures may not be appropriate for the data set used, or may not correspond

 directly with the economic concepts they are designed to represent (and thus

 be mutually inconsistent). Therefore, it is convenient to use an econometric
                                         -21-



model that   is   capable of distinguishing these measures parametrically for a

given body of data.

      One model that can be utilized for this purpose is based on a

Generalized Leontief restricted cost function and similarly constructed demand

for output function, as developed in Morrison [1989a]. Combining the

resulting representations of the technology, characterized by unrestricted

returns to scale and multiple quasi-fixed inputs in the cost function, and of

demand behavior, reflected in the inverse demand function, one can allow both

factor demand and price decisions to be represented explicitly.

      More specifically, the nonconstant returns to scale Generalized Leontief

cost function with two fixed inputs, capital (K) and labor (L), and two

variable inputs, materials (M) and energy (E), is


7) C —             a..         +
                                       6         +
                                                     ii   mn mni5 i1

       + Y5EEIXk         6ik
                                   +                       + ipi EkEllkckdl
where x1, xk denotes K and L, Pj and Pj index the prices of E and M, 5m' s

depict the remaining arguments (Y, t, 1( and AL), and including K and      L
allows for internal costs of adjustment on these inputs which reflects their

quasi-fixity.

      The inverse demand function for output is specified as


                                                      2
                                             hTh'h
     -l
8) D (EXP,p,r,ppi,Y) —             p   — [



where h indexes the components of the vector of shift variables for the demand
                                                                           the
function; in my empirical implementation h includes expenditure (EXP),

price of imports (PIM' the interest rate (r), and the consumer price index

 (Pp)-
                                                       -22-



        These expressions are used to construCt a system of estimating equations

including (i) the cost function (7) plus the variable input demand equations

                                                              (ii) a MR—MC expression
for E and M, derived from Shephard's Lemma;

representing short run price setting using the expressions for marginal

revenue (MR—py+(aPy/3Y)'Y) and marginal cost (MC—8G/8Y);
                                                                    paths of the two inputs; and,
(iii) two Euler equations9 to reflect adjustment

to complete the system, (iv) the output demand equation.

            This system of equations was estimated using three stage least squares,

allowing for endogeneity of both output quantity and price as well as
                                                       the input prices. The data set used
permitting nonstatic expectations on

includes similarly constructed data for U.S. manufacturing from Berndt and

                                                                       Sawa at Kyoto University,
Wood [19841, Japanese manufacturing from Takamitsu
                                                              Watkins of DataMetrics in Alberta,
and Canadian manufacturing from G. Campbell

Canada. For further elaboration on the data and estimation methods see

Morrison [1989a,bJ. The data were pooled for estimation, using procedures
                                                                            with those for the
 outlined in Morrison [1988]. Pooling the Canadian data

 U.S. and Japan alters the estimates for the U.S. and Japan                    (Morrison [1989a1)

 and for Canada alone (Morrison [l989b]) slightly but not substantively.
                                                                                            to
             Based on the resulting parameter estimates, it is straightforward

 compute the cost and demand elasticities required for the adjustment factor

                                                       is computed as 81np/3lnY using the
 ('CY'CPY)CY/PY
 equation for p1 in (8), and, using (7),                       is   31nC/8lnY8lfl(G+PKK+PLL)/ölY.

 The individual components of                     can be further identified based on the

 definitions of returns to scale (MC.Y/C*) and capacity utilization                     (C*/C) from

  9These are based on the Euler equation
   -G       -   rG.x   -
                           px + G.xx.*.+   Cxx.* — 0
        x
   developed in Berndt, Fuss and Waverman [19801.
                                     -23-



the last section and noting that MC—3C/3Y—ÔC/8Y, C*_C+ZKK+ZLL, ZK=-8G/ÔK, ZL—-

8G/8L, and CC+PKK+PLL. Once these measures are calculated it is possible to

determine the impacts of returns to scale, capacity utilization and the markup

on productivity growth measures through computation of the the bias

corrections and the decomposition of EYt as developed above.



V. Distinzuishin the Components of Productivity Change: An Empirical Example

      Let us designate ADJecy'cU/(l+Cpy) the full adjustment factor. The

components of this measure, the combined numerator ecyLCU_€cy and ADJ itself

are presented in the second to sixth columns of Table 1 for the U.S., Japan

and Canada)-°   ADJ tends to approximate one closely, which suggests zero

profits on average for these countries due to the the relationship between

revenues and costs. This interpretation stems from the equality C.ADJ=py.Y

which implies ADJ measures py/AC where AC is short run average total cost with

the fixed factors values at their ex-ante prices.         Interestingly,

although short run profits or losses are possible in this model,   the

components of ADJ tend to offset each other, which is consistent with the Hall

[1989] suggestion that monopolistically competitive markets are predominant   in

the U.S.

      For the U.S., in 1961-62 and 1974-80 average total costs at least

slightly exceeded average revenue. However, in other years, especially 1968



 '°These estimates differ little from those in Morrison [1989a,b], but some
 deviation does arise due to pooling Canada with the U.S. and Japan.
 Although both capacity utilization and scale economies appear somewhat lower
 in the current estimates for the U.S. and Japan, the combined       measure is
 virtually the same. This suggests a slightly different decomposition
                                                                         of
 cost changes in response to output variation - - a larger  role for capacity
 utilization and smaller role for scale economies - - although the differences
 are not substantive. For Canada the cost elasticities are very similar
 although the measured markups tend to be slightly lower than when
 independent estimation is carried out.
                                      -24-


                                 earned; revenues were up to 9% higher than
to 1971, economic profits were
                                  were even larger from 1960 to 1973, although
average costs. In Japan profits

in 1974 revenues fell short of costs and after that profits were not as large.

1980 and 1981 also appear to have been poor years for Japanese profitability.

The worst years for Japan therefore follow immediately on energy price

increases. In Canada profitability did not vary nearly as much, with revenues

exceeding costs by two percent or more in most years, especially the late
                                                       exceeded revenues for
1960s to early 1970s. The only years average costs

Canada were in the first part of the sample; energy price hikes did not appear
                                                        by the U.S. and Japan.
to cause the problems with profitability experienced

However, this could at least partly result from including Canada's large
                                                and from the fact that oil
petroleum refining industry in manufacturing,

prices were constrained from rising to world prices in Canada.

      The breakdown of the full adjustment index ADJ into its components

provides additional information about what causes    the deviation between costs

and revenues. Economies of scale appear to be an important cost determinant
                                                            The figures in column
 for all three countries, especially in the later years.

 two of Table 1 suggest that marginal cost increasingly falls short of average

 (total) cost over time. In this sense economies of scale exist and are

 becoming larger. This could be a result of increasing communications and

 computer technology, a broader world market, or a number of other changes in

 the cost structure of production, although identification of these

 determinants cannot be accomplished within this framework.

       These cost patterns appear to be accommodated, in the U.S. and

 particularly Japan, by investment that results in excess capacity for firms,

 and by increasingly large price margins. Capacity utilization changes appear

 particularly important in Japan. It might be noted that the significant CU
                                        -25-


declines observed for Japan are a combination of large decreases in the shadow

value to market price ratio for capital along with a smaller decline over time

for labor. The weaker fall in CU for the U.S. arises because the ZIJPL ratio

in the U.S. increases slightly rather than decreasing over time. In Canada

capacity appears instead to be overutilized. CU is larger than one even in

the later years of the sample, although it falls toward one in 1975 and 1980

after the energy price increases. This is true even though the labor shadow

value ratio drops somewhat over time.

      The markup of price over marginal cost also has a noticable time trend,

especially in Japan; as marginal costs decline relative to average costs,

price margins increase to compensate. The markups are very similar in the

U.S. and Canada, ranging usually between 10% and 20%, although in Japan they

rise from 6% to 46% during this period. They also have a cyclical trend,

although this pattern differs between Japan and the North American countries.

In general, markups appear to decline during recessions; for example for all

countries the 1973 and 1979 OPEC shocks are reflected in a downturn in the

markup ratio. When all demand and supply impacts are taken into account,

however, the correlations between CU and the markup suggest a tendency for

procyclicality of markups in the U.S. and Canada but countercyclicality in

Japan. This result for the U.S. and Canada is not particularly strong; for

the three countries together there is a - .75 correlation between CiJ and the

markup.11

      The impacts on productivity growth measures of the characteristics of

production reflected in these indexes can be computed directly using the

framework developed earlier. Adjustments to correct for the erroneous



 11See Morrison (l989b1 for further analysis of the cyclicality of markups
 and its determinants.
                                       -26-


                                                      are reported in Table 2 for
assumptions of CRTS and instantaneous adjustment
                                       with the implied bias corrections. The
cost-side productivitY growth, along
                                                       in the first column is
traditional cost-side productivity growth measure
                                               (1) from the data using traditional
computed by directly calculating equation
                                              factors reported above are then used
index number procedures. The adjustment
                                       and capital components to allow for scale
to modify the weights on the output
                                                     individually and then
economies, subequilibriUm and adjustment costs,

together, as outlined in section II.

      The traditional measure in column one of Table 2 reflects the patterns

generally associated with comparisons of secular and cyclical trends for these
                                                              1974 and 1975 were
countries, Japan has the largest growth rate, although
                                              decline in 1974 and a 1% drop in 1975.
very poor years, with a 5% productivity

The U.S. experienced lower productivity growth and more years of productivity

decline, with 1970 and 1974-75 being the worst years.        Canadian productivity

growth appears roughly similar, with somewhat higher growth in the late 1960s

 to early l970s and a worse productivity slump in the early l980s.

       The second column captures the impact of correcting for scale effects by

 weighting output growth by       as in (3). The impact of this adjustment is

 most apparent from the bias correction computations in      the third column. Most

 of these numbers are negative, and the biases are particularly large        in the


 mid-range of the sample and for Japan. The U.S. and Canada biases exhibit a

 very similar time trend. The negative values indicate that a substantial

 portion (up to more than 50%) of cost decreases (productivity increases)

 observed have been erroneously attributed to technical change when       instead

 they arose due to scale economies.

       Adjustment for this causes the productivity declines in the 1974-75

 period to be smaller than usually thought, especially in the U.S.,       because
                                     -27-



scale economies were not being exploited with stagnation in output growth

during this period. In Canada, the slightly recessionary period of 1969-70

appears worse and only one year of productivity (technical change) increase

remains for 1978-82. In the U.S. scale economies were mainly apparent in the

1963-1969 period and were responsible for most of the cost declines generally

attributed to technical change. The strong productivity growth observed for

1972-73 in standard measures is also tempered by this adjustment. In general,

taking scale economies into account appears to smooth the productivity growth

index; much fluctuation in productivity growth can be "explained" in terms of

incorrect measurement of scale economies.

      Adapting the productivity growth measure instead to permit

subequilibrium, a procedure that yields the index in the fourth column,    also

results in many negative bias corrections. It is apparent that incorrectly

dealing with slow adjustment of capital and labor stocks often causes

overestimates of true productivity growth. The pattern is different than that

for scale economies, however; in many cases the correction causes fluctuations

to appear larger rather than smaller, especially for the U.S. and Canada.

      The 1970 decline in the U.S., for example, is even greater than before

and exceeds the drop in 1974, although the latter is also more   substantial

than originally estimated. This suggests from (5) that, given that excess

capacity exists (Zk<pk overall), capital growth falls short of output growth.

Later in the 1970s, however, some smoothing takes place; the decline appearing

in 1975 is somewhat attenuated and the increases in 1976 and 1977 are     smaller

with the adjustment. Since CU is still below one in these years, this

suggests relatively strong investment in this period.   In Japan, by contrast,

incorporating utilization changes actually cause measured productivity     growth
                                        -28-


                                     although not for 1976 to 1979. Most of the
to improve for the earlier years,

negative biases for Canada also occur in the mid 1970s and later, causing not

only 1974-75 to look worse, as in the U.S., but also 1980-82. These bias

numbers are not as large as for scale economies, however. Measures including
                                    in (5'), are reported in the next two columns.
adjustment costs explicitly, as
                                               costs does not affect these
As seen there, incorporation of adjustment

patterns significantly.
                                                             in the last two
      The total effect of these adjustments, as reported

columns, presents a very different picture of "true productivity" or
                                                    In this scenario, 1966 to 1970
technical change, than is generally perceived.
                                                     slowdown" in the U.S., in
were really the years of the worst "productivity

terms of technical change. Traditionally measured productivity increases

resulted from incorrectly including the effects of scale economies and changes
                                                                    to have
 in utilization. Since 1971, however, true productivity appears

 improved; except for 1974 and 1978 productivity advances occurred every year,
                                                                  growth in the
 sometimes substantially. In Japan, by contrast, productivity

 early 1960s was even better than standard measures indicate. However, much of

 the cost declines attributed to technical change in the late 1960s and through

 the 1970s appear really to have been due to scale economies.      For Canada the

 productivity growth indications are rather bleak for the post-1973 period;
                                                                               All
 from 1974 on, only in 1976 was there positive true productivity growth.

 other cost declines resulted from scale economies and utilization

 fluctuations. The only years in the sample which improve with the adjustments

 for Canada are 1960, 1975, and 1982, the latter two of which were originally

 the worst years.

       These indexes suggest not only a smoothing process, or an "explanation"

 of standard productivity growth fluctuations, by correcting for restrictive
                                          -29-



assumptions, but also provide evidence of smaller productivity growth

increases than generally thought for many years. Although the U.S. is

performing better compared to earlier years and Japan is experiencing strong

but not as spectacular productivity growth as often is thought, Canada is

doing very poorly. Errors in computations are particularly serious when

output growth rates are large or differ significantly from changes in quasi-

fixed input stocks.

      Some of the implications suggested by the indexes are highlighted by the

average annual productivity growth rates provided for 1960-81 and pre- and

post- 1973 at the bottom of Table 2, and by the standard deviations reported

for the entire sample period.

      For the U.S. the results are dramatic. The average growth rate as

traditionally measured for the entire sample period is .807%, which breaks
                                                           1973-84. Both the scale
down to .976% and .512%, respectively for 1960-73 and

and utilization adjustments, however, absorb some of the observed cost

increase, especially for the earlier period, leaving only a .359% and .358%

annual average growth rate for the sub-periods. Further, the standard

deviation of 1.030 from the corrected measure is considerably less than the

a—l.254 of the traditional procedure, indicating that for the U.S. correcting

for biases reduces the cyclical variation.

       For Japan, the 1.659% and .459% averages for the sub-periods both drop

with adjustments, to 1.315% and .414%. Again the decline is greater for the

 first part of the sample --    the   bias is -.344 as compared to -.045 --   although

 the difference between the bias corrections for the two time periods is not

 quite as large as for the U.S. Also, the capacity utilization adjustment

 actually augments the traditional measure of technical change rather than
                                      -30-



removing a part of the observed growth.      Recognition of subequilibriuin,

however, results in some smoothing in terms of the standard deviations;

o'.-l.974 for the traditional measures, but is 1.888 and 1.943 for the capacity

utilization adjusted indexes with and without adjustment costs incorporated,

respectively. This contrasts with the U.S., for which this adjustment

somewhat increases the standard deviation.

      For Canada, comparison with an analogous time period (only to 1981)

suggests that the decreases from standard to corrected measures of technical

change for both periods are almost of the same magnitude. The outcome of

these adjustments is evidence of an increase in true productivity of .371% per

                                   that for the U.S., but a decrease of .429%
year through 1973, very close to
                                     This is a result of cost declines from
per year for the post-1973 period.
                                                               been attributed to
both scale and utilization changes which have erroneously

technical change in traditional measures. The impact of scale economies was

particularly strong during the earlier period due to greater      growth. The

 standard deviation is also reduced by the adjustments, suggesting      less

                                                                               results
 fluctuations in measured productivity growth, although this smoothing

 only from adjusting for scale economies; as for the U.S., adjustments         for


 subequilibrium actually augment the variation.

       Overall, in the adjusted measures, the much heralded productivity

 decline of the 1970s in the U.S. virtually disappears. For Japan and Canada

 the slowdown remains, but with lower overall levels of productivity growth

 attributed just to technical change for both periods. The evidence from the

 annual average growth rates thus reflects a smoothing of the often cited

 secular trends. The standard deviations also are reduced significantly with

 the adjustments, although most of this impact appears to stem from the
                                     -31-


smoothing effect of correcting for scale economies. This establishes some

smoothing of cyclical patterns.

      In addition to correcting the cost-side productivity growth measure for

scale and utilization changes, the other element of the adjustment process

discussed above is the decomposition of the full output-side productivity

change measure from the corrected cost-side measure. To determine the impact

of these adjustments we return to Table 1; the multiplicative factors that

cause the deviation of the cost and primal side measures, are, of course,

simply the indexes already presented there. Several comments are in order.

      First note that the difference between the primal and dual productivity

growth measures with all the adjustments taken into account is very small.

This arises because the adaptation of the cost to primal measure simply

requires dividing ECt by ADJ (once all corrections to the weights in the

measures are made), where ADJ, as already discussed, closely approximates one.

      Second, interpretation of the trends causing the deviations that do

exist between the primal and dual measures is possible directly from the ADJ

index; if the full productivity change      can be written as -E/ADJ, then

the primal measure exceeds the cost measure as long as ADJ<l. Some positive

component of the output-side measure, therefore, can be attributed to scale

economies, capacity utilization and markups during 1974-1980 for the U.S.;

during the years 1974, 1980 and 1981 for Japan; and in 1960-61   for Canada.

For the U.S. and Japan it tends to be the case that cyt overstates the pure

impact of technical change during recessionary years. Therefore these

adjustments exaggerate both productivity declines and increases;   if these are


years of negative productivity growth, this means the primal measure implies

the decline is worse than is really the case.
                                         -32-


                                                characteristics is allowed for,
      If only one of these cost and demand

however, interpretation of the decomposition of the output-side measure is

                                        is less than one as long as economies of
ambiguous. For example, since

scale exist (true everywhere in this sample), EYt always appears to

overestimate the impact of technical change      if only this characteristic is

taken into account in the decomposition of the primal measure. Since scale

economies are increasing, this overestimation -     - even   for negative

productivity growth years -   - is   greater in the later years of the sample.

      Finally, if instead, the focus is to adjust for markups, the primal side

productivity growth measure can be "corrected" by multiplying it by

 y/MCI/(l+ipy).12 This measure is presented in the last column of Table 1.

Since the markup ratio always exceeds one and has been increasing, the

adjusted measure always is greater than the standard measure, and any slowdown

 in productivity growth over time (as long as growth remains positive) appears

 less consequential with the adjustment.

       Again, however, this independent adjustment for demand characteristics

 can be misleading if cost characteristics such as scale economies exist that

 should be accommodated; since these characteristics tend to counterract each
                                                                       taken in this
 other in terms of profitability. The advantage of the approach

 paper is that all these impacts are simultaneously considered within an

 integrated, coherent framework. Moreover, the empirical significance is
                                                                                  the
 substantial; for the U.S. when all the adjustments are taken into account

 slowdown is entirely eliminated.




   120r, equivalently, by dividing by (l+Epy). Note that this is equal to -
   ECt/ECy from the definition of ADJ'.
                                     -33-



VI. Cpncludin2: Remarks

      This paper has provided an integrated framework for correcting and

decomposing cost and primal productivity growth measures to consider the

impacts of scale economies, subequilibrium, costs of adjustment and markup

behavior. This framework has then been then used to assess productivity

fluctuations in the manufacturing sectors of three countries, the U.S., Japan

and Canada.

      The results suggest that a significant portion of cost declines in

production resulting from scale economies and capacity utilization

fluctuations has been erroneously attributed to technical change.      Since the

marginal cost of production has fallen over time relative to average cost,

this has contributed to observations of a productivity growth slowdown over

time. Declines in capacity utilization, on the other hand, have sometimes

obscured true productivity increases, particularly in Japan.

       Two types of adjustments have been developed and implemented for

identifying the impacts of these characteristics of production. The first
                                                              for errors in the
corrects both cost and primal productivity growth measures
                                                             corrections involve
 traditional measurement procedures typically used. These

changing the weight on the output growth term in the dual measure for both

 scale economies and fixity, and altering the weight on the quasi-fixed input

 growth terms in both primal and output measures to account for subequilibrium
                                                                     "biases" in
 and adjustment costs. These adjustments, and the corresponding

 the traditional measures, have been shown to have substantial empirical

 impacts on the trends reflected in productivity growth   indexes.

       The second adjustment can be thought of as a decomposition of the primal

 measure to identify the separate impacts of scale economies, fixity and
                                                                      In total
 markups on the full output-side measure of productivity growth.
                                       -34-


                                       on the trends reflected in the primal
these adjustments have little impact
                                    to be the rule over time. This arises
measure since zero profits appear

because scale economies are counterracted by markups of price over marginal
                                       one of these effects, such as markups,
cost. Therefore, adjusting by only
                                    For example, adjustment of the primal measure
provides ambiguous information.
                                    which can be thought of as decomposing eyt
to value output at marginal cost,

into its price and technical change components if           implies 6Yt has

                                                if markups have been rising, as
increasingly understated productivity growth

appears to be the case. However,     if it is recognized that y'1 due to

economies of scale and fixities, the remaining
                                                  component of yt includes these

effects. Incorporating this tends to neutralize the initial implication.

      The results reported here therefore provide a number of important

 insights about the relationships between different characteristics of

 production and economic performance
                                       indicators. They also suggest a partial

                                                     growth slowdown, since in
 "explanation" for observations of a productivity

 periods of significant growth firms can take advantage of potential cost

 savings from scale economies and markups appear larger, resulting in an
                                                           especially for the U.S.
 overestimate of productivity growth. This is evident,
                                                    The reverse occurs in the
 and Japan, for the late 1960s and early 1970s.

 later 1970s. Capacity utilization fluctuations may, however, compensate at
                                                             scale economies exist
 least somewhat for this; if expectations are optimistic,

 and current investment is therefore strong, capacity utilization may decline.
                                                                  This appears to
 which may cause measured productivity to be biased downward.

 be the case particularly for Japan in the l9lOs and early l980s.
                                           -35-


                                           Table 1
                       Primal Productivity Growth and its Components,
                          U.S., Japanese and Canadian Manufacturing

Year      -€Ct                 Cuc                                          't             EYt/(l+EPY)
                                                (..4/(l+Epy))
U.S.
          1.745        .919     .996    .916       1.105        1.012       1.725           1.907
1960
           .334        .921     .984    .906       1.100         .997            .335           .369
1961
          2.021        .918     .984    .903       1.104         .996       2.028           2.239
1962
1963      -.630        .905    1.005    .910       1.118        1.017       -    .620       -   .693
          1.978        .900    1.006    .906       1.124        1.018        1.942          2.183
1964
                       .890    1.013    .902       1.139        1.026         .102           .116
1965           .105
                       .882    1.014    .894       1.152        1.030       -1.411         -1.627
1966      -1.453
1967       -   .966    .868    1.021    .886       1.173        1.040        -   .929      -1.090
                       .841    1.038     .873      1.219        1.064        -.042          -.051
 1968      -.045
           -.394       .823    1.049     .864      1.250        1.080        - . 365        -   .046
1969
 1970     -1.083       .799    1.063     .849      1.286        1.093        -   .992      -1.276
                       .810    1.055     .854      1.261        1.077         .571              .719
 1971       .614
                       .832    1.033     .859      1.224        1.052        1.065          1.304
 1972      1.120
                       .832    1.036     .861      1.222        1.052        1.605          1.961
 1973      1.689
                       .872     .987     .860      1.150          .989      -1.164         -1.339
 1974     -1.152
                                .961     .850      1.128          .958              .595     .672
 1975       .571       .884
                       .888     .953     .846      1.126          .953        .511           .575
 1976       .487
                                .941     .834      1.128          .940        .365           .411
 1977       .343       .886
                                .973     .841      1.150          .967       -.041          -.047
 1978      -.039       .865
                                .992     .850      1.155          .982        .404           .466
 1979        .397       .857
                               1.015     .851      1.161          .988       1.171          1.359
 1980      1.156        .838
                               1.072     .849      1.198        1.017        1.091          1.295
 1981      1.099        .791

J at an
                               1. 137   1.112       1.060       1.178        5.135          5.444
1960       6.051       .977
                               1.078    1.051       1.065       1. 120       1.523          1.622
1961       1.705       .975
                               1.080    1.042       1.086       1.132        1.787          1.940
1962       2.022       .965
                                        1.029       1.102       1.134         .645              .711
1963           .731    .959    1.073
                                        1.016       1.124       1.142         .200              .224
1964           .228    .952    1.068
                                        1.000       1.140       1.140         .097              .110
1965           .110    .945    1.058
                               1.057     .996       1.154       1.150        1.071          1.236
1966       1.231       .942
                                         .977       1.171             144    2.359          2.763
1967       2.699       .937    1.043                            I .

                               1.036     .959       1.203       1.154        1.879          2.261
1968       2.167       .926
                               1.007     .922       1.239       1.142          .934         1.156
1969       1.066       .915
                                 .973    .884       1.268       1.120        1.064          1.349
1970       1.192       .908
           -.923       .893      .950    .848       1.317       1.117           -   .826   -1.088
1971                                                                                             .130
                                 .942     .832      1.353       1.126         .096
1972            .108   .883
                                          .822      1.384       1.138         .021               .029
1973            .024   .878      .937
                                          .753      1.324         .997      -2.596         -3.437
1974      -2.588       .881      .855
                                          .750      1.360       1.020         .185               .251
1975            .188   .863      .869
                                          .756      1.379       1 .042        .395               .545
1976            .412    .858     .882
                                          .751      1.394       1.048         .048               .067
 1977           .050    .851     .883
                                          .723      1.462       1.056         .707              1.033
 1978           .746    .832     .868
                                          .719      1.463       1.052            1.120          1.638
 1979          1.178    .828     .869
                                          .692      1.393          .963          1.078          1.501
 1980          1.038    .837     .826
                                          .681      1.427          .972          2.355          3.359
 1981          2.289    .814     .837
                                            -36-




Table 1, continued.


Canada                                                       .988        .747        .796
                         .943     .983    .927     1.066
1960          .738                                                       .387        .412
                                  .984    .930     1.065     .990
1961          .384       .944
                                          .960     1.075    1.032    1.950       2.096
         2.013           .932    1.030
1962
                                 1.020    .951     1.075    1.022    -    .385   -    .414
1963     -    .393       .933
                                                            1.049         .408        .442
              .428       .925    1.048    .969     1.082
1964                                                        1.028    1.489       1.625
                         .916    1.029    .942     1.091
1965     1.531                                                       -    .451   -    .501
                                 1.053    .946     1.111    1.051
1966      - .474         .898                                        -    .411   -    .459
          - .429         .895    1.047    .936     1.116    1.045
1967                                                        1.083         .888   1.026
           .961          .862    1.088    .937     1.155
1968                                                        1.099         .027        .032
           .030          .835    1.103    .921     1.194
1969                                                        1.079    -1.101 -1.302
         -1.188          .840    1.086    .912     1.183
1970                                                        1.054         .646           .751
           .681           .854   1.063     .907    1.161
1971                                                        1.048         .378           .442
           .397           .849   1.057     .897    1.168
1972                                                        1.056         .487           .568
           .515           .849    1.066    .906    1.166
1973
                                  1.050    .909     1.142   1.038     -   .712    -      .814
 1974     - .739          .865                                        -   .941   -1.065
          - .955          .870    1.031    .897     1.131    1.014
 1975                                                                     .218           .252
                          .844    1.058    .893     1.157    1.033
 1976             .225                                                                   .233
                                  1.096    .853     1.221    1.042    -   .191    -
 1977        -    .199    .779
                                                                          .366    -      .421
                                           .886     1.149    1.018
 1978        -    .373    .845    1.048
                                                                      - .357      -      .411
                                  1.054    .890     1.151    1.024
 1979        - .366       .844                                        - .962     -1.093
             - .967       .858    1.031    .885     1.135    1.005
 1980                                                                 - .057      -      .066
             - .058       .823    1.071    .881     1.164    1.026
 1981                                                                 - .339         -   .396
              -   .346    .810    1.079    .873     1.166    1.018
 1982
                                                      -37-


                                                       Table 2

                  Cost Productivity Growth (%),                   Traditional            and Corrected

Year     Trad         Corrected
                                   Bias                      Bias            EctA           Bias            ctT Bias
          Ect          EctK


1960      2.071        1.915        -   .155    2.067         -   .004       1.900           -   .171       1.745       -    .326
1961       .331         .370            .039         .300     -   .031        .295           -   .035        .334            .003
1962      2.679        2.021        - .658      2.677         -   .002       2.669           -   .010       2.021       -    .658
1963      -   .188     -   .611     - .423      -    .233     -   .044       -    .210       -   .022       -   .630    -    .442
1964      2.431        1.915        - .516      2.472             .041       2.496               .066       1.978       -    .453
              .800     -   .001     - .801       .881             .081        .914               .114        .105       -.696
1965                                                                                                          - .497
1966      -   .957    -1.510        -.554       -    .941         .015        -   .893         .064 -1.453
                                                          - .586                               .402   - .966  - .782
1967      -   .184     -   .557     -    .373   -    .397
                                                     .581     -                              -




1968      1.051            .339     -    .712        .356
                                                     .695   .689
                                                              -                              - .362     .045 -1,096
                                                                                                            -


                                                   - .222                                    - .301   - .394  - .824
1969       .430        -   .071     -    .502        .208   .130
1970     -1.198        -   .118     1.080 -2.292 -1.094 -2.224                              -1.026 -1.083       .115
                                                   - .352                                    - .409     .614  - .880
1971      1.494        1.050        - .445 1.142          1.085
          2.266         .629       -1.637        2.797            .531        2.831            .565   1.120 -1.146
1972                                                                                                          - .947
          2.636        1.293 -1.343              3.041            .405        3.078            .442   1.689
1973                                                                                         - .318           - .028
1974     -1.124        - .838   .286            -1.294        -    .170      -1.443                  -1.152
1975     -1.107            .070     1.177        -   .790          .317       -   .577               .530       .571     1.678
1976      1.838            .791 -1.046           1.547        - .291          1.488          -       .349       .487    -1.351
                                    -    .900    1.200        - .291          1.195          -.296              .343    -1.148
1977      1.491            .591
                       -   .012     -    .660        .560     - .088           .593          -       .055   -   .039     -   .687
1978       .648
           .642            .411     -    .231        .666          .024        .624          -       .018       .397     -   .245
1979
                                         .664        .415          .211        .490                  .286   1.156            .952
1980       .204            .868
          1.505        1.263         -   .242    1.627             .122       1.353          -       .152   1.099        -   .406
1981

Jaoan
                                     -   .482    6.530        2.117           6.596          2.182          6.051        1.637
1960      4.414        3.931
                                     -   .453    2.403        1.250           2.206          1.053          1.705         .552
1961      1.153         .700
                                                                              2.432           .590          2.022         .180
1962      1.843        1.463         - .380      2.570         .728
                                                                              1.197           .471              .731      .006
1963           .726     .293         - .433       .971         .245
                       - .346        - .648      1.032         .730            .921           .619              .228     - .074
1964           .302
                       - .211        - .343       .465         .333            .475           .343              .110     - .022
1965       .132                                                                                                          - .294
                                     - .695      1.925         .400           1.966           .442          1.231
1966      1.525            .830                                                                                          - .465
                       2.118       -1.046        3.809         .645           3.797           .633          2.699
1967      3.164                                                                                                          - .768
                       1.802       -1.133        3.326         .391           3.344           .409          2.167
1968      2.935
                        .975 -1.319              2.404         .110           2.412           .118          1.066 -1.228
1969      2.294
                       1.311 -1.347              2.579         -      .080    2.525              -   .134   1.192 -1.466
1970      2.658                                                                                             - .923  - .578
1971       -   .345   -1.001   - .656            -   .281             .064       -   .293            .052
1972       1.161            .134    -1.027       1.055         - .107 1.080                      -   .081        .108   -1.053
                                                 1.047         - .222 1.022                      -.246    .024          -1.245
1973       1.269            .206    -1.063
                                                               1.401 -3.576                      1.862 -2.588            2.850
1974      -5.438 -4.336            1.102 -4.037
                   - .831                  - .029              1.224   - .176                    1.078           .188    1.441
1975      -1.253                     .422
                                                               - .316  1.266                     - .361          .412   -1.215
1976       1.627            .651   - .976  1.311
                                   - .804    .761              - .269    .760                    - .270          .050       -   .980
1977       1.030            .225
                           1.171 -1.251    1.851                  -   .572       1.842           - .581          .746 -1.676
1978       2.423
                                   - .622  1.753                  -   .246       1.718           - .281         1.178       -   .821
1979       1.999           1.377
                                                                      .627        .928               .600       1.038           .710
1980        .328            .458         .130        .955
                                        -.848       2.984             .030       2.995               .040       2.289       -   .666
 1981.     2.954           2.106
                                                                -38-




Table 2, continued.

                                                                                             .781               .106               .738                 .063
                                          -   .042          .785             .110
1960         .675            .633
                                                                         -   .055            .604           -   .030               .384             - .250
                                              .224          .579
1961         .634         .410
                                                                                            2.550               .112           2.013                - .425
                         1.906            -   .532         2.525             .087
                                                                                                                                   .393             - .487
1962        2.438
                                              .448           .117            .023            .066           -   .028           -
1963         .093        •   .354         -
                                                                                                                 .180               .428            - .504
                                          -.661             1.076         .145              1.111
1964         .932         .271                                                                                   .144          1.531                - .574
                                          -   .691          2.238         .133              2.249
1965        2.105        1.414                                                                                   .108          -    .474            - .650
                                              .726            .128       -.049                .284
             .177        -    .551        -
                                                                                                            -    .349          -    .429            - .697
1966                                                          .100       -    .168          -   .082
1967          .268       -    .064        -.331
                                                                                                                 .080                  .961          - .729
                                          -    .756         1.801                .111        1.770
            1.690                .934                                                                                                                - .979
1968                                                                             .034        1.149               .141                  .030
            1.009        -       .013 -1.022                1.043                                                                                    - .805
 1969
                                                           -1.331        -       .948       -1.328          -    .945          -1.188
 1970       -   .383     -       .255    .128
                                                                                                                 .067            .681              -1.021
                                                            1.731                .029        1.770
 1971       1.703                .690 .1.013                                                                  .295               .397                -      .919
                                                            1.583                .267        1.610
 1972       1.316                .170 -1.145                                                                  .260                     .515 -1.173
                                          -1.350            1.915                .228        1.948
 1973       1.688             .337                                                                           -.277                         739       -.900
                                           -.588             -.068        -.228              -.116
 1974            .161        -.428                                                                           -    .531          -      .955           .058
                                 .447       .566           .1.644            -   .631       -1.544
 1975       -1.013           -
                                                                                             1.035              - .006                 .225          -      .816
 1976        1.041               .267         - .774         1.119               .078
                                                                                                                - .242             -   .199             -   .767
                                              - .485            .362         -   .204          .325
 1977         .566               .082
                                                                                 .276           .687                .292           -   .373             -   .768
                                 .589         -.985             .671
  1978        .395           -
                                                                                                .673                .275           -   .366             -   .764
                             -   .590         -   .988          .668             .269
  1979        .399
                                                                             -.363 -1.441                       - .469             -   .967                 .006
             -   .972        -   .517             .455     -1.335                                                                                            .307
  1980
                                                                .074         - .322  - .044                     - .293             -.058                -

  1981           .249            .235         -    .014     -
                                                                                                                - .454             -.346                1.494
                             -.028            1.812        -2.837            -.997 -2.294
  1982      -1.840

 Average Annual Growth Rates

                                                                              - .072             .723           -  .084                 .359            -  .448
 1960-81         .807             .446         - .361           .735                                                                                    -  .619
                                               - .500           .874          - .102             .870            - .106                 .359
 1960-73         .976             .476                                                                           - .046                 .358             - .154
                                                                .492          - .021             .466
 1974-81         .512             .393         -.119


 1D
 1960-81        1.223             .592            - .631     1.608                   .385       1.611                   .388
                                                                                                                        .461        1.315
                                                                                                                                           .987          -

                                                                                                                                                         -
                                                                                                                                                                .236
                                                                                                                                                                .344
                                                  - .787     2.131                   .472       2.120
  1960-73 1.659                   .872                                                                                                     .414             -   .045
                                                  - .356      .694                   .235           .719                .260
  1974-81         .459            .102

  Canada                                                                                                            -   .069               .062             -   .518
                                                  - .427         .485            -   .095           .511
  1960-82         .580            .153
                                                                                 -.004          1.034                   .010               .371             -   .654
                                  .395            - .629     1.021
  1960-73 1.025                                                                                 -   .053            -.156              -   .429             -.533
                  .103           -.249            -.352      -.038               -.140
  1974-81                                                                                       -.302               -.189              -.419                -.307
                                 -.224            -.111         -.348            -.235
  1974-82 -.113

  Standard Deviations

  U.S.                                                                                                                                     1.030
                                                                 1.409                              1.389
  1960-81 1.254                    .917
  .J avan                                                                                                                                  1.616
                                                                 1.943                              1.888
  1960-81 1.974                  1.553
  Canada                                                                                            1.269                                    .793
   1960-82 1.026                   .647                          1.318
                                      -39.-




References

Abel, A.B. (1979), Investment and the Value of Capital, Garland Publishing Co.
         New York.

Berndt, Ernst 9.., Melvyn Fuss and Leonard Waverman [1980], Emoirical Analysis
         of Dynamic Adjustment Models of the Demand for EnerEY in U.S.
         Manufacturinz Industries 1.947-74, Final Research Report, Palo Alto,
         California, Electric Power Research Institute, November.

Berndt, Ernst R., and Melvyn Fuss [1986], "Productivity Measurement Using
        Capital Asset Valuation to adjust for Variations in Utilization",
        Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 33, No. 1/2, Oct./Nov. , pp. 7-30.

Berndt, Ernst R., and Dieter M. Hesse [1985], "Measuring and Assessing Capacity
        Utilization in the Manufacturing Sector of Nine OECD Countries,"
         European Economic Review, Vol. 30, No. 5, October, pp. 961-989.

Berndt, Ernst R., and David 0. Wood [1984], "Energy Price Changes and the
         Induced Revaluation of Durable Capital in U.S. Manufacturing During the
         OPEC Decade", manuscript, M.I.T. Center for Energy Policy Research,
        January.

Denny, Michael, Melvyn Fuss and Leonard Waverman [1981], "The Measurement and
         Interpretation of Total Factor Productivity in Regulated Industries,
         with an Application to Canadian Telecommunications", in Productivity
         Measurement in Regulated Industries, (Thomas G. Cowing and Rodney
         Stevenson, eds.), Academic Press.

Domowitz, Ian. 9.. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen [1988], "Market
         Structure and Cyclical Fluctuations in U.S. Manufacturing", The Review
         of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 70, No. 1, February.

Fuss, Melvyn and Leonard Waverman [1986], "The Extent and Sources of Cost and
         Efficiency Differences Between U.S. and Japanese Automobile Producers",
        N.B.E.R. Working Paper #1849, March.

Hall, Robert E. [1988], "The Relation Between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S.
         Industry". Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 96, No. 5, October,
         pp. 921-947.

Hall, Robert E. [1989], "Invariance Properties of Solow's Productivity Residual",
         Manuscript prepared for Robert Solow's 65th birthday celebration, April.

Hulten, Charles (1985), "Short Run and Long Run Cost Functions and the
        Measurement of Efficiency Change", Journal of Econometric. Vol. 33,
        No. 1/2, Oct/Nov., pp. 31-50.

Morrison, Catherine J. [1985], "Primal and Dual Capacity Utilization: An
        Application to Productivity Measurement in the U.S. Automobile
         Industry", Journal of Business and Economic Statistica, Vol. 3, No. 4,
         October, pp. 312-324.
                                     -40-




                                  "Productivity Measurement with NonstatiC
Morrison, Catherine J. (l986a1,              Utilization: An Integrated Approach",
         Expectations and Varying Capacity
                 of Econoifletric-S. Vol. 33, No. 1/2, Oct./NoV., pp. 51-74.

                              "Quasi-FiXed Inputs in U.S. and Japanese
Morrison, Catherine J. (1988],
        Manufacturing: A Generalized Leontief Cost Function Approach",
                                                          No. 2, May,
        view of Economics and Statistic5, Vol. 70,
        pp. 275-287.
                                 "Markups in U.S. and Japanese Manufacturing:
Morrison, Catherine J. (1989a1,
         A Short Run Econometric Analysis, manuscript, February".
                                 "Markup Behavior in Durable and Nondurable
Morrison, Catherine J. (l989b],
         Manufacturing: An Applied Production Theory Approach", manuscript,
         March.
                                     Berndt (1981), "Short Run Labor
Morrison, Catherine J. and Ernst R.
                                           Journal of Econometric, Vol. 16, pp.
         productivity in a Dynamic Model",
         339-365.
                                      Diewert (19881, "New Techniques in the
Morrison, Catherine J., and W. Erwin
                                                    manuscript, December.
         Measurement of Multifactor Productivity",
                                          Between Production and Cost Functions:
 Ohta, M. (1975), "A Note on the Duality
          Rate of Returns to Scale and Rate of Technical Progress", Economic
         udies Ouarterly, 25, pp. 63-65.
                                                                  Journal of
 Romer, Paul M. (1986], "Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth",
          political Economy, 94, October, pp. 1002-1037.

 Solow, Robert M. (1958], "Technical Change and the Aggregate
                                                        Vol.
                                                               Production
                                                              39, No. 5, August,
         Function", Review of Economics and Statisticl,
          pp. 312-320.
</ref_section>
